Stage 1: There is No Association between the Shi‘ism and the Ghulat
===================================================================

In order to avoid instances that incorrectly introduce Shi‘ah beliefs, a
non-Shi‘ah research worker should, in the first place, consider the
above issue and take it for granted.

At this important and indispensable stage, we learn that there is a
serious disagreement between the Shi‘ism and Extremism and that there is
a wide gap between the two. In fact the Imamiyyah’s lofty Islamic
realities are completely different from the low, menial designations
belonging to the perverted *Ghulat* sects:

***“And do*** ***not mix up the truth with the falsehood.” (2:42)***

At this sensitive stage we acquire knowledge of the far-reaching
consequences and the greatest influence on the Wahhabism that have
stemmed from the unjustified combination of the Imamiyyah Islamic
thought with that of the extremists, because they have attributed
various matters to the Shi‘ahs that are totally foreign to the realities
of the Shi‘ah school of thought. Thus, it is perhaps because of this
particular section—presently being discussed—that “the proper method of
discussion” has often been reiterated. Also, it is because of the
Wahhabis’ insufficient knowledge of this very stage that they have felt
free to ascribe whatever is left from Zoroastrianism, Judaism and
Christianity to the Shi‘ah school of thought, thus presenting a chaotic
visage of the Shi‘ism.

I believe that the purely unblemished realities and particularities of
the Shi‘ism cannot be understood without analysing this alleged Shi‘ah
association. Before anything else, we have to make a distinction between
the Shi‘ah profundity (of learning) and the exaggerative substance found
in the *Ghulat*. It is the mingling of the two that has encouraged the
Wahhabis to ascribe the Shi‘ahs with the false legends coming from the
perverted *Ghulat* sects.

In this chapter we extensively deal with what is, in reality, the
*Ghulat* belief, but has been attributed to the Shi‘ah. This stage has
been titled “recognition of the Shi‘ah’s association” because the
profane and polytheistic views borrowed from the Zoroastrianism, Judaism
and Christianity should be totally removed from the realities of the
Imamiyyah school of thought that have stemmed from the Holy Qur’an and
the lofty Sunnah of the blessed Prophet (S). Unless the Wahhabis are
freed from the nuisance of mingling the Shi‘ism with Extremism, it will
not be possible to correct the methods they make use of in their inquiry
into the Shi‘ism.

At this stage, we have discussed this particular problem that the
Wahhabis have and scientifically expounded the hidden causes and factors
contributing to it. We should, of course, mention that both the past and
contemporary Sunnis have rid themselves of this inconvenience. That is
why we see them defending the Imamiyyah school of thought and busily
defying those who are still involved in this admixture.[^1]

Before the matter is brought to an end, reference should be made to a
few points of great importance. The present research methodology is made
up of three stages that ought to be followed in sequence, thoroughly and
without the slightest modification or change. I believe that this
method, if not applied in order, will not keep the basic foundations it
stands on and the worthy goal it is intended for, which is correcting
the way the Wahhabis study the Shi‘ism and explaining the difference
between the Sunnis’ and Wahhabis’ methods of investigation. Wahhabi’s
literature on the Shi‘ism will certainly not resist falsifications,
false statements and misconceptions, unless they follow our method of
investigation.

After we have outlined the factors that have helped the past and present
Sunnis to achieve success in their studies on the Shi‘ism, and after
comparing them with those of the Wahhabis, the primary factor will
appear to be the one that prevented the Sunnis from getting caught in
the trap of mingling the Shi‘ism with Extremism.

This is a critical stage because once the Wahhabis’ diseased conception
of linking the Shi‘ah school of thought to the *Ghulat* is cured, the
mistake they make when expounding Shi‘ah realities will also be treated;
this, in turn, will lead to re-formation of their study system by basing
it on a scientific and realistic approach. The contemporary Sunnis have
followed their predecessors’ methodology because they have been aware of
the danger that awaits them at this stage. These people have given the
Shi‘ism an interpretation different from that of the Wahhabis. They
openly pushed away the Wahhabi interpretation of the Shi‘ah realities
and set up scientific criteria which the Wahhabis should refer to before
any investigation and interpretation.

It is, therefore, essential that this stage be carefully examined, so
that ordinary Sunnis do not walk in the footsteps of the Wahhabis, who
themselves cannot appreciate the importance of the Shi‘ah
characteristics except through an awareness of the importance of this
level.

This is why we expect the reader not to content himself with a mere
inattentive study of this section, but ponder on the issue to arrive at
a conclusion.

We expect that the Wahhabis’ conscience will awaken and perceive the
critical point, since it was an error at this particular stage that
triggered all the Wahhabis’ later misinterpretations of the Imamiayyah
realities.

Here, we desire that the Wahhabis return to a true approach in their
Shi‘ah research; an approach taken up by the Sunnis of the past and the
present and favored by Islam, too.

In my book “*An Undetachable Link between the Shi‘ahs and the Ghulat*”—a
product of the time I was a Wahhabi—I mingled the Shi‘ism and the
*Ghulat*, and as a result considered the Shi‘ahs as infidels. This was
because I had been unable to view the Shi‘ism and the extremist *Ghulat*
as two separate things and had entirely relied on the Wahhabi
literature—not even on the Sunnis’—in my attempts to identify the
Shi‘ah. This is the justification for crowning the pyramid with this
very critical stage.

While I was still in my reverie of negligence, I used to attribute to
the Shi‘ahs myriad beliefs taken from the Zoroastrians, idolaters,
stories of the Age of Ignorance [*Jahiliyyah*], Sufi nonsense and the
extremists’ conception, despite the abundant apostasy found in them. I
crammed all these in my book “*An Undetachable Link between the Shi‘ahs
and the Ghulat*”.[^2] I thought I was doing the right thing. Then having
known of this stage of investigation, I realized my mistake and learned
that the error of taking the Shi‘ahs and the *Ghulat* as identical would
inevitably end in an inaccurate conclusion.

After I had corrected the crookedness of my mind, I was able to
distinguish between what was attributed to the Shi‘ism but in fact did
not belong to it and what was not recognized as part of the Shi‘ah
school of thought but actually belonged to it. As a result, I burned the
above book a little before it was supposed to be printed.

When I was a Wahhabi, I used to think it was acceptable to call the
Shi‘ahs by such designations as the Zoroastrians, Jews, or Gnostics.[^3]
But when I recognized my mistake I became confident that such names
befit the *Ghulat*. My perception of the error I had made at this
particular stage, no doubt, played an important role in liberating me
from the grip of the Wahhabi research methodology, and helping me follow
the approach of the earlier and contemporary Suunis—not so extensively
of course. It was also effective in revising my opinion concerning the
Shi‘ah, and authoritatively freed me from the trap I had fallen into,
i.e. the mingling of the Shi‘ism with the *Ghulat*.

There is no doubt that the environment where I had received my training
was closely linked with the difficulty created for me. In San‘a, Yemen’s
capital, I studied in a religious school affiliated to the Wahhabism.
This school is responsible for printing and distributing books on the
Shi‘ism. The authors of these books, who had all been trapped when
identifying the Shi‘ism and the *Ghulat*, had mingled the Shi‘ism with
the extremist sects and attributed to the Shi‘ahs superstition and
idolatry of all sorts. These books had, of course, left a great
impression of the Shi‘ism on me.

The school felt satisfied with the books that similarly followed the
Wahhabis’ method of investigation, and issued no permission for other
the Sunni books that pursued a different method in their search to know
the Shi‘ah.

Some time later, I found a chance to study the works of the eminent
Sunni writers regarding the Shi‘ism and I was greatly surprised to find
that their research procedure was fundamentally different from that of
the Wahhabis. They seemed to have noticed the erroneous mingling of the
Shi‘ism with the extremists. These authors strongly criticized the
Wahhabis’ methods that saw no distinction between the Shi‘ism and the
*Ghulat*, and believed that what the Wahhabis write concerning the
Shi‘ism does not give the reader even the slightest hint of the
realities or features of the Shi‘ah school of thought.

Professor Hamid Hafni, the contemporary Sunni author and Head of the
Department of Arabic Literature of the ‘Ayn-u Shams University, says, “I
spent a long time studying the doctrinal pronouncements of the Imams of
the Ahl al-Bayt (*‘a*), in particular, and the Shi‘ah belief, in
general, through the works of those who had criticized this school of
thought. I did not, however, gain anything worthwhile to familiarize
myself with this school of thought.”[^4]

Such is the opinion of the distinguished Sunnis who maintain that the
Wahhabis are unaware of the error they commit at “the stage of the
Shi‘ah’s affinity”; naturally, they don’t keep the Shi‘ism and the
extremists apart.

Anwar Jundi, a Sunni Egyptian thinker, says, “It is right that a
research worker separates the Shi‘ahs from the extremists, whom the
Imams (*‘a*) of the Shi‘ahs have severely criticized and about whose
tricks they have given warnings.”[^5]

Pointing to the same trouble, ‘Ali ‘Abd al-Wahid Wafi, another Egyptian
scholar, says, “Many of our authors have mingled the Ja‘fari Shi‘ism
with other Shi‘ah sects.” [^6]

Muhammad al-Ghazzali, the Sunni *imam*, who has extensively tried to
correct the Wahhabis’ method of studying the Shi‘ism, has
authoritatively defied those Sunnis who have followed the Wahhabis and
has taken pains to offer a solution to those who are caught up in the
trouble of mingling the Shi‘ism with the Extremism. He says, “Some liars
who have mingled the Shi‘ism and the *Ghulat*, have spread the rumor
that the Shi‘ahs are ‘Ali’s (*‘a*) followers, whereas the Sunnis are
Muhammad’s (S), and that the Shi‘ahs consider ‘Ali (*‘a*) more
meritorious for the rank of Prophethood, and that Prophethood was
erroneously conferred on someone else. These are very hideous
accusations and very mean lies that correspond with the *Ghulat*
(belief) only.”[^7]

Al-Ghazzali has also said, “Some of these (people) have falsely accused
the Shi‘ahs of maintaining that certain verses of the Qur’an have been
deleted.”[^8]

Some Sunni thinkers maintain that the Wahhabis go to extremes when they
investigate the Shi‘ah school of thought. They mingle Shi‘ism and the
*Ghulat*, and thus deviate from the right path. This is a fact testified
to by Muhammad Bihi, an Egyptian scholar, who says, “The Wahhabis have
widened the gap between the Sunnism and Shi‘ism. This has intensified
the ideological breach between the Sunnism and Shi‘ism from the 18th
century onwards, yielding an ever-increasing discord, all because of the
negative effect of the Wahhabi conception.”[^9]

‘Abd al-Halim Jundi, another Sunni scholar, says, “The Shi‘ahs were
attributed with what is the *Ghulat*’s design; this has left an
unfavorable impression on how other people perceive the Shi‘ism. They
have also attributed the Shi‘ahs with things that they themselves hate,
such as the deification of the Imam. This is the Extremism, ending in
blasphemy.”[^10]

Dr. Taha Husayn says, “The Shi‘ah’s enemies ascribe to them anything,
never restricting it to what they (themselves) have heard or seen of the
Shi‘ah, but multiplying it still further. They do not stop even at this
point, but put the blame for the strange beliefs on the helpers of the
Ahl al-Bayt (*‘a*) of the Prophet (S). These accusers are similar to
bandits in ambush; they make an excessively critical study of the
Shi‘ahs every single word and deed, attributing to Shi‘ah much more than
what the Shi‘ahs have (actually) said or done, blaming the Shi‘ahs for
strange beliefs and actions.”[^11]

Mention was previously made of Dr. ‘Ali ‘Abd al-Wahid Wafi, a Sunni
thinker, who in his *Bayn al-Shi‘ah wa Ahl al-Sunnah* has dealt with the
discord caused by the Wahhabis. Refuting the Wahhabis for a baseless
commotion they have caused between the Sunnis and Shi‘ahs, he says in
his book, “However extensive the mutual disagreement might seem, it will
not exceed the religiously permitted *ijtihad*.”[^12]

The Sunni research worker, Fahmi Huwaydi, another one of those who have
realized that the Wahhabi’s insistence on excommunicating the Shi‘ahs
stems from the concept of identifying the Shi‘ism with the Extremism,
saying, “Excommunicating the Shi‘ahs is one of the Wahhabis’ chief
projects.”[^13]

All these scholars maintain that the Wahhabis have ended up erroneously
confusing the Shi‘ism and Extremism. Some Sunni thinkers even believe
that the image the Wahhabis present of Shi‘ism seriously contrasts with
the realities of this school of thought, and is in complete harmony with
the extremists’ belief, a point Salim Bihansawi has raised in his works.
In his book,[^14] he has done a thorough survey on the necessity to
correct the Wahhabis’ method of research into the Shi‘ism, and has
clearly shown that they have parted with the Sunni’s method of
investigation. In answer to an accusation laid against the Shi‘ahs that
Shi‘ahs have a different Qu’ran, he reacts vehemently saying, “The
Shi‘ahs have, in their mosques and homes, the Qur’an that is exactly the
same as the Sunnis’.”

Some other Sunni thinkers, such as Anwar Jundi, the Egyptian scholar
whom we have cited, hold that the Wahhabis’ conception of the Shi‘ahs
comes from the writings of the extremists, even of the Jews, Christians,
the Magi and Orientalists; and this naturally yields nothing but
identifying the Shi‘ism with the *Ghulat*.

Hasan al-Banna, the leader of the Egypt’s Islamic movement, is one of
the most ardent scholars who have tried to amend the Wahhabi’s method of
studying the Shi‘ism. He has severely opposed the theoreticians who
combine the Shi‘ism with the *Ghulat*, and is shocked at the Wahhabi
blunders in spite of the abundant Shi‘ah treasure that has filled
libraries the world over.[^15] (This is a statement Professor ‘Umar
Talmisani, the al-Banna’s pupil, quotes from his master in his book.)

‘Abbas Mahmūd ‘Aqqad, a distinguished Sunni author, had also perceived
the deviation. Anis Mansūr, the famous Egyptian writer, quotes him as
having said, “Were I permitted to live longer, I would do a logical
research on the Shi‘ism, because the nonsense wrongly attributed to the
Shi‘ism has shown most people a crooked visage of the Shi‘ism.” However,
his life did not last.[^16]

Muhammad Kurd ‘Ali, the Sunni historian, has also vehemently assailed
those who do not differentiate the Shi‘ism from the Extremism, saying,
“Certain authors falsely believe that the Shi‘ism is an innovation
introduced into religion by ‘Abd Allah ibn Saba, a vain assertion
stemming from insufficient knowledge. How false such an assumption seems
to anyone who is aware of ‘Abd Allah ibn Saba’s stand among the Shi‘ahs,
of the Shi‘ahs’ aversion to his words and deeds, of the Shi‘ah scholars’
opinion of him who have unanimously pronounced their hatred of
him.”[^17]

Greatly surprised at the identification of the Shi‘ism with the
*Ghulat*, ‘Umar Tilmasani, the leader of the Ikhwan al-Muslimin says,
“The Shi‘ah jurisprudence has, with its power and culmination of
thought, enriched the Muslim world.”[^18]

A leader of the Sunnis, a religious erudite of the time, Muhammad Abū
Zahrah, greatly bewildered by the Wahhabi approach, has criticized the
Wahhabis’ invalid interpretations of some Shi‘ah theological
expressions. Also, he has proved that the Wahhabis have not understood
the purport of “dissimulation”. This word, as explained by the Shi‘ahs,
is derived from the Qur’an. He says, “Dissimulation means that a
believer who fears to be persecuted, or who desires to achieve his lofty
goal—rendering a service to the God’s religion—keeps a part of his
belief in secret. This stems from the Qur’an.”[^19]

***“Let not the believers take the unbelievers for friends rather than
believers; and whoever does this, he shall have nothing of (the***
***guardianship of) Allah, but you should guard yourselves against
them,*** ***guarding carefully; and Allah makes you cautious of
(retribution from)*** ***Himself; and to Allah is the eventual coming.”
(3:28)***

In answer to the Wahhabis who take the Shi‘ah view on the Imamate as
identical with that of the extremists, Abū Zahrah says, “The Imamiyyah
do not rank the Prophet (S) and the Imam (*‘a*) on the same level.”[^20]

The great leader of the Sunnis, the dean of the al-Azhar University,
Shaykh Mahmūd Shaltūt, is among those who supported the Sunnis’ dealing
with the Shi‘ahs. He ardently challenged the Wahhabis’ manner of study
because they had blundered badly, linking the Imamiyyah with the
extremists.

He made a great effort to lead the Wahhabis back to the general Sunni
trend, and to stop the Shi‘ahs—the Sunni tension plotted by the
Wahhabis’. The Wahhabis, as a result, opposed him, accusing him of
trying to bring the Sunnis and extremists into closer contact. What he
desired to do was to make the Wahhabis understand that they were
attributing to the Shi‘ahs what were in fact the Saba’iyyah’s,
Khattabiyyah’s and Bayaniyyah’s ideas, who the Shi‘ahs condemn as
unbelievers. He maintained that the reason the Wahhabis linked the
Shi‘ism with perverted beliefs—as the Wahhabis called them—was because
to the Wahhabis, the Shi‘ism was a branch of the Extremism.

Mahmūd Shaltūt was compelled to assail certain contemporary Sunnis who,
having been tainted with the Wahhabism, eyed their predecessors’
dealings with the Shi‘ahs negatively. He believed that these people
formed the greatest impediment in the proximity [*taqrib*] of the
Sunnism to the Shi‘ism. He says, “The idea of *taqrib* is being defied
by the short-sighted and malicious found in every society. These are the
people who think that their stability is dependent upon the discord of
religious sects; they are the people in whose hearts there is a
disease—those who lovingly dance around their whims—and have peculiar
inclinations. These are the mercenary writers who are at the service of
those who conspire against the Muslim unity, and, directly or
indirectly, resist any reformatory movement that aims at uniting the
divided Muslims.”[^21]

No sooner were the Imamiyyah and the extremists considered as integral
that the Wahhabis started calling the Shi‘ahs *rafidi* [heretics],
whereas this is a general term used in sectarian literature to identify
most of the extremist groups whom the Shi‘ah scholars had considered as
unbelievers long before the Sunnis attempted to do so. This is why Anwar
Jundi says, “The *rafidi*s are neither Sunnis nor Shi‘ahs.”[^22]

There is no need to quote hundreds of other oral or written statements
of Sunni scholars to demonstrate the danger there is in identifying the
Shi‘ism with the extremists.

These citations, if made, will add up to many pages. The identification
of the Shi‘ism with the Extremism, hard for an analyst to discern at the
onset, is thus known to be one of the biggest problems the enemies of
Islam have worked out in order to destroy the foundation of the Islamic
unity. It is difficult to recognize because the enemies of Islam have
deceptively clothed the hidden carcass it contains in seemingly
befitting attire and made it into a Muslim institution. Today, there are
simple-minded Sunnis who have been deceived by the Wahhabis, have not
conceived their ominous aims and are caught up in this problem. This
situation is, however, being made ineffective within the narrow circle
it has made around the Wahhabi faction.

It is good to know that the Wahhabis do consider the Shi‘ahs as people
of extreme thoughts, but cannot realize that in fact the Shi‘ahs are not
afflicted with Extremism; it is the Wahhabis themselves who suffer from
the disease of the inability to identify the Shi‘ahs. They try to find
out the factors that have contributed to the appearance of the Extremism
in the Shi‘ahs, but cannot understand that they should, instead, look
for the reasons of “the mingling problem” in themselves.

Having realized that the Wahhabis are trapped because they had not
properly investigated previous Sunnis’ books, the contemporary Sunni
thinkers began to look for the factors that helped in the emergence of
the deviation.

They have now clearly announced that the Shi‘ahs do not suffer from the
Extremism; this is an illusion that has the Wahhabis in its grip, and
has come about because they did not distinguish between the Shi‘ism and
the Extremism.

I made an extensive study and learned that the methods of study into the
Shi‘ism are restricted to the following three:

1) The Wahhabi faction’s method;

2) Past and present Sunni thinkers’ method;

3) The Shi‘ah scholars’ methods.

I was, at first, firmly devoted to the Wahhabi manner; but some time
later, I came to know of the Sunni method and was, later on, guided to
study the Imamiyyah scholars’ method. There I noticed an undeniable
contrast between the Wahhabi and Sunni approach. If we accept the
Wahhabis’ method in spite of so many differences and variations, then
logically speaking, both methods will be invalid; that is, neither the
Wahhabi research nor the Sunni analysis on the Shi‘ism.

In the following parts you will come to believe that the Sunnis’
interpretation of the Imamiyyah’s creed presents more facts than the
Wahhabi’s comment that bears absolutely no reality and is mere
presumption.

When we review the product of the Wahhabis’ studies, we learn that they
are at a complete loss to give a correct interpretation of the Shi‘ah
belief system. The crooked image that the Wahhabis portray of the
Shi‘ism is not anywhere close to what the eminent Sunni and Shi‘ah
scholars paint for us.

Being in the grip of a gross deviation and under the influence of the
extreme view of identifying the Imamiyyah with the Extremism when there
is no link between the Shi‘ism and Extremism, the Wahhabis are never
able to penetrate the correct meaning of divinity, prophesy and other
realities of the Imamiyyah as the Shi‘ahs understand them. It is evident
that such circumstances bring the Wahhabis nothing but perplexity.

Strange to say, some simple-minded Sunnis accept the Wahhabis’ opinion
concerning the Shi‘ahs and mock the manner their thinkers had followed.
These people are unaware of the harsh conflict going on between the
Sunnis and Wahhabis; so they are easily deceived. These conflicts stem
from the issue of the Shi‘ah identity.

Just as the issue of the Shi‘ah identification launched a struggle
within the Sunnism when the Wahhabiyyah appeared in the eighteenth
century A.D., it has stretched the battlefield out to include the
Wahhabis and Sunnis in a conflict, the reason for which we will never
understand until the problem has been settled. Many of the matters that
were simply a differing point between the Shi‘ahs and Wahhabis have now
turned into points of conflict between the Sunnis and Wahhabis.

The Sunnis, fully aware of the radical dissimilarities between the
Imamiyyah and Extremism, have openly said that what the Wahhabis raise
against the Shi‘ahs pertains only to the Extremism of the *Ghulat*, not
the Shi‘ahs. The Wahhabis’ viewpoint, though an aid in the
intensification of the struggle between the Sunnis and Shi‘ahs, has
developed into a fire that is now burning the Wahhabis and Sunnis both.
The reason for the oft-repeated warnings of the Shi‘ah and Sunni
thinkers is now made clear. So long as the problem among the three sects
is not settled, there will be no hope to reach an understanding and stop
the tension.

Dr. Nasir Qaffari, the hard-line Wahhabi author who calls the Shi‘ah
unbelievers, gives an interesting account of sharp conflicts between the
Wahhabis and Sunnis. He says, “The bulky case of the disputes among the
contemporary writers on Imamiyyah attracted my attention. A group of
writers such as Muhibb al-Din Khatib, Ihsan Ilahi Zahir, and Ibrahim
Jibhan call the Imamiyyah, the unbelievers who are pushed out of the
Islamic bounds by their extremist convictions.

Others such as Nashar, Sulayman Dunya and Mustafa Shak‘ah consider the
Imamiyyah as those that take the middle course, the moderate, with no
inclination towards Batinis. Still others such as Bihinsawi having been
doubtful (about the reality) corresponded with the Shi‘ah scholars on
the issues Muhibb al-Din Khatib and Ihsan Ilahi Zahir had raised. In a
whirlpool like this, truth will either disappear or lose colour.”[^23]

My persistence in getting to the roots made me write my doctorate
dissertation on *“The Wahhabis’ Problems Arising from Confusing the
Shi‘ahs with the Ghulats”*, where I explained that these problems arise
from the differences in study methods.

After lengthy analyses of the Shi‘ah research methods, I realized that
the Wahhabi method can never be adopted to know the Shi‘ahs, in
particular because the Wahhabis and Sunnis extensively differ in their
knowledge of the Imamiyyah. The Wahhabis’ methods of Shi‘ah studies, if
applied, will produce nothing except the mutilation of the research
topic—the realities of the Shi‘ism—because it is thought that the
followers of the Household of the Prophet (S) have no (sound) method of
explaining their doctrine. One cannot help referring to the comments and
explanations the Imamiyyah themselves offer, if he does not want to get
involved in the crucial conflict between the Sunnis and Wahhabis on the
significance of the Imamiyyah doctrine. This is exactly what Dr. Qaffari
reported concerning Salim Bihansawi.

“Having seen the difference of opinion between Ihsan Ilahi Zahir and
Mustafa Shak‘ah on the Ithna ‘Ashariyyah Shi‘ism, Bihansawi referred to
the Imamiyyah *‘ulama’* in order to discover the reality. He wrote the
book, *al-Sunnat al-Muftara ‘Alayha*, in which he collected the outcome
of the dialogues he had had with these scholars. It was then that he
realized the Sunni’s study method on the Shi‘ah realities was closer to
the truth.”

We also see that Dr. Hamid Hafni Dawūd, the great Sunni thinker, demands
that the (Sunni) writers should abandon the Wahhabi’s method and stick
to the Imamiyyah’s approach in the exposition of their ideas.

In a prelude to the late Muzaffar’s book *‘Aqa’id al-Imamiyyah*, he
writes, “Those who imagine that they can understand the Shi‘ahs’
beliefs, sciences, and social culture by studying what the Shi‘ahs
opponents have written, are in manifest error no matter how
knowledgeable these writers are, how well they know the ideas, and how
impartial and just they are in quoting the thoughts and ideas.”

I would like to say, explicitly, that although I spent a long time
studying the beliefs of the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (*‘a*), in general,
and the Shi‘ah doctrine, in particular, by going through what the
historians and the critics had written concerning the Imamiyyah, I was
unable to gain anything worthwhile. My extensive research and my zeal to
understand the nuances of the Imamiyyah produced nothing worthwhile, but
pushed me still further away from the truth of the beliefs of the
Shi‘ahs.

This was because I had trusted the writings of the Shi‘ah opponents, and
had left my work incomplete and barren. In lieu of my burning desire to
search for the truth—wherever it might be—I had to open my Shi‘ah study
folder in a different way; that is, I made up my mind to familiarize
myself with this school through the works of its scholars because it is
evident that the scientists of any school are better acquainted with
their own beliefs than are their opponents, however eloquent these
antagonists might be in rhetoric.

Being scientifically honest, one of the most important foundations of a
scientific research that makes one take the most care, is what I had set
myself to follow in all the investigations I was to do and all the
papers I was to write. How can a researcher be sure that his citations
are true if he does not refer directly to Shi‘ah sources however sharp
he may be in understanding the issues? He will be basing his argument on
an unscientific foundation if he does not.

All these made me concentrate my Shi‘ah studies on their books and quote
their beliefs from their own works and statements—without the least
alteration—so as to keep away from the error others had made when
judging the Shi‘ahs.

A researcher, desiring to acquire facts from a source other than the
original, will have been unfaithful to realities and will have done an
unscientific job as did Dr. Ahmad Amin, from Egypt, when he was studying
the Shi‘ism. Trying to bring to light certain parts of the Shi‘ah
doctrine, he went to extremes presenting the Shi‘ism as a manifestation
of the Judaism in Islam and a fabrication by ‘Abd Allah ibn Saba. This
is certainly a false claim, one that the Shi‘ahs hate and against which
their scholars have written books, an example of which is ‘Allamah
Muhammad Husayn Kashif al-Qita’s comprehensive research work “*Al-Shi‘ah
wa Usūluha*”.[^24]

An example will illustrate the problem. The Wahhabis have said, in their
books, that according to the Shi‘ahs, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) is in the clouds,
and the Shi‘ahs will not help any of his sons to rise up unless the Imam
(*‘a*) himself calls out from the sky inviting people to help that
person. Evidently, this is an idea of the extremists who believe that
Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) is in the clouds whence he talks to the people. Having
studied the issue and discussed it with eminent Shi‘ah *‘ulama’* in the
city of Qum, their greatest center of learning, I realized that they
resent these words. What they take as certain is the issue of which the
Sunnis, too, are sure: “When Imam Mahdi, may God’s blessing be upon him,
whose rising is accepted by both the Sunnis and Shi‘ahs, reappears, an
angel, high up in the sky, will call out his name inviting people to
help him.” The Wahhabi writing, as you see, cannot be trusted.

From the selected words of the Sunni thinkers quoted, it becomes clear
that the Wahhabis do not know the Shi‘ahs, and a wide gap appeared
between the Wahhabis and Sunnis for no cause other than the Wahhabis’
mistake in identifying the Shi‘ism and mixing it up with the Extremism.

The following points clarify why I ever insisted in bringing the issue
to light and in quoting Sunni thinkers, I want to explain:

1. The extraordinary impact of the problem in diffusing the differences
between the Shi‘ahs and Sunnis on the one hand, and the Sunnis and
Wahhabis on the other.

2. The significant role the problem has in the emergence of deviations
and in the failure of the Wahhabis’ studies of the Shi‘ahs.

3. The effect of the solution of the problem on these three sects in
reaching an understanding and in stopping the tension.

4. The Imamiyyah’s real visage.

The most recalcitrant external opponents of the divine religion are the
pagan, atheistic and materialistic thoughts that intensify the
counter-religious points of doubt. The worst internal enemy of any
religion that questions both the existence and the identity of the
religion, I believe, is the mixing of reality with delusion. It produces
an untrue and incorrect sense of the religion and the *shari‘ah*, and
portrays an inverted and crooked image of the religion. All these make
man’s intellect flee from religion and gravitate towards atheism. The
mixing of the Shi‘ism with Extremism is a kind of mixing realities with
delusions.

5. The radical reason for the Wahhabis’ linking the Shi‘ahs with the
extremist Sūfis.

The main reason for such a belief stems from identifying the Imamiyyah
with the extremists, whereas the Shi‘ah *‘ulama’* excommunicate these
extremist Sufis.

All the explanations given so far are constituents of the first stage of
Knowing the Shi‘ahs.

In stage one of knowing the Shi‘ahs, a recall can be made of the
following two basic factors as causes for the emergence of error and
deviation among the Wahhabis.

1. The Wahhabis’ lack of knowledge;

2. The Wahhabis’ method of study.

The first factor itself stems from three other causes:

a. Lack of knowledge of what the Ghulat means;

b. Lack of knowledge of what the Twelver Shi‘ism means;

c. Being unaware of the Imamiyyah’s position towards the Extremism and
the extremists.

The second factor, too, stems from two causes:

a. The Wahhabis’ mode of thinking;

b. The Wahhabis’ breaking away from the Sunnis’ approach of treating the
Twelver Shi‘ism.

We do not desire to conduct a lifeless research, but we desire that the
reader be on guard against the danger that takes shape at this stage and
not fall prey to it.

Negative consequences of the problem of mingling
------------------------------------------------

The complications resulting from the prevalence of “the mingling
ailment” pointed in brief are:

1. Misinterpreting the reality of divinity and Prophesy in the Shi‘ahs’
doctrine;

2. Misinterpreting the reality of the *shari‘ah* and religious
injunctions in the Shi‘ahs’ doctrine;

3. Misinterpreting the reality of the aims of the Shi‘ah’s school of
thought;

4. Misinterpreting some Shi‘ah expressions;

5. Misinterpreting the reality of the Shi‘ah sources;

6. Misinterpreting the reality of the Imamate in the Shi‘ah doctrine;

7. Misinterpreting the reality of the Shi‘ah identity;

8. Misinterpreting the origin of the Shi‘ah school of thought.

These eight errors yield the greatest fallacy: misinterpreting the
Shi‘ah peculiarities; resulting in mingling the Shi‘ah peculiarities
with those of Extremism.

In order for the dear reader to be acquinted with the ominous
consequences of these errors, he/she is to look at the two following
pictures:

The above diagram shows how the Wahhabis can go astray through the five
main factors.

The above picture shows that these 8 errors are the end result of the
very five causes and that this sedition can have dire consequences.

Before proceeding with the factors that have helped in the emergence and
expansion of the Wahhabis’ problem of mingling the Shi‘ism with
Extremism, we should mention a few points.

1. The problem of confusing Shi‘ism with Extremism, already existing
within Wahhabis ideological system, has not appeared out of the blue. It
is the outcome of many factors that joined hands in the course of time
and created this problem. It has scientifically been proved that
contrary to certain discoveries that are the result of a mental spark,
historical problems do not appear spontaneously.

2. It is very hard to diagnose the causes of historical problems, since
these are processes which are different from those at work in a simple
ordinary illness. You will see that certain factors do not induce the
problem, but they develop it.

3. It is impossible to diagnose the factors that have brought this
particular problem about except through a careful study of the history
of this problem. For this reason we went through all relevant Wahhabis
literature and after long years of investigation and study, we became
aware of the background of the problem and then recognized the causal
factors. Through these investigations, it became clear to us that the
roots of this problem in Wahhabis ideological system go back to the time
the Wahhabi school emerged during the Ottoman rule.

To seize the power in hand, the Ottoman government was at severe wars
against the Shi‘ite safavid kings. In order to urge the people to fight
against the Shi‘ite Iranians, the Ottoman government drew up an agenda
for excommunicating the Shi‘ites and for permitting the shedding of
their blood. This plan infiltrated into the Indian subcontinent where a
Shah ‘Abd al-‘Aziz Dihlawi, influenced by the project, wrote a book
called *al-Tuhfah al-Ithna ‘Ashariyyah*. The Ottoman government
published a summarized version of this book among the Sunnis, thus
intensifying the differences between Shi‘ism and Sunnism. This book had
a great influence on Wahhabis’ behavior towards the Shi‘ites and on the
formation of the problem of equating Shi‘ism with Extremism.

We can clearly see the impression this book has left on Muhibb al-Din
Khatib in his book *al-Khutūt al-‘Aridah fi Din al-Imamiyyah*, a summary
of *al-Tuhfah al-Ithna ‘Ashariyyah*. This book is one of Wahhabis’
sources in their study of Shi‘ism. Khatib himself was one of the
founders of Wahhabis’ ideological system whose approach left a lasting
influence on Wahhabis’ studies of Shi‘ism, which is clearly felt in the
writings of Ihsan Ilahi Zahir.

Historians are well aware of the political conditions governing the time
when the book *al-Tuhfah* was written. All Indian historians have said
that this book was published in Oudh, the kingdom of Lucknow at the end
of 12th Century after Hijrah when there were desperate political
struggles between the *sultan*s, kings, who supported Shi‘ism and those
who supported Sunnis at Lucknow area. No doubt such books do great
services to governments’ political aims and intentions. That is why we
see that these books are usually donated to governors and kings involved
in the strife.

Mahmūd Shukri Alūsi, who has summarized the book *al-Tuhfah*, has
w4ritten the following statements in the introduction to the book:

“I dedicate this book to God’s vicegerent on the earth and the Prophet’s
representative in reviving the religion, that is, the personage who best
observes peoples’ rights, administers the affairs by drawing up exact
plans and applying a deep insight, adopts the best approach in
stabilizing people’s affairs and their safe-keeping, and favors the
scholars and the benevolent of his country… and he is the Commander of
the Faithful, whose obedience is obligatory on all, the king of the
lands and the seas, the monarch, the son of the monarch, the combatant
king ‘Abd al-Hamid Khan, the son of the combatant king ‘Abd al-Majid
Khan. O God! Support him through your help, and make him victorious for
Thy name to be glorified; remove the seditions of the black-hearted
enemies of his and Thine, and crush them with the sword of thy rage and
domination.”[^25]

He then continues in this way: “My aim at dedicating this book to his
lofty precinct is to obtain his look cast on the book so it will be
accepted. It is then that I will, God willing, have a wish fulfilled. I
have prepared this book in nine chapters, the first of which explains
Shi‘ites sects and their state…”[^26]

It is a pity that this book, which was published in a special political
situation, shaped the Wahhabis system of thought so effectively that
they are still following on the same track, and are ignoring the
oppositions raised by the eminent Sunni scholars against the book. This
book is indeed an offspring of politics. That which comes together with
politics should leave together with politics.

The Ottoman policy demanded that Shi‘ite school of thought be
misrepresented, because after the fall of Baghdad, achieved by Iran’s
Shi‘ite government, the Ottomans saw their own existence was being open
to danger. The Ottoman government knew it well that the Sunnis will not
enter a bloody war against Imamiyyah Shi‘ites unless it is somehow
accepted by the general populace that the Extremists, the *Ghulat*, are
disbelievers and are not considered as Muslims.

It was in this way that the problem of equating Shi‘ism with Extremists
came to the fore, in the days of Ottoman’s political condition, and was
flourished more fully by Wahhabis, who were then making use of the
literature in circulation during the Ottoman period. All these books
were, however, missionary publications, not scientific and analytical
ones. It is clear that non-scientific propagations aim at distorting the
rival’s real visage, and skip any scientific dialogues with him.

After the fall of the Ottoman government, many Sunni dignitaries
remarked that there was a need to revive the approach that the former
Sunni thinkers had adopted when dealing with Shi‘ites. At a time when
such an approach had already been consigned to oblivion; however, Shaykh
Mahmūd Shaltūt, rector of the al-Azhar University and the great leader
of Sunnis issued a *fatwa* stating that Shi‘ism is similar to the other
four Sunni schools of thought, and it can be chosen.

The above-mentioned points are just samples forming the chronicle of
Wahhabis’ view that equates Shi‘ism with Extremism. The readers can
follow the issue more fully and convincingly in the discussions that
will soon come.

4. As for the problem of Wahhabis’ equating Shi‘ism with Extremism we
need to say that the issue requires an extensive discussion to be
conducted on each of the areas involved. These include: Extremism, the
Imamiyyah, the relationship between Imamiyyah and Extremism, and finally
Wahhabis itself.

In the third area of our investigation we need to see whether Shi‘ism
lives in acquiescence with Extremism, or whether there is a large gap
between the two. How do individual Shi‘ites and Extremists view each
other?

In the fourth area of our investigation we need to investigate the
extent of familiarity between Wahhabis and Shi‘ites. Are the Wahhabis
aware of the reality of Shi‘ism? How do Wahhabis deal with other
Muslims? How do Wahhabis define *Ghuluww*, Extremism? And how do
Shi‘ites define it? What is the difference between the Sunnis manner of
dealing with Shi‘ites with Wahhabis’ manner? On what basis does the
Wahhabis’ ideological organization stand? How did it influence the way
they deal with Shi‘ites?

It will be possible to fathom the problem after these four areas are
fully investigated. It is a problem that has indeed jeoparadized the
understanding there should exist among Muslims—an issue that needs to be
solved.

5. After extensive examinations of the corpus of Wahhabis’ writings
concerning Shi‘ism and after detailed enquiries conducted on the
writings of those who had fallen prey to the problem created by
Wahhabis, we understood that these writers can be divided into six
groups:

a) Those that had authored books because they wanted to acquire the
pleasure of the rulers who were severely fighting the Iranian Shi‘ite
government. That is why we see their books fully hued with propaganda
and security hints as if these books have been published by an
intelligence office which is at the service of colonizers. These books
represent the foreign policies of the same anti-Shi‘ite government, and
have nothing to do with the realities of Shi‘ite school of thought.
These authors who are in fact court mercenaries play an important part
in the development of the sedition arising from equating mentioned
above.

b) The second group are the simple-minded people who have been
deceived by those in the first group—that is, these are the people who
have naively trusted the court mercenaries and have thus come to believe
that the Imamiyyah school of thought is a branch of the Extremists, and
that Shi‘ites are not included among Muslims. While writing the book
*“The Relationship between the Shi'ites and the Extremists”* I myself
belonged to this group.

c) Those in the third group were not simple-minded people, but were
not experts either, nor did they have a deep vision and insight into the
question. They had unconsciously fallen into a trap, overstating things
that were not really points of exaggeration, and pointlessly attributing
to Imamiyyah school of thought the things in which the Imamiyyah
themselves have no belief. Because they lack precision in their study of
Shi‘ite books, they misunderstand the realities of Shi‘ism, confuse
between Oneness of God [*tawhid*] and polytheism, and accuse Shi‘ism to
be polytheists.

They do not differentiate between the great polytheism that puts one out
of the pale of Islam, and the lesser polytheism that exists among most
Muslims without harming the basis of their Islam. They do not
discriminate levels and degrees of unbelief [*kufr*] either; that is,
between the *kufr* that does not put one out of the pale of Islam and
the one that does so. They confuse these points, accuse all opposing
Islamic sects as apostates and consider most Muslims as disbelievers.

d) The fourth group is those who consider their own religious ideas
as dictates of the party to which they belong, and so condemn any
opposing voice. They are so persistent in their conviction that they
even prejudge other schools before discussing their doctrines, listening
to what these schools have to offer and before acquiring any knowledge
therein. They consider all the opponents as “those who are followers of
falsehood”. They take any opposing voice as some kind of Extremism, and
drive it away by means of various accusations.

e) The fifth group includes those who do not tolerate the logical
oppositions that the Shi‘ites express against Wahhabism. Rather than
answering these oppositions, they blindly defend Wahhabism; and are
therefore forced to deny many indisputable points between Sunnis and
Shi‘ism. In fact, their prejudiced defense of Wahhabism pushes them out
of a logical and rational route and urges them to assume an emotionally
defensive position. Instead of giving answers to Shi‘ites, they level
multitudes of accusations at them. They attribute to Shi‘ites the things
that they themselves have attributed to Extremists. People of this fifth
group too have rendered valuable services to the illness of equating
Shi‘ism with Extremism.

The Wahhabis are now facing huge number of scientifically potent
oppositions that Shi‘ites and even certain Sunnis have leveled against
them. Because they are unable to solve these problems, and because they
have learned that the Wahhabi argument is painfully weak, they have
gathered all their force to vigorously defend Wahhabism. To achieve
their goal they launched a dangerous project, misrepresenting the
realities and facts of Shi‘ism. They did it because they had no aim
other than strengthening their defensive front, and made use of all
means they had at their disposal. Marring of the Imamiyyah visage was
one their defensive stratagems. They were not concerned with the
realities of Shi‘ism, but merely desired to strengthen their own
defensive lines by ruining the imaginary enemy and by making
accusations.

f) The most dangerous of anti-Shi‘ite authors are those who have
infiltrated into the lines of certain naïve Wahhabis, feigning to be one
of their number while both the Sunnis and Wahhabis condemn them. Sunni
dignitaries, having learned of the ominous plans of this latter band
whose goals were not but achieving power, wealth and fame, drove them
away. Inevitably, they took refuge with Wahhabism in order to attain
their wicked goals.

‘Abdullah ‘Ali Qasimi Najdi may be considered as one among people of the
latter group. He left Arabia for Egypt. There he contested against
al-Azhar university scholars, and they excommunicated him. He wrote a
book called “*Wahhabiyyah Revolution*” that sounded very pleasing to
Wahhabism, but forced the Sunnis to react against it. Later on, he wrote
another book called “*Contest between Islam and Idolatry*”, and called
the Shi‘ites idolaters. Wahhabis became very happy. Some time later, he
made his own idolatrous tendencies known: he denounced divine religions
and attacked divine Prophets. At this point, Wahhabis rejected him too.
The inverted visage he had presented of Shi‘ism had left a lasting
influence and mark in memories.

g) An important source in the propagation of the confusion in
question was ambiguities in certain lexical items commonly in use from
the first century after Hijrah and shortly afterwards. In those days the
word “Shi‘ism” was applied to many sects. The dim and blur atmosphere of
the time prepared the ground for the cultural attacks of Imamiyyah
enemies. On the pretext of opposing Extremist sects, Shi‘ism was
unjustly labeled as “extremist” and flooded by extensive accusations.

h) The confusion between sense and significance of Shi‘ism―which was
applied to many sects―and sense and significance of Twelver Imamiyyah,
which is used to refer to only one school of thought was a cause for the
Wahhabis to attribute to the Imamiyyah followers many inappropriate
opinions and ideas―things that the Imamiyyah and the Sunnis call as
disbelief, *kufr*.

It is evident that if the meaning of words and the conceptual boundaries
that separate them from each other are not precisely defined, they will
turn into instruments in the hand of mischief-makers or in hand of the
naïve.

i) Another element that has contributed to equating Shi‘ism with
Extremism―as Wahhabis understand it―is the presence of certain *Ghulat*,
Extremists, in Kūfah a Shi‘ite centre in the first century after Hijrah.
These were people who, according to clear evidence of history, were few
in number and had been forcefully repelled by the Shi‘ite community of
the time and even by those in following epoch. Little by little they
died away. Wherever Imamiyyah Shi‘ism gravitated into the bosom of the
people, Extremism was forced to leave. Further explanations will follow.

j) Given the Ummayyid and the Abbasid policy of using tortures,
threats, and massacres against *Ahl al-Bayt*, members of the Household
of the Prophet, peace be upon him and his descendants―in spite of the
lofty ranks they had among Muslims―it is no wonder to see that in order
to justify the criminal acts of the criminals, the same caliphs and
rulers exposed the oppressed Shi‘ites to manifold tortures, and accused
them of having uttered apostetic word, particularly at a time when the
weak and the wronged are unable to defend themselves when facing with
the bullying enemy.

Factors contributing to the advent and expansion of the theory of equating Shi‘ism and Extremism in Wahhabis’ view
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

We said that the first factor contributing to the advent of this
particular extremist notion had been the Wahhabis’ unawareness of the
Imamiyyah Shi‘ism. This unawareness falls into three divisions:

1. Ignorance of the meaning of Extremism;

2. Ignorance of the meaning of Shi‘ism;

3. Ignorance of the Imamiyyah’s position with regard to Extremism and
the Extremists.

In this chapter we will explain the first, leaving the remaining points
for another book of ours, “*Imamiyyah’s View Concerning Extremism and
the Extremists*”.

Ignorance of the meaning of Extremism
-------------------------------------

Exaggerated zeal and Extremism, *Ghuluww*, is a phenomenon that has been
rejected by all Islamic schools of thought, *madhahib*. You will not
find any school that has sanctioned it. The angry look that schools of
thought have given the Extremism is because of repeated warnings of the
Qur’an and specified in the words of the Prophet, peace be upon him and
his descendents, both constantly reminding Muslims that deviations in
religion are based on Extremism foundations. The history of Extremism
goes back to the time when “deviation” was born in history. In other
words, there is no deviation without having stemmed from some kind of
Extremism. It is a definite historical point that Extremist inclinations
have been at work in all sects that are outwardly Islamic but are in
fact distanced from the reality of Islam.

Here, we do not intend to recount all Qur’anic statements and the
*sunnah* vocabulary in regard to Extremism and its dangerous outcome,
nor do we plan to talk about *Ghulat* sects, their roots and the
influence exerted on them by Zoroastrianism, Judaism, and Christianity,
because these are unrelated to our discussion. We would rather reveal
something that is closely connected with our aim, and has not been
discussed elsewhere, that is, the position of the concept “Extremism” in
the Wahhabiyyah culture and the definition of its concept.

Ever since the 18th century CE, when the Wahhabiyyah was established
until today, various and weird definitions of “the Extremism”,
*ghuluww*, incongruous with the Imamiyyah’s and even with the Sunnis’
views, have been in vogue. These are definitions that finally end in
charging Islamic sects with Extremism.

I remember the time when I, as a prejudiced Wahhabi, was being trained,
in Wahhabi training centers of Arabia. The definition that we were given
concerning the concept “Extremism” was such that it did not spare most
Sunnis including the Ash‘arites, and the Maturidis, let alone the
Imamiyyah.

This method applied in training and propaganda had left abnormal
influences on me and other students. For example, we considered these
sects as tainted with Extremism, polytheism, disbelief and deviation.
Therefore, we did not permit ourselves to read and study their ideas. We
were pessimistic of their scholars and did not treasure holding
dialogues with them.

The contemporary Sunni scholar, “Yūsuf Qardawi” depicts this pitiful
event that has come from hatred and infected complexes of the Wahhabis
as follows: “No one other than the enemies of Islam will benefit when
Islamic rites are misrepresented, religious symbols are destroyed and
values are demolished. It is a pity that these acts have now been turned
into wishes of certain Muslims. On my trip to Arabia last year, I came
across a terrible and pitiful event: a series of books that had attacked
and rebuked the scholars leveling accusations against them. Some of
these books had been written by certain *salafi* supporters Wahhabi
Fundamentalists, who had not spared any of the past and contemporary,
living or dead, scholars [*‘ulama’*] but had sharply charged them with
accusations, slanders and vilifications”.[^27]

Muhammad al-Ghazzali, the leader of the contemporary Sunnis, calls the
Wahhabis’ interpretation of religion “queer and unfamiliar”[^28], and
reckons it as the most dangerous enemy of Islam. He says, “The
development of Islamisation is being threatened from various directions,
the most dangerous of which is a kind of religious thought in
extremist-fundamentalist attire that even the true Salafiyyah
hate.”[^29]

How prudent it would be if the Wahhabis heeded these remarks and
critically examined their own understanding and interpretation of the
Extremism. Without self-criticism, one will not be able to examine one’s
outlook and distinguish the truth from falsehood.

The important point to be made here is that there are two usages for the
term “Extremism”: one in jurisprudence and the other in tradition,
*hadith.* It is an erroneous application of the meaning of “Extremism”
to jurisprudence that pushes one into infidelity and unbelief. The
implications we come across in the history of *hadith* merely refer to
some narrators, poles apart from what it means in jurisprudence.

Shahristani, the Ash‘ari, says, “The *Ghulat* are the people that went
to extremes as regards their religious leaders [the *imam*s]; took them
out of the limitations that are set for all created beings and installed
them on the divine throne: sometimes likening them to God and sometimes
likening God to them, excessive in one direction and belittling in the
other. Their doubt has its sources in the notion of the infusion of the
divine into man [*hulūl*] in metempsychosis and in the claims the Jews
and Christians had made.”[^30]

The kind of Extremism that leads to infidelity, according to the above
text, has two fundamental bases:

a. Deifying man: raising man to the dignity of divinity.

b. Lowering God’s position to man’s.

The idea of the infusion of the divine into man denotes a lowering of
God’s position, and the notion of man’s pre-eternity ends up in his
being deified. These two serious notions can easily be understood if a
bit of investigation is conducted on the *Ghulat* sects.

On the other hand, the kind of Extremism discussed in the science of
*hadith*, when referring to certain narrators, pertains to the
off-shoots [*the furū‘*] of Islam, not to the roots [*the usūl*]. The
former is no cause for infidelty. It is the Wahhabi’s mingling of the
two that has driven them into committing dangerous blunders. Such is the
case with the contemporary Wahhabi writer, ‘Abd al-Rahman ‘Abd Allah
Zar‘i, who was unable to differentiate between the two in his book
*Rijal al-Shi‘ah fi al-Mizan*.

When we study the books the Sunnis have written on the science of the
narrators of *hadith* [‘*ilm al-rijal*], we see that the Sunni authors
have used the term *ghuluww* [Extremism] to refer to many people who
although disagree among themselves as to the superiority of the
Companions, never take them as deities. Therefore, these narrators
cannot be considered as infidels The Wahhabis gradually drifted away
from the current meaning of “Extremism” as the Sunnis had recognized it,
and extended the scope of its application so widely that the resulting
fire began to burn the Sunnis too. Taking Shi‘ahs and Sunnis as
supporters of the Extremism, the Wahhabis directed torrents of
accusations against the non-Wahhabi sects.

The outcome of extending the concept of the Extremism
-----------------------------------------------------

The outcome of extending the concept of the Extremism is most noticeable
in the Wahhabis’ dealing with the opposing parties on certain points of
difference. It is necessary, therefore, to refer to some imaginary,
quarrelsome problems that have been created under the pretext of
fighting the Extremism.

1) Making a fuss on the issue of God’s attributes, the Wahhabis accuse
as an extremist anyone who opposes their idea on God’s attributes.
Scores of books that denounce the Shi‘ism and Sunnism have been written,
and the world of Islam is now filled with a great commotion. Instead of
being a factor unifying Muslims, the issue of God’s attributes has, in
the hands of the Wahhabis, been turned into a weapon to create
turbulence and tension.

Muhammad ‘Adil ‘Azizah, the contemporary Sunni scholar, has done a lot
to make the Wahhabis understand that the *Ash‘ari*s and the *Maturidi*s
are not extremists. If anyone considers them as extremists, then Ibn
Kathir of Damascus, much respected by the Wahhabis, should also be
called an extremist because he has not followed the Wahhabis (view) on
God’s attributes.

All the Sunnis and Shi‘ahs make an interpretation [*ta’wil*] of the
Qur’anic verses pertaining to the divine attributes without considering
it a cause for the Extremism. The Shi‘ah and Sunni religious scholars,
the *‘ulama’*, have found no relationship between interpreting the
divine attributes and Extremism; the scholars of both denominations have
strongly criticized the Wahhabis’ method of evaluation.

Muhammad ‘Adil ‘Azizah, who has written a book on Ibn Kathir of
Damascus’ view on the divine attributes, says, “I have written this book
with the aim of narrowing the scope of the differences and eliminating
the present animosity among Muslims because, these days, many Sunni men
of learning are being subjected to accusations, calumny and
excommunication by the Wahhabis, merely because they have pronounced
their own judgment differently from that of the Wahhabis on God’s
attributes.”[^31]

Anyone reading this book will understand that Ibn Kathir’s method of
explaining the God’s attributes differs from that of the Wahhabis. He
says, “This little treatise, containing Ibn Kathir, the Salafi’s words
on the divine attributes will prevent a liberal Muslim from hastily
accusing others—who hold the same ideas as Ibn Kathir does—of being
misguided and outside the pale of Islam, because Ibn Kathir is known to
all as being knowledgeable, meticulous and sound (in mind). Ibn Kathir
is said to have asked Ibn ‘Abbas for the interpretation of the Qur’anic
verse: *“Upon the day when the legs shall be bared, and they shall be
(summoned) to bow themselves, but they cannot.”* (64:42); Ibn ‘Abbas
said, “A great matter is disclosed.”[^32]

Now, the objection we make is this: why, then, do the Wahhabis call the
Sunni and Shi‘ah populace who interpret the Qur’anic verses of the
divine attributes “extremists”? This has resulted in heavy blows and
blind attacks to befall the Shi‘ism and Sunnism from the 18th century
onwards. We can fathom the profundity of this catastrophe in many
utterances of the Shi‘ahs and Sunnis.

Dr. Muhsin ‘Abd al-Hamid, the contemporary Sunni scientist, unveils the
catastrophe. He says, “In recent years, my colleagues and I have
witnessed a current that imagines itself to be in charge of implementing
ideological improvements and confronting manifestations of polytheism in
Islamic society; it has filled the cultural centers with futile
arguments concerning divine attributes. This painful situation was the
first impetus for me to review these verses.”[^33]

This black sedition of the Wahhabis has, from its inception, drowned
many scholars in its abyss. Dr. Muhammad ‘Ayyash Kabisi, the
contemporary Sunni thinker says, “This sedition of the Wahhabis urged me
to focus my doctorate thesis on this particular matter, conduct a
complete deductive study of all the divine attributes mentioned in the
Qur’an and in the traditions, and explicate the comments of the past and
present ulamas. These investigations expand our breast to receive
tolerantly the disagreements there are in the interpretation of the
Qur’anic verses and not to take them as the borderlines between faith
and disbelief, between unity and polytheism.”[^34]

When I was a Wahhabi myself, I thought that anyone whose belief was
different from that of the Wahhabis was misguided, deviant, and an
extremist, while I took my own ideas as foolproof.

I remember the time I was studying at Ibn Sa‘ūd University in 1988,
where I fiercely criticized all the Sunnis who did not subscribe to the
Wahhabism: I was averse to people like ‘Abd al-Fattah Abū Ghudah,
Muhammad al-Ghazzali of Egypt, Muhammad ‘Ali Sabūni, Hasan al-Banna, and
scores of others whose belief on the divine attributes was different
from that of the Wahhabis. When I finally got away from the trap the
Wahhabism had me in, I realized the bewildering fate that was awaiting
them.

The approach I have been following in my discussions with the Wahhabis
has been to quote the people who the Wahhabis believe in, because it is
impossible to mention Shaykh Tūsi, the eminent Shi‘ah scholar, or cite
his belief directly. The Wahhabis cannot tolerate even hearing his name,
let alone listening to his judgment. Therefore, you should, from the
beginning, route your point through such people as Ibn Kathir so the
Wahhabis do not turn away. This, of course, works only if the Wahhabis
have no ill intention, but are the simpletons that are caught up in the
trap. They are more in need of medication than disputation. We should
view them as a physician does, that is, we should do our best to cure
them.

These wrongly educated naïve Wahhabis are of the opinion that any
opposing opinion denotes disbelief and Extremism, but they are unaware
that this is pure illusion, an invention of their sick mind. Being
involved in such illusion, I once thought that all others were in an
open boat of Extremism, but only we would be saved. I thought I was a
physician wishing to cure someone who was ill with Extremism. This is
why I wrote the book *Al-Silatu bayn il-Ithna ‘Ashariyyah wa Firaq
al-Ghulat*, the link between Ithna ‘Ashariyyah and the *Ghulat* sect,
the instructions to cure*.* Before it was published, however, something
unexpected happened, and I realized that it was I who was diseased and
in need of someone to cure me. I found the top physician, one who could
fight this dangerous virus; it was the Imamiyyah, whom I had mistaken as
extremists. The situation changed: just a couple of days before the
event I thought I was the physician, but realised in fact I was the
diseased.

I was like a doctor who was carrying a deadly virus in his brain, but
imagined that all other people had cancer, until he happened to meet
another specialist, supposedly one of his patients. The latter diagnosed
the former’s illness. The scene changed dramatically: the former doctor
himself was in need of therapeutic measures.

Today, I have not only discovered that the Imamiyyah are not suffering
from Extremism, but the Wahhabiyyah themselves are seriously ill,
suffering from the hallucination that the Shi‘ism and Extremism mean the
same thing. It is the Wahhabiyyah that should cure itself the soonest.
To me, most Wahhabis are simple-minded, not malicious, patients, and I
deal with them as a doctor does, doing my best to rid them of the
dangerous disease of equating Shi‘ism with Extremism; this is a task
that cannot be done except through a peaceful dialogue:

***“Had you been rough, hard-hearted, they would certainly have
dispersed from around you.” (3:159)***

Anger cannot treat the patient who is spiritually sick; this is exactly
what we mean when we speak of “the unity among Muslims”: a peaceful
symbiosis and a scientific dialogue (to be conducted) under the
patronage of understanding and of terminating the tensions, not with the
aim of calling each other liars, resorting to quietism or abandoning of
religious beliefs.

2) Making a fuss over certain doctrinal points that the Wahhabis assume
are part of the principles of the religion [*usūl*] and a borderline
between disbelief and Islam, although they are subsidiary points
[*furū‘*] and arguable. The Wahhabis do not make a distinction between
*usūl* and *furū‘* in religion and label *Ghali* and anyone who
disagrees with them on any article of faith a disbeliever,
excommunicating him from the fold of Islam. For the Wahhabis any
doctrinal point is a part of the principles of religion [*usūl al-din*].
It is true that each single principle of religion is a doctrinal point,
but not every article of faith can be a principle of the religion. These
should not be confused. It is such a confusion that has made the
Wahhabis believe that is impossible for the Shi‘ahs and Wahhabis to
reach an understanding. The Wahhabis take all differences as oppositions
to the principles of religion.

Dr. Nasir Qaffari reiterates the same point in his book, *Mas’alah
al-Taqrib*, and strongly rejects the possibility of any understanding
between these two schools of thought, although most of the differing
points (he refers to) are not part of the principles of either party’s
belief system; they are either questions that the Sunnis themselves do
not include in the *usūl* or are the juridical points that have nothing
to do with the belief system.

When I say these issues are parts of the subsidiary doctrinal issues, I
do not mean that they may be disregarded for the sake of unity; what is
meant is that since they are not included in the principles of religion.
They can be examined, discussed and refuted without an apparent loss of
faith in this world.

Muhammad ‘Abd al-Halim Hamid, honoured by the Wahhabis, also says, “That
the doctrinal points are called “the principles” is a recent
development. Theologians and certain jurists have divided religious
issues into two categories: belief and practice. The practical juridical
questions derived from the doctrinal ones are considered secondary
issues, “*furū‘*”, in contrast to the principles, “*usūl*”. The name,
but not the reason, spread wide among the Sunnis; in the course of time
the reason was forgotten. Whenever the doctrinal points are called “the
principles of religion”, it is meant to show the special position and
the superiority “belief” has over “practice”; it never denotes that
there are no questions of secondary import within the doctrinal
points.”[^35]

He quotes Ibn Taymiyyah’s lengthy discourse in which he said that the
principles of religion and the doctrinal points should not be combined.

God knows how hard I tried to stop the tension among the Shi‘ahs, Sunnis
and Wahhabis. But, I am increasingly convinced that it is the Wahhabis
themselves who add more fuel to the fire. I have studied almost all the
Wahhabis’ books carefully and come to the conclusion that the burning
fire of sedition the Wahhabis have made, originates from a double
confusion: equating the Shi‘ism with Extremism on the one hand, and
confusing the principles of religion with the secondary doctrinal points
on the other. To me “mingling” is the most serious spiritual and mental
disease, and as I was one of the victims of this virus myself, I set out
to discover the cause of the illness and the ways to treat it.

The religious strife and the bloodshed we see in the Islamic countries,
like Pakistan, are because of the impact of such Wahhabi writings as
Ihsan Ilahi Zahir’s. This sect has published thousands of books, essays
and interviews on the issue of identifying the Shi‘ism—and other Islamic
sects too—with Extremism. But it is the Wahhabis themselves who are ill;
they muddy the waters, mingle the Imamiyyah with the *Saba’iyyah* and
Extremism, Polytheism with Islam, and disbelief with belief. It is our
duty to cure the naïve and unbiased stratum of people from this deadly
disease. This book attempts to offer a sound method for the dialogue
between the Shi‘ahs and Wahhabis.

For example, if we want to talk to a Wahhabi about *tawassul*, resorting
to the noble Prophet, (S) after his demise, we should first ask him if
he considers the issue as belonging to the principles of religion. If he
doesn’t, then discussing the matter and disproving Wahhabis’ opinion
will not cause polytheism nor will it put one out of the fold of Islam.
If he does, he should be reminded that the Wahhabi scholars have divided
the doctrinal issues into the two groups: *usūl* and *furū‘*, and that
not every doctrinal issue belongs to the category of the principles of
religion; none of the four Sunni canonical schools have included it
among the principles of religion either. The authorities whose words are
accepted by the Wahhabis are as follows:

Shaykh Hasan al-Banna says, “Supplication and entreaties to God
[*tawassul*] if made through one of His servants, could be considered a
secondary issue; it is not an issue of faith”.[^36] When the Wahhabis
understand that the differing point is simply a secondary question, not
an issue of principles, we are cleared of the charge of disbelief and
polytheism (they make against us) because the disagreement over a
secondary issue is no cause for polytheism. (Item five of the
twenty-point principle that he had in mind for the unity of Muslims.)

Muhammad Ghazzali, the contemporary *imam* of the Wahhabis sees no
logical cause for the accusations the Wahhabis make concerning
*tawassul.*[^37]

3) The *hadith*s with a single transmitter are another alibi for the
Wahhabis to accuse their opponents of Extremism, an accusation that
looks more like a war than a scientific argument. The Wahhabis accept
isolated narrations as a proof, but their opponents do not. Arguments on
such narrations have been going on among Muslims for a long time without
fighting or accusing the opposition of innovation in religion and
polytheism, the Wahhabis have turned the argument into a black sedition,
as exemplified in the Wahhabi Shaykh Muhammad ibn ‘Abd Allah’s “*Hujjat
al-Ahad fi al-‘Aqidah wa Shubahat al-Mukhalifin*”.[^38]

Anyone reading the Wahhabis’ books or taking part in their gatherings,
can easily understand that they accuse their adversaries—whether the
Sunnis or Shi‘ahs—of Extremism. If a Muslim ever voices an objection
about anything, he will be labeled an extremist; this is a concept whose
scope of meaning has been so widely extended by the Wahhabis that it can
include most Muslims!

In fact, it is the Wahhabis themselves that have demolished the
conceptual barriers of “Extremism”, trespassed the boundaries depicted
by the Qur’an and *Sunnah*, and presented a visage of Extremism so weird
that it introduces most Shi‘ah and Sunni scholars as deviated
extremists. Today, the Wahhabis call most of the premises adduced from
the Qur’an and *Sunnah* as cases of Extremism. If they go on for some
more time, you will certainly not find even one typical man that could
be called “moderate”, judged by the Wahhabi standards.

The Wahhabis should know that if someone holds the view that accepting
narrations made by only one reporter is not permissible in doctrinal
questions he is not an extremist nor is he cast out of the fold of Islam
and faith. The mere rejection of a *wahid* narration, when the doctrinal
issues of religion are concerned, is no cause for disbelief. ‘A’ishah
and ‘Umar, both the apple of the eyes of the Wahhabis, were wont to
rejecting such traditions. The Sunnis have reported an episode in which
‘Umar quoted the Prophet (S) as having said that a dead person will be
punished in the grave if his folks cry for him. ‘A’ishah, however,
refuted the narration.

How can a narration with one transmitter be a proof to accuse a Muslim
with when the narrator may have erred, forgotten the *hadith* or made
adjustments to it? Is it logical to accuse Muslims of being extremists
and polytheists because they have refuted an opinion that has been based
on a single-transmitter narration some Wahhabis stick to? Ibn Taymiyyah
himself has said, “The Companions have disproved many *wahid* narrations
that the people of *hadith* had reckoned as sound [*sahih*].”

By insisting that one-transmitter narrations should be accepted in
doctrinal issues, the Wahhabis have committed dangerous errors, one of
which is incorporating into the principles of religion the points that
are miles away from Islam. More painful yet is their using these points
as bases to launch various accusations from, to fabricate unusual and
illogical dogmas and to call anyone who rejects these dogmas a
disbeliever. But they should know that the Muslim populace does not
accept this behavior.

Qadi ‘Ayad says, “Ibn Qasim and Ibn Wahab have said ‘We believe that the
practice of the people of Madinah is more authorative than a narration
that has only one transmitter’.”[^39]

Malik, the leader of the Sunnis, has discarded many *ahad* narrations
because they are in conflict with the practice of the people of Madinah.
What are the Wahhabis going to do with these incidents?

Shaykh Yūsuf Qardawi has written, “I noticed that the Hanbalis were
divided on this matter, because what had been handed down from Ahmad ibn
Hanbal was itself conflicting. It is now clear for me that most Hanbali
researchers of the principles of religion do not consider the
one-reporter narrations as something that bring certainty and knowledge.
This is a point Abūya‘la has mentioned, as have ‘Abu’l-Khattab, Ibn
Qudamah and even Ibn Taymiyyah.”[^40]

Are the Wahhabis aware that Ibn Taymiyyah, their leader*,* has said,
“This is a one-reporter narration. How can it possibly serve as a
foundation for a principle of religion on which sound belief
rests?”[^41]

Shatibi has also said, “In dealing with the principles of religion,
[relying on] guesswork will not suffice, because the probability of
contradicting it exists; guesswork is all right in the case of the
secondary issues of religion [*furū‘*]; the people of *shari‘ah* act on
it because there is a reason for it; so, guesswork is forbidden in all
cases except in the secondary issues of religion; all religious scholars
consider this a satisfactory idea.”[^42]

In doctrinal issues, the Sunni populace allows no argumentation
concerning the narrations with a single transmitter because they are not
sure if they can prove their point. The list of such notable people
includes Imam al-Haramayn, Sa‘d, Ghazzali, Ibn ‘Abd al-Birr, Ibn Athir,
Safi al-Din Baghdadi, Ibn Qudamah, ‘Abd al-‘Aziz Bukhari, Ibn Sabki,
San‘ani, Ibn ‘Abd al-Shakūr, Shanqiti, and scores of others.

Khatib Baghdadi has said, “A one-transmitter narration is unacceptable
in any religious issue that requires finality.”

Abū Ishaq Shirazi says, “A one-transmitter narration brings no
knowledge.”[^43]

Ghazzali has said, “A one-transmitter narration brings no knowledge;
this is a necessity; therefore, we do not confirm whatever we hear since
affirming two contradictory pieces of information is affirming two
oppositions.”[^44]

Ibn ‘Abd al-Shakūr also says, “The avant-garde in the science of *usūl*
maintain that a narration with one transmitter, received from a source
other than the Infallible (Imams) (*‘a*), surely brings neither
knowledge nor certainty, whether or not it is presented together with an
analogue. In the case where the isolated narration is intended to convey
knowledge, (care must be taken because) if two just people bring two
opposing pieces of information, affirming them will be affirming two
contradictions.”[^45]

‘Abd al-Qahir Baghdadi has written “The one-transmitter narrations could
be acted on if they are correct in the chain of transmitters, and if
they are not logically impossible in the text; they bring no knowledge
though.”[^46]

Bayhaqi has said “Concerning the issue of the divine attributes, our
scholars do not base their argument on a one-transmitter narration if
the narration is not based on the Qur’an or on the consensus of opinion,
[*ijma‘*].”[^47]

Fakhr Razi has also said “When *usūli*s say ‘one-transmitter tradition’,
they mean it is a tradition that does not bring knowledge and
certainty.”[^48]

Elsewhere he has said “Basing their discourse on one-transmitter
narrations, some people talk about the divine attributes although these
narrations are far from finality and certainty.”[^49]

Muhammad Ghazzali, the Egyptian, has also joined the long list and said
“I graduated from al-Azhar University about half a century ago, and have
been teaching for years. I discovered that the one-transmitter
narrations merely produce a surmise and can be used to issue a religious
verdict until more evidence has not been found. Therefore, it is a sort
of exaggeration to claim that such narrations produce certainty; it is
null and void, considered logically or by referring it to the
transmitted science.”[^50]

Elsewhere, Ghazzali says, “A narration that has only one transmitter
merely produces a surmise; it can function within the scope of *furū‘*,
not within the principles of faith [*usūl*]. I would like to emphasize
that a one-transmitter narration has never produced anything except
guesswork. However, there are now some people who desire to rely on
one-transmitter narrations in order to prove their own faith and
consider those who refute the narration as disbelievers; this is a sort
of Extremism.”[^51]

Yūsuf Qardawi says, “The doctrinal issues should be based on certainty,
not on guesswork; the soundly-documented narrations with one
transmitter, on the other hand, do not produce certainty. It is the
narration with an established chain of transmission, Mutawater that
brings certainty; the former issue is confirmed by the Qur’an,

***“And they have no knowledge of it; they do not follow anything but
conjecture, and surely conjecture does not avail against the truth at
all.” (53:28)***

and the latter by the *usūli* scholars. This is a method that is
prevalent in notable scientific centers of the world of Islam, such as
al-Azhar, Zaytūnah, Qruwiyin, Diwband, etc.”[^52]

Sayyid Qutb has also said, “One-transmitter narrations cannot be
accepted in doctrinal issues; in such instances we refer to the Qur’an
and the traditions that have been received with an unbroken chain of
transmission (mutawater); in doctrinal issues the condition for
accepting these narrations is that they should be mutawater.”[^53]

Mahmūd Shaltūt says, “All religious scholars maintain that a
one-transmitter narration does not produce certainty, nor can it be used
to base a doctrinal issue on. The researchers have all called this an
indisputable matter; this is certainly an undisputable consensus.”[^54]

Of the scores of similar statements the Sunni scholars have made, only a
portion has been mentioned above to convince the Wahhabis that they
should not accuse of disbelief and polytheism anyone who opposes them.

The discussion presented so far concerns the first reason why the
Wahhabis have been unable to know the Imamiyyah: their lack of knowledge
of what the Extremism means. The second reason, the Wahhabis’ lack of
knowledge of what the Shi‘ism means, is thoroughly discussed in our
second book *Mawqif al-Ithna ‘Ashariyyah min al-Ghuluww wa al-Ghulat*.
The third reason, the Wahhabis’ lack of knowledge on the Imamiyyah’s
position towards the Extremism and the extremists, will also appear in
the same book. Below is just a brief discussion on the third item.

A brief report on the Imamiyyah’s stand against the Extremism and the extremists
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The fiery stand it takes against the Extremism and the extremists is the
Imamiyyah’s unique peculiarity when this school is contrasted with
others. No other school of thought has shown as severe a reaction as the
Imamiyyah has brought to the fore. This is because the Imamiyyah’s
mentality, stemming from the glorious Qur’an and the true Prophetic (S)
*Sunnah*, is at war with the extremist conceptions, and is doing its
best to correct these deviations (from the truth) and save the infested.
Further explanation is unnecessary. What is clear requires no details.
Many of the extremists I have met and talked to, have given up the
Extremism and profane beliefs, and have returned to the fold of Islam.

Because the Wahhabis are unaware of the Imamiyyah’s basic view and
thought, they equate the Extremism with the Shi‘ism; this being an
illness they suffer from. They should, therefore be made to understand
that it is a misconception; (along with this), the Shi‘ah’s point of
view, based on the Shi‘ah sources, should be explained to them. They
should know that the Imamiyyah keeps aloof of the extremists because the
Shi‘ism keeps pace with the Qur’an and the true Prophetic (S) *Sunnah*
both in word and deed. Doubts can certainly be removed when evidence is
offered. Our detailed discussion centers round the following five
points:

1. The Imamiyyah’s view on the extremists’ conception;

2. The Imamiyyah’s view on how the extremists legalized their opinions;

3. The Imamiyyah’s view on leaders of the Extremism;

4. The Imamiyyah’s view on the extremists’ narrations;

5. The Imamiyyah’s view on the extremists’ books.

The Shi‘ah school of thought has played an undeniable part in rescuing
Muslims from the grip of the extremist deviations. The procedure this
school has adopted in countering the Extremism, has forced the extremist
thought to remain confined within a narrow circle, unable to spread out.

The opinion the Shi‘ahs vehemently fight against is the false notion of
“deification of man”, i.e. man’s abandoning the quality of being a
servant to God. This false notion is the outcome of drawing no
distinction between divinity and submission to Him. The Imams (*‘a*) of
the Shi‘ahs have, in hundreds of narrations that have been quoted from
them, clarified man’s rank and have expressly said that however far he
travels along the path to perfection, man will never attain the rank of
divinity.

The words of the Imams (*‘a*) of the Shi‘ahs have their origin in the
glorious Qur’an and the pure Prophetic (S) narrations and are similar to
an explanation of these two sources; that is why a sway of the Qur’anic
style of expression can be seen in all their words that communicate (to
us) both the worship all created things owe to Allah and the Unique
Lordship of the Divine. Since the extremists have, in their propaganda,
centered on the deification of man or deification of the Imams, the
Imams (*‘a*) of the Shi‘ahs have emphasized that they are servants of
the Divine Essence, Allah, and fully submissive to Him. In this way they
have totally eradicated the extremists’ fundamental notion of the
deification of man.

The Shi‘ah transmitters of *hadith* have taken great pains to preserve
the *hadith*s on this topic and considerably influenced attempts made to
wipe up the deviated ideas of the extremists. It was on the basis of
these narrations that the Shi‘ah jurists reacted strongly towards the
*Ghulat* sects and excommunicated them. The Wahhabis, who equate the
Shi‘ism with the Extremism, take these narrations as allusions to the
Imams (*‘a*) of the Shi‘ahs, blaming the Shi‘ahs accordingly. This is
the unfortunate conclusion of identifying the Shi‘ism with the Extremism
to which we previously referred. A few narrations are mentioned below:

1. Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq (*‘a*), on the authority of his ancestors, has
quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as having said, “Do not rank me higher than
is my due, for God had appointed me as His servant before He chose me as
His prophet.” When the Holy Prophet (S), whose dignity is the highest
among men, places so much emophasis on his worshipping Allah, the Imams
(*‘a*) of the Shi‘ahs certainly do the same.

2. Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) has said, “Beware of going to extreme as regards us;
consider us as servants that have been brought up.” Being an obedient
servant to Allah, an important instruction of the Shi‘ism, is quite
prominent in the Imamiyyah books. When I see the narrations from the
Imams (*‘a*) of the Shi‘ahs and match them with the words of the Shi‘ah
men of knowledge, I see that there is a complete correspondence between
the two. That the Imams (*‘a*) are Allah’s servants is a fundamental
fact of the Shi‘ism, an issue thoroughly integrated with the life of
this school and its followers. Therefore, the Extremism finds no place
among the followers of this school of thought. Deep in his heart, every
Shi‘ah believes in the words of Imam Rida (*‘a*), who said, “Anyone who
elevates the dignity of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*), to
consider him a divinity, is among those upon whom God’s wrath is
brought, and is of those who have gone astray. Did ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib
(*‘a*) not eat (food) and marry as others did? Can such a person occupy
the station of divinity? Were it so, then you could each be a god.”

The Shi‘ah books abound with such narrations and the Shi‘ah scholars
have also followed the same manner (of thought and belief). Anyone
frequenting the Shi‘ah gatherings, will be convinced that these ideas do
not merely fill the gaps in the Shi‘ah books, nor live a dormant life;
they are in fact a part of the Shi‘ah community, the blood circulating
through it and giving it vitality and honour.

The picture presented so far depicts the first stage of introducing the
Shi‘ism to the Wahhabis—the step following the separation of the
Imamiyyah from the Extremism. Now, let’s take a cursory look at the
second stage, i.e. the study of the Imamiyyah in detail.

[^1]: The words of great Sunnī men of learning on the Wahhābīs’ big
problem of “mingling Shī‘ism with Ghulāt” are mentioned in a separate
chapter.

[^2]: When I was a Wahhābī I believed that the Shī‘ahs were more extreme
and polytheistic than the Ghulāt themselves, but my long investigation
and the scores of the Shī‘ah books that I studied—all proclaiming their
aversion of extremist’ Sufi exaggeration and polytheism—made it clear to
me that there is a fundamental difference between the Shī‘ism and the
Ghulāt. I have put down all these positions in my book: “Shī‘ahs view on
the extremes and the Ghulāt”.

[^3]: Gnosticism, a mystical and philosophical school that flourished in
the first two centuries C.E., maintains that it is possible to know God
through esoteric knowledge. The author of this book may have meant Sufi
sects.

[^4]: Murtadā al-Razawī, Fī Sabīl al-Wahdat al-Islāmiyyah, p. 45.

[^5]: Al-Islām wa Harikat al-Tārīkh, p. 421.

[^6]: Bayn al-Shī‘ah wa Ahl-e Sunnah, p. 11.

[^7]: Risālah al-Taqrīb, no. 3, the first year, Sha‘bān 1414 AH, p. 250.

[^8]: Laysa min al-Islām, p. 48.

[^9]: Al-Firkr al-Islāmiyyah fī Tatawurihī, p. 140.

[^10]: Al-Imām Ja‘far al-Sādiq, p. 235.

[^11]: ‘Alī wa Banūh, p. 35.

[^12]: Bayn al-Shī‘ah wa Ahl al-Sunnah, p. 4. “We do not consider this
statement as valid; so we have criticized it in details in our book, A
Re-reading of the Idea of Taqrīb”, Eskandari, the Arabic translator.

[^13]: Irān min al-Dākhil, p. 322.

[^14]: Al-Sunnah al-Muftarā ‘Alayhā, p. 6.

[^15]: Dhikriyyāt lā Mudhkarāt, p. 250.

[^16]: La‘allaka Tadhaka, p. 201.

[^17]: Khutat al-Shām, vol. 6, p. 251.

[^18]: Al-‘Ālam al-Islāmī Magazine, no. 91.

[^19]: Al-Imām al-Sādiq, p. 22.

[^20]: Ibid., p. 151.

[^21]: Risālat al-Islām Magazine.

[^22]: Al-Islām wa Harikat al-Tārīkh, p. 28.

[^23]: Usūl-u Madhhab al-Shī‘ah al-Imāmiyyah al-Ithnā ‘Ashariyyah, vol.
1, pp. 10-11; it is a book in which I have criticized Dr. Qaffārī. This
book will soon be published.

[^24]: A prelude to ‘Aqā’id al-Imāmiyyah, p. 20-23.

[^25]: Al-Tuhfah al-Ithnā ‘Ashariyyah, summerized, pp. 2-3.

[^26]: Ibid.

[^27]: Yūsuf Qardāwī, al-Shaykh al-Ghazzālī kamā ‘Araftuhu Rihlatu Nisfi
Qarn, p. 263.

[^28]: Muhammad al-Ghazzālī, Humūm al-Dā‘iyyah, p. 15.

[^29]: Muhammad al-Ghazzālī, Sirr Ta’akhkhur al-‘Arab, p. 52.

[^30]: Al-Milal wa al-Nihal.

[^31]: ‘Aqīdah al-Imām al-Hāfiz ibn Kathīr fī Āyāt al-Sifāt.

[^32]: Ibid., p. 8.

[^33]: Prologue to the book “Tafsīr Āyāt al-Sifāt”.

[^34]: Al-‘Aqīdah al-Islāmiyyah fī al-Qur’an wa Manāhij al-Mutikallimīn.

[^35]: Ma‘an ‘alā Tarīq al-Da‘wah, pp. 134-137.

[^36]: The fifth principle out of the twenty principles he has taken
into account for unity among Muslims.

[^37]: Dastūr al-Wahdah al-Thaqafiyyah bayn al-Muslimīn, p. 130.

[^38]: P. 4.

[^39]: Tartīb al-Madārik, p. 66.

[^40]: Al-Shaykh al-Ghazālī kamā ‘Araftuhū Rihlatu Nisfi Qarn, p. 125.

[^41]: Minhāj al-Sunnah, p. 133.

[^42]: Al-I‘tisām, vol. 1, p. 235.

[^43]: Al-Tabsirah, p. 298.

[^44]: Al- Mustasfī, vol. 1, p. 145.

[^45]: Muslim al-Thubūt Bisharh-i Fawātih al-Rahmūt, vol. 2, pp.
121-122.

[^46]: Usūl al-Dīn, p. 12.

[^47]: Al-Asmā’ wa al-Sifāt, p. 357.

[^48]: Al-Ma‘ālim, p. 138.

[^49]: Asās al-Taqdīs.

[^50]: Al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah bayn Ahl al-Fiqh wa Ahl al-Hadīth, p. 74.

[^51]: Dastūr al-Wahdah al-Thaqāfiyyah bayn al-Muslimīn, p. 68.

[^52]: Al-Shaykh al-Ghazzālī kamā ‘Araftuhū Rihlatu Nisf-i Qarn, pp.
123-124.

[^53]: Fī Zilāl al-Qur’ān, vol. 6, p. 4008.

[^54]: Al-Islām, ‘Aqīdah wa Sharī‘ah, pp. 74-76.


