Stage 2: Analytical Study of the Imamiyyah
==========================================

The second step we need to take in introducing the Shi‘ism to the
Wahhabis is to make a detailed analysis of the beliefs in this school of
thought, and explain it to the Wahhabis so that incorrect analyses and
false beliefs do not engage their minds, nor cause them to accuse us of
the Extremism and disbelief, attributing to us the false notions that
have nothing to do with the Imamiyyah.

The facts that we plan to investigate are available in the Imamiyyah’s
authentic books. We do not, of course, mean to make an extensive study
of the texts, for this will be done in another book. We merely say that
in all their publications, the Wahhabis commonly attribute the Shi‘ahs
with all the extremist beliefs and opinions and then shower them with
accusations that the Shi‘ahs strongly refute.

A number of contemporary Sunni writers have unfortunately followed the
Wahhabis’ manner, whereas their researchers have realized it necessity
to refer to the authentic books of a *madhhab* and make a scholarly
analysis and investigation of their content before commenting on them.

The reason for the difference in the manners adopted by such persons as
Ihsan Ilahi Zahir, who gives a verdict to excommunicate the Imamiyyah,
and Shaykh Mahmūd Shaltūt, who calls the Imamiyyah one of the Islamic
authentic schools of thought becomes clear to us: the former has taken
the second-hand documents of the *Ghulat* as sufficient evidence, but
the latter has studied and analyzed the first-hand sources.

We will now go through four important questions.

1. The reality of divinity and prophecy as viewed by the Imamiyyah
------------------------------------------------------------------

These two issues occupy a fundamental position in the Shi‘ah doctrine.
Anyone referring to the Imamiyyah books will clearly understand that the
Shi‘ahs display great interest in the issue of the Oneness of God and
His Lordship and take it as belonging to a guild different from that of
worship that creatures must render to God, for Lordship [*rubūbiyyah*]
is specifically Allah’s Divine Essence, and all others are placed on the
plane of rendering worship and being creatures.

The extraordinary significance of this issue has set the Imamiyyah up to
taking a harsh stand against the Extremism and its beliefs and write
myriads of books in which they have rejected the extremists’ ideas and
excommunicated the extremists, because the *Ghulat* have not separated
the station of Lordship from that of worship, but believe in unification
[*ittihad*] and incarnation [*hulūl*]*.*

As regards Prophecy, the Imamiyyah have established their belief upon
the Qur’anic texts, maintaining that the Prophet’s (S) mission is the
last, and his superiority over all definite. This is something the
extremists do not accept. Rather, they consider others superior to the
Prophet (S). The Imamiyyah are of the opinion that no other Prophet (S)
has come after Muhammad (S) nor will ever come. Also, anyone who denies
that Prophecy ends with Muhammad (S) is a disbeliever. This belief
surely stems from the Qur’an.

2. The realities of the divine injunctions and laws in the Imamiyyah school of thought
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

To understand these realities, they should be sequenced as we have
arranged, because until the first reality is not understood, the second
one cannot be attained. The former reality concentrates on theory, the
latter on practice; the first reality talks about intellectual reasoning
and the second speaks about corporeal acts: belief in the first issue
leads to practice in the second one.

Having first proved that there is no transcendental beloved or a creator
or one who regulates the affairs except Allah, and having established
the fact that law-making is exclusively His, we proceed to the second
issue and say that legislation should be adduced from the Qur’an and
from the revelation [*wahy*]; since the Prophet’s (S) *Sunnah*
originates from the revelation, it is a source of legislation

If you refer to the Shi‘ah juridical books, you will see that the
precepts and verdicts are all documentary: they have the Qur’an or the
true *Sunnah* as their proof and support, intend the external meaning of
the orders, flee from the esoteric and interpretive implications,
sentence to apostasy anyone who interprets [*ta’wil*] the religious
injunctions, does not feel obliged to observe the rules and washes his
hands of acting according to the *shari‘ah* laws. The Shi‘ahs maintain
that however important belief may be, it is not enough to make one
needless of the religious injunctions and laws.

3. The Imamiyyah’s ultimate religious end
-----------------------------------------

It will not be possible to know the ultimate goal of a school of
thought, unless its outlook on articles of faith and practical questions
are understood. The Wahhabis, however, desire to understand the ultimate
goal of the Shi‘ah school of thought before dealing with the position
this school has adopted concerning faith and practice. This is
impossible because the goals begin to flourish within the matrix of
faith and practice. It is not possible to separate one’s goals from
their beliefs, but the Wahhabis work hard to fabricate false aims for
the Shi‘ism and launch their attacks without having deliberated on the
significance of the first and second realities mentioned above.

4. The purport of some terms common among the Shi‘ahs
-----------------------------------------------------

I have often seen that the Wahhabis misinterpret certain expressions as
*bada’*, dissimulation [*taqiyyah*], inerrancy [*ismah*] and *mushaf*
that are commonly used in the Shi‘ah culture. So long as the meanings of
these words are not made clear, there will exist no feasibility of a
strife-free dialogue between the Shi‘ahs and the Wahhabis because of the
profound diversity there is between the Shi‘ahs’ interpretation of the
words and how the Wahhabis understand them, although these expressions
are formally the same.

This may seem to be the point where the two realities of Imamate and the
Twelfth Imam’s (*‘a*) occultation should be brought up, but to make it
easier for the Wahhabis to grasp the idea we moved it to stage three
because it is very hard for them to perceive them at this particular
stage. Now, let us take a cursory look at the issue of knowing the
Imamiyyah.


