The Epilogue: The Future Belongs to the Shi‘ism
===============================================

Our success in introducing the Shi‘ism in the best possible manner will,
hopefully, lead those who had dealt heavy blows on this school of
thought (to change and) adhere to it. They did it because many of them,
unable to perceive the grand realities and peculiarities of this school,
feigned thousands of lies against the Shi‘ism, displayed it wrongly and
finally distanced themselves from it. The Wahhabis will easily convert
to this school of thought and propagate for it once they have clearly
perceived the Imamiyyah’s shining realities.

What has surprised the Wahhabis is that the Shi‘ism has withstood surges
of enmity that had aimed at crushing it, and has successively spread in
the nooks and crannies of the world. The secret for the increasing
expansion of the Shi‘ism lies in the Imamiyyah’s deeply-rooted strength
of thought that has attracted hundreds of the Sunnis and scores of the
Wahhabis: those who were, until recently, the Shi‘ahs’ most stubborn
enemies have now turned into its strongest defenders.

Almost no region—Arab or non-Arab—can be found in which the Shi‘ism has
not penetrated. The Wahhabis have now clearly understood that in the
near future, it is the Shi‘ahs that will constitute “the majority” in
the Muslim World because they have already found a strong foot-hold in
the regions where the Wahhabis expected it the least. They have thus
realized that the future belongs to the Shi‘ism.

Dr. ‘Ali Salūs, the contemporary Wahhabi writer has confessed saying,
“The Imamiyyah is the greatest of the Islamic schools of thought.”[^1]

It is our hope that the Wahhabis will gradually turn to the Shi‘ism and
that the future belongs to us, provided that we apply the best method in
presenting the Shi‘ism.

Shaykh Rabi‘ ibn Muhammad Sa‘ūdi, another Wahhabi writer says, “Having
returned to Egypt after four or five years, I felt that there was a new
line of thought in Cairo… What surprised me the most was that it was our
brothers, the children of the most eminent Egyptian scholars, our former
classmates, those in whom I used to have good faith, who had all been
attracted to this new line of thought, viz. the Shi‘ism.”[^2]

I have addressed the present book to people like him to let them know
that a strife-free dialogue between the Shi‘ahs and Wahhabis is not
impossible.

As a further proof I would like to quote Dr. Nasir Qaffari, the famous
and biased Wahhabi writer, who says, “Many have converted to the
Shi‘ism… Anyone reading the book *‘Unwan al-Majd fi Tarikh al-Basrah wa
Najd* will take fright when he learns of the great number of the
communities that have turned to the Shi‘ism.”[^3] He then calls the
Shi‘ism a great clan. The more we study the Wahhabis’ writing, the more
we understand that the future belongs to the Shi‘ism, and that this
school of thought has increasingly been growing among the Wahhabis and
Sunnis.

In his compendium of Ibn Taymiyyah’s *Minhaj al-Sunnah*, Shaykh ‘Abd
Allah Ghaniman, a professor of graduate studies at Madinah Islamic
University says, “The Shi‘ism is now ruling over all Islamic
regions.”[^4] This proves that the Wahhabis know that the Shi‘ism will
soon attract them.

Another promising piece of news comes from Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman
Maghrawi, a Wahhabi author, who says, “I fear the spread of the Shi‘ism
among the Western youths.”[^5]

Yet another author, Majdi Muhammad ‘Ali Muhammad, reports the following:
“A Sunni youth, overwhelmed by doubt and uncertainty, came to see me. He
was bewildered by the Shi‘ah ideas that had been passed on to him…”[^6]

And there are hundreds of other similar cases. So, it is our
responsibility to introduce the school properly and logically, to
penetrate the Wahhabis and explain the realities and peculiarities of
the Shi‘ism. The important point to bear in mind is that rather than
answering the doubt they raise, the discussion ought to center on the
*thaqalayn* *hadith.* Just remember that it is awfully hard to convince
a Wahhabi before you ever try to answer his question.

***“He it is who sent His Apostle with guidance and the true religion,
that He may make it overcome the religions, all of them, though the
polytheists may be averse.” (61:9)***

[^1]: Al-Shī‘ah al-Ithnā ‘Ashariyyah fī al-Usūl wa al-Furū‘, vol. 1, p.
21.

[^2]: Prologue to the book Al-Shī‘ah al-Imāmiyyah fī Mīzān al-Islām.

[^3]: Prologue to the book ‘Usūl al-Madhhab al-Shī‘ah al-Imāmiyyah
al-Ithnā ‘Ashariyyah.

[^4]: Mukhtasar al-Sunnah.

[^5]: Min Sabb al-Sahābah wa Mu‘āwiyah fa Ummuhū Hāwiyah, p. 4.

[^6]: Intisār al-Haqq, pp. 11-14.


