On The Path of Religion
=======================

In a class at the Jaffery Primary School of Mombasa, it was time for
religious instruction. The subject was: The meaning and benefits of
following a religion. This is how the lesson went.

Pupil: Please, Sir, tell us the meaning of religion.

Teacher: Religion is a collection of beliefs. It lays down the rules of
character, how to deal with your family members as well as with other
people, It also teaches us rules concerning money matters. They have
been taught to us by the Prophets who were messengers of God, sent for
the guidance of Mankind.

Pupil: May I know what benefit do we get from following a religion?

Teacher: By following the teachings of true religion, a person becomes
happy in this world as well as in the next one.

Pupil: Please, Sir, tell us what religion teaches us.

Teacher: The teachings of religion mainly consist of:

**1) Beliefs:** To believe in One God, who created this world, the Sun,
the Moon, the Stars, and other planets and everything in them. Because
of his kindness, he did not leave human beings without guidance. He sent
Prophets to guide them to the right path so that they may fulfill the
duties he has laid down. Those who follow the teachings of the Prophets
would be successful and happy in this as well as the next world.

**2) Character:** Religion teaches us to be good and kind to everyone,
to love everyone, to respect parents and teachers, to seek useful
knowledge, to protect our rights and those of others and to live
moderately.

**3) Social and Economic Guidance:** A perfect religion lays down rules
about how to behave and deal with people when they do wrong. It also
teaches us rules about money matters, how one should earn one's living,
how one should take care of the poor and needy relatives, what type of
business is allowed.

**4) Worship:** Religion teaches us that we pray to God and fast, so
that by such actions we remember God and purify our Body and Mind.

We should obey God only and not follow people. God has created all of
us. Therefore he knows better what is good for us. He has laid down a
code of life for our benefit. Therefore, it is in our interest to follow
it.

Pupil: May I know, Sir, how belief in a religion affects our lives?

Teacher: Belief in religion not only affects a person's spirit or soul
but also his body and action.

A person who believes in one God, acts differently from a person who
does not believe in God. He who believes in God cannot at any time
become proud, because he knows that whatever he has acquired has been
given to him by God and God can take it back whenever he wishes.

He does not look down upon other people as he knows that all of them
have been created by God in the same way as he was created.

He does not bow down before anyone but God. He knows that everything has
been created by God and he provides for all our needs. He alone is
worthy of being worshipped.

He also believes in life in the next world and always tries to do good
and refrains from doing bad. The better his deeds, the better will be
his life in the next world.

A person who believes in God does all the good work even if he is not
paid for it or appreciated by others. He continues to do good to others.
He sacrifices his time, money and energy in serving people for the sake
of God, as this pleases God. He does not become selfish.

Thus belief is connected with character and character with actions. They
are all connected to each other.

Pupil: Now Sir can you tell us what would happen if a person did not
believe in religion?

Teacher: A person who does not believe in God and life in the next world
does not know who created him, why he was created and what is the
purpose of his life. He is like a traveller who is lost and moves around
aimlessly.

When such a person falls into trouble, he has no where to look for help.
If he wants anything, he has no one from whom he can ask to fulfill his
wishes.

A person who believes in religion asks for help from God when he is in
difficulties. He asks God to fulfill his wishes. He is sure that God
will help him and will grant him his desires if they are good for him.
But a person who does not believe in God has no one.

A non-believer acts according to his whims. He is most of the time
selfish. He is not prepared to help others for he does not expect to get
God's reward for his sacrifices for the trouble he takes for others.

His only aim in life is to find happiness for himself at all cost. He
does not know what is the purpose of his life. He does not hesitate to
tell lies, steal, hurt others and do all sorts of bad things; if these
actions will gain something for him. He does not know that God will
punish him for his bad deeds in the next world.

A person who believes in religion is afraid of God and will not do bad
things. He knows that any difficulty that comes to him in this world is
meant to test his faith in God. He, therefore, faces it patiently and
prays for God's help. He knows that this will please God and he will be
rewarded for it by God in the next world.

The bell rang. It was time for another lesson. When the children went
home, they fully realised the need for a religion. Since then, they
respected their religious teachings more and more and made every effort
to follow them. In so doing they became happier and successful in life.


