Care for Animals
================

A man once came to Prophet Muhammad (S) carrying with him his belongings
and a box. He said, “O Prophet! While I was passing through a jungle, I
heard the voice of some bird's babies. I took them and put them in this
box. The moment I did that, their mother came fluttering round my head.”

And the Prophet said, “Put them down”. When the man put the box on the
ground, the mother of the young birds joined them. Seeing this, the
Prophet asked the man who now had a look of surprise on his face, “Are
you surprised by the affection of the mother towards her young? I swear
by Him (Almighty Allah) who has sent me, surely, God is more loving to
his servants than the mother to these young birds. Return these baby
birds to the place from where you took them, and let their mother be
with them.”

“Fear God with regard to animals”, said the Prophet of Islam, “ride them
when they are fit to be ridden, and get off their backs when they are
tired; surely, there are rewards for being kind and gentle to animals,
and for giving them water to drink.”

Islam has taught that in the eyes of Allah, animals also have rights in
the same way as man has. They should not be treated badly, tortured or
left to starve without food or water.

Imam Ali (a) had some ducks under his care in his house. At the time of
his death, he had given particular advice to his sons to take good care
of those animals, or to set them free if it was not possible to look
after them properly.

The Holy Qur'an has also guided us by telling us that, in the eyes of
God there is no difference between the human world and the animal world.

***“There is not an animal (that lives) on the earth, nor a being that
flies on its wings, but (forms part of) communities like you. Nothing
have we omitted from the Book, and they (all) shall be gathered to their
Lord in the end.” (6:38)***

The Prophet of Islam was once performing ablution (Wudhu) for prayers
from a pot of water. A cat passed there and turned its eyes at the pot
of water with a thirsty look. The Prophet realised at once that the cat
was very thirsty, so he stopped the ablution (Wudhu) and placed the pot
before the cat. Only after the cat had fully quenched its thirst, did
the Prophet resume the ablution (Wudhu).

By this action, the Prophet has shown that quenching the thirst of even
a small dumb animal is a noble act full of virtue and should be given
first attention before one prepares for offering prayers to God.


