Nazr: A Vow with Allah to Be Fulfilled
======================================

Imam Hasan (a) and Imam Husain (a) were still very young probably in
their fifth to sixth year of age. Once, both of them fell sick and their
parents, Imam Ali (a) and Bibi Fatima (a) were grieved to see them in
unhealthy condition.

The Holy Prophet Prophet Muhammad (S) came to see them. He loved them
very much and on seeing them sick, he also was much grieved. They all
prayed for their quick recovery. The Holy Prophet suggested to the
parents to keep a Nazr for the restoration of the health of the
children. Thereupon. Imam Ali (a) and Bibi Fatima (a) made a Nazr (a
vow) that they would fast three days upon the recovery of the children.

Allah accepted their prayers and granted their Nazr. Both the children
recovered from their illness. Imam Ali (a) and Bibi Fatima (a) decided
to fast in fulfilment of the Nazr. When the two children came to know of
this, they too decided to fast. The maid-servant in the house, Bibi
Fizza, who loved the children very much also decided to join in the fast
on the happy occasion of their recovery.

On the first day of the fasting, Imam Ali (a) went out in the morning
and brought 3 sa'a wool for spinning and 3 sa'a barley as its wages.
Bibi Fatima (a) spinned 1 sa'a wool, then ground 1 sa'a barley, and
prepared five loaves of bread. In the evening, all of them gathered to
break the fast and each of them had a loaf placed before him.

When they heard the Adhan (call to prayers), they prayed and sat to
break the fast. Suddenly, a poor man knocked on their door and asked for
something to eat. All of them, one by one, passed their loaves to the
beggar. There was no other food in the house, so all of them had to be
content with water. They went to bed and slept without food. The next
day they fasted again in fulfilment of the Nazr, but yet with almost
empty stomach.

Second day, Bibi Fatima (a) again spinned 1 sa'a of wool, ground 1 sa'a
of barley, and again baked 5 loaves. Again they sat together to break
the fast with the usual one loaf of bread for each. As they were about
to break the fast, an orphan came all of a sudden to their door and
asked for food saying he was very hungry. Although the inmates of the
house were themselves hungry for two days, they were happy to feed the
boy. Everyone gave his or her bread to the orphan. They again slept
without any food.

On the third day as they sat down to break the fast, a prisoner knocked
at their door asking for something to eat. Although the people of the
house of the Holy Prophet had been suffering from near starvation for
the last three days, they again gave away all the bread to the prisoner
and contented themselves only with water for the third day in
succession.

It was in appreciation of these sacrifices, that Almighty Allah revealed
the whole 'Surah al-Dahr', which contains, among other things, the
following Ayat:

***“They (Ahlul Bait) fulfil vow and fear a day the evil of which shall
be spreading far and wide” (Surah Al-Dahr, 76: Verse7)***

This is how Ahlul Bait, the people of the household of the Holy Prophet
Muhammad (S), kept and fulfilled their their Nazr (vow). They also set
example of sacrifice by feeding the poor and caring for those who were
in need.

The tradition of Nazr is a very old one. During the time of Bani Israel,
centuries back, in the name of God, people used to present their sons at
Baitul-Muqaddas, in the service of the pious people there, They used to
stay within the walls of the mosques.

Once Imran, the father of Hazrat Maryam (Mary) got the good news that
Almighty would bless him with a child. The child would be so gifted that
with the command of God, he would cure the sick, restore sight to the
blind, bring life back unto the dead and he shall also be a Prophet of
God. When Bibi Hanna, the mother of Hazrat Maryam, heard this news, she
vowed that she would free the child from the worldly attachments (to
spend life in the service of Allah). The following Ayat in the Qur'an
refers to this event:

***“When said (Hanna) the wife of lmran, 'My Lordl Verily I have vowed
to thee what is in my womb to be (dedicated) for Thee (exclusively for
Thy service) freed (from all worldly responsibilities), therefore accept
(it) from me; Verily Thou Ant the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing'“. (Sura
Ale-Imran, 3:35)***

Over 2000 years ago people worshipped idols in Arabia. There was a King
by the name of Hasan who decided to destroy the Holy Ka'aba. Because of
this evil intention, he fell sick and ended being a leper. Upon
realising his mistake, he begged pardon from God and vowed that if his
health was restored, he would place Ghilaf (Covering) over the Holy
Ka'aba. This wish of his was fulfilled and he, in turn placed the Ghilaf
made of palm leaves, For many years a new black cover made of thick
cloth is being placed on Ka'aba every year.

Thus Nazr is a media by which a human being seeks assistance and
pleasure of God. Whenever one prays to God for assistance, it is
recommended that one uses a media which can take him to God. Nazr is one
of such medias.

Whenever a person keeps a Nazr and prays for something from God and upon
being granted his wish when he fulfills the Nazr which he had pledged,
his faith in Allah is enhanced. As faith increases, one tries to refrain
from sins and endeavours to do more virtuous deeds in order to please
and be nearer to Allah.


