Imamat Is Guidance We Need
==========================

Basra is a big city and the main port of Iraq. It is situated at the
mouth of river Euphrates.

There, in a big mosque, people used to assemble to discuss various
subjects on Islamic rules and laws. A famous learned priest of Sunni
sect by name Amr Bin Ubeid was once preaching on the subject of Imamat.
He was surrounded by a big crowd of people who were asking various
questions on the subject. Suddenly, a young and intelligent student of
Islam by name of Hesham, entered the gathering and sat down in the first
row. He addressed the priest saying that he was a stranger and would
like to ask some questions. On getting the permission to do so, he asked
the following:

Hesham: First, Sir! May I please know if you have eyes?

Amr: Young Boy! Is this a question to be asked?

Hesham: Whatever it may be, this is my question to which I shall
appreciate your answer.

Amr: Alright! you are at liberty to ask, even though it is a foolish
question.

Hesham: As I have already asked, Sir, may I please know if you have
eyes?

Amr: Yes, I have.

Hesham: For what use are they?

Amr: With eyes, I can see faces of people and colour of various things.

Hesham: And you have a nose also?

Amr: Yes, I do have one.

Hesham: What is its function?

Amr: I smell the scent and odour by it.

Hesham: And do you have a mouth?

Amr: Yes I do have.

Hesham: For what use is it?

Amr: I can talk to people or taste food and drinks with it.

Hesham: Do you have ears?

Amr: Yes, I have two ears.

Hesham: What is their function?

Amr: I can hear voices by them.

Hesham: And do you have a mind?

Amr: Almighty has bestowed me with that also.

Hesham: What is its use?

Amr: With that I am able to distinguish things whatever is felt by the
other senses like hands, eyes, ears, nose, tongue etc. In case of a
difference, I am able to solve with its help. In case of doubt, I can
dispel with it and be sure.

Hesham: So, does it mean that despite being sound and healthy, all these
organs cannot function independently without the help of the mind.

Amr: No, No! none of the organs can function independently without the
help of the mind.

Hesham: Why is it so? After all, are the organs perfect and strong
enough to differentiate between things?

Amr: Young Boy! When any organ has some doubt about a thing which it
smells, sees or tastes, it brings the matter to the mind and it is the
mind which confirms the truth and removes the doubt.

Hesham: So, from what you have said, do you want me to understand that
God Almighty has created and designed the mind to guide the organs and
remove doubts.

Amr: Yes! It is so.

Hesham: So the mind is a necessity, otherwise the organs could not work
independently.

Amr: Yes.

Hesham: Please Sir! Proclaim your opinion with fairness and justice on
this point also. If Almighty has not left the organs of man's body
without the guidance of the mind, how is it possible that Almighty God
could leave millions of His creatures without an IMAM to guide and solve
their problems arising out of doubts and conflicts? Should not our
common sense accept this fact?

On hearing this logic argument. and having no answer to give, Amr Bin
Ubeid kept silent and went into deep thinking.

Hesham was a deeply learned person and one of the closest companions of
Imam Ja'far Sadiq (a) from whom he had obtained his knowledge.

'IMAM' is an Arabic word which literally means 'Leader' or 'Guide'. Any
leader or guide can be good or bad, true or false. Therefore, it is
essential for every Muslim to know what makes and who is a true and good
Imam. The Holy Prophet has said: “If a man dies without recognising the
Imam of his time, he dies the death of ignorance.”

It is of utmost importance that the Imam must be appointed by a Prophet
under the command of God, nobody can be an Imam either by claiming to be
so, by inheritance or by the wealth or power which he may have.

It is essential that an Imam possess certain characteristics and
qualities so that a clear distinction can be made between a true and
false Imam. Some of these are as under:

1. An Imam must be free from every defect - Physical as well as Mental;

2. He must be born of legal Marriage;

3. He must be Ma'sum (Infallible-Sinless) like the Prophet - from birth
to death;

4. He must possess all knowledge and be the wisest of all human beings
of his time;

5. He must know all the languages including those of animals also;

6. He must be able to perform miracles;

7. He must be bold, brave and most courageous;

8. He should be most generous and be able to help needy and weak
persons.

In short, an Imam is the Holiest, most Pious of all - after the Holy
Prophet Muhammad (S)


