The Learned Man and the Hungry Dog
==================================

Isphahan is a beautiful city in Persia. In this lovely city there once
lived a very great learned man. He was also very poor. His name was
Muhammad Baqar. Because he lived in Isphahan he is known as Mohammad
Baqar-e-Isphahani which means Muhammad Baqar of Isphahan city.

Muhammad Baqar-e-Isphahani was poor and therefore he could not afford
good food. He had no money to buy rich food. For many years he had been
living on simple food. Once he felt like eating liver. Food made from
liver is tasty and rich in strength. So he began to save money each day
from his small earnings so that he could buy a pound of liver and thus
satisfy his desire.

After many days he saved enough money to buy a pound of liver He was
happy. He went to the bazaar and bought a nice piece of his favourite
liver.

Feeling very, very happy he was returning home from market with the
parcel in his hands. On the way home, near a ruined house, he saw a dog
with her puppies. The dog with her young ones looked very hungry. Her
stomach had gone deep inside. She was not able even to give milk to her
little ones and feed them. The dog and her puppies were also shivering
from the cold climate.

Mohammad Baqar-e-Isphahani felt sorry for the poor animals. He went near
them and stroked them kindly. Then he opened his parcel of liver and cut
small pieces and then piece by piece fed them.

The dog while eating looked thankfully at Mohammad Baqar-e- Isphahani
and then at the sky as if she was thanking Allah for the favour and
praying for the generous and kind man.

Having fed the animals Mohammad Baqar-e-lsphahani went home. Tired and
hungry he slept that night shivering in the cold. But, somehow he felt
happy.

Soon after this incident the learned man began to get rich. Gradually he
became richer and richer until he was a millionaire. He became go rich
that once when the King of Isphahan was in need of money, Muhammad
Baqar-e-Isphahani gave him a loan of 20,000 dinars.

Moral: Kindness is never wasted.


