God Sees You Everywhere
=======================

A teacher had many good students in his class but had particular regard
and high respect for one of them. Some of the students one day asked the
teacher the reason for this. In reply he said, I shall tell you
tomorrow.”

The next day, he handed to each of those students one live chicken. He
asked them to take the chickens to a place where they would not be seen
by anyone and then slaughter them. After a while, they returned with
their chicken duly slaughtered. But his favourite student came back with
his chicken alive.

The teacher asked him why he had not slaughtered it. He replied. “You
had asked me to go to a place where nobody would see me. I tried hard to
find a place where God Almighty could not see me. But I failed.
Everywhere went I was sure that God could see me and I could not hide
from Him. So I could not carry out your instructions.

On hearing this, the teacher turned to the other students and remarked,
“The reason why I respect this student more is because of his constant
awareness of the existence of God who can always see him, no matter
where he is. Consequently, he does not commit any sin”.

The sixth Imam, Ja'far al-Sadiq (a), said to one of his friends, lshaq
Bin Ammar, “Fear God as if you are able to see Him because He sees you.
And if you think that He is not able to see you, then you become a
non-believer. And if you believe that He sees you and you commit a sin
in His presence, then you consider Him as the lowest of those seeing
you”.


