She Had True Faith
==================

Abu Baseer was once in the company of Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a) when a
woman came and said to the Imam, “I have come to ask a question. I am
ill. Physicians in Iraq have told me to take liquor. Now I want to know
what to do in such circumstances?”

The Imam asked her, “Why don't you drink what the doctors have
prescribed for you?”

She replied, “As I am your follower, I shall obey what you say. If you
permit me, I shall drink it; if not, I shall keep away from it; so that
if I am asked by the Almighty God on the Day of Judgement why I did so,
I shall reply that I followed the instructions of the Imam of the day.”

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a) turned to Abu Baseer and said: “O Abu Baseer.
Did you listen to what this woman has to say? Are you not moved by her
faith? Inspite of her illness, she is refraining from taking liquor
without the Imam's permission.”

The Imam then turned to the woman and said, “By God, I do not permit you
to drink. If you do so, you shall be sorry when your soul reaches your
throat (that is at the time of death)”.

So saying the Imam pointed at her throat; and asked her three times if
she understood what he had said. The woman nodded her head.

One of the things which Islam has strongly forbidden is the taking of
any intoxicating drink, like beer, wine. They are harmful to the body
and mind. Under their influence one loses one's senses and is apt to
commit criminal acts. We read of fatal accidents and crimes committed
because of drinks.

Even trading in liquor and sitting in bars where people are drinking are
also forbidden in Islam so that there is no temptation in the way of
people to taking them.

The Holy Qur'an says,

***“O Believers, Intoxicants and games of chance, idols and divining
arrows, are abominations devised by Satan. Avoid them, so that you may
prosper. Satan desires to stir up enmity and hatred among you by means
of intoxicants and gambling, and to keep you from the remembrance of
Allah and from your prayers. Will you not abstain from them?” (Chapter
5, Verses 90, 91)***

The above verses from the Qur'an warn us of the effects of drinking.

The first Imam, Ali (a), said, “Suppose a drop of liquor is put in a
well and from its water a land is irrigated. Grass grows on the land and
a sheep grazes there. That sheep then gets mixed in a flock of other
sheep who have grazed elsewhere. If all the sheep are slaughtered making
it difficult to identify the meat of the sheep who had grazed on a land
which was irrigated from the water of the well, then I shall not eat any
of that meat.”

Thus Imam Ali (a) has emphasized the evil of alcohol.

For the sake of our own physical, mental and spiritual welfare, we
should always keep away from drinks.


