Preface
=======

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) reports: \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib (a.s) was missioned by
the Holy Prophet to go to the market and purchase a shirt. He went to
the market and purchased a shirt for twelve Dirhams. The Holy Prophet
asked, “How much did you pay for it?”

- “Twelve Dirhams.”

- “I do not like it so much! I would like to have a less expensive one.
Is the seller ready to take it back, please return it?”

- “I do not know, Allah’s Messenger.”

- “Go and see whether he agrees to take it back or not.”

\`Ali took the shirt with him, returned to the market and asked the
seller, “The Holy Prophet wants a shirt of less expensive price than
this. Are you ready to pay back our money and take back the shirt?”

The seller accepted it; \`Ali took the money and came to the Holy
Prophet. Then they both went towards the market. On the way, the Holy
Prophet saw a slave-girl crying.

- “Why are you crying?”

- “My master gave me four Dirhams and sent me to the market for
shopping. I do not know how I lost the money. At present, I am scared to
go back home.”

The Holy Prophet gave her four Dirhams from those twelve Dirhams and
said, “Buy what you want and go back home!” Then, he went to the market,
purchased a shirt for four Dirhams and put it on.

On his return, he saw a naked man; immediately he took off his shirt
and gave it to him. He returned to the market, purchased another shirt
for four Dirhams, put it on and took the way towards his house. On the
way, he saw the same slave-girl sitting, puzzled, embarrassed and
perplexed.

- “Why didn’t you go back home?”

- “O Allah’s Messenger, it is too late. I am afraid they might beat me,
for I have slightly delayed.”

- “Let us go together. Show me the way to your house! I will intercede
for you with them so that they may not bother you.”

The Holy Prophet accompanied the slave-girl. As they reached the house,
the girl said, “This is the house.”

The Holy Prophet said in a high voice from behind the door, “O people
of the house, peace be upon you.” He did not get any reply. Thus he said
again, yet there was no reply. For the third time, he saluted, and they
replied, “O Allah’s Messenger, peace and Allah’s mercy and blessings be
upon you.”

- “Why did you not reply for the first time; didn’t you hear my
voice?”

- “Of course, yes! We heard your voice the first time and came to know
that it was you!”

- “Then what was the reason for your delay?”

- “O Allah’s Messenger! We loved to hear your voice again and again.
Your salaam is peace, blessing and grace for our house.”

- “This slave-girl of yours was delayed. I came here to ask you not to
pester her.”

- “O Allah’s Messenger! Because of your gracious visit, this slave-girl
is free from now on.”

The Holy Prophet said, “Thanks to Allah, how blessed these twelve
Dirhams were; which became the dress of too naked persons and a
slave-girl got emancipated.”[^1]


