Five Moral Habits of the Holy Prophet
=====================================

Allah’s Messenger is reported by Imam al-Baqir (a.s) as saying:

<p dir="rtl">
خَمْسٌ لَسْتُ بِتَارِكِهِنَّ حَتَّى الْمَمَاتِ: لِبَاسِي الصُّوفَ،
وَرُكُوبِي الْحِمَارَ مُؤكِفاً، وَأكْلِي مَعَ الْعَبِيدِ، وَخَصْفِي
النَّعْلَ بِالْيَدِ، وَتَسْلِيمِي عَلَى الصِّبْيَانِ لِتَكُونَ سُنَّةً
مِنْ بَعْدِي.
</p>

I will not quit five habits until the moment of my death: wearing
coarse clothes, riding a mule without packsaddle, eating with the
slaves, weaving footwear with my own hands, and saluting children so
that it will become a tradition after me.

**A Jew Becomes Muslim By the Holy Prophet**

Imam Musa (a.s) has quoted Imam \`Ali (a.s) as saying, “Allah’s
Messenger owed a Jew a few Dinars, so he asked for it. The Holy Prophet
said, “I can’t pay it now.” The Jew said, “I will not leave you until
you pay my money.” The Holy Prophet said, “Then I will sit beside you.”
He sat beside the Jew for along time during which he performed all his
prayers in the same place. The Holy Prophet’s companions made an attempt
to intimidate him. Looking at them, the Holy Prophet asked, “What are
you going to do with him?” They said, “O Allah’s Messenger! A Jew is
taking you a hostage like that!” The Holy Prophet said, “Allah has not
commissioned me to do any injustice to non-Muslims.” When the day was
coming to an end, the Jew said, “I bear witness that there is no god but
Allah and I bear witness that Muhammad is His servant and His Messenger.
I give away a portion of my wealth for the sake of Allah, O Messenger! I
swear by Allah what I did to you was to see whether you are the same
person described in the Torah. I have read your description in the Torah
that Muhammad, son of \`Abdullah, is born in Mecca; he migrates to
Medina. He is neither rough nor furious. He is neither foul-mouthed nor
does he use indecent words. I testify to the oneness of Allah and your
Prophethood. This is my wealth at your disposal. Spend it as Allah has
commanded.”[^2]

**Interest-Free Loan For The Needy**

Reporting his father, Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) says, “A needy came to the
Holy Prophet asking for help. The Holy Prophets asked, “Is there anyone
here to give an interest-free loan?” A man from the Ansar rose up
saying, “I have such a loan.” The Holy Prophet said, “Give four vessels
of date to this man.” The man did so and came to the Holy Prophet after
sometime asking for the payment of his loan. The Holy Prophet said, “We
will pay it in the coming days.” The man came another time, hearing the
same words. But when he came for the third time, the Holy Prophet smiled
and said, “Is there anyone here to give an interest-free loan?” A man
rose up saying, “O Allah’s Messenger! I have it.” The Holy Prophet
asked, “How much is that?” The man said, “As much as you wish!” The Holy
Prophet said, “Give eight vessels of date to this man.” The man said,
“You owe me only four vessels.” The Holy Prophet said, “The other four
vessels too are for you.”[^3]

**Eating with the Poor**

Reporting his father, Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) says, “During the time of the
Holy Prophet, the needy had to spend nights in the mosque because they
had no home. One evening, the Holy Prophet broke his fast with the needy
in the mosque in a stone vessel. Since the food had been blessed by the
Holy Prophet, thirty people ate from it and they took the rest of the
food for their wives.”[^4]


