Piety and Contentment
=====================

Quoting his forefathers, Imam al-Rida reports: Allah’s Messenger said:
An angel came to me saying, “O Muhammad! Your Lord sent greetings to you
saying: I will fill Mecca with gold if you wish so.” But the Holy
Prophet raised his head toward the sky saying, “O Lord! I will eat my
fill one day to praise You and remain hungry to beg you.”[^5]

**Amazing Humbleness**

Ibn \`Abbas reports: The Holy Prophet would always sit on the earth; he
would eat on the earth; he would milk the sheep; and he would accept the
slaves’ invitation to barley bread on their tablecloth.”[^6]

**Sympathy with People**

Among the homeless poor people who used to live in the mosque, there
was a believer who was poor and indigent. He would follow Allah’s
Messenger when praying and never lost congregational prayer. The Holy
Prophet had sympathy for him closely watching his needs. The Holy
Prophet kept on saying, “O Sa\`d: I will make you needless if I gain
something.” A long time passed but the Holy Prophet did not gain
anything. Hence, his sympathy for the man increased. Allah Almighty Who
was watching this, sent Archangel Gabriel to him with two Dirhams
saying, “Allah is Aware of your sorrow about Sa\`d. Would you like to
make him needless?” The Holy Prophet said, “Yes.” “Give these two
Dirhams to him to start a business.”

Taking the two Dirhams, the Holy Prophet left home for the mosque to
perform his Noon Prayer with Sa\`d waiting for him. He said, “Do you
like business?” Sa\`d said, “Yes, I do. But I do not have money.” The
Holy Prophet gave the two Dirhams to him saying, “Start a business with
it and seek the Divine food.” After completing his prayer, the Holy
Prophet said, “Go after business from now on, for I was very sorry for
you.” Sa\`d did so in a way that he bought goods for one dirham selling
them for two Dirhams or bought goods for two Dirhams selling them for
four Dirhams. In this way, he made a fortune and his business became
brisk.

He went so far as to find premises near the mosque and set up his
business there. He was so engaged in his business that he took no heed
of Bilal’s call to prayer nor would he come to the mosque for prayer.
One day, the Holy Prophet said to him, “O Sa\`d! You are so much
preoccupied with the world that you have failed to perform prayer with
the Prophet! What has happened to your previous spirituality?” Sa\`d
said, “Shall I waste my property? I have no option! I have to sell my
goods to people and receive the price and to purchase goods from people
and pay for them!” The Holy Prophet became sadder for Sa\`d than before
when he was poor and indigent. At this time, Gabriel came to the Holy
Prophet saying, “O Muhammad! Allah is Aware of your sorrow for Sa\`d.
Which one do you like best, the former or the present conditions?” The
Holy Prophet said, “The former conditions, for he is in a situation that
this world has ruined his Hereafter.

” Gabriel said, “Tell Sa\`d to return the two Dirhams you gave him.
When he does so, he will be back to his former conditions.” The Holy
Prophet too went to Sa\`d telling him affectionately, “O Sa\`d! Don’t
you want to return our two Dirhams?” Sa\`d said, “Yes, I will, along
with two hundred Dirhams!” The Holy Prophet said, “Only those two
Dirhams!” Sa\`d gave the two Dirhams to the Holy Prophet and soon he
lost what he had gained. Thus, he returned to the former situation.[^7]

**Kindness against Ingratitude**

Quoting Imam \`Ali, Imam Musa reports:

The Holy Prophet was always benevolent and benefactor yet he was never
appreciated by people. He was kind to Quraysh, Arabs and non-Arabs. We
Ahl al-Bayt are the benefactors but our benefaction is not appreciated.
The chosen believers too are like us.[^8]

**Devotion**

Reporting Imam al-Sadiq, Abu-Basir narrates:

Allah’s Messenger would always eat like a servant, sit on the earth
like a servant and act upon the fact that he was a servant of
Allah.[^9]


