A Permanent Cure
================

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) has said: A Bedouin woman passing by the Holy
Prophet who was eating on the earth said, “O Muhammad! I swear by Allah
that you eat and sit on the earth like a servant of Allah.” The Holy
Prophet said, “Woe to you! Who is more deserving than me to be a servant
of Allah?” The woman said, “Give a morsel of your food to me!” The Holy
Prophet gave her a morsel. The woman said, “No, give me the morsel in
your mouth!” The Holy Prophet brought out the morsel from his mouth and
gave it to her. The woman never experienced any pain in life until she
died.[^10]

**Honoring A Nobleman**

Hatam al-Ta’i was a noble, generous, and kind Arab. He would make food
of a camel every day to feed people. He was doing this whole heartedly
and with devotion. Nevertheless, he died before the advent of Islam.
After Hatam, his son \`Adi succeeded him; he was as generous as his
father. It is said that one day a man asked him for one hundred Dirhams.
\`Adi said, “By Allah, this is nothing, ask for more!” When a poet
eulogized him, \`Adi said, “Wait for me to give you a reward before you
read the eulogy.” In the 9th A.H., the Holy Prophet sent a group headed
by Imam \`Ali to Tay Tribe to invite them to Islam but they fought them
and were defeated. Most of the Tay people were taken captives along with
considerable booty. \`Adi, Christian by faith, escaped to Syria, leaving
his sister, Safanah among the captives. Before the Holy Prophet, she
stood up and said, “O Allah’s Messenger! My father passed away; my
guardian who is my brother has escaped to Syria; be gracious to me.” The
Holy Prophet ordered to give here new dress and send here respectfully
to Syria.

Seeing this, \`Adi was surprised. When his sister told him about the
Holy Prophet’s gracious behavior, \`Adi asked for an advisable act. The
sister said, “You would better go to him, for it would be a source of
pride for you to believe him, should he be a prophet and it would be an
honor for you should he be a king.” \`Adi moved quickly, went to the
mosque and introduced himself to the Holy Prophet who invited him to his
house.

On the way home, an old woman came to the Holy Prophet and held him
standing for a long time speaking of her needs. The Holy Prophet too was
patiently listening to her! \`Adi said to himself, “This is not the
attitude of the kings to speak with the needy in this manner.” When they
reached home, the Holy Prophet made \`Adi sit on the mattress while he
himself sat on the earth facing him. \`Adi said, “It is not good for me
to sit on this mattress when you sit on the earth.” The Holy Prophet
said, “You are our guest!” Then the Holy Prophet said, “Perhaps you look
at the actual poverty and indigence of Muslims and our numerous enemies
that you do not accept Islam. But this situation will not last long.”
Hearing this, \`Adi willingly embraced Islam, defended Ahl al-Bayt after
Allah’s Messenger and remained steadfast until the end of his life. He
fought along with Imam \`Ali in the battles of Camel, Siffin and
Nahrawan for the sake of Allah. In the Battle of Jamal (Camel), he lost
one eye and three of his sons were martyred in the front of justice
against injustice.[^11]

**Great Forbearance**

Anas ibn Malik says: A Bedouin came to the Holy Prophet, took his cloak
by hand and drew it in a way that its edge left an abrasion on the Holy
Prophet’s neck. Then he said, “Order to bestow on me of Allah’s property
which is with you!” The Holy Prophet smiled and ordered to give to him
what he needed.”[^12]

**Courtesy towards the community**

Whenever the Holy Prophet noticed the absence of a brother-in-faith for
three days, he would inquire about him. He would pray for his people if
they were not near by and would rush to visit them if they were
ill.[^13]

**Honoring a Guest**

One day the Holy Prophet had a lot of guests at home. Jarir Ibn
\`Abdullah entered the house but could not find a place to sit. So, he
had to sit outside. Seeing this, the Holy Prophet spread his shirt for
him to sit on. Jarir picked up the shirt, put it on his face and kissed
it.

Salman says: I went to see the Holy Prophet who was leaning on a
cushion. When he saw me, he offered his cushion to me saying: O Salman!
Allah will have his mercy on a Muslim who offers a cushion for his
brother-in-faith when he comes to visit him.[^14]

**Respect for Kindness**

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) said: When a foster sister came to see the Holy
Prophet, he spread his cloak for her to sit on. He also started to speak
to her with a smile on his lips. When she left, her brother came to the
Holy Prophet but his behavior was quite different. When asked why they
were not treated equally, the Holy Prophet said: I respected the sister
more because she was more kind to her parents.[^15]


