Forgiving the Enemies
=====================

When the Holy Prophet conquered Mecca with his strong army of twelve
thousand soldiers, he treated people so kindly that they all were
surprised. No one could believe that a victor could treat the defeated
party in this way. People of Mecca had gathered in the Sacred Mosque to
see the leader of Muslims and Islam come out of Ka\`bah and judge those
who committed all kinds of persecution against him for thirteen years.
However, after breaking the idols, the Holy Prophet came out of Ka\`bah
addressing the people of Mecca as such, “O people! You were bad kinsmen
and neighbors for me.

You expelled me from my hometown and fought against me in an unmanly
way. You did not spare any attempt to persecute me, my friends and my
companions. You killed my uncle, Hamzah. You fought against Allah’s
Messenger so I have the right to avenge myself on you. Based on this
right, your men must be killed, your wives and children must be taken
captive, your property must be seized by the conquerors, and your houses
must be demolished. But I leave the judgment to you. What do you think?”
Suhayl ibn \`Amr, representing his people, said, “We speak good and
think good. You are an honorable brother and an honorable nephew who has
power over us.” These words impressed the tenderhearted Prophet in such
a way that his eyes were filled with tears. People of Mecca started
weeping. Then the Holy Prophet said, “I do the same thing as my brother
Joseph did. There is no sin upon you today. May Allah forgive you; He is
the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful.”[^16]

**A Graceful Generosity**

Sahl ibn Sa\`d al-Sa\`idi says: I made a cloak of black and white wool
for the Holy Prophet and he liked it. While touching it, he asked, “What
a good cloak this is!” A nomadic Arab who was present there said, “Give
me this cloak!” The Holy Prophet immediately took it off and gave it to
him.”[^17]

**Helping a brother-in-faith**

Abu-Sa\`id Khargushi in his book, Sharaf al-Nabi writes: A needy
companion of the Holy Prophet got married and asked him something. The
Holy Prophet went to \`A’ishah’s house saying, “Do we have anything to
help this companion?” \`A’ishah said, “We have a bag with flour in it.”
The Holy Prophet gave it to the companion while they had nothing for
themselves.[^18]

**Forgiving A Foulmouthed Man**

Ka\`b ibn Zuhayr was an idolater who was steadfast in his idolatry
until the conquest of Mecca. One of his indecent works was poem of
reproach and satire about Allah’s Messenger. He and some other atheists
who were extremely biased in their paganism and in committing horrible
crimes against Islam were so detested that the Holy Prophet made Muslims
duty bound to shed their blood upon the conquest of Mecca. Hearing this,
Ka\`b ibn Zuhayr, with his poetic talent, composed an ode eulogizing the
Holy Prophet and set out for Medina where he introduced himself to
Abu-Bakr and beseechingly asked to take him to the Holy Prophet so that
he might forgive him. Abu-Bakr accepted his request and took to the Holy
Prophet. He covered his face with his turban so that nobody would
recognize him, said, “O Allah’s Messenger! This Arab man wishes to
embrace Islam.” The Holy Prophet stretched out his hand and Ka\`b
pledged his allegiance, saying, “My father and mother are at your
disposal, O Allah’s Messenger! This is the station of one who seeks
refuge with you. I am Ka\`b ibn Zuhayr.” He immediately recited the ode
eulogizing the Holy Prophet. When he finished, the Holy Prophet rewarded
him with his stripped cloth from Yemen, accepted his Islam and forgave
him.

**Behavior towards the Chief of Hypocrites**

\`Abdullah ibn Ubay who was the chief of hypocrites in Medina and his
friends did not spare any attempt to persecute the Holy Prophet and
Muslims. They were spying in favor of the enemies of Islam and insisted
on hypocrisies so much so that Qur’anic verses were revealed on their
being deprived of Allah’s mercy and their punishment on the Judgment
Day. Nevertheless, they did not stop their hypocrisy nor did they
repent. When the Holy Prophet returned from Tabuk, \`Abdullah ibn Ubay
fell sick and lay in the course of death. Based on the Qur’anic verse
“He brings forth the living from the dead (7:95)” His son, a true and
pure-hearted youth, was favored by the Holy Prophet and Muslims. Based
on the Qur’anic verse, “And you shall do good to your parents (2:83)” he
would visit his father everyday as a religious duty.

This good son of Ubay asked the Holy Prophet to visit his father to
save the dignity of the family. Hence, the Holy Prophet too visited his
father to preserve the dignity of a man who was a true believer. Out of
sympathy, the Holy Prophet said to \`Abdullah ibn Ubay, “I forbade you
to make friends with the Jews but you did not accept it. Now is it not
time to do away with the love of the enemies of Allah and depart for the
hereafter?” In response, \`Abdullah said, “As\`ad ibn Zurarah was the
enemy of Jews but this enmity was of no avail when he was on the verge
of death. This is not the time to reproach me. I am on the verge of
death. I would like you to perform prayer for my dead body and give me
your shirt so that I will be buried with it.” The Holy Prophet gave his
outer shirt to him generously. But \`Abdullah said, “I want the shirt
which has touched your holy body.” The Holy Prophet complied with his
request and gave his under shirt to him.

After \`Abdullah’s death, the Holy Prophet condoled his son, attended
the funeral service, prayed for him and in response to people’s protest
said, “My shirt, prayer and pardon will not be of avail for him.”

Following this manly and generous act, a thousand persons of the
Khazraj embraced Islam.”[^19]


