Behavior Towards the Companions
===============================

The Holy Prophet would visit his companions and inquire about their
health in the same way that they would visit him and inquire about his
health. He would bid them a fond farewell as they would bid him a fond
farewell. He would hug them as they would hug him. He would kiss them as
they would kiss him saying, “My father and mother are at your
disposal.”

If the Holy Prophet was invited to a party even at midnight, he would
accept it. When he was riding, he would not allow anyone to be on foot
at his service. If it were possible, he would make him ride with him; if
not, he would say, “You go to the appointed place, I will come after
you.” When he passed by children, he would salute them.[^20]

**Helping a Mother!**

It is reported that certain slaves from Bahrain came to the Holy
Prophet making a line before him. Among them, there was a woman who was
crying. The Holy Prophet said, “Why are you crying?” The woman answered,
“I had a son sold to Banu-\`Abs. The Holy Prophet asked, “Who sold him?”
The woman said, “Abu-Usayd al-Ansari did.”

Furious, the Holy Prophet said to Abu-Usayd Ansari, “Get on the horse
and return her son as you have sold him.” The man got on the horse and
after some time returned him.[^21]

The Holy Prophet said, “Whoever separates a mother and her children,
Allah Almighty will separate him from his friends.” [^22] The Holy
Prophet has also said, “Never go to the nest of birds at night nor
scaring them from their nests, for night is a time of rest for them.”

**Sublime Morality**

Ibn \`Abbas reports: One day, the Holy Prophet was sitting in the
mosque along with his companions when a Bedouin entered carrying a sword
and a lizard in his lap and shouting, “O Muhammad! You are a sorcerer as
well as a liar!” The companions wanted to kill him but the Holy Prophet
stopped them. Turning to the Bedouin, he said, “O Arab brother! Who are
you looking for?” The man said, “I am after Muhammad, the sorcerer and
liar.” The Holy Prophet said, “I am Muhammad but I am neither sorcerer
nor liar. Rather I am Allah’s Messenger.” The Bedouin said, “I swear by
idols that were it not for your dignity I would have killed you with
this sword. I swear by Lat that I will not believe you unless this
lizard believes you.” The Holy Prophet said, “O lizard! Who am I?” The
lizard said, “You are Allah’s Messenger.” With this, the heart of the
Bedouin was illuminated with the light of faith so he truthfully
testified to the oneness of Allah and the Prophethood of Muhammad. He
further said, “O Allah’s Messenger! When I entered this mosque there was
no man more hostile than me to you and now there is no one loves you
more than I do.”[^23]

**Tolerating Hardships**

It is reported that one day the Holy Prophet along with one of his
companions went to the desert of Medina. He saw an old woman at a well
intending to draw water but she could not. The Holy Prophet went near
her saying, “O old Lady! Would you permit me to draw water for you?” She
said, “If you do good, you will do good for your own souls (17:7)”

The Holy Prophet went to the well, drew up the bucket, filled her
water-skin, put it on his shoulder and said to the woman, “Go ahead and
show me the way to your tent.” The companion insisted that he should
carry the water-skin but the Holy Prophet said, “I am more deserving
than anyone else to carry the load of my nation.”

The old woman led the way and the Holy Prophet was followed her until
they reached her tent. The Holy Prophet put down the water-skin and set
out for Medina.

The old woman entered the tent saying to her children, “Get up and
bring the water-skin in.” They asked, “O mother! How did you carry this
heavy water-skin up to here?” She said, “A sweet-speaking young man
carried it for me.” They asked, “Where did he go?” She said, “He went
that way.” The children of the old woman went after the Holy Prophet.
When they recognized him, they said, “Mother! This is the man you
believe in and are eager to see.”

The old woman and her children ran after the Holy Prophet until they
reached him and started kissing his hands. The old woman who was weeping
said, “O Allah’s Messenger! I did not recognize you. Forgive me for
being insolent to you. How can I apologize?” The Holy Prophet consoled
her, prayed for her children and retuned them kindly.[^24]


