Bilal the Great African Muslim
==============================

Bilal is very lovingly remembered by all Muslims of the world as one of
the earliest great African Muslim.

He was born in a village in a mountainous place in Western Arabia.
Bilal's father was called Rebah and his mother was known as Hamama[^1].
They had come to Arabia as slaves from Ethiopia. The father and mother
were slaves of Ummayya bin Khalaf, a rich man from the tribe of Quraish.
Bilal was therefore born in slavery and served as a housekeeper. His
master Ummayya bin Khalaf was not a Muslim.

When Bilal was about the age of 40, it was the time when Prophet
Muhammad started teaching the new religion of Islam, Bilal was attracted
by the teaching of Prophet Muhammad. He accepted the religion of Islam
and became a Muslim.

When Ummayya bin Khalaf and his family went to worship idols, Bilal
would pray to Allah as taught by Islam.

In the early days of Islam the tribe of Quraish who were strong and many
and lived in and around Makkah, disliked Islam.

They also disliked Prophet Muhammad and his new teachings. If any person
accepted the new religion, they oppressed and harassed him.

One day Ummayya bin Khalaf came to know of Bilal's secret prayers. He
called Bilal and asked,

“Oh Bilal, do you worship and bow down to the God of Muhammad?”

Bilal was not afraid. He replied,

'Yes Master, I do worship Allah, the only God.”

The reply angered Ummayya greatly. He began to torture Bilal. He was
tied with ropes and made to lie on the burning hot desert sand at
mid-noon. He was then asked to forget the God of Islam and worship the
'great' idols known as LAT and UZZA. But Bilal was strong in his new
belief. He refused to worship idols and kept crying “AHAD-AHAD”, meaning
“One God, One God.” The tortures continued and were increased. Hot iron
rod were stamped on his pained body. Yet Bilal would not yield.

On one hot day Bilal lay on the burning hot sand tied to the ground. A
very heavy stone was placed over his chest. Bilal could no longer bear
the heat and the load so great. He had also grown weak. In that tied
condition even water was denied to him. In the condition he lay and lost
his senses. As the day neared its end, it became cooler; he regained his
conscious (senses). He found that the heavy stone was no more on his
chest. He wondered who had come to free him from pain. His heavy eyes
slowly opened only to look at the bright smiling face of Prophet
Muhammad.

Prophet Muhammad had heard of and seen the torture of Bilal. It pained
him extremely to learn that a true believer should suffer in such a
manner. He also felt pity for the poor man He told Abu Bakr to purchase
Bilal from Ummayya and set him free. This was done. In similar ways the
Prophet had many slaves set free. He insisted that slaves be treated
fairly and kindly. By his own conduct he also set such examples.

When Bilal first came before the Holy Prophet, he praised the Holy
Prophet in two poetic lines of his native language. The Prophet asked
Hassan bin Thabit to translate it in Arabic. He translated it in words
which means:

“When in the world, the virtues are described, thou art mentioned as the
model of virtues in our midst.”

Among the slaves from Africa, Bilal was the first to accept Islam. He
had a strong faith in Allah and a great love for the Prophet. He had a
pure character. Soon he earned high respect of the Prophet and other
great Muslims of the time. The Prophet liked Bilal's sweet voice and
made him the first Muazzin -The Caller To The Prayers.

All through his life Bilal remained a close companion of Prophet
Muhammad and was with him at every occasion. When the Prophet died he
was very saddened. Thereafter all his life he looked grieved and very
solemn. He had gone to Madina when the Prophet had migrated. After the
death of the Prophet he did not feel happy to stay in Madina. He sadly
discontinued giving 'adhan' and migrated to Damascus, Syria. He died
there after about eight (or ten) years. His grave is still existing in
the famous Muslim graveyard in Damascus. People still go to his grave to
pay respect and salute him.

[^1]: In some books the name of his father is given as “Riyah” and of
his mother as “Jumana”.


