Ali and The Killer
==================

Ali was a great man. He was brave and wise, kind and good. He was a
famous soldier. He fought and won many battles for Islam. He was Caliph
of the Muslim world. His rule was just and kind. People loved him
because he was always helpful and kind to the poor.

When Ali became Caliph he went to live in Kufa. Kufa is a city in Iraq.
Before he had lived in Madina. Madina is a city in Hejaz which is
nowadays a part of Saudi Arabia.

One early morning Ali went to Mosque of Kufa for prayers. There were
some people in the mosque. One man was sleeping with his face downward.
He had a hidden sword under him. His sword was poisoned. The man
pretended to be sleeping. His name was Ibn Muljim.

Ali entered the mosque and began his prayers. While praying he bowed his
head to Allah. From the back came lbn Muljim and with his poisoned sword
struck a deadly blow on Ali. Ali fell down bleeding. Ibn Muljim ran
away.

The other people saw this tragedy; they found Ali wounded and bleeding.
He was bandaged.

Meanwhile, people outside the mosque saw Ibn Muljim running with a blood
red sword in his hand. They ran after him. After much pursuing they
caught him. Ibn Muljim was brought before Ali when Ali was still in the
mosque.

Frightened, Ibn Muljim stood before Ali. His breathing was heavy because
of the running. He was also thirsty, that Ali could see. Then Ali was
taken to his house. There was much crying and weeping in whole Kufa. At
this time milk was brought for Ali. He looked at the milk, and said,
“Give a glass like this one to Ibn Muljim also, he is very thirsty.”

The milk was given to the culprit. He gratefully drank and quenched his
thirst.

Ali died two days after because of the wound given by Ibn Muljim.

Moral:
------

To have mercy upon even your worst enemy is a great noble act.

Sayings:
--------

“The best truth is keeping promises.”

“Better to be dumb than to lie.” - Ali (a)


