Whose pleasure shall we seek?
=============================

Many, many years ago there lived a man called Luqman. He was not a
Prophet. But he was very wise. He was an African who was caught as a
slave and sold in another country.

Luqman was so wise and respected that a Surah in the Qur'an also is
called by his name (Chapter 31). He gave good advice to his children.
His advice is equally good for all the children of the world even today.

Once Luqman said to his son, “Oh son! Do not tie your heart in seeking
the pleasure of people. You are not likely to succeed. Do not pay
attention to what people say. Instead tell yourself always to seek the
pleasure of God.”

Luqman wanted this lesson to be always remembered. Never to be
forgotten. He thought of a way. He then told his son to ride a donkey.
The son obeyed. The father followed behind on foot. They travelled in
this way for some distance. After some distance they came across a group
of people. Seeing the son on the donkey, one of them said, “What an
impolite and bad boy. The old father is walking on foot. The young son
is comfortably riding on the donkey. This is no manner to show respect
to one's father”.

Father and son heard this. The son came down from the donkey. Luqman
rode on the animal. After sometime they came across another group of
people. On seeing the father riding the donkey, the elder of the group
said, “Oh you old man! This is not the way to bring up a son. You make
him walk in the hot sun, while you sit comfortably on the donkey.”

Luqman paid attention to what the people said. He came down from the
donkey. Both father and son walked on foot. The donkey walked in front.
They went a little further. People seeing them, said, “How foolish you
are? You walk behind a donkey. Why don't you ride it?”

Luqman and his son once again accepted what the people said. They both
rode the donkey and went further. They came across a river. There was a
bridge to be crossed. Some people were sitting there. They saw Luqman
and his son riding the donkey. One of them said, “It is very unkind and
cruel of you two to ride on the poor donkey. The little animal can
hardly take all your burden.”

So taking this advice Luqman and his son dismounted from the donkey.
They travelled a little distance further. Looking very lovingly Luqman
said to his son, “You have heard and seen what the people said. It must
have assured you, by now, that whatever you do or whichever way you
move, one is not able to please the people of the world.” He pointed at
the flowing river and added,

“A person can build a wall across the river. It will stop the flow of
the water. But it is not possible to shut the mouth of the people from
criticism.”

Very clearly, similar is the case in our world today. The tongue has no
bone. It can speak even without thought. There are as many opinions as
there are people in the world. It is very bad to find fault with the
other person. Especially when he is doing something good.

A person can feel very hurt when he listens to all the tongues that talk
loose. To avoid getting hurt by loose talk, a person can train himself.
He can discipline himself to think. By thinking he can know what is
wrong and void. When a person is sure that what he is doing will please
his Master, the Almighty Allah, then he must never worry what others
speak.


