Creation Of Adam
================

One day Shamim asked her grandmother, “Tell me Grandma, who made us? How
did we come on this earth?”

Grandmother smiled sweetly and said, “Yes, my child, I will tell you.
Listen to me carefully and patiently.”

She began:

“Many, many years ago, in fact thousands of years ago. There were water,
trees, mountains, birds and animals on this earth. But there was no man
or woman.

At this time Allah created one human form. It was man's body. Then Allah
made the body alive. He was called Adam. Having created Adam, Allah
commanded all his angels to bow down to it. All the angels obeyed and
bowed down. But one Jinn (who used to pray with the angels) and who was
called Azazil, did not do so. He stood erect against the order of his
Master and Creator.

God asked him:

'Why did you disobey my order and did not bow down as commanded?'

Azazil proudly replied: 'Oh God, You made me from fire. Now you ask me
to bow down to a body made from clay and earth. I cannot belittle
myself. That is why I will not bow down to Adam.'

The reply displeased Allah. For, all who are created by him are to obey
His orders.

Azazil was sent out of heaven onto the earth. And from then on he was
called Iblis and Satan.

Iblis before coming onto the earth begged Allah to look at his many
years of prayers and obedience.

Allah asked him to ask for reward.

Iblis thought deeply. He felt that it was because of Adam that he was
sent out of Heaven. (In fact it was not Adam but the pride which had
caused the downfall of Satan). So he thought that Adam was his enemy. He
decided to ask for life upto the Day of Resurrection. Allah granted him
life upto a certain day. It is the day of the Reappearance of our 12th
Imam (a).

Having got such a long life, he vowed to misguide Adam and all his
progeny on every possible way.

Hearing his determination, Allah told him that his scheme would be
successful for only those men who would be of evil thoughts and deeds.
But he would never succeed against good people.”

“Oh, how bad of Iblis”, cried Shamim, “to think in such an evil way”.

''Can Iblis hurt us?”, asked Shamim.

“Yes,” replied Grandmother. “He can harm us by making bad things appear
tempting to us. We must always be careful”.


