Leadership By Example
=====================

Man is a living creature. To live he must have food. Without food man
cannot live long or make himself stronger.

Once, many, many years ago there was a great Imam living in the city of
Madina. Madina was the main city of Arabia. The Imam was a descendant of
Prophet Muhammad. His name was Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq. He was the most
learned and most pious of all people.

One day he learned that there was wheat shortage in Madina. As a result
citizens of Madina were overtaken by fear that wheat may no longer be
available. Heads of the families flocked to the bazaar and bought as
much wheat as their money would allow. Those people who had enough wheat
in the house, they took good care of it. Many poor people could not buy
food and stock. They did not have that much money. They bought their
wheat from the bazaar on a daily basis and in little quantities that
their little money would allow. And the price was going up every day.

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq called the in-charge of his house, named Muattab
and asked him: “How much wheat do we have at present?”

Muattab replied: “Sir, we have enough to last us for several months.”

“Take it to the bazaar and offer all for sale to the people”, instructed
the Imam.

“Oh! son of the Prophet! Wheat is very scarce in Madina. (If we sell our
stock, perhaps it would be impossible to purchase later)” advised the
care-taker.

''Do as I have said (Sell all our stock to the people).”, replied Imam.

Muattab, did as he was told and sold all the wheat. He reported the
result to his master.

Thereafter, the Imam gave instructions to buy the requirement of his
house on day to day basis like other people of Madina. He intended his
house to be no different than the poorer citizens of Madina.

The Imam further told Muattab to use, from then on, half wheat and half
barley for the bread of his household. Then he said:

“By the grace of Almighty I have the strength to provide my house with
bread made from pure wheat. But I want Allah to see me living
economically (just like other people around me).”

The Imam set a noble example of good leadership.

**Sayings:**

“The best man is he who is of most service to others”.

“By knowledge thou art saved; by ignorance thou art lost”.

“Ignorance is the most hateful enemy”. - Imam Ali (a)


