Hazrat Ibrahim and The Old Man
==============================

In the Middle East there is a land known as Palestine. Long before, in
this land there lived a very great prophet. Prophet is a messenger of
Allah. He has been chosen by Allah Himself to teach people religion,
good thoughts and good deeds. The name of this great prophet was Hazrat
Ibrahim. (He is also known as Abraham in the Bible). He had come to
Palestine from Iraq.

Hazrat Ibrahim was very fond of guests. He liked to invite guests to his
house. He was good to travellers. He took them to his house and gave
them food to eat and bed to sleep. This good quality of his is described
in the Qur'an.

Every morning Hazrat Ibrahim stood by the main road near his house and
waited for travellers to pass. As soon he saw them he invited them to
his house to be his guests. Hazrat Ibrahim liked this good deed very
much. It pleased him to make other people happy and comfortable. Thus,
Hazrat Ibrahim would everyday bring home one guest at least. If he came
across no traveller even for a day he would become unhappy. Without
having a guest, he would not touch food himself.

Once it so happened that no traveller passed that way for three days
running. This, naturally, upset Hazrat Ibrahim. It made him sad. Without
having a guest on his table he would not eat. Each morning Hazrat
Ibrahim went to the main road hopefully. He would strain his eyes far
away to the horizon. Yet no traveller was to be seen. Each evening he
would return to his home disappointed.

Three days passed. One morning an old man appeared on a camel. Hazrat
Ibrahim was happy. He invited the old man to his home to eat with him
The old man accepted the invitation.

In the house they set to eat. Hazrat Ibrahim recited “Bismillah” before
taking the food, but the old man did not say anything. Hazrat Ibrahim
asked why he did not remember Allah before taking his meal. Was not
Allah our Creator, our Nourisher and our Master? Was it not proper to
remember Him before partaking of the food provided by Him?

The old man said that it was not the custom in his religion. Hazrat
Ibrahim asked him what his religion was. He said that he was one of
those who worship fire.

Hazrat Ibrahim was very much annoyed and turned the old man out.

As soon as the old man went away, the angel Jibrail came to Hazrat
Ibrahim, from Allah. Jibrail told Hazrat Ibrahim that Allah had been
feeding this unbeliever person for seventy years. Could not Hazrat
Ibrahim tolerate him for even one meal! Hazrat Ibrahim felt very sorry
for this. He immediately ran after the old man. Finally he reached him
and persuaded him to return to his house to have food together. He
finally succeeded in getting the old man to his home.

**Moral:**

1. However good you may be, it does not give you right to judge other
persons.

2. You should always seek the forgiveness and pleasure of God.

3. Always entertain and please a guest.


