An Example Of Forget and Forgive
================================

Malik al-Ashtar was a great soldier and general. He is very well
remembered in the history of Islam. He later became the Governor of
Egypt. Malik al-Ashtar served under the great caliph and Imam Ali.

Once at the time when he was commander-in-chief in Kufa, Iraq, he was
walking on foot in the streets. His head was shaven. As he was passing
on the way a man seeing his shaven head slapped him on head as a joke to
make people laugh. He did not know that it was the Commander-in-chief
whom he had slapped. The Commander did not even raise his eyes to see
who the offender was. He continued to walk as nothing had happened.

People in the street and the shops saw this. They at first were
surprised and expected him to get angry. But soon they began to talk of
the great general's humbleness.

The loafer came to know of the identity of his victim. He was greatly
shaken with fear. He thought the Commander-in-Chief would punish him for
the insult.

He immediately went running after Malik al-Ashtar to beg his
forgiveness. He went first to Malik al-Ashtar's house but could not find
him. After some search he found him sitting in Masjid al-Kufa (the Kufa
Mosque) praying. He waited patiently until the General finished his
prayers. Then politely he approached the General, bowed his head and
humbly begged for the forgiveness.

Malik al-Ashtar lifted the man and said, “But, my sole purpose to come
here was to pray to Allah to forgive you.”

There is a lesson to be learnt in this example. Let us keep away from
pride and enmity. Let us forget and forgive the wrong done to us. Malik
was a follower of Ali.

Imam Ali said:

“Hurry not to punish a man for fault committed.”

“Leave room for pardon between the two acts.”

“The best deeds of a great man are to forgive and forget.”


