Imam Husayn (As)’S Portrayal of Islamic Society During Umayyad Rule
===================================================================

Imam Husayn (as) delivered this speech in Karbala:

“The world has changed beyond recognition: its goodness has receded and
nothing remains of it except for drops, like the drops of water that
remain in a jar [when it is emptied of its contents] and a despicable
sustenance like unwholesome pasture. Don’t you see that truth is not
acted upon and falsehood is not refrained from? Let the believer
earnestly desire meeting God, for I do not consider death to be anything
but bliss and living with the oppressors anything but humiliation.”

Sayyid Ibn Tawus has recorded this speech of Husayn in *Al-Luhuf*,
adding that he delivered it in Karbala. It is also reported by Ibn Abd
Rabbih in *Al-Iqd al-Farid* (2: 312), Abu Nu’aym al-Isfahani in *Hilyat
al-Awliya* (3: 39), and Ibn Asakir (4: 333), all indicating that Husayn
(as) gave it in Karbala, as did Sayyid ibn Tawus in *Al-Luhuf*.
Al-Tabari has also related it in Al-Tarikh (6: 229) and said that the
Imam (as) spoke those words along the way to Karbala at Dhu Husum. In
whichever place Husayn (as) might have said those words, they portray
for us an exact picture of the period Imam Husayn lived and the
misfortunes and catastrophes that befell the Muslims in it. This speech
comprises three points that deserve reflection:

1- The condition of the world at that time (the social, political and
spiritual situation).

2- The people’s disregard of truth and inclination towards falsehood.

3- Need for aversion towards the world and desire to meet God.

1- The Condition of The World At That Time
------------------------------------------

Change takes place in two ways: a thing may change without losing its
fundamental features or it may change beyond recognition. The change
which the people and society underwent during the Umayyad affliction was
of the second type, change beyond recognition from what it was during
the time of the Messenger of God (S). The Muslims reverted to
pre-Islamic (*jahiliyah*) customs and values although they did not
renege on Islam. However pre-Islamic customs, values and ideas returned,
and the Umayyads regained, in the new dispensation, the positions of
influence which they occupied during the pre-Islamic period, based on
the same values and concepts.

This awful deviation took place within only half a century after the
demise of the Messenger of God (S). The palaces of the Umayyads and
their governors bore no resemblance to what was prescribed in God’s Book
or the Sunnah of the Messenger of God (S), as demonstrated in his public
and private life style. What is prescribed in the Book of God and
communicated to us by His Messenger (S) and what also appeared in his
way of conduct differs greatly from what we know of the luxury,
dissipation and aggression of Umayyad palaces.

Anyone who considers the Book and the Sunnah to be the standards for
decent life will no doubt condemn the attitude of the Umayyads and find
it impossible to reconcile the two. This is what the Martyr Grandson [of
the Prophet (S)] was telling us about when he said: “The world has
changed beyond recognition.”

Then he added: “… and its goodness has receded”, which is the situation
when a civilization experiences decline. When nations are on the ascent
they uphold goodness which springs from them as water springs from the
earth. This is the sign of a sound innate nature, intellect and
conscience of the nation; it is the situation that is characterized by
cultural, intellectual and human progress. The drying-up of this
goodness in innate nature is an indication of the decline of
civilization. There exists a constant relation between upholding
goodness and cultural advancement and also between disregard for
goodness and cultural decline. Cultural progress in human life
invariably stems from the overflowing of goodness from man’s innate
nature and all cultural decline results from its drying up.

To explain this point further, when human nature is unimpaired,
qualities flow from it such as mercy, faith, sincerity, righteousness,
affection, piety, decency, loyalty, gratitude, chastity, self-esteem,
truthfulness, trustworthiness, knowledge and justice. The Qur’anic view
is that these qualities constitute the normal situation in man’s life
and the Qur’an calls it *al-ma’ruf* (the known thing) because man’s
innate nature is acquainted with it.

On the other hand sound human nature disowns and avoids heresy,
obstinacy, ingratitude, greed, perfidy, lying, oppression, dissipation,
cowardice, despair, indecision and betrayal. The Qur’an calls them
abominable deeds because human nature finds them reprehensible.

When man’s nature becomes impaired he no longer finds goodness
attractive nor is disgusted by what is abominable, whereas a person with
sound senses and taste is attracted towards wholesome things and
disgusted by repulsive ones. When one is bereft of his sound innate
nature and conscience, he not only loses the power to distinguish
between the good and the bad, but abominable things really attract him
and good ones repel him.

The soul and the innate nature seem to have undergone mutation. If one
loses his untainted nature he must have already lost his conscience, for
conscience is the sentinel that watches over nature. Conscience
continues to act as the faithful guard of nature until all its power of
resistance is exhausted.

Before we round off this discussion we must add this point from the
Imam’s speech: Corruption of the nature and conscience of people does
not occur involuntarily, although once it occurs the consequences are
beyond man’s will power. However, God the Exalted has given man control
over his conscience and innate nature and the two will only be corrupted
through the abuse of his choice and volition. Whatever the case may be
with regard to Imam Husayn’s (as) brief statement that described the
condition of the nation, the question we should ask is what truly befell
the Muslims?

There is a relationship between the descending of God’s mercy on man and
the flow or decline of goodness from his soul. God’s mercy flows
unceasingly and is never cut off from man and creation even for a
moment. However, this descending mercy has particular places of landing
such as unimpaired souls and hearts, for they are receptacles of God’s
mercy.

When souls and hearts become diseased and their goodness dwindles, their
share of divine mercy and blessing decreases or is even stopped
completely. God’s mercy is not niggardly, however, it is the souls and
hearts that turn their backs on it when goodness in them recedes. *God
Most High says:* ***“Indeed God does not change a people’s lot unless
they change what is in their so*****uls”**[^1]

‘And nothing remains of it except for drops like the drops of water
(subaba) that remain in a jar.’

*Subabat al-ina*’ means the drops of water which usually remain after
the water in a container is poured out. These drops cannot quench the
thirst of man or animal. Similarly, when goodness in man’s innate nature
dries up except for drops like the drops remaining in a jar-nothing good
can be expected from such a person.

Man’s innate nature is in fact the spring from which all goodness flows,
so when this goodness dries its decay leads to the depravity of man and
society. I have said before that when fairness and goodness emanate from
innate nature God’s mercy and blessings descend on it and when it lacks
them this descending mercy of God does not land there.

‘And a despicable sustenance like unwholesome pasture.’

Sustenance is not only for the body; there is sustenance for the heart,
the mind and the soul as well. Just as bodies die when they lack what
will sustain them, hearts, minds and souls also die when they lack their
sustenance. The death of hearts, minds and consciences is more dangerous
than bodily death. In his speech, the Imam is saying: What was left for
the people during that time of trial by way of sustenance for their
hearts, souls and minds was too meagre to save man from corruption, like
unwholesome pasture, which, as a result of plant epidemic, becomes
scorched and yellow with a few patches of green here and there.

Such was the condition of society when it was gripped by this
tribulation [i.e. the Umayyad scourge], because all goodness that was in
the people’s souls had been swept away and nothing was left of it except
the drops that remain in a water container after its contents have been
poured out, drops that cannot quench one’s thirst.

2- The Peoples Disregard For Truth And Their Inclination Towards Falsehood
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Imam (as) says: “Do you not see that the truth is not acted upon and
falsehood is not refrained from?”

This is the second part of the Imam’s address which alludes to the sign
of the dwindling of innate nature and weakening of the conscience. Don’t
you see that the right thing is not being done? Had innate nature been
flowing in their souls, the people would not have ceased to act on the
truth, but when man’s nature becomes corrupted he loses the motive to
act upon the truth. Conversely, a sound nature and conscience reject
falsehood and consider it repulsive, just as normal feelings and tastes
loath offensive food and drink. When one’s feelings become dysfunctional
he no longer considers loathsome what normal people do.

Likewise, when one’s conscience and innate nature are sound and
unimpaired he deems the truth to be truth and falsehood to be falsehood,
acts on the former and refrains, and also prevents others, from the
latter. But when his innate nature and conscience are corrupted he will
not have the motive for working with the truth nor a deterrent from
accepting falsehood.

The foregoing is a precise picture of the misfortune that struck the
people in the wake of this Umayyad-caused tribulation. The Imam (as)
painted this picture on the day of Ashura or in Dhu Husum.

3- Need For Aversion To The World And Desire To Meet God
--------------------------------------------------------

The Imam (as) said “Let the believer desire to meet God, for I do not
consider death to be anything but bliss, and living with oppressors
anything but humiliation.”

This statement in the Imam’s speech contains two feelings:

(i) The world no longer had anything that the believer could desire;
wares and pleasures could not attract or make him incline towards them.
This feeling urges asceticism and aversion towards worldly pleasures.

(ii) A yearning to meet God is most pleasing thing to the believer. This
is clearly stated by Husayn (as) in the above address. Death is a way to
meet God and through it the veils over the believers’ hearts are
removed, so that they may witness the grandeur and beauty of God which
they could not witness in worldly life, and in this resides the
believer’s bliss and joy in the hereafter. How can the joys and
blessings of paradise be compared with the joy of meeting God in the
hereafter?

Thus, to the believer, death constitutes nothing but bliss. There is
nothing in the life of this world that may bind him to it except the
company of the righteous and the best of people, or righteous deeds such
as maintaining good, praying, glorifying God, upholding justice,
trustworthiness, truth, and being prepared for sacrifice, martyrdom,.
The believer may be tied to the world but when it is bereft of these
values, the righteous become scarce and the faithful encounter nothing
in this world except deception, rivalry, oppression, lies and perfidy
which they become weary of and detest. They feel that the world is a
prison.

[^1]: . Qur’an, Ch: 13, Vs: 11.


