Loyalty and Repudiation on the Day of Ashura
============================================

Conflict of Loyalty
-------------------

The fight for people’s loyalty is not a new thing in human life, and
there are two contending poles in this conflict: the divine pole and its
extensions in man’s life, and the pole of taghut which employs blind
force, propaganda and allurement in the cultural domain. Every taghut
has a specific centre towards which people’s loyalty is attracted but
all such centres oppose the divine focus. Ziyarat al-Warith, one of the
ziyarahs of Imam Husayn (as), aims at making one’s loyalty with the
divine pole more profound and separating one from all the artificial
poles created by taghut.

Monotheism And Polytheism In Loyalty
------------------------------------

Loyalty is a part of the concept of monotheism, a concept that rejects
polytheism: “There is no god besides Allah”. Unity of loyalty is the
most important aspect of monotheism.

Man cannot keep another loyalty together with loyalty to God Almighty,
whatever loyalty that might be. Any loyalty other than that of God is
sure to be in opposition to it unless it is under the extension of His
loyalty. Most instances of polytheism which the prophets used to fight,
as related in the Qur’an, pertain to polytheism of loyalty and not
polytheism with regard to the Creator. A majority of polytheists divide
their loyalty between God and other-than-God, thus sharing their loyalty
and obedience with *taghut*.

Hence, when *taghut* tries to establish its guardianship and authority
over man's life, it is in fact declaring war on God, the Glorious and
the Exalted, because it trespasses God's authority, bounds and
guardianship over mankind. Most of the conflicts between monotheism and
polytheism during the time of the prophets (as) were on this very issue.

The prophets (as) were working to unite the centre of loyalty in the
life of mankind by inviting them to be loyal to God and obey Him and by
urging them to reject any loyalty other than that of Almighty God.

Ferociousness Of The Conflict Of Loyalties
------------------------------------------

The conflict of loyalties is among the most ferocious types of conflict
in man's history. It is unlike political conflict where the bone of
contention centers on issues such as land. Even if we call the conflict
on loyalties a political one it must be of a special kind unlike the
political battles that the people are accustomed to. Here the battle is
fought on one thing and that is the right to leadership and authority
over man.

The right to authority is neither divisible nor plural. It is either for
God alone without any associate or rival, which is monotheism, or for
other-than-God, wholly or partially, which is unbelief or polytheism.
Based on this issue mankind is divided into two groups: one believes in
the unity of God with regard to loyalty and obedience and does not
accept any associate for God in matters of loyalty and authority. The
other subscribes to and obeys other centres of loyalty, which could be
*taghut,* country or personal desires. The conflict between these two
groups of people is the greatest of all conflicts and constitutes the
most important events in man's history on earth.

The Theatre Of Conflict Entails A Stand And Rejects Onlookers
-------------------------------------------------------------

Although one can be indifferent towards many issues, one cannot be a
mere onlooker with regard to the question of loyalty because it is a
fundamental issue of human existence which requires of man a clear and
specific stand, whatever this may entail by way of sacrifice. The
question of loyalty is not akin to bargaining or sweet talk, and a
person whose loyalty is not for God would be simply tossed about by
personal desires, political and social changes.

It is loyalty to God that defines a man’s personality and course of
action and gives him his real worth, which is the position of
vicegerency to God on earth. It also determines his stand, movement,
course and goal. One is not allowed to treat a question as important as
this with indifference and negligence; one must be firm and serious
about it!

Elements And Instance Of Loyalty
--------------------------------

Loyalty to God is crystallized by having a relationship with Him through
the following ways:

### 1- Obedience and Submission

God Most High says: ***"All the response of the faithful when they are
summoned to God and His Apostle that He may judge between them is to
say, 'We hear and obey.' It is they who are felicitous."***[^1]

Just as loyalty to God requires obedience and submission to Him and His
Apostle (S), it requires disobedience to other-than-God as well. God
says: ***"So be wary of God and obey me, and do not obey the dictates of
the profligate."***[^2]

### 2- Love and Sincerity to God the Glorious

God says: ***"Say, 'If your fathers, your sons, your brethren, your
spouses and your kinsfolk,*** ***the possessions that you have acquired,
the business you fear may suffer and dwellings you are fond of are
dearer to you than God and His Apostle, and, to waging jihad in His way,
then wait until God issues His edict, and God does not guide the
transgressing lot."***[^3]

***"Among the people are those who set up peers besides God, loving them
as if loving God- but the faithful have a more ardent love for***
***God…"***[^4]

### 3- Helping God, His Messenger (S) and the believers

***"O, you who have faith! If you help God He will help you and make
your feet steady."***[^5]

***"God will surely help those who help Him. Indeed God is All-strong,
All-mighty."***[^6]

***"… and those who gave them shelter and help- they are guardians of
one another…"***[^7]

***"… and those who gave them shelter and help, it is they who are truly
faithful."***[^8]

***"… Those who believe in him, honour him and help him, and follow the
light that has been sent down with him, they are the felicitous."***[^9]

### Direction in Loyalty

With this comprehensive meaning, loyalty attracts all the abilities,
capacities, talents and inclinations of man toward a single pole and
also directs all his attention, his actions and his desires to it.
Consequently, it confers on this centre complete control over human
existence, thereby saving man from a divided personality and sense of
loss that affects many people.

The first thing unity of loyalty does to man is to draw all aspects of
his inner and outer being towards one point.

Secondly, it directs this harmonious sum of capabilities, inclinations,
desires and actions toward a single direction, which is the straight
path that God the Exalted enjoins us to follow. When this happens, man
changes from a weak being beset by anxiety, confused thoughts and
capabilities, into a strong entity that moves along the straight path.
He becomes free from weakness and indecision, uncertainty and doubt with
regard to the direction of his movement, and is not torn between
different motives and desires.

Thirdly, it liberates man from all other centres of focus and motives,
such as the ego, wealth, worldly possessions, desires and taghut that
threaten to contain his efforts, actions and all aspects of his life.
Fourthly, it bestows on him total harmony between the limbs and the
heart, the manifest and the hidden, the outward and the inward. Loyalty
exercises total control over man's limbs, his actions and his movement,
and gives him mental harmony coupled with obedience, attention, love and
desire to serve God.

Among the most important features of this condition of attention,
absorption and concentration on the focus is that it does not happen
through coercion but stems from man's total psychological harmony and
irresistible attraction towards this focus. One's limbs can be subjected
to compulsion and pressure but sympathies, wishes, affection and hate
cannot be made to yield to the coercion of external motives.

Because of this fact, love of God, love for His sake and hate for His
sake are among the most important elements and essential qualities of
loyalty and repudiation, and this is what makes one's obedience and
submission to God, His Messenger (S) and His friends- the Imams (as),
and his worship of Him spring from desire, love and longing.

God the Exalted says: ***"God draws an example: a man jointly owned by
several contending masters and a man belonging entirely to one man: are
the two equal in comparison?"***[^10] God draws an example for
monotheism and polytheism from two men. One is torn between contending
masters, each of whom commands guardianship and control over him.

These associates are opposed to one another and the man's mind is
scattered between them. The other man has submitted all his affairs to
only one man (and a man belonging entirely to one man), obeys him in
everything and accepts his guardianship and authority in all affairs.

It is the same in the case of monotheism and polytheism. Monotheists are
like the man who submits to one man and is at ease while polytheists are
like the one that is the subject of the contest of contending masters.
From this example it becomes clear that polytheism and monotheism here
pertain to loyalty.

The Qur'an quotes Joseph the truthful (as) as saying: ***"O my two***
***prison mates! Are different masters better, or God, the One, the
Irresistible?"***[^11]

The two prison inmates of Joseph (as) were not denying the one and
irresistible God, they were associating other masters with God
concerning guardianship and authority over their lives. Joseph
disapproved of their failure to submit all their affairs to the One and
Irresistible God.

Concerning the reasons why prophets are sent, the Commander of the
Faithful (as) said: "God has commissioned Muhammad (S) [as prophet] to
release His servants from servitude to servants to servitude to Him,
from the covenants of His servants to [enter] His own covenant, from
obedience to His servants to obedience to Him and from loyalty to His
servants to loyalty to Him."[^12]

### Repudiation

The other face of this issue is repudiation, for we cannot understand
the meaning of loyalty separately from repudiation. This religion is
dynamic by nature: pulling down and rebuilding, the rebuilding taking
place on the demolished site. Clearly and precisely, this means that the
mission of this religion is to remove every polytheistic and oppressive
entity and to establish monotheism and justice in its place.

For anyone who understands this statement, it is clear that monotheism
and justice of the new dispensation do not stand in a vacuum; they
occupy the former position of polytheism and oppression, and it is only
natural that it should provoke the ire of the leaders of unbelief. It
will induce them to confront Islam in a most severe and fierce manner,
and this confrontation will not cease until polytheism and oppression
are completely eliminated.

An Analysis of the State of Challenge and Confrontation Between Monotheism and Polytheism
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As long as polytheism and oppression possess a state and have dominion
over a section of the earth, this challenge and hostility against Islam
and its defenders will continue. The mission of this religion on earth
is to liberate man from the captivity of *taghut* and selfish desires,
and to remove the hurdles on man's way to God. These two aspects of the
mission would pre-empt taghut’s entity in the political, economic,
cultural and propaganda domains.

However, this wholesale challenge on taghut's political existence will
not come about without counter measures in the form of a fierce and
desperate response from it. In the face of this reaction, the camp of
monotheism must inevitably take a similar stand because it is
unthinkable for it to answer taghut's declaration of war with an offer
of peace and reconciliation or tolerance.

To prove equal to these challenges and confrontations that originate
from the camp of taghut the Muslims must respond to the war and
challenge with a declaration of war and a counter challenge. In the
absence of this the camp of monotheism will have no foothold anywhere in
the world.

In addition to confrontation and repaying in kind, there should be total
boycott and severing of ties with the polytheist camp in all dimensions
of relations. This action is the repudiation which represents the other
side of loyalty in Islam.

The dynamic nature of Islam requires two things from the nation when
confronting difficult challenges. These issues, which are in fact two
faces of a single question, are internal cohesion and severing ties with
the external enemy. ***"[They] are hard against the faithless and
merciful amongst themselves."***[^13]

Firstly, there should be cohesion, harmony, cooperation, mutual support
and the attitude of yielding to one another within the community. This
is the first side of this requirement and it is the loyalty aspect. God
Most His says***:"… and those who gave [them] shelter and help, they are
allies of one another.”***[^14] ***“The faithful, men*** ***and women,
are comrades of one another…”***[^15]

Certainly they belong one with the other. This is indeed the most
beautiful description of the state of unity in the political existence
of the community. To quote the hadith:

"With regard to their mutual affection, mercy and sympathy, the
believers are like a body which, when one limb is ill, all other parts
of it respond with vigil and fever"

And the Holy Quran:

"Believers are like a building: its parts support one another."[^16]

"Maintain close relations, be kind and merciful to one another and be
brethren who are devoted to one another as you are enjoined by God"[^17]

This is aimed at making the Islamic nation a single body whose parts are
in harmony like a compact structure. Secondly, there should be total
severance of ties with the enemies of God and His Messengers, who are
waiting for some evil to befall this religion. God Most High says:

***"The faithful should not take the faithless for allies instead of the
faithful"***[^18]

***"O, you who have faith! Do not take the faithless for friends instead
of the faithful."***[^19]

***"O, you who have faith! Do not take the Jews and the Christians for
friends: they are friends of each other. Any one of you who takes them
as friends is indeed one of them"***[^20]

***"O, you who have faith! Do not take your father and brothers for
intimates if they prefer faithlessness to faith …"***[^21]

This is repudiation of God's enemies and the Messenger's (S); it is
forbidden to be their ally, show them affection or endear oneself to
them. The twin conditions of strong internal cohesion and complete
severance of ties with the external enemy require a central leadership
that will guide the nation through various challenges and hurdles,
liberate mankind and remove the shackles on them and the obstacles on
their way to God. Without this central leadership, the important goals
of the Islamic call cannot materialize in the life of mankind.

Loyalty Is Within The Domain Of Monotheism
------------------------------------------

Loyalty would have no value if it did not come under the umbrella of
monotheism. True loyalty in man's life is only the one which lies within
this domain: any other form of loyalty, unless it enjoys God's
permission and command, would be a false one, the type Islam has
abolished. True loyalty may and may not exist.

If it exists then it must have the positive and negative sides together
(loyalty to God alone, rejecting and repudiating other than God), and
the negative aspect of it is no less important than the positive one.
Allegiance to God cannot take place except by rejecting any other form
of allegiance along with it or in opposition to it. To accept any
guardianship parallel to that of God – or in opposition to it- means to
associate partners with God.

From the foregoing, we can see that unity of loyalty is one of the most
important features of loyalty, and we have already said that most
instances of polytheism discussed in the Qur'an are those of polytheism
in loyalty and not with respect to the Creator. Therefore, there will
never be true guardianship in opposition to that of God and there can
never be true guardianship without His permission and command.

True Guardianship Is Only By God's Permission, Within The Domain Of His Guardianship And By His Appointment
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

We find this fact clearly stated where God Most High talks about His
appointment of some of His servants as guardians, Imams and deputies
over the people. Their Imamate and guardianship would not have been
possible had God not conferred it upon them and commissioned them for it
beforehand.

In the story of Abraham (as) the Most High says: ***"He said, 'I am
making you the Imam of mankind,' He said, ' And from among my
descendants?' He said,' My pledge does not extend to the
unjust."***[^22] Here imamate refers to guardianship over the people,
thus, God made Abraham (as) a guardian after he had been a prophet.

In the story of David (as), the Most High said: ***"O' David! Indeed we
have made you a vicegerent on the earth, so judge between people***
***with the truth."***[^23] The words ‘so judge between people with the
truth’ indicate that vicegerency here means guardianship and authority.

Concerning Abraham's descendants who He gave him after delivering him
from the unjust people, He said: ***"And we gave him Isaac, and Jacob as
well for a grandson, and each of them We made righteous. We made them
Imams, guiding by Our command and we revealed to them the performance of
good deeds, the maintenance of prayers and the giving of zakat, and they
used to worship us."***[^24]

Without intending to elaborate, we would like to point out that the
source of authority and power in human life is God Most High and not the
people, as is held in modern democratic tendencies and even by some
Muslims because of their poor understanding of their religion. No one is
entitled to manage the affairs of the Muslims without God's permission.

The basic principle in this issue is that God is the source of power and
leadership and there is nothing in the religious texts to suggest that
God has entrusted the people with the issue of sovereignty. We are
saying this after an exhaustive study of the texts from which this
supposed mandate is inferred.

The Role and Importance of Guardianship in the Life of the Community
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Abu Ja'far (as) said: "Islam is built on five [things]: prayer, zakat,
fasting, pilgrimage and guardianship (wilayah). Nothing has been
proclaimed as much as wilayah”.[^25]

‘Ajlan ibn Salih said: I said to Abu Abdullah (as) ' Tell me about the
tenets of the faith’ and he said: "Bearing witness that there is no
deity except God and that Muhammad is the Messenger of God, affirming
that which comes from God, the five prayers, paying zakat, fasting
during the month of Ramadan, performing pilgrimage to the House, loyalty
to our friends, enmity to our enemies and joining the truthful
ones.”[^26]

Abu Ja'far (as) said: *"Islam is built on five things: prayer, zakat,
fasting, pilgrimage* and wilayah" Zurarah (the narrator of the hadith)
said, 'I said: which is the best among them? He said "Wilayah (loyalty
to the divinely-appointed guardians) is the best because it is their key
and the guardian [to whom loyalty has been prescribed] is the guide to
them …'

Then he [Abu Ja'far] said: "The peak of the affair and its key, the door
to all things and the [source of the] pleasure of the Merciful is
obedience to the Imam after knowing him. God the Mighty and Sublime
says: ***"Whoever obeys the Apostle certainly obeys God; and as for
those who turn their backs [on you], We have not sent you to keep watch
over them”***[^27] Then he [Abu Ja'far] said: As for those people, God
will admit the virtuous among them into paradise by virtue of His
mercy." [^28]

This hadith calls for much reflection. Should one spend the night in
prayer and the day fasting but without knowing loyalty to God and
loyalty to His friends one would not have completed the elements of
faith. Loyalty to God does not become complete simply by observing the
practical aspects of divine law unless obedience to the Messenger (S)
and holders of authority after him is added. This is also part of
obedience to God. This is so because the essence of religion is not just
a set of instructions about worship, transactions, contracts, unilateral
pronouncements (*al-iqa‘at*), although they are also part and parcel of
religion.

The core of religion is commitment to God, His Messenger (S) and friends
and obedience to His commands and those of His Messenger (S) and his
successors (as). Through this commitment, a believer comes to know the
characteristics of his religion. The Messenger of God (S) has commanded
his community to attach themselves to his Household (as) in addition to
the Book of God, so that they may define for them the broad outlines of
their religion.

The Messenger of God (S) said: "O, you people! I am but human. My Lord's
messenger will soon come [to call me back] and I will answer. I am
leaving two weighty things: the first is the Book of God in which there
is guidance and light so keep to the Book of God and hold fast to it",
Then he urged the people to arouse their desire in God's Book and then
continued: "and my household. I remind you of God concerning my
household. I remind you of God concerning my household. I remind you of
God concerning my household.”[^29]

The question of loyalty is therefore, a fundamental issue in Islam and
without it Islam cannot discharge its central role of establishing man's
relationship with God, leading man towards achieving the goals of
religion in life, urging mankind to serve God and removing the obstacles
that *taghut* has thrown on the way of this mission. This fact is
continuously affirmed by the inexorable clash between the pole of
loyalty and that of *taghut*.

Throughout history, man finds himself between these two poles. These two
centers work in opposite directions in man's life and each one tries to
attract his loyalty to it and separate him from the other. The following
holy verse hints at the conflict between the poles of wilayah and
taghut: ***"God is the Master of the faithful: He brings them out of
darkness into light. As for the faithless, their patrons are the Rebels
(taghut), who drive them out of light into darkness. They shall be the
inmates of the fire and they shall remain in it [forever].”***[^30]

Arrogance and Abasement
-----------------------

*Taghut* cannot make the people subservient and rob them of their
freedom, will and essential qualities, except by abasing them. This is
an intricate process which the arrogant elements who spread corruption
in the earth consider to be good while God, His Messenger (S) and the
faithful detest it.

In essence, this cultural and psychological process robs man's soul of
the values and the qualities God has endowed it with, such as courage,
chastity, intelligence, honour, resistance, service, faith and morality
and makes him inconsequential in the social, cultural and political
arena like a floating piece of wood that is helplessly thrust about by
the waves. The Qur'an calls this process despising.

About Pharaoh, the tyrant of Egypt, a contemporary of Moses (as), God
said: ***“So he despised his people”***, that is, he robbed them of the
values and qualities which would save them from deviating and getting
'swept away by the waves' and becoming servile opportunists who never
disobey the tyrant, but, instead, conform to all his positions and
opinions, his understanding and taste, and his way of life.

There are two forms of obedience: conscious obedience which is the one
meant in God's words: ***"Obey God, and obey His Apostle and the Holders
of authority among you,”*** and unconscious obedience which results from
abasement, loss of insight and human values. This is depicted by God's
words: ***"So he despised his people and they obeyed him. Indeed they
were a transgressing lot”***[^31]

Features of the Conflict Between Truth and Falsehood
----------------------------------------------------

1- In essence, there is an ideological conflict between the two poles of
monotheism and polytheism. A close study of the Qur'anic verses that
talk about monotheism and polytheism will reveal that most of them refer
to the monotheism and polytheism of loyalty and not as pertains to the
Creator. In fact the polytheism which is the subject of rejection and
criticism in Qur'anic discourse and to which the people fall prey is the
polytheism that pertains to loyalty.

2- This ideological contest invariably transforms into a conflict of
civilization between two cultures with deep roots in history and a wide
geographical spread. These are the cultures of monotheism and
polytheism. Yes it is a clash of cultures where the contending camps
have certain peculiarities in terms of their ways of thinking and
practical methodology.

3- The third feature of this conflict is that it is a political struggle
over centers of power in society, the most important of which are
political power, wealth, publicity, military prowess and cultural
control. These centers of power constantly support the activities of
each camp and whichever controls them becomes the stronger party in the
conflict. Each side endeavours to control these institutions and employ
them in enhancing its presence and activity in society.

4- This conflict is one of the inexorable historical realities and among
the divine norms that neither change nor get altered and, therefore,
none of the two camps can escape confrontation and its consequences
except by relinquishing their role and terminating their activities. The
faithful party tries to exercise its influence over all important
positions in society, for it cannot carry out its mission unless it
gains influence in the political, military, socio-economic and
communication arenas on the global level.

This will not take place in a vacuum but in the same sphere of activity
and ambition of *taghut* and the leaders of deviation. *Taghut* will
never withdraw from the field nor stop its reactionary and corrupting
activities against mankind until after long efforts and bitter contests.
The Qur'an affirms this unchangeable historical reality in clear terms:
***"And they will not cease fighting you until they turn you away from
your religion if they can”***[^32]

It is an amazing verse from the Book of God… These people will not stop
fighting and pursuing us until they make us renege on our religion if
they can! And there is no need for much analysis on why they insist on
fighting the Muslims because Islam naturally seeks to extend over
*taghut*'s sphere of influence and interest. Any amount of spread and
taking over of the positions of power by Islam means a corresponding
amount of withdrawal by *taghut*.

Therefore, the leaders of unbelief will most certainly confront this
religion and its adherents with all the ideas, conspiracies and
molestations at their disposal, until they extirpate them or make them
leave their religion if they can. It is not correct to disregard this
persistent conspiracy and attack, but confronting it is not possible
except through an equally resolute action as the Most High says:

***"Fight in the way of God those who fight you but do not
transgress.”***[^33]

***"Fight all the polytheists just as they fight you all.”***[^34]

Whether this war is called defensive or offensive in Islamic
jurisprudence, it is in reality a war in defense of mankind and Islam.

5- This conflict will last long and it will take place in continuous
rounds and this contention cannot be resolved through reconciliation and
understanding because the subject of conflict is a civilizational or
ideological one of a magnitude that cannot be resolved unless the power
bases of unbelief fall apart. As long as the bases of strength, wealth,
political and military powers remain in the possession of unbelief and
under the control of its leaders they will continuously be a source of
sedition.

The Most High says: ***"Fight them until polytheism is no more and
religion becomes exclusively for God."***[^35] The limit of this war is
that the bases of power of faithless global arrogance should fall. This
contest will continue till all the power centers of faithless arrogant
powers are uprooted, all persecution is brought to a stop and
insubordination to God and His Messenger is terminated. Because of this,
this conflict is unparalleled in ferocity and desperation in the course
of history.

The idea of engaging in negotiations with unbelief and *taghut* in order
to reach some mediocre solution is nothing short of naivety, impotence
and defeatism. This defeatist attitude is the beginning of defeat on the
battle field and psychological defeat starts by entertaining the
possibility of holding a round-table meeting with *taghut* with the view
of reaching some understanding and ending the conflict.

Thus the fight with *taghut* is on existence and not on borders. Our
attitude to this war is defensive rather than offensive albeit with a
minor difference in the meaning of the terms defense and offense. By
defense we mean to defend mankind along with their freedom and honour
against *taghut.* Just as *taghut*'s hostility against mankind, their
honour, freedom and values is a crime, to acquiesce on this hostility is
criminal.

It is the right of God's religion, the right of the call to God and the
right of the one who we invite to God that we should defend him and
never allow *taghut* to obstruct man's way to God or to cast a veil
between mankind and Islam. This is the core of the defence we are
talking about i.e. defence of mankind.

6- This conflict requires the believing community to take a clear and
decisive stand on the issue of declaring loyalty and repudiation,
declaring loyalty to God, His Messenger and those invested with
authority over the Muslims and declaring repudiation of the enemies of
God, His Messenger and His friends. Therefore it should be borne in mind
that:

- There has to be a stand,

- The stand must be clear, distinct and declared,

- The war against the leaders of unbelief is serious and there is no
joke about it,

- It has already started so there is no waiting or looking for it,

- It is inevitable, ferocious and knows no abatement,

- It is desperate: it knows no gentleness or mercy,

-It does not suffice for one to silently maintain his love for God, His
Messenger (S) and His friends, without taking a practical stand and
without the people knowing it,

- It does not suffice that one's heart be with God, His Messenger (S)
and His friends but his ‘sword and spear’ against them.[^36]

-It will not suffice that one should give part of himself and his wealth
to God, His Messenger (S) and His friends and give the rest to *taghut.*

-It will not suffice for one to give himself entirely to God but remain
amiable to *taghut* or maintain some links by which one may revert to
the fold of *taghut.*

This is because loyalty is indivisible: it should either be entirely for
God the Exalted or He would accept nothing of it, for God is independent
of creation. Therefore loyalty requires a firm clear-cut position which
must be publicized by way of one's association [to a group] and
separation [from another]; through love and affection, hate and enmity;
through allegiance and denouncing; through peace and war.

7- Loyalty and repudiation are two sides of the same reality with
respect to this historical conflict and the stand it entails. Without
repudiation, loyalty has no use and it cannot play its active role in
the life of the community unless it is coupled with denouncing the
enemies of God, His Messenger (S) and His friends.

Therefore a stand is not made of loyalty alone; it consists of two
faces: a positive one and a negative one, peace and war, mercy and
harshness, association and separation, love and hate. So long as these
two sides are not found together in one's stand it will not be a real
one but a strain of hypocrisy, and a kind of political civility and
double game playing. God the Most High has said: ***“... [They] are hard
against the faithless and merciful amongst themselves.”***[^37]

8- Just as the pole of loyalty consists of one centre, one line and a
single extension throughout history, that of *taghut* also comprise one
line, one civilization and one extension. In loyalty to God's Prophet
(S) and friends we recognize no difference between those nearer to our
own age and those who lived earlier. All of them bear God's religion and
convey His message. God has bestowed on all of them prophethood, imamate
and guardianship over His servants. We therefore give allegiance to them
all and believe in what God has revealed to them and we make no
distinction between them.

God the Most High says: ***"Say, 'We have faith in God, and that which
has been sent down to us, and that which was sent to Abraham, Ishmael,
Isaac, Jacob and the Tribes, and that which Moses and Jesus were given,
and that which the Prophets (as) were given from their Lord; and we make
no distinction between any of them, and to Him do we submit."***[^38]

The Most Glorious also said: ***"The apostle has faith in what has been
send down to him from his Lord, and all the faithful. Each [of them] has
faith in God, His angels, His scriptures and His apostles. [They
declare,] ‘We make no distinction between any of His apostles.' And they
say, ' We hear and we obey. Our Lord! Forgive us, and toward You is the
return.”***[^39]

As we pay allegiance to all God's friends, it is also obligatory that we
should repudiate all their enemies. Just as loyalty is a single issue,
repudiation is also one. Therefore, we are required to denounced Pharaoh
and Nimrod, just as we denounce Abu Jahl and Yazid, and also the tyrants
of our age and their cohorts. This is because the same reason why we
repudiate and curse the despots of our time also calls for repudiation
and cursing Cain, Pharaoh, Nimrod, Abu Jahl, Yazid and Hajjaj.

The conflict between the poles of truth and falsehood, guidance and
deviation, and *wilayah* and *taghut* is not a personal war; rather it
is a civilizational one. Each of the two fronts has a historical
dimension and deep cultural roots in either guidance or misguidance. In
essence, the conflict is a single one through all its historical stages;
the allegiance is one and so is the repudiation, throughout the
different stages and epochs of this conflict.

The Incident of Al-Taff: A Touchstone For Loyalty And Repudiation
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The event of Al-Taff in Karbala which happened in 61 A.H. remains the
foremost scene where loyalty and repudiation are exhibited. Amongst many
great historical events and theatres of conflict between truth and
falsehood, this one was distinctive with respect to attracting the
loyalty of the faithful and inducing them to repudiate the opposite
camp. Because of this the believers' loyalty and repudiation manifested
themselves in the issue of Karbala more than in any other conflicts
between truth and falsehood.

Loyalty and repudiation towards that event assume concrete form today
through several manifestations such as: conducting mourning sessions,
weeping, reciting the supplications of visitations (*ziyarat*),
pilgrimage to Karbala, literary works and speeches. All these aspects
and many more give expression to the believers' devotion to Husayn (as),
his family and his companions, and also their denouncement of their
enemies.

The incident of Al-Taff was among instances of conflict that leave their
impact in history and impress themselves on all generations: one cannot
just give them a casual or unconcerned look nor read their story without
being moved. Although more than one thousand three hundred years have
passed this tragic event still has great impact on the souls, hearts and
minds, and it still influences those God has endowed with awareness and
insight concerning his religion.

The people still receive the issue of Karbala enthusiastically and react
to it positively or negatively with regard to loyalty and repudiation.
What is the secret behind this? What made it a mirror for loyalty and
repudiation in the course of this long history? The battle of Al-Taff
was so distinct that no one was left in doubt as to the nature of the
contending parties.

There was no any ambiguity around the battle which took place in the
land of Al-Taff: no one doubted that Husayn (as) was inviting people to
God and His Messenger, and to be steadfast on the straight path of God;
and no one doubted that Yazid ibn Mu'awiya had violated the limits set
by God and even openly declared so, and he also openly engaged in sin
and crime although he was occupying the position of successor of God's
Messenger (S).

No one among the Muslims who were on the battlefield on that day when
Abu Abdillah Husayn (as) was facing Yazid ibn Mu'awiya would hesitate
for a moment to take the position that Husayn (as) was rightly guided
and Yazid deviated. As such there was nothing hidden or confusing
concerning this battle, so anyone who supported Husayn (as) must have
done so out of conviction and guidance and anyone who took Yazid's side
must have done so knowing fully that they were misguided.

Thus for both camps, the issue was not hidden at all. All the people who
lived at the time of the battle or witnessed it or were acquainted with
it either directly or indirectly knew the truth from falsehood, and they
could distinguish between God's call and *taghut*'s call. No one
abandoned Husayn (as) because the matter was confusing or he was unable
to distinguish between what was true from what was false; the Imam was
forsaken because the people preferred peace and comfort to being killed
in the way of God, the Glorious.

No one drew a sword on Husayn (as) out of confusion, ignorance or
ambiguity but they did so knowing very clearly that, by fighting him
they were in fact, at war with God the Great, His Messenger (S) and His
friend- the Imam (as). This clarity that surrounded the battlefield
makes the incident of al-Taff stand out among other historical events,
it reflects a vivid picture of the struggle between truth and falsehood
and the confrontation of the centre of loyalty to God and that of
loyalty to *taghut*. As such it has been a perpetual symbol of contest
between right and wrong and also a theatre in the life of the believers
where loyalty and repudiation were exhibited.

The incident of al-Taff leaves no room for hesitation or indecision
because it was a manifest confrontation between right and wrong, between
God's party and Satan’s party and between guidance and deviation.
Therefore a clear and definite stand is necessary on this issue and
where such a stand is not in alliance with God's army and does not
denounce their adversaries, it will inevitably be one that approves the
actions of Yazid and his army, and the one who takes this stand deserves
to be cursed and expelled from God's grace.

"May God curse a people who have killed you, may God curse a people who
have wronged you, may God curse a people who have heard about that and
approved of it.”[^40]

Because the issue of Karbala is a distinct one among major historical
events, and it entails a clear stand and opinion, we find that it
strongly and continuously induces loyalty in the souls of believers. The
weeping, the mourning sessions, the mourning processions and the
pilgrimage to the shrine of the holy Imam in Karbala, and other
instances of loyalty and association cannot all be done out of emotion
since emotion alone does not have that strong impact on peoples' lives.

Since the battle of al-Taff is a symbol of confrontation between right
and wrong and a rallying point of loyalty and repudiation then the
strong attachment to this question means a declaration of allegiance and
denouncement, as well as a strong attachment to the centre of loyalty.

The feeling of unity of loyalty and unity of repudiation consolidate the
unity of the community's focal point. And the perception that the
community has one focal point intensifies its feeling of being a single
family from Adam (as) to the present day. It rallies around one point;
fights on one front for the sake of one issue. It shares love and hate,
peace and war, carries out the same mission, subscribes to the same
culture and believes in the same faith.

When the believer's perception of the unity in loyalty, repudiation,
love, hate, obedience, enmity, faith and rejection intensifies he will
then have a profound feeling that the believers comprise a single
believing family in history. It is then that the believer feels that
loyalty to God, His Messenger (S) and His friends had covered all time
and place and made this community into a single bloc which is united in
sensitivities, feelings, faith, war, peace and mission. He will perceive
that a strong cohesive force binds him with other members of this
gigantic family, despite the great difference in time and the long
distances that exist between its members.

With this, his consciousness of sharing the same destiny with others
will intensify and imbue him with a sense of strength and pride in God.
In this fierce battle, the believer is not alone; he is in fact part of
faithful community rooted in history and spread all over the earth. It
seeks the help of God the One and Irresistible in consolidating the
mission, inviting people to God the Most High, establishing the religion
in peoples' lives and removing all the hurdles that are on the way of
the Islamic call.

This feeling of being with God and with the faithful will take away from
the minds of callers to God, the feeling of being forlorn amidst the
scuffle with *taghut* and its arrogance, tyranny and power. Abraham (as)
was alone a nation obedient to God in confrontation with Nimrod.
***"Indeed Abraham was a nation obedient to God, a man of pure faith,
and he was not one of the polytheists.”***[^41]

[^1]: - Qur'an ch: 24 vs: 51

[^2]: - Qur'an ch: 26 vs: 150- 151

[^3]: - Qur'an ch: 9 vs: 24

[^4]: - Qur'an ch: 2 vs: 165

[^5]: - Qur'an ch: 47 vs: 7

[^6]: - Qur'an ch: 22 vs: 40

[^7]: - Qur'an ch: 8 vs: 72

[^8]: - Qur'an ch: 8 vs: 74

[^9]: - Qur'an ch: 7 vs: 157

[^10]: - Qur'an ch: 39 vs: 29

[^11]: - Qur'an ch: 12 vs: 39

[^12]: - Al-Wafi 3: 22

[^13]: - Qur'an ch: 48 vs: 29

[^14]: - Qur'an ch: 8 vs: 72

[^15]: - Qur'an ch: 9 vs: 71

[^16]: - Sahih Muslim 8: 20 Dar al-Fikr ed.

[^17]: - Bihar Al- Anwar 74: 399

[^18]: - Qur'an ch: 3 vs: 28

[^19]: - Qur'an ch: 4 vs: 144

[^20]: - Qur'an ch: 5 vs: 51

[^21]: - Qur'an ch: 9 vs: 23

[^22]: - Qur'an ch: 2 vs: 124

[^23]: - Qur'an ch: 38 vs: 26

[^24]: - Qur'an ch: 21 vs: 72- 73

[^25]: - Usul al-Kafi 2: 18; Bihar al-Anwar 68: 329

[^26]: - Usul al-Kafi 2: 18; Bihar al-Anwar 68: 330

[^27]: - Qur'an ch 4 vs: 80

[^28]: - Usul al-Kafi 2: 18; Bihar al-Anwar 68: 332- 333

[^29]: - This hadith has been recorded by the master traditionists
through numerous chains of transmission and Allamah Mir Hamid Husayn
al-Luknawi has compiled those chains in several volumes of his
Al-Abaqat. Among the sources of his hadith is Sahih Muslim 7: 122 (Dar
al-Fikr Beirut)

[^30]: - Qur'an ch: 2 vs: 257

[^31]: - Qur'an ch 43 vs 54

[^32]: - Qur'an ch: 2 vs: 217

[^33]: - Qur'an ch: 2 vs: 190

[^34]: - Qur'an ch: 9 vs: 36

[^35]: - Qur'an ch 8 vs: 39

[^36]: - Along his way to Iraq, at Al-Safah, Imam al- Husayn (as) met
al-Farazdaq ibn Ghalib (the poet) and asked him about the people.
Al-Farazdaq said: Their hearts are with you but their swords are with
the Umayyads, and the decree descends from the heavens. Al-Husayn (as)
said: You have said the truth. The affair is God's, He does what He
wishes and every day He is engaged in some work. If the decree descends
with what we want, we praise God for His blessings and He is the resort
[who enables us] discharge gratitude. However, if the decree stands in
the way of [our] hope then he does not stand accused he whose intention
is the truth and his mind is pious. Tarikh al-Tabari 6: 218; Tarikh Ibn
al-Athir 40: 16

[^37]: - Qur'an ch: 48 vs: 29

[^38]: - Qur'an ch: 2 vs: 136

[^39]: - Qur'an Ch: 2 vs: 285

[^40]: - See Ziyarat al-Warith.

[^41]: - Qur'an ch:16 vs: 120


