The First Speech of Imam Husayn's (as) Uprising
===============================================

In Mecca, on the night before he left, Imam Husayn (as) addressed a
gathering of Muslims where he informed them that he was about to die. He
also appealed for their support and invited them to join him in his
revolt against the Umayyad government. We are relating here what Sayyid
ibn Tawus recorded in his *Al-Luhuf*. In this speech Imam Husayn (as)
informed the Muslims that his death was near at hand. He said:

"Death has been destined for the children of Adam the way a necklace is
destined [to hang from]on a girl's neck … A [kind of] death which I am
[surely] going to meet has been chosen for me. It is as if I am seeing
my joints being cut up, between al-Nawawis and Karbala by desert foxes
which will fill their empty stomachs and starved bellies with my
remains. There is no escape from a day that has been decreed. God's
pleasure is our pleasure, we the Ahl al-Bayt. We shall patiently bear
His trial and He will give us in full the reward meant for the patient.
None of the flesh of the Messenger of God (S) will ever be separated
[from him]; it will all be gathered for him in paradise. By them [i.e.
the Ahl al-Bayt] he will be delighted and what he has been promised will
be fulfilled for him"

Then he said: "Listen! Anyone who will sacrifice his life for our sake,
having made up his mind to meet God, should come with us, for I am
setting out tomorrow morning, God willing.”[^1]

We shall only explain the last statement of the Imam (as) from which
nine points can be derived: “Listen! Anyone who will lay down his life
for our sake, having made up his mind to meet God should come with us,
for I am setting out tomorrow morning, God willing.”

1- Listen! Anyone Who Will Sacrifice His Life For Our Sake
----------------------------------------------------------

Husayn (as) does not request wealth, leadership, power or any worldly
interests from the people; nor does he invite them to join him in order
to attain victory or power, or to overthrow another power. He calls on
them to sacrifice their lives and blood. This is a unique example of
leadership and an exceptional sort of political discourse.

Leaders usually do not require blood from the people but invite them to
actualize some political and military goals, paying with the number of
lives necessary for achieving those goals, and expending them strictly
as the cost of the achievements they pursue.

But Husayn (as) was inviting the people, from the first day, to
sacrifice their lives and blood without attaching any hopes of immediate
political and military gains from it. This is a singular factor that
distinguishes his uprising from other movements, and his type of speech
from other political speeches. To be aware of this peculiarity it is
important to understand the uprising of Husayn (as).

Ubaydullah ibn al-Hur al-Ju'fi was not aware of this fact although he
was not among those who were fighting Husayn (as). When the latter
sought his support Ubaydullah declined and gave excuses saying: 'Of what
use is my support for you since I did not leave in Kufa anyone ready to
help you? I adjure you by God, do not impose this affair on me, for I am
not ready to die. However, you can take this horse of mine
*al-Mulhiqah*, [the one which overtakes] for I never pursued anybody
while I rode it but outstripped them. Take it, it is yours.'

Husayn (as) replied: "If you prefer your soul to us we are in no need of
your horse.”[^2]

If al-Ju'fi had grasped what Husayn (as) was requesting from him he
would not have presented his horse instead of his life and blood.
Ubaydullah ibn al-Hurr al-Ju'fi was not part of the official and
declared opposition to Husayn (as), rather he desired not to meet him
lest he embarrassed him by seeking his support.

When the Imam actually sought Ubaydullah's support he betrayed him
giving some excuses. He is counted among those who failed to support the
Imam and not among those who fought him. Later he regretted his lack of
participation but it was of no avail.

2- 'Who Will Sacrifice?
-----------------------

This question asks the people to offer their lives and blood consciously
and by choice.He did not want it to be a sort of extortion nor was he
the type who would deceive the people into laying down their lives and
blood. Husayn (as) insisted on this issue in an amazing way, since the
time he left Hijaz until the time he met his death in Karbala together
with his family and companions. On more than one occasion he permitted
his comrades and his family to leave, and relieved them of their duty of
allegiance to him.

The last time the Imam offered them the chance to leave and freed them
of their allegiance to him was the night before the tenth of Muharram
when he gathered them at his place and, with characteristic clarity and
candour, he said:

"I am giving you permission to go, all of you, you are under no covenant
of mine. The night has covered you so take it as a mount [i.e. disperse
under its cover]. Let each man among you take a man of my family, and
you should disperse in the country and the towns till God brings relief.
These people are only after me. Once they get me they will not pursue
the others."[^3]

Though Husayn (as) announced that they were freed of their allegiance to
him and could disperse he was not needless of their support; he was
indeed in dire need of supporters. He tried whenever he could to rally
the general public or specific individuals for his support. Why then
that repeated emphasis that his companions and the people who had joined
him should return to their towns and families? Why was he also insisting
on announcing his request for help? How could seeking support and giving
permission to leave be reconciled?

With Husayn (as) the matter was clear: he wanted the people to sacrifice
their lives for his sake, consciously and voluntarily, not because they
were forced or embarrassed into doing so. Why? Because the path along
which Husayn (as) wanted to travel could not be taken by the people
unless they joined him consciously, voluntarily and resolutely.

If they were to be compelled to do so or if they had no awareness of
what they were doing they would not attain what he intended for them. He
intended to sort out, from that nation, the elements which had the
purest nature and intention and take them as companions to Karbala to
meet God. If their minds were sullied, even to a small degree by
discomfiture or greed for the world they would lose that sincerity and
purity which he required from his comrades as they set out for the
meeting with God.

The journey to meet God differs from all other journeys. Such a journey
entails purity and sincerity of intention more than is required by
others. It is because of this that his companions' participation was to
be with insight and choice. This is the divine aspect of the movement
which Husayn (as) was intent on actualizing.

On the political front Husayn (as) wanted to give the consciences and
hearts of the Muslims a jolt and return them to their selves after they
had been alienated by the Umayyads. This he wanted to achieve by his
death and that of the faithful who were with him. This profound
revolution in people’s souls, this return to the self would not be
achieved unless the elements that participated in making that battle
eternal possessed insight and resolve.

Conversely, if these elements were weak and vacillating the outcome of
their participation would have been a negative one. In the light of
this, Husayn (as) insisted that the people should sacrifice themselves
voluntarily and consciously.

3- 'For Our Sake'
-----------------

This is the third issue in Husayn's mission. Firstly, he wanted the
people to sacrifice their lives. Secondly, he requested that this
sacrifice should be voluntary, it should be consciously made and as an
offering. Thirdly, he requested that effort and sacrifice should be ‘for
our sake’. This last one pertains to association and allegiance: it
should not be done for any other purpose for which the people usually
give their allegiance.

This issue is of paramount importance because the value of an action
does not lie in its size, type or form only, but also in the agent’s
affiliation which influences the way they act. Many groups revolted
against the Umayyads; they hated them, publicized their crimes and
fought them; they also bore sufferings, persecution and aggression; and
they sacrificed themselves for that cause. However, all this took place
in political contexts other than that of allegiance, that
politico-ideological line of loyalty which God has made a duty in His
word: ***"Your guardian is only God, His apostle and the faithful who
maintain the prayer and give the*** ***zakat*** ***while bowing
down."***[^4]

Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr, Abu Muslim al-Khurasani, the Kharijites, and
other groups of people revolted against the Umayyads. We cannot belittle
their efforts and sacrifice but they lacked the allegiance which the
Imam (as) described as being 'for our sake'. An action loses its value
when its source lacks the appropriate affiliation, relation and
allegiance along the lines defined by God and His Messenger (S). The
prerequisites of a righteous deed are:-

(i)- Righteousness of act

(ii)- Sincerity to God in the act

(iii)- Affiliation i.e. allegiance of the agent

The issue of affiliation is a fundamental principle, just as the
righteousness of the action and sincerity to God the Most High. The
meaning of affiliation is that the action should fall within the nexus
of allegiance to God, His Messenger (S), the Holders of authority among
the Muslims and the nation, which, in fact, is united by its loyalty to
God, His Messenger (S) and those charged with authority.

The series of allegiance and association make up the political and
ideological system of the believing nation, and a good deed is one which
is done within this system, along the line of affiliation which must be
an extension of that affiliation which is done for the sake of God and
His Messenger (S) and also by their permission and command, and in the
absence of this, no authentic loyalty or affiliation is possible.

This teaching is peculiar to this religion. Other political and
ideological systems do not consider action to be so much associated with
affiliation; it is judged according to its kind and amount only. In
Islam, work attains real worth if it is a righteous deed done with
sincerity, in the right ideological connection for the sake of God alone
(i.e. loyalty).

Without these two features work will be of no value. Husayn (as)
represents a link in that series and a part of that nexus of loyalty,
and because of this he lays down the condition that service and
sacrifice should take place as part of that system: ‘for our sake.’

4- Sincerity
------------

The phrase ‘…having made up his mind to meet God’ denotes sincerity.
Here the Imam (as) points to two other issues in his call, sincerity and
mental preparation, which constitute the fourth and fifth points. Both
issues are necessary for the great revolutionary project which Imam
Husayn (as) was carrying out. The Imam was hinting at the issue of
sincerity when he said: *"… having made up his mind to meet God*”[^5]
and requesting anyone who wanted to accompany him on this trip to
prepare their minds only to meet God and for no other purpose: any other
aim was worthless on this journey.

The following text is the first narration recorded by al-Bukhari in his
Al-Sahih that the Messenger of God (S) said**:** "Actions are judged
according to intentions and for every man is what he intends. He whose
migration was for the sake of worldly gain or a woman he might marry,
then [the reward] of his migration is that for which he migrated."[^6]

The relationship with the Imam is an affiliation that mediates his
companions’ relationship with God, and not an end in itself. The real
end of work is to earn the pleasure of God and He is the beginning of
the chain of allegiance. If any link in that chain should break away
from God the Exalted, it would fall and lose its worth.

The centres of focus for allegiance are bridges and pathways that lead
to God. This fact is alluded to in the supplication of *Ziyarat
al-Jaamiah al-Kabirah*, some of which reads:

‘Peace be on the places by which God is known …..Peace be on those who
summon towards God, are guided towards His pleasure, and are firm in
God's affair.’

And, lest we imagine that the expression: ‘for our sake’ which is
contained in Imam Husayn's (as) speech was an end in itself, he quickly
added: ‘…having made up his mind to meet God’.This is what is meant by
sincerity and unity of loyalty.

5- Reconciling Oneself
----------------------

The fifth point the Imam hinted at in his call is to reconcile oneself
to difficulties (*al-tawtin*) which is also indispensable in this
arduous journey. To offer lives and blood for God's sake, as Husayn (as)
calls for, is no easy task. In the Surah of Anfal, the Qur'an calls it
the ‘thorny path’.

One may rush onto this path without due mental preparation, and then
along the road waiver and be gripped by fear until he finally backs
down. Instances of this abound in missionary movements. In order to be
saved from retreating and being taken unawares by the horrors of this
road, one should prepare to meet God and also be mentally prepared for
this onerous journey along the thorny path.

To reconcile oneself for an encounter with tribulation is the highest
form of mental preparation, as though one is ready to become the abode
for trials, sufferings and death. Such a person will not be surprised by
trials when they come. Psychological preparation for trials is of
different types, the highest, the best, and at the same time the hardest
being what the Imam calls ‘reconciling oneself’. To a large extent, this
is similar to the well-known hadith: *"Die before you die”*[^7] The
first death is severing relationships that link man with the world as a
preparation for facing real death, so that when it overtakes him he will
not be thrown off guard. This will absorb most of the shock caused by
trials and real death.

The second aspect pertains to reconciling it to God's decree which is
destined for His servant as he walks along the thorny path. This fine
educative sense is hinted at by Islamic texts. In the supplication of
Kumayl we read: *"And make me pleased and contented with your
appointment."*[^8]

Similarly, we have in Ziyarat Amin Allah: *"O God make my mind reassured
about what you have destined, pleased with your decree and patient with
the coming down of your test."*[^9]

The expression 'reconcile oneself' in that speech prepares man to face
the trials that come from God with total submission and acceptance of
God's decree. This second aspect of suggestion also has the effective
role of absorbing from the mind the shock caused by sudden death and the
trials of the theatre of confrontation.

6- Meeting God
--------------

The sixth point in Imam Husayn (as)'s speech is: to reconcile oneself
with the reality of meeting God. The Imam chose this delicate expression
to describe death. Death has two faces: a negative and a positive one.
The former is separation while the latter is union. Death cuts, at a go,
all the relationships one establishes with much effort and difficulty
over a lifetime, such as relationships that pertain to wealth, children,
spouses, and accumulated piles of gold and silver and horses of mark'
[^10] that prove to be very intimate, but then death will come and sever
them at once, rather than gradually.

This is the negative and awful side of death that descends on every man
without exception. The other side of death is that of union, the
brilliant and positive side. Death is the outlet God opens for His
servants through which they meet Him. Since the world acts as a veil
that prevents man from meeting God, His righteous servants are only able
to meet Him by way of dying, because death removes the veil, *"We have
removed your veil from you and so your sight is acute today,"*[^11] and
they are now able to soar up to meet God.

God the Most High says:

***‘They are certainly losers who deny the encounter with God’***[^12]

***‘They are certainly losers who deny the encounter with God and
they*** ***are not guided.***’[^13]

***‘He elaborates the signs that you may be certain of encountering your
Lord’***[^14]

***‘So whoever expects to encounter his Lord- let him act
righteously’***[^15]

***‘Whoever expects to encounter God [should know that] God’s
[appointed] time will indeed come’.***[^16]

***‘Indeed those who do not expect to encounter Us and who are pleased
with the life of this world and satisfied with it …’***[^17]

This is the brilliant side of death.

One’s psychological condition with regard to death varies according to
one's way of viewing it. Those who look at death from the negative side
are frightened by it and shocked when it surprises them, whereas those
who view it from the positive side find it a window through which they
encounter God.

So the second group love death and yearn for it and, in death, they find
an outlet to encounter God, as the Commander of the Faithful (as) said
when the accursed Ibn Muljam struck him and he fell in his prayer niche:
*“I have succeeded, by the Lord of the Ka'aba"*. When the Glorious
Qur'an challenges the Jews concerning their claim that they were God's
favorites to the exclusion of all people, saying*:* ***" '… then long
for death should you be truthful'. Yet they will never long for it
because of what their hands have sent ahead …",***[^18] it was refering
to this fact.

Before we close our discussion on this section of the Imam's speech, we
shall put this question: How can one reconcile himself with death and
tribulation so that one is not shocked and jolted out of his convictions
by unexpected miseries and adversities with which God the Exalted has
associated man's life?

In response we say that there are two educational factors in life that
help man to prepare his mind for trials and death. They are constant
remembrance of death, concentrating on the desire to encounter God the
Exalted, and looking at the positive side of death.

The first factor ensures that man gets accustomed to the question of
death and forms the habits of thinking about it so that when
tribulations and death visit him he will not be startled. The second
factor makes man realize that death is in fact an outlet that leads one
to meet God, as though worldly life was a hindrance, and death comes to
liberate him so that he may encounter God in the next world and he is
gladdened by the glory, beauty and good names of God. Those who attain
this meeting, find in it pleasure incomparable to anything else.

7- Let Them Set Out
-------------------

This journey is different from many other journeys: it has external and
internal aspects. Outwardly, it was a journey from Hijaz to Iraq for the
purpose of helping Husayn (as), whereas inwardly it was a journey from
'I' to God, from this world to the next, from monopolistic tendencies to
altruism, from docility and preference for peace to sacrifice and
*jihad.* The first journey took place on the face of the earth on the
theatre of political struggle, whereas the second happened inside the
soul. So long as this journey does not have both these two dimensions,
it will not be of benefit nor will it reach its goal.

The internal dimension of this journey precedes and gives shape to the
external one. The people who did not respond to Husayn (as)'s call at
the outward level and those who answered him initially but retreated
when the going got tough, were in fact among those who did not make the
second journey inside their souls. Among the best examples of those who
made the internal journey among the companions of Husayn (as) was Zuhayr
ibn al-Qayn (may God have mercy on him).

He had been a follower of the Umayyad cause but he became an Alid; he
chose to live a peaceful life before but later accepted tribulation
instead of ease and well-being; he was a worldly man but he turned into
a man of the hereafter. Zuhayr ordered that his tent and luggages should
be taken to Imam Husayn (as) and divorced his pious and courageous wife
who taught him how to take difficult decisions in times of crisis. All
this took place within the span of a few minutes.

What Husayn (as) told Zuhayr when they withdrew together remains a
mystery. At least we know that that meeting was the line of demarcation
between the two stages of Zuhayr's life, and that he underwent a
profound change which he carried along with him to encounter God.
Zuhayr's affiliation was with the Umayyad clan and he turned to the Alid
and accordingly, the nature of his loyalty, repudiation, relationships
and impediments changed from being Umayyad to being Alid.

This constitutes the internal dimension and essence of this journey.
Those who declined to participate with Husayn (as) had in fact stayed
behind in another journey which was supposed to take place in their
souls. As long as that arduous internal journey is not achieved, one
will not succeed in making a similar one on the battlefield.

The internal journey is the major migration, whereas the one which takes
place on the battlefield is the minor migration in the life of mankind.
Major migration is the foundation of minor migration, just as the major
jihad [i.e. jihad of the soul] is the root of success of the minor jihad
[i.e. jihad with arms].

Husayn's (as) words: let him set out with us', is still ringing, through
the course of history, in the ears of worldly people who want to live in
comfort and peace as well as in the ears of the terrorized, the
terrified and the oppressed. He is inviting them to set out from their
world to his own, from the world of servility and worldly vanities to
the world of honour which renounces, worldly things.

The caravan of Husayn (as) is still moving along the 'thorny path' and
gaining ground. It is joined by a people who have preferred the
hereafter to this world and God's pleasure to the ephemeral things of
this world; whereas those encumbered by inordinate desires fail to join
it.

8- 'With Us'
------------

Let Husayn's (as) companions congratulate themselves on being in his
company on this journey. It has been said about difficult travels of the
olden days when long journeys were arduous and dangerous: 'Select the
co-traveler before setting out.'[^19] The road to Karbala was indeed
difficult and long; it was an uphill road in difficult terrain with many
pitfalls.

It started from ‘I’ and ended with God the Exalted; from the world to
the hereafter; from attachment to the world to independence from it.
There are many pitfalls and dangers on this road and those who shun it
are numerous while those who follow it are few; however, to be in the
company of Husayn (as) guarantees safe movement and guarantees reaching
the destination.

On every difficult road one needs a guide and leader; the work of the
guide is to give direction and guidance, just as signboards at
crossroads serve to show travelers' destinations. For small and easy
roads one does not need more than one guide but for difficult roads one
requires, in addition to the guide, a leader who should precede him and
take the lead, and also imbue him with strength of heart and confidence,
so that he may not get exhausted, terrified, hopeless or forlorn*.*

For the travelers along the 'thorny path', Husayn (as) was a guide, a
teacher and a model. He used to say to the people when he sought their
help*: "My life is together with your lives and my family with
yours."*[^20]

Who can tell the extent of resolve and the will to change the course of
history which is exhibited by this sentence: *"For I am setting out
tomorrow morning, if God wills."*[^21] Great feats usually require
resoluteness. Resolve signifies strength while hesitation is a mark of
weakness. Imam al-Sadiq (as) says: *"The body does not fail where the
will is strong**."***[^22]

One cannot know the kind of support, guidance, success and victory God
bestowed on this small band on that journey, for despite its simplicity,
that journey changed the course of the history of Islamic civilization.
Had it not been for it, the Umayyads would have been able to alter the
outstanding characteristics of this religion and derail it, and they
would have portrayed a different picture of Islam akin to the arrogance
and profligacy of kings rather than God's religion.

Had this religion changed, the course of human civilization would have
been altered.

9- 'If God Wills'
-----------------

This is the ninth point in Husayn's (as) speech. In this sentence we can
perceive two wills being assimilated, one into the other. No work can
achieve its real value unless both wills are present in it together; the
one assimilated by the other. The first will is that of man, while the
second is that of God the Exalted. The first dissolves into the second.

Man is God's vicegerent who is supposed to execute His will and purpose
on earth by developing the world and reforming mankind, i.e. man is not
divested of the freedom to choose and decide his destiny. Here lies the
difference between a mere tool and a vicegerent; each effects the
purpose of a second party but the first does this possessing no choice
whereas the second carries out that purpose through his own choice and
will. Inorganic matter, plants and animals are subservient tools that
are employed to actualize the will and purpose of God the Exalted in
accordance with fixed divine laws that govern nature.

However, these actors are devoid of will and choice. As for man, he is
the vicegerent of God whom He created and honoured with viceroyalty over
the earth. *The Exalted says:* ***"Indeed I am going to set a viceroy on
the earth"***[^23] He has been invested with this position in order to
execute God's purpose on earth but through his own will and volition and
not otherwise.

In this section of the speech of Husayn (as) we vividly perceive this
reality. First, he says: 'For I am setting out tomorrow morning'. In
this phrase one way or the other ‘I’ and the human will come to the
fore: ‘I’ and ‘am setting out’. However, the second phrase: 'if God
wills' immediately follows the first in order to moderate the effect of
‘I’’s appearance in the first phrase and also to direct both ‘I’ and the
human will towards assimilation into God's will, and so that ‘I’ may be
employed in executing His will and purpose.

Here Husayn (as) used the first phrase: 'I am setting out' to express
his limitless resolve and will to sacrifice. His will compels ‘I’ to
emerge and then directs it on the journey towards God the Exalted. No
doubt 'I' appears here within the sphere of obedience to God and not
that of desires, nor is the emergence of 'I' and its focus in the arena
of obedience to God the same as its emergence in the arena of worldly
desires.

However Husayn (as) was proceeding on his journey towards God and he
wanted to be free from ‘I’ even in the sphere of obedience to God; he
did not want to carry ‘I’ with him to God the Exalted. So when he
resolved to make the journey to God he said: ‘if God wills’, tying his
purpose to God's purpose and fusing his will and choice into God's will,
thereby, employing it for the execution of God's will.

As we hear this phrase, 'if God wills', from Husayn (as)'s speech we
feel the departure, we perceive God's decree, but we do not find the
decision maker, 'I'. Husayn (as)’s stand in this journey was so similar
to that taken by his forefather Ishmael (as) the first sacrificed one,
when his father Abraham (as), the friend of God told him that he would
slaughter him, just as God showed Abraham (as) in a dream!

***"When he was old enough to assist in his endeavour, he said, ‘My son!
I see in a dream that I am sacrificing you, what do you think?’***
Ishmael replied without hesitation: ***‘Father! do whatever you have
been commanded. If God wishes, you will find me patient.’"***[^24]
Indeed Ishmael’s words: 'Father! do whatever you have been commanded',
which he uttered as an adolescent, carry with them unlimited sacrifice,
service, offering, certainty, courage, resolve, strength, patient,
struggle against desires, self-abnegation, disdain for the world,
turning towards God, sincerity to God, aversion to other-than-God and
many other values beyond my imagination.

Human will surely manifests itself in this sacrifice and offering, and
through it ‘I’ also appears. But God's Sacrificed One, Ishmael (as) did
not like to carry this ‘I’ in his journey to God. It is true that ‘I’ is
only manifesting itself here in the arena of obedience to God, and not
in the sphere of rebellion, selfish desire, greed, niggardliness,
weakness, cowardice and love of this world. But this theatre and those
who are in it should all be for God, so Ishmael possessed nothing of it.
Ishmael did not want to enter this divine sphere encumbered with ‘I’.

He wanted to be relieved of it, his actions and sacrifice assimilated
into God's will and purpose, as if (and there is no place for ‘as if’
here but certainty) he had no role, no impact, no action and no any
credit in this unique sacrifice; all was the result of His decree, will
and grace. And surely it was Ishmael (as) who said: *"If God wishes, you
will find me patient."*

You will perceive the sacrifice, God's decree and His favour and grace
which He bestowed on Ishmael (as) on account of this sacrifice, but
Ishmael (as) totally disappears under the expression 'if God wills', so
much so that you can hardly perceive his presence despite the immensity
of the sacrifice.

May God bless you, O son of Abraham, friend of the Merciful! Your
greatness has been obscured behind God's greatness so He exalted you in
His firm book. You got assimilated in God's will so He made you manifest
in the Great Qur'an which mankind recite day and night for all time:
***“And mention in the Book, Ishmael. Indeed he was true to his promise,
an apostle and a prophet. He used to bid his family to [maintain] the
prayer and to [pay] the*** ***zakat, and was pleasing to his
Lord.”***[^25]

The scene of this sacrifice, which is unique in history, looked small on
earth but great in the heavens. On that day the angels gathered to
witness this spectacle and saw that the Father of the Prophets, Abraham
(as) laid down his own child Ishmael (as) on his forehead while the
latter was in complete submission to God's command, unperturbed and
still, but no man on earth was witnessing that great scene. So the
angels raised their voices, beseeching the Merciful and Compassionate to
ransom Ishmael with a great sacrifice.

The world was then steeped in the darkness of unbelief and ignorance and
amidst this darkness a beam of light began to shine from the valley of
Mina to the heavens, and the angels gathered in throngs around it to
watch this immense sacrifice, the sacrifice of the son and the sacrifice
of the father. You never can tell which one of the sacrifices was
considered by the angels, on that day, as the greater: the father's
sacrifice of his son or the son's, presenting himself to be sacrificed
by his father? And which was more sublime in their view, this unique and
amazing sacrifice by the adolescent youth Ishmael (as) or tying it all
to God's decree: ‘if God wishes you will find me patient’?

Exercise patience, dear angels! Do not register what these father and
son did, as the ideal. Wait till God brings a descendant of the two men,
the Father of the Martyrs to Karbala carrying his suckling child in his
hand. He will request water for it, for it would be burning with thirst,
but the wicked Hurmalah ibn Kahil al-Asadi will shoot an arrow at it,
while it is still in its father's hands, and slaughter it, cutting its
jugular veins completely. Then Husayn (as) will place his hand below the
child's throat to collect the blood and then throw it towards heaven
lest God's wrath descends on earth.

With all this, Husayn (as) did not consider anything of his actions as
great; he did not deem his sacrifice and offering as a thing of
consequence. He did not suffer from conceit as a result of this immense
offering for God's sake. He deemed all this work as issuing from God and
by His will, favour and grace. He had no role or credit of his own; all
credit went to God alone. Husayn (as) was not more than a mere executor
of God's will. Therefore, in the theatre of sacrifice, while immersed in
supplication and communion with God, quite oblivious of what was around
him, Husayn (as) said: “*O God! Take whatever is acceptable to You, for
I submit to Your Pleasure.”*

[^1]: -Bihar al-Anwar 44: 366

[^2]: - Sheikh al-Sharifi's Kalimat al-Imam al-Husayn (a.s): 368

[^3]: - Tarikh al-Tabari 4: 321- 322; Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin's Lawaji'
al-Ashjan pg: 118.

[^4]: - Qur'an ch: 5 vs: 55

[^5]: - Sheikh Abdullah al-Bahrani's Al-Awalim pg. 127

[^6]: - Sahih al-Bukhari vol: 1, chapter on how the revelation to the
Messenger of God started.

[^7]: - Sheikh Ali al-Namazi's Mustadrak Safinat al-Bihar 8: 63

[^8]: - Ibn Tawus’ Iqbal al-A'mal 3: 332

[^9]: - Bihar al-Anwar 99: 185

[^10]: - Qur'an ch: 3 vs: 14

[^11]: - Qur'an ch: 50 vs: 22

[^12]: - Qur'an ch: 6 vs: 31

[^13]: - Qur'an ch: 10 vs: 45

[^14]: - Qur'an ch: 13 vs: 2

[^15]: - Qur'an ch: 18 vs 110

[^16]: - Qur'an ch: 29 vs: 5

[^17]: - Qur'an ch: 10 vs: 7

[^18]: -Qur'an ch: 62 vs 6-7

[^19]: - Al-Kafi 8: 24

[^20]: - Bihar al-Anwar 44: 382

[^21]: - Bihar al-Anwar 44: 366

[^22]: - Wasa'il al-Shi'ah 1: 38

[^23]: - Qur'an ch:2 vs: 30

[^24]: - Qur'an ch: 37 vs: 102

[^25]: -Qur'an ch: 19 vs: 54 -55


