Meditations On Husayn’s Speech On The Day Of Ashura
===================================================

Husayn (as) addressed the people on the Day of Ashura, saying:

“You have drawn the sword with which we armed you, against us, and
ignited the fire we kindled against our enemy and yours, against us. So
you have joined hands with the forces of your enemies against your
allies, in spite of being aware that they (your enemies) have not
established any justice among you, nor do you expect any good from
them.”[^1]

This is Husayn’s address to the people on the day of Ashura. It is a
strange speech which he gave at that critical hour before they drew
their swords on him. This address carries boundless grief on account of
those people who drew their swords against the son of the daughter of
the Messenger of God, (S). I will talk on a number of points regarding
this speech.

1- “You Have Drawn The Sword With Which We Armed You, Against Us.”
------------------------------------------------------------------

With respect to any struggle people fall into three groups: The first
and the second are the opposing parties, while the third are mere
observers who stay behind without supporting the truth. This group makes
up a wide cross section of society.

The first and second groups bear the price of the struggle, that is,
hands and heads will have to fall. This equally involves both the
contesting parties and is not specific to the party of truth or
falsehood. This is the norm of God Most High with regard to contests.
God Almighty says:

“If you are suffering they are also suffering like you, but you expect
from God what they do not expect.”[^2]

He also said: ***"If a wound afflicts you, a like wound has already
afflicted those people; and We make such vicissitudes rotate among
mankind…”***[^3]

The party of truth is distinguished in the contest by God’s help and
support and the victory He grants them. Indeed God has promised them
that. God Most High says: ***"If you help God, He will help you and make
your feet steady”***[^4] and ***"God has ordained: ‘I shall surely
prevail, I and my apostles.”***[^5]

This is what the believers expect from God when they are engaged in a
contest. This expectation assures the hearts of the believers of divine
support on the battlefield, a support which will ensure the outcome of
the conflict in their favour. The foregoing analysis pertains to the two
warring parties. The third group is a very complex one that can easily
slip towards the side of falsehood as it is susceptible to enemy
influence.

These are the people whom Husayn (as) addressed on the day of Ashura.
They had sheathed their swords during the times of Ali (as) and al-Hasan
(as). They had abandoned Ali (as) in Siffin and after that al-Hasan (as)
till he had to compromise with Mu’awiya in order to save what remained
of his father’s partisans. When these people put down their arms and
forsook Ali (as) and al-Hasan (as), Mu’awiya drew them and after him, on
the day of Ashura, Yazid did the same.

They did not lay down arms for long because the field of struggle abhors
those sitting on the fence. He who does not side with truth on the field
of contest and prefers safety over trouble of battle will undoubtedly
side with falsehood very soon. The stand of the defenders of truth is
firm and secure, and beyond the reach of the enemy, but those who stand
on the fence easily drift towards the enemy side. They are defenseless
and within easy reach of the enemy who can allure them to join the
bandwagon, or terrorize and force them to side with falsehood.

Because of this, the positions people take on the field of conflict boil
down to two: either they stand with truth in terms of loyalty and
denouncement or they stand with falsehood in a like manner. These were
the people Husayn (as) was addressing at Karbala. They had sheathed
their swords and betrayed his father and brother before and were drawing
them on him in Karbala. So he said to them: ‘You have drawn the sword
with which we armed you against us.’

The sword denotes power. Before the advent of Islam, the Arabs were an
isolated, weak nation living in the desert with neither power nor
wealth. Islam bestowed on them power and wealth, made them bearers of
the message of monotheism and conquered the world for them, thus making
them lords and rulers over the world. Syria was then the seat of this
power, which Islam had brought to the Arabs, and it used it to exercise
political and military influence over large parts of Asia and Africa.

To these people, Husayn (as) spoke on the day of Ashura at Karbala,
saying:

“God has guided you through my grandfather the Messenger of God (S) and,
through him, provided you with this vast control that stretches over the
earth. He has made you leaders and lords in the world. Therefore, this
power and sword is ours although it is now in your hands. However, you
have forsaken my father and brother before; you sheathed your swords and
abandoned them then. And here you are today drawing the sword, which the
Messenger of God (S) placed in your hands, to fight the son of his
daughter.

It would have been more becoming of you to have fought Muawiya ibn Abi
Sufyan with this sword before, in support of my father and brother, and
today, Yazid ibn Mu’awiya in my support … for they have left the
tradition (*sunnah*) of God’s Messenger and we tried to bring them back
to the straight path but they did not return to it.”

2- ‘And You Ignited The Fire Which We Kindled Against Our Enemy And Your Enemy, Against Us.’
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

What was this fire that Husayn spoke about on the day of Ashura?

Who ignited it?

Where did he ignite it?

This fire was the great explosion of light that took place in the
Arabian Peninsula. It sent to mankind a radiance that enlightened the
hearts and minds of men from the east to the west. With this light,
which entered every house, God removed the darkness of ignorance from
mankind. This light turned into faith, sincerity, service, certainty,
values, sacrifice, prayer and supplication, schools for the
dissemination of knowledge and mosques for worship that soon spread all
over the world. It also emerged as uprisings and movements of the
oppressed against the oppressors. On the other hand, this fire
eliminated the thrones of the tyrants in Persia, Byzantine and Egypt. It
also broke away the fetters and shackles from the hands and feet of men,
and set them free from the grip of the oppressors.

The Messenger of God (S) ignited this fire in the Arabian peninsula and
it was barely fifty years after its kindling that it illuminated the
globe from east to west. The Messenger of God, (S) did not select a
specific class for this call. In fact he released the dormant forces of
innate nature and reason from the souls of those Arabs who answered his
call. He made them a great force that vanquished the armies of Persia
and Byzantium, and swept away the thrones of Chosroe and Caesar.

This action of the Messenger of God (S) was exactly like the work of an
engineer when he produces light and heat from a cold dark rock; or the
way a cold dark piece of wood gives us light and heat when it comes into
contact with fire. He produced, out of them, paragons of righteousness
and piety, strength and resistance, faith and submission to God, who
were able to propagate this mission all over the world. They became
lords and leaders of humanity after having lived in isolation from
civilization in a plantless desert region.

In no more than fifty years from the death of the Messenger of God (S),
the people burnt the house of his daughter. They set fire to Fatima’s
(as) door in Medina, and later to the tents of his household in Karbala.

How cruelly they disregarded the rights of the Prophet’s family!

How ungratefully they repaid the Messenger of God (S) for his favours!

How regrettable the conduct of the servants!!

And God Most High clearly expressed His Wish to them:

***"Say, ‘I do not ask of you any reward for it except affection and
respect for [my] kith and kin.’***[^6]

3- “You Have Joined Hands With The Forces Of Your Enemies Against Your Allies.”
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is the second act of apostasy, which is worse than the first. The
Imam (as) pointed out to the first when he said: ‘you have drawn the
sword which we armed you with, against us.’ When the people reneged the
first time, the swords shifted from the side of the Household of the
Messenger of God (S) to the side of their opponents and enemies. This
fact has been precisely described by al-Farazdaq when he met Husayn (as)
on the way to Iraq. He said to the Imam (as): “Their hearts are with you
but their swords are against you.”[^7] This is a perfect description of
the psychological and political condition of the people at that time.
Indeed their hearts were with Husayn (as) until then although their
political inclinations were in favour of the Umayyads. This was the
beginning, and it constituted the first act of perfidy.

The normal situation is that the hearts and swords should converge on
the side of the truth, but if the heart and the swords disagree, this is
the first step towards apostasy. The second step is when the two are
agreed on being hostile to, and fighting the Prophet’s Household (as.).
This is the situation about which the Imam (as) is informing us in this
statement:

“You have joined hands with the forces of your enemies against your
allies.”

The term al-ilb, which the Imam used, denotes rallying or joining hands
with a common enemy and needs some explanation. A nation (*ummah*) is a
group of people who are united by a common loyalty and a common thing
which they repudiate. This is the soundest and most precise definition
of *ummah* (nation).

The Muslim nation is united by loyalty to God, His Messenger (S) and the
Imams (as) of the believers. ***"Your guardian is only God, his Apostle
and the faithful who maintain prayer and give the*** ***zakat***
***while bowing down [in rukuh].”***[^8]

He who accepts this guardianship is part of this nation and he who
rejects it or part of it does not belong to this nation. Similarly, this
nation has a common position of repudiating the rebellious forces of
taghut which God Almighty has ordered us to disbelieve in, and the
idolaters. So he who repudiates these two is a member of this nation and
he who does not is not its member. ***"Worship God and keep away from
the Rebel”***[^9]

Thus, on the day of Ashura, The Imam (as) said to them: A repudiation of
God’s enemies and a common hostility towards them used to unite us. We
also shared a common loyalty towards God’s friends. But today “you have
joined the forces of your enemies against your allies”, exactly the
opposite of what should have been the case. You should have united with
your allies against your enemies. This is the second act of apostasy.

In fact, this was the condition of the people whom Husayn (as) addressed
on Ashura. This showed the change-over between the two poles of love and
hate, loyalty and repudiation, and it is the highest form of volte-face
in the human personality.

4- “They Have Not Established Any Justice Among You, Nor Do You Expect Any Good From Them.”
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Imam (as) is saying that their hearts have turned from guidance to
misguidance, from God’s friends to His enemies. They have become loyal
to those that deserved repudiation, while the Umayyads have not changed
their former position: “they have not established any justice among
you.” The Umayyads are still committing injustice as they did before,
still steeped in oppression and deviation.

No change had taken place in the stand of the Umayyads; the only thing
that happened was a volte-face of hearts from the axis of loyalty to
that of repudiation and from repudiation to that of (a new) alliance,
for the people had shifted their alliance from the *Ahl al-Bayt* (the
Prophet’s household) to the Umayyads without there being any change in
the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) from the position of guidance and righteousness,
or in the Umayyads from their deviation and oppression.

“Nor do you expect any good from them”

That change of hearts was not prompted by any transformation in the
Umayyads from unjust rulers to justice-loving ones, nor was it because
the people expected the Umayyads to treat them with justice. Therefore,
the people were not deceived by the Umayyads when they gave them their
loyalty and fought their antagonists. What then prompted the people to
change over from the family of God’s Messenger (S) to the family of
Umayyah? The reason was that the Umayyads had subdued them with terror
or enticement. There is a difference between deception and degradation.
One who is deceived by his enemy loves his enemy, is loyal to him and
fights his enemy’s enemy out of mistake. This is a weakness in terms of
awareness and knowledge but not a debasement. But he who allies himself
with his enemy and supports him with his arms and wealth, and then gives
him his heart knowing that he is his enemy abases himself and becomes
contemptible.

Nations have always been subdued and degraded either by force and terror
or by money. The Umayyads used both methods: debasement with force and
terror and debasement with money and power. Although they used
enticements, propaganda and deception, their excessive oppression,
luxury and sinful style of life was too prominent to be lost on anyone.

5- “Woe To You! Are You Heading Towards These People And Forsaking Us?
----------------------------------------------------------------------

This is the most pathetic volte-face in man’s life: he turns against
himself by loving his enemy and hating his friend. A human being loves
and hates; loves his friends and hates his enemies. When one forgets
oneself, he forgets who he should love and who he should hate and above
all, love and hate change places for him so that he now loves his enemy
and hates his friends! This is the condition with which God punishes
those who forget Him; He makes them forget themselves ***"…who forgot
God so he makes them forget their own souls.”***[^10]

The people Husayn (as) addressed on the day of Ashura were among those
who forgot God so He made them forget themselves, forgot who they loved
and hated. They loved the Umayyads who they were supposed to be hostile
to because they perpetrated tyranny, sin and ungodliness; and they
fought their friends and allies whom God had commanded the Muslims to
love and obey, as recorded in the definitive (*muhkamat*) verses of His
book.[^11] I cannot imagine the extent of pain that afflicted the Imam’s
heart as depicted by this speech. A pain that stems from his compassion
for them with regard to the level of misery they had reached. This pain
was not because the Imam had lost their support in his tribulation.

6- “O Slaves Of (This) Nation And Strangers!”
---------------------------------------------

This is the trait of slaves. Slaves must be loyal to whoever buys them.
There is no permanent principle for their loyalty. He who buys them from
the slave market deserves their loyalty, whether they like or hate him.
Therefore their loyalty changes hands instantly from one master to the
new master who pays their price to the old one and the latter hands over
the whip to the former.

In an instant, the slaves forget their old love and loyalty and become
faithful to their new master and new loyalty. People’s loyalty is to
their parties, in ease or difficulty and in defeat or victory, unlike
those who are strangers to the parties, for their loyalty is always for
the victorious whether they are in the right or not. This is the
situation with floating political alliances; they carry dangerous
psychological implications that depict a lack of principles and values.
Also this attitude shows complete subordination to the one with the
upper hand and a complete abandoning of the self and values.

7- “Away With You, O Slaves Of The Nation And Strangers To The Parties!”
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here the Imam (as) is praying for their being distanced from the mercy
of God. This is because God’s mercy descends on man at different
stations in man’s life. When one distances himself from these points he
removes himself from God’s mercy. This is God’s norm of treating His
servants so let us ponder on it. There is a reciprocal relationship
between the descending mercy of God and the points at which it descends.

This descending mercy activates the places it descends upon. When rain
falls on a land it becomes green, blossoms, ripens and bears fruit. This
is what the descending mercy does to its place of descent. The place of
mercy also seeks its place of descent and does not come down on a place
unless it deserves the descent of mercy.

This deserving is to seek God’s mercy in the existential sense by having
the potential to receive it, and this is necessary for mercy to descend.
On the other hand, rejecting God’s mercy pushes it aside and makes it
remote. God’s mercy is continuously descending although there are
factors that facilitate its reception, just as there are factors that
bring about its rejection.

Ponder over the prayer of the righteous servant of God, Noah (as)
against his people: ***“And Noah said: ‘My Lord! Do not leave on the
earth any inhabitant from amongst the faithless. If you leave them, they
will lead your servants astray and will beget only vicious
ingrates.”(Qur’an-71:27)*** It is a strange prayer in which Noah (as)
speaks of God’s norms of sending mercy and cutting it off. All their
potential for receiving goodness had dried up and all readiness to seek
mercy: “… and they will not beget any but vicious ingrates”. So, on what
would God’s mercy descend?

Husayn (as) prays to God Most High against those people on the day of
Ashura because their hearts have lost all the values, which are the
points in their souls at which mercy descends. So there remained no
place in their souls and lives on which divine mercy would alight. Thus
he said: Away with you! O slaves of the nation.

8- “An Old Treachery That Was Part And Parcel Of Your Forefathers”
------------------------------------------------------------------

Just as good can be deep-rooted, evil can also be so. The roots of
goodness reach out to innate nature, reason, conscience and the heart
while those of evil are linked to selfish desires. When evil and selfish
desires take root in the mind one loses all the sources of goodness that
are in his soul. The foundations of goodness that are associated with
his heart, conscience, reason and innate nature dwindle as well.

Heredity plays a part in establishing goodness or evil. I do not mean to
say that the effect of heredity is inevitable but that it plays an
important part. Heredity enhances good and intensifies evil although not
with coercion. This means that mankind falls into two groups: the good
tree and the bad tree (lit. tree) and each one is a tree. A tree has
roots and fruits and there are similarities in some aspects between the
roots and fruits of a tree. The roots of a tree form its foundation, the
fruits its derivatives while the trunk serves as the means of conveying
the features from the roots to the fruits.

In like manner good and bad lines of mankind carry good and bad traits
from ancestors to their offspring so that goodness or evil are
deep-rooted in each of them. Consequently, these two sets of ancestors
constitute two lines in human history: a rising line that moves upwards
continuously and a falling line, continuous in descent. Nimrod’s family
is on the descent and Abraham’s family on the ascent; the family of
Moses is ascending and the family of Pharaoh descending.

The law of heredity enhances this ascent and descent. It does not only
convey the features of good and evil from forefathers to offspring but
also refines them and sorts out evil from good and vice versa. As time
goes on, the divergence between these two families (of good and evil)
widens until a time is reached when the members of the evil family
become devoid of goodness and its spring dries up from their souls. At
that point divine punishment descends on them since they no longer
deserve mercy.

This is what happened at the time of Noah (as) and it could happen at
any other time. Then the bad family comes to an end and falls, and a new
circle of history will begin. Surely, the law of heredity carries good
and bad traits from generation to generation and promotes both the good
and the bad together. It is this law that Imam Husayn (as) was hinting
at when he said:

“Certainly, I swear by God that yours is an old treachery which has
become part and parcel of your forefathers and which the offspring among
you have strengthened. So you are the worst fruits: an eye sore to the
viewer and an easy morsel for the usurper.”

The Imam (as) meant to say that treachery and wickedness was deep-rooted
in them. It first reared its head on the day of Siffin, after which sons
inherited it from their fathers. It took root first with their
forefathers and gained strength and blossomed at the hands of the
offspring among those present.

Therefore, they are the worst fruit of the bad tree. We must add that
the inheritance we are discussing here is that of values and behaviour
and it does not apply to biological inheritance. The law of biological
inheritance in plants, animals and humans does not necessarily apply to
that of values, thoughts and behaviour. The two laws can be completely
different as in the case of Noah's son.

The Qur'an gives a precise description of him saying: ***"Indeed he is a
[personification of] unrighteous conduct"*****,**[^12] although he was
among the offspring of Noah (as) who was a leader of the righteous. This
difference came from the determining factor in biological inheritance
that does not apply to the inheritance of actions and values, which
follow will and choice.

[^1]: - Sayyid Ibn Tawus’s Al-Luhuf fi Qatla al-Tufuf pg: 58.

[^2]: - Qur’an Ch: 4, Vs: 104.

[^3]: - Qur’an, Ch: 3, Vs: 140.

[^4]: - Qur’an Ch: 47, Vs: 7

[^5]: - Qur’an Ch: 58, Vs: 21.

[^6]: - Qur’an Ch: 42, Vs: 23.

[^7]: - Sheikh al-Sharifi’s Kalimat Imam al-Al-Husayn (a.s) pg. 370.

[^8]: - Qur’an Ch: 5, Vs: 55.

[^9]: - Qur’an Ch: 16, Vs: 36.

[^10]: - Qur’an Ch: 59, Vs: 19.

[^11]: - “Say, ‘I do not ask you any reward for it except the affection
for [my] relatives’ – Qur’an Ch: 42 Vs: 23. “Your guardian is only God,
His Apostle, and the faithful who maintain the prayer and give the zakat
while bowing down” Qur’an Ch: 5, Vs: 55.

[^12]: - Qur'an Ch: 11 vs: 46.


