Husayn (As)’S Letter From Karbala To His Brother, Muhammad
==========================================================

Mayassar ibn Abd al-Aziz reported that Abu Ja‘far (as) has said: Husayn
ibn Ali (as) sent a letter from Karbala to Muhammad ibn Ali. [It read]:
“In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. From Husayn ibn
Ali to Muhammad ibn Ali and the Hashimites who are with him. [Know that]
the world is as if it has never been and the hereafter is as if it has
always been. Peace.”[^1]

The Reason The Letter Was Written
---------------------------------

Husayn (as) wrote this letter from Karbala to his brother Muhammad ibn
al-Hanafiyyah at a critical juncture in the history of this nation. The
Umayyads had gone to great lengths in tyranny and had corrupted Islamic
society. They had succeeded in spreading terror, temptation and
deception to different regions of the Islamic world, and the people had
responded to this three-pronged agent of control and acquiesced to the
oppression and corruption that was being perpetrated by the Umayyads.
They altered the outlines of this religion to such an extent that
nothing would have remained of Islam but its name, as Husayn (as) said:
“Then bid farewell to Islam for the nation has been afflicted with a
shepherd like Yazid.”

On the one side, the people had been possessed by fear and terror and
their preference for safety and well-being, and on the other by
enticements. Imam Husayn (as) had witnessed this severe trial in all its
ramifications as he traveled from Medina to Karbala… And now here he was
confronting the army of the Umayyads. He was the son of the daughter of
the Messenger of God (S), and one about who no one was in any doubt as
to his honour in the sight of God and his eligibility for the leadership
of the Muslims. With all this, no one stood by him from this nation,
large as it was, except seventy-two souls from his family and
companions.

There were two faces to this tribulation: an external one in the form of
the political and social life of the nation that came under the
oppression and corruption of the Umayyads, and an internal one which was
the minds of the people with their love for the world, personal
well-being and anxiety about death. Between these two faces a clear
reciprocal relationship existed, for terror and corruption results in
weakness and mental impotence, and love for the world enables the rulers
to oppress and corrupt the people.

Yes, Husayn (as) was facing a big problem, as big as the Islamic world
itself. It was two-sided, one inside the minds and the other in the
political life of the nation. He was working to change both. On the
first front he was working in order to condemn the rule of the Umayyad
family, nullify the legitimacy of their power and expose their crimes
and corruption to the Muslims. On the second front, the Imam was trying
to break away the barrier of fear from the minds of the Muslims and
imbue them with enthusiasm, bring back the will-power which they had
been robbed of and restore their trust, strength, courage, and reliance
on God.

The Imam was striving to remove the widespread defeatist tendency that
was affecting the Muslims. He knew that the reason behind all this
defeatism was internal: love for the world and neglect of the hereafter.
He thought that the way to treat this terrible psychological problem was
to make the hereafter the object of desire not the world, and make them
overcome the fear of death. It was against this background that the Imam
wrote to his brother Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah and addressed the
community of his grandfather. He presented the diagnosis of the problem
and gave the precise prescription for its treatment.

“[Know that] the world is as if it has never been and the hereafter is
as if it has always been. Peace.”

Devotion To God And Withdrawing From The World
----------------------------------------------

The statement of the Imam, precise as it was, contained the whole
solution: exclusive devotion to God by reducing the charm and glamour of
the world. The Commander of the Faithful (as) once said concerning
Uthman ibn Maz‘un (may God have mercy on him) “I used to have a brother
in [faith and the love of] God whose contempt for the world exalted him
in my eyes.” In addition to cutting down the fascinating effect of the
world, one has to attach great importance to the hereafter in his mind
and arouse interest in it. This is what the Imam alluded to in his
address: “[Know that] the world is as if it had never been and the
hereafter is as if it has always been.”

Now let us ponder over this statement of the Imam and discuss both parts
of it. But before that we shall ask: what is ‘the world’ and what is
‘the hereafter’?

What Are The World And The Hereafter?
-------------------------------------

What is meant by the world is attachment to it and what is meant by the
hereafter is having a relationship with God and wanting to meet Him.
With this, one can live in the world while being among the people of the
next world, and we can describe them as living in the world and not
living in it.

They are living in it in the sense that they move amidst the worldly
people in their normal activities such as business transactions and
family life. However, they do not live in this world since their hearts
never get attached to it, nor does the world penetrate into their
hearts. Their hearts are only attached to God: they sense, in this
world, the blessings of paradise and the torment of hell.

How Can A Person Be Among The People Of The Hereafter While Living In This World?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If we want to know how one can be among the people of the hereafter
while still living in this world, and how one can treat the malaise of
attachment to the world and free his soul from it and subsequently
attach himself to the hereafter, we have to ponder over these words with
which the Imam (as) addressed Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah: … “[Know that]
the world is as if it has never been and the hereafter is as if it has
always been.”

Worldly life will surely come to an end and one’s relationship with the
world will not last; all that one acquires in this world and one’s
attachments will finish. It is the hereafter that is permanent: ***“What
is with you will be exhausted but what is with God is permanent.”
(Qur’an-16:96)***What is with us is our possessions and what we are
attached to in the life of this world, and what is with God is the peace
and pleasure of the next world.

God Most High says: ***"The parable of the life of this world is that of
water which we send down from the sky. It mingles with the earth’s
vegetation from which humans and cattle eat. When the earth puts on its
luster and is adorned, and its inhabitants think they have power over
it, Our edict comes to it, by night or day, whereat we turn it into a
mown field, as if it did not flourish the day before. Thus, do we
elaborate the signs for a people who reflect”.***[^2]

It is the permanent and enduring pleasures that deserve man’s attachment
instead of the fleeting enjoyments that quickly disappear and cannot
last for man. Every enjoyment is fitted for man’s affection to the
extent for which it lasts for him, and the relationship between the
duration of worldly pleasures and those of the next world is the same as
the relationship that exists between the limited and the unlimited or
the absolute. So the proportion of one’s attachment to the world and the
hereafter should be the same as the proportion of the duration of
limited worldly pleasures to that of the limitless pleasures of the
hereafter.

Man’s attachment to this world and its pleasures and his disregard for
the hereafter often stem from an illusion of the permanence of, as well
as, his false hopes in, the former and forgetfulness with regard to the
hereafter. This is the consequence of illusion and forgetfulness.

The cure for this condition is for one to assume that the world has
never been. This assumption will soon come true willy-nilly, for when
all that pertains to the world is taken away from him it will be as
though the world has never been. Secondly, one should assume that the
hereafter is already here, and it will also soon come, because for each
individual, the hereafter starts when he breathes his last. These two
suppositions, which are very near to reality, are indeed the remedy for
that baseless illusion and forgetfulness.

From The Hereafter To The Hereafter
-----------------------------------

Based on this conception of the world and the hereafter, when the sons
of the hereafter leave this world they, in fact, leave the hereafter for
the hereafter and not the world for the hereafter. This is because they
have never really lived in this world nor has it ever become wedded to
their hearts, to have necessitated their removal from it to the next
world: they were already living in the hereafter before moving to the
hereafter. Based on this understanding of the world and the hereafter
mankind fall into four classes:

The first class, which moves from the world to the world.

The second class which moves from the hereafter to the world

The third class which moves from the world to the hereafter.

The fourth class which moves from the hereafter to the hereafter.

The first class: The people who move from the world to the world are
those who do everything in this world for its sake only; they never seek
God’s pleasure and other-worldly reward at all. All their activities are
from the world and back to it because if, for instance, they leave the
house for the shop they are moving from the world to the world: their
stay in the house is for worldly concerns, likewise is the time they
spend in the shop.

The second class: The people who move from the hereafter to the world
are those who are transformed from attachment to the hereafter to
attachment to the world, and after having worked for God’s sake they
become egoistic. Such people change from a position of work and activity
for God’s sake to gain his pleasure and the reward of the hereafter, to
that of seeking worldly benefits; thus they turn away from God towards
the world.

The third class: the people who move from the world towards the
hereafter are in direct opposition to the second class. This group
forsakes the fleeting possessions of this world and refuses to be
attached to it, and instead seeks the pleasure of God and the rewards of
the hereafter and courts it.

The fourth class: Those who move from the hereafter to the hereafter. We
have already talked about them. They live in the world among the people,
move in business centres and streets as people do, and establish social
relationships like marriage as people do, but their hearts never get
attached to the world. These people move from the hereafter to the
hereafter in all the activities they engage in this world.

Incentives and Barriers
-----------------------

Like every other activity, movement towards God has incentives and
barriers. When the incentives are there and the barriers are removed man
can set out on his way toward God whereas, in the opposite case, his
movement towards the Almighty is hampered. Among the principal things
that induce one into this activity is the yearning to meet God (in the
hereafter) and among the most important barriers is love of this world
and attatchment to it.

For man to be able to move towards God Almighty he has to make his heart
oblivious of the world so that he will not be attracted towards its
lures, lest it distract him from God. This is what Imam Husayn (as)
meant by his precise but significant and forceful words: ‘As if the
world has never been’. On the other hand, one must think about the
hereafter till he becomes attracted towards it. This is what the Imam
intended by saying ‘As if the hereafter has always been’, that is, it
has been ever since the beginning; never was it hidden nor will it ever
be.

When man succeeds in concealing the world from his heart and conscience,
and makes the hereafter always present, he starts off on his upward
journey to Almighty God at a quick and firm pace because of the presence
of a strong spur and the absence of barriers. When on the other hand,
worldly matters are strong and influence the mind and feelings and the
hereafter disappears from one’s heart and conscience, all activity comes
to a standstill. Between the poles, there exist a number of stages by
which man progresses or falls.

The Imam had witnessed widespread acquiescence to falsehood and
divergence from the truth, acceptance of tyranny and submission to
tyrants. The source of this situation was preference of this world over
the next, safety over tribulation, and the fear of death, apprehension
and pursuit, and their attendant difficulties. And the root cause of all
this is love for this world and disregard for the hereafter.

The Imam (as) wanted to address that phenomenon which was widespread
among the people at that time so he wrote that letter to Muhammad ibn
al-Hanafiyyah and through him, to the Hashimites who were with him and
to the rest of the people.

Now we shall study these two points from Imam Husayn (as)’s letter:

‘As If The World Has Never Been’
--------------------------------

The assumption ‘As if the world has never been’ is not an empty one; it
is a reality which the Imam portrays in this way. The basis of this
supposition is to consider despicable the value, duration and enjoyments
of this world. This scorn for the world means divesting it of all value
and consequence except, of course, where the world constitutes a means
of building the hereafter and discharging the duties of servitude to God
and carrying out one’s responsibilities as His viceroy on earth. In this
case the world per se loses all value to man ‘as if the world has never
been.’ It is related in Islamic texts that the example of man in this
world is like that of a traveler who takes rest in the shade of a tree
for an hour or so on a hot day, and then leaves it and goes on. Such is
man’s stay in the world.

The Messenger of God (S) is reported to have said: *“What do I have to
do with the world? My relationship with the world is only like the case
of a rider on a summer day that takes rest* *for an hour or so in the
day in the shade of a tree, and then goes away.”*[^3]

It is reported from the Commander of the Faithful (as) who said: “The
world is not a permanent home and you are in it, like riders who erected
a canopy and took some rest and then carried their belongings and went
away. They were light when they entered it but burdened when they left
it. They did not desire to leave it nor have they found a way of
returning to what they left in it.”[^4]

The Messenger of God (S) was asked: ‘How does a man live in the world?’
‘The way the caravan passes’, he replied. ‘How long does one stay in
it?’ the questioner asked. ‘As long as the one who is left behind by the
caravan stays’, he replied. Then the questioner asked: ‘How much is [the
lapse] between the world and the hereafter?’ ‘The twinkle of an eye’, he
replied, ‘God, the Mighty and Sublime, has said: ***“The day when they
see what they are promised [it will be] as though they had remained only
an hour of a day.”.***[^5]

It is also reported from the Commander of the Faithful (as) that *“the
world is [like] the shade of a cloud or a dream in sleep.”*[^6]

In another narration he also said: “Indeed, the world is the home from
which no one will be safe [while one is still] in it and one cannot
retrieve anything that is part of it (the world). People have been
tempted in it as a trial. Whatever they acquire of its possessions they
will be made to leave behind and called to account for them. And what
they take that does not belong to it (the world) they will arrive [in
the hereafter] to meet it and abide by it. To the prudent, the world is
comparable to the shadow, which after full length diminishes and after
once increasing decreases.”[^7]

Ali (as) also said concerning the world: *It is never limpid for the
drinker or faithful to the companion”*[^8] These real pictures that
Islamic sources depict of the world make it completely contemptible in
the eyes of the people ‘as if it has never been’. This is what Husayn
(as) wanted to tell the people on that day: that the world will not stay
nor be untainted for anyone. Therefore it is inappropriate or even
impermissible for a free man to submit to its dictates and abandon the
responsibility to bid what is right and forbid what is wrong and to
strive against the unjust, or prefer personal well-being over
tribulation.

As If The Hereafter Has Always Been
-----------------------------------

The hereafter is the place for requital while the world is the place for
work. In the hadith, it is stated that: today (i.e. the world) [is time
for] work and not for accounting and tomorrow (i.e. the next world) [is
time for] accounting and not for work. This is the most precise
description of this and the next world. So what is the requital of the
hereafter?

The requital of the hereafter consists of rewards and punishments, both
outward and inward. The outward sensory aspect comprises paradise and
hell, respectively. The inward aspect of requital is non-sensory.
Starting from this world man receives the recompense of his deed, as he
performs them, in the form of either elevation or regression. However,
this internal aspect of one’s work is not perceived by the senses during
the work. When one dies and the veil is removed from his eyes he will
see it: ***"We have removed your*** ***veil from your eyes and so your
sight is acute today.”***[^9]

Concerning those who misappropriate the property of orphans, the holy
Qur’an says: ***"Indeed those who consume the property of orphans
wrongfully only ingest fire into their bellies.”***[^10] This fire which
they put in their bellies when they wrongfully consume the orphan’s
property is the same fire which will burn them internally in hell
although they will only feel it in that world and not here. Thus they
receive their reward during the act except that they do not sense it
until after their death.

The blessings and torment of the next world will commensurate with man’s
level of perfection or decline. Just as there are levels of perfection,
there are levels of decline. The blessings or torment will reflect the
level of perfection or decline he reaches. It has been related in a
hadith about reciting the Qur’an, on the authority of the Messenger of
God (S) that *“It will be said to him (i.e. the reciter of the Qur’an):
Recite and ascend. For every verse he recites he ascends one
level”*[^11]

On the authority of Ali ibn Husayn Zayn al-Abidin (as) who said: *“It
will be said to the person who has read the Qur’an: ‘Read and ascend’.
He who enters paradise from among them will not be surpassed in position
except by the prophets and the truthful ones.”*[^12]

These texts show that Qur’an reciters have varying positions in paradise
and the blessings they are provided by God will be according to their
position in the hereafter, which in turn will be in proportion to their
positions in this world, which commensurate with what they have read of
the Qur’an.

On the authority of the Commander of the Faithful (as): “It will be said
to the reciter of the Qur’an: Read and ascend, and recite the way you
were reciting in the world, for your position in the world is
[proportional] to the last verse you read”[^13]This depicts a series of
proportionate things: what a believer receives of the blessings of
paradise is proportionate to his position in the next world. His
position in the next world is proportionate to his position in this
world. His position in this world is proportionate to what he reads,
comprehends and acts upon from the Qur’an. This is the meaning of ‘Read
and ascend’.

A deeper and more intense portrayal of this fact is given in verse
forty-six of Surah Hud where an eternal picture of Noah’s son is given
as: ***"Indeed he is [a personification] of unrighteous
conduct.”***[^14]

This picture is among the treasures of knowledge in the Qur’an. Man is
nothing but his own deeds and Noah’s son was an example of unrighteous
deed. Man’s action is his position in this world and this in turn is his
position in the next. Just as Noah’s son was of unrighteous conduct,
there are many examples of righteous conduct in this world. If we follow
the series of proportion we previously mentioned we will arrive at the
amazing outcome to which Imam Husayn (as) draws our attention, that is,
the hereafter is in fact standing before us in this world although we do
not feel it.

Sensing the hereafter right here in this world balances man’s behaviour
by refining his manners and freeing him from subservience to selfish
desire, in setting the soul free and helping it to soar toward God and
in removing the barriers that hinder his progress on the way to the
Almighty.

After this presentation of Islamic texts from the Book [the Qur’an] and
the Sunnah [the Prophet’s tradition] we wish to say that the position of
the believer in the hereafter, whether ascending or descending, will be
proportionate to his works — righteous or otherwise. Every good work
that man does in this world raises him and every bad one lowers him. And
the degrees by which he ascends or descends into paradise or hell
respectively, depend on his position in this world.

This issue is of paramount importance in Islamic culture. In a nutshell,
man encounters the recompense for his actions in this world even before
the next although he does not sense it. What he receives in the
hereafter in the form of blessings or torment constitutes the external
aspect, whereas his internal ascendance or fall becomes his lot in this
world. Man ascends and descends in this world and this ascent and
descent are connected to the ascent and descent in the hereafter, except
that one can remedy one’s fall in this world but cannot do so in the
hereafter.

This means that one achieves nearness to God through his good works and
gets distanced from Him because of his bad deeds. ‘As if one is living
in the hereafter and as if it has always been.’ Therefore the hereafter
is standing here in this world and this is the meaning of ‘And as if the
hereafter has always been’ in Imam Husayn’s letter to Muhammad ibn
al-Hanafiyyah and the Hashimites who were with him.

The Results That Follow The Two Viewpoints
------------------------------------------

First viewpoint: Presence of this world and absence of the hereafter.

Second viewpoint: Absence of this world and presence of the
hereafter.‘As if the world has never been and as if the hereafter has
always been.’

The first view urges love, attachment and devotion to the world, and
disregards the hereafter, arouses inordinate hopes and expectation with
regard to the world as if it will never end and forgets the hereafter as
if it will never come. He who loves the world seeks to preserve himself
physically and becomes a coward, shrinks from struggling and prefers
safety, and loses his self-esteem and honour. The Commander of the
Faithful (as) used to say: ***"The world debases.”***[^15]

This explains Islam’s disapproval of the world which seduces man, and
makes him lose his innate wisdom by attaching him to worldly
possessions, inducing indifference towards the hereafter, making him
turn away from God and finally causing his ruin. Among the outstanding
consequences of this viewpoint are weakness, cowardice and humiliation;
lack of a firm stand in the face of oppressors and dependence on them;
and sluggishness towards fighting the oppressors, and choosing personal
welfare in the life of this world.

This is what the Almighty says to such people: ***"O you who have faith!
What is the matter with you that when you are told: ‘Go forth in the way
of God’, you sink heavily to the ground? Are you pleased with the life
of this world instead of the hereafter? But the wares of the life of
this world compared with the hereafter are but insignificant.”***[^16]
Finding pleasure in and relying on the life of this world and paying
much attention to worldly property results in inertia that prevents one
from struggling in the way of God. It also makes one sluggish, which is
the bane of man’s activity towards God.

The Outcome Of The Second View
------------------------------

The greatest outcome of it is renunciation of the world and concern for
the hereafter. Asceticism is a praiseworthy trait that imbues man with
strength of character, courage, insight and attention to God. It makes a
person take courageous stands and frees him from indecision, impotence
and humiliation.

Contempt for the world and death, and concern for the hereafter are the
source of all courage and resolute stands in man’s life. On the other
hand, attachment and dependence on the world and giving much attention
to it strips man of the power to take decisions and remain steadfast in
it, leads to justifications and pretexts in giving up one’s stance, and
finally, an outright denial of one’s former position.

Expelling The World From The Mind And Replacing It With The Hereafter
---------------------------------------------------------------------

This is the essence of Husayn’s letter to his brother Muhammad ibn
al-Hanafiyyah and the Hashimites who were with him: erasing the world
from their minds and ushering in the hereafter ‘As if the world has
never been, as if the hereafter has always been’. It was a precise
prescription to cure the lethargy that prevented the Muslims from taking
a courageous and responsible stand against the Umayyad conspiracy which
caused great damage to the Muslims and Islam. It corrupted them in mind
and spirit and played havoc with their culture. It stole from them their
will and conscience.

These were the stages planned by the Umayyads to destroy the cultural,
intellectual and social dimensions of the then Islamic society. A vast
movement was necessary to foil this conspiracy, but it had already
paralyzed the people’s will and conscience to such an extent that they
were no longer able to respond to the son of the daughter of God’s
Messenger (S), who urged them to struggle against this plot and nullify
it.

Imam Husayn (as) wished to cure the people’s apathy towards *jihad*,
their weakness with regard to bidding what is good and forbidding what
is bad, their inability to confront injustice and oppression, and their
preference for personal safety. It was a precise prescription to remedy
that situation.

### First point

The first point in this prescription is to prepare the minds to
relinquish the world in order to meet God by feeling contempt for the
world and its temporary enjoyments, possessions and vicissitudes.
Preparing the mind in this way has a number of benefits:

1- One will not get attached to the world, nor rejoice at it, nor depend
on it.

2-One will not grieve for what is lost or be filled with despair by
misfortunes.

3- One will not become anxious about losing God-given bounties in the
future.

The Most high says: ***"So that you may not grieve for what escapes you
nor exult for what comes your way.”***[^17]

Three things drive man into tribulations: joy, grief and fear. Rejoicing
over worldly possessions, grief over what he loses and fear and anxiety
about what he may lose in future. When he rids himself of these three
hurdles the world will become inconsequential before him and he can
prepare to meet God. He will be freed from the grip of fear, weakness,
inertia and indecision.

The path to all this, as we have already said, is for one to undervalue
the world and assume that God has provided him with things as trial in
the form of wealth, spouse and children. Then he can free himself from
fear, grief and rejoicing at worldly acquisitions. Attachment to the
world is similar to the force of gravity with respect to the earth; if
you are able to leave the earth’s gravitational field, the force of
gravity that controls your movements will cease to act on you.

Similarly, if one can make his mind leave the world while still living
in it he will no longer be affected by the affliction called “attachment
to the world.” When people die and leave this world they become amazed
at how those living are wedded to the world, its embellishments and
possessions.

Islam does not ask people to live a life of seclusion or withdraw
themselves from political and social circles and family life, nor
abandon worldly enjoyments. This issue is too obvious to warrant any
comment. It is also very clear that Islam invites people to activity in
order to seek for provisions and develop the world, with the condition
that the gravitational pull of the world does not overpower them or
strip them of their freedom of will. This middle path is to extricate
the soul from attachment to the world but not from the world per se.
There is a clear difference between these two things. God Almighty has
mentioned the perfect yardstick in His book: *“So that you may not
grieve for what escapes you nor exult for what comes your way.”*

When we become sure of ourselves with regard to ‘grief’, ‘joy’ and
‘fear’, then one can enjoy what God has made permissible, without
objection. This cannot be achieved unless one removes himself from the
world’s field of attraction and this is the meaning of the well-known
hadith: “Die before you die.” The first death which the hadith urges is
voluntary death while the second death the hadith refers to is
involuntary death.

What is required of man is to die voluntarily before the inevitable
involuntary death. Voluntary death means that one should extricate
oneself from attachment to the life of this world before the involuntary
death removes him from the world. This is what is meant by distancing
the world from the soul, and it is a hard psychological process.

This is the first point in Imam Husayn’s prescription for his brother,
Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah, the Hashimites who were with him and the
rest of the people. Man has two viewpoints before him; one of them
intensifies his torment and anxiety while the other removes anxiety,
torment and fear from him.

The first is the assumption that man will live very long, which is a
false assumption.

The second one is that life is short. The basis of this assumption is
the absence of the world in the mind of that individual who always keeps
death in sight so that the world no longer seems to be under his
control; or, as if he has never lived in it to encounter difficulty in
separation from it.

This assumption frees man from the seduction and captivity of the world
but it does not seek to isolate him from the world; it only frees the
soul from getting attached to it and nothing else. The person with this
view participates with people in business, in the school, on the farm,
in public and at home, out of a sense of duty and responsibility and not
because of attachment and dependence. The two motives differ in the
sense that should any misfortune befall one’s business or affect his
children he will not be overwhelmed by grief, which, one who is attached
to the world will experience.

### Second Point

The second point in Imam Husayn’s prescription is making the hereafter
always present in the mind. This is also a difficult mental activity.
The Imam’s expression of this point is an exact one: ‘As if the
hereafter has always been’. That is, it has always been around since man
first entered this world and will remain when he returns to God. It
would have been different if he had said ‘as if the hereafter is
around.’

Does the world really mean attachment to it and the hereafter meeting
God? A man can live a long life in this world associating with people
both at home and in public and participate in social life without
getting attached to the world at all and without separating from God
ever since he came to know Him through his innate nature and his
intellect. Such people have entered the world, remained outside it,
known God and never parted with Him. Their bodies are in the world
together with the people while their hearts are averse to the worldly
possessions to which the people are attached and on which they depend.

The Commander of the Faithful, Ali (as) gave an apt description of the
condition of these people in the world, as recorded by al-Sharif al-Radi
in a sermon in Nahj al-Balaghah which came to be known as the sermon of
the God-fearing. He said: *“If there had not been fixed periods (of
life) ordained for each, their spirits would not have remained in their
bodies even for the twinkling of an eye because of (their) eagerness for
the reward and fear of chastisement.The greatness of the Creator is
seated in their hearts, and, so, everything else appears small in their
eyes.To them, Paradise is as though they see it and are enjoying its
favours.To them, Hell is also as if they see it and are suffering
punishment in it.”*

In this sermon the Imam (as) mentions the mental procedure followed by
these people in order to make the hereafter present before their eyes
while they live and interact with the people: *“And when they come
across a verse which contains what creates eagerness for (Paradise) they
pursue it avidly, and their spirits turn towards it eagerly, and they
feel as if it is in front of them.”*

This is the process of making the hereafter present which is the second
point in the Imam’s letter to Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah. These two
issues provide the cure for all the misfortunes one may encounter in
this world, the means of freedom from one’s captivity that is caused by
attachment to it and the launching pad for the journey to God Almighty.
Thus man changes from a mere object that is flung around by the flow of
events to an active element of change that is responsible before God for
determining the fate of human beings and building society. Likewise,
from being a servant of despotic rulers and their desires he turns into
a caller who arouses the nation and warns oppressive rulers to mend
their ways or face their doom.

[^1]: - Bihar al-Anwar 45:87.

[^2]: - Qur’an Ch: 10 Vs: 24.

[^3]: - Bihar al-Anwar 73: 123.

[^4]: - Ibid 78: 18.

[^5]: - Ibid 73: 122; Qur’an Ch:47 vs:35

[^6]: - Ghurar al-Hikam 1: 102.

[^7]: - Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 63.

[^8]: - Ghurar al-Hikam 1: 85.

[^9]: - Qur’an Ch: 50, Vs: 22.

[^10]: - Qur’an Ch: 4, Vs: 10.

[^11]: - Usul al-Kafi 2: 441.

[^12]: - Mustadrak al-Wasa’il 1: 299, first lithographic edition.

[^13]: - Majma’ al-Bayan 1: 16.

[^14]: - Qur’an Ch: 11. Vs: 46.

[^15]: - Ghurar al-Hikam 1: 11

[^16]: - Qur’an Ch: 9, Vs: 38.

[^17]: - Qur’an Ch: 57 Vs: 23.


