Defying Death On The Day Of Ashura
==================================

How Do We Deal With Death?
--------------------------

The issue of death and the way to deal with it is among the prominent
elements of the bloody fight by the Bank of the Euphrates on the day of
Ashura. From this angle, the event of Ashura is distinct among great
historical events.

When Husayn (as) was leaving Hijaz and heading towards Iraq he announced
that he would meet his death on that trip. He also informed the people
of his own death and urged them to lay down their lives for the same
cause and prepare themselves for their meeting with God. Throughout the
journey to Karbala, Husayn (as) had been frankly telling his companions
and the people he met that their destination was inevitable death. His
companions entertained no doubts about it: they were absolutely sure.

The only excuse offered by those who wished to forsake Husayn (as) was
their fear of death, and there are many instances of this in Husayn’s
journey to Karbala. This is a remarkable feature of the battle of Ashura
which distinguishes it from other similar incidents. For a revolutionary
leader to invite people to their death is very rare, if not completely
unheard of. Such leaders invite the people to activism and revolution
and request them to get ready to sacrifice their lives for it, if need
be. Husayn’s case was different

. He did not seek a military conquest as imagined by the people; he only
wanted to embark boldly upon a tragic sacrifice unparalleled in history,
in order to jolt the nation’s conscience. Husayn (as) had found that the
Umayyads had succeeded in controlling the people’s will and rendering
them subservient through terror and exile.

In this atmosphere the Umayyads tried to reinstitute pre-Islamic values
and views in the new Islamic society with no significant opposition from
the community. Therefore a strong jolting of the people’s conscience was
necessary to restore the will they had been robbed of, and this could
only be achieved by a tragic sacrifice unparalleled in history! Thus
Husayn (as) prepared his family and his companions for this tragedy!

This feature of the event of Ashura makes it unique when compared to
most other similar events in history. It is a deceitful mistake of
history to have stripped Ashura of this feature. If the feat of defying
death and seeking martyrdom be divorced from the event of Ashura it will
be nothing more than an insurrection against Umayyad rule by an
extremely unequal military force. It would not have achieved its goals
as expected by those who were advising Husayn (as) against his journey
to Iraq, without realising his intention. The Imam (as) was seeing what
they were not seeing and knew what they knew not.

How Do People Face Death?
-------------------------

Death is an important matter with regard to how people organize their
lives. With respect to this natural phenomenon which is a part of God’s
inexorable norms, people fall into two groups: the overwhelming majority
who are apprehensive of death and try to escape it, and the minority who
challenge death and long for it.

The fear of death and challenging death, play a significant role in
organizing people’s lives and in determining their destiny. If a nation
is afraid of death oppressive rulers will not need much effort to
subjugate and cow them down. Their lives become subservient to the
despot and they gradually lose their innate nature and conscience, which
form the basis of a decent life. However, a nation which has the power
to face death without fear and proves it, cannot be made to bow down to
the will of tyrants. It is impossible to rob such people of their will
and goals.

We shall now dwell, to some extent, on these two situations (i.e. fear
of death and challenging death):

### Fear of Death

Fear of death deeply affects people’s lives and has wide-ranging effects
in society with respect to activism and struggle, so this phenomenon
deserves a closer study. By God’s will, we will discuss, in what
follows, the causes of this phenomenon, its negative effects on society,
and the useful educative ways to cure minds of this condition.

### Causes

Attachment to the world is among the most important causes of fear of
death. If one lives in this world like all people and enjoys its good
things but his heart does not get attached to it, death will not
frighten him. We shall discuss this point presently, God willing.

Another cause of fear of death is poor preparation for the hereafter,
because of which one is afraid of embarking on a new phase of life that
will be everlasting. It is to this fact that the following Qur’anic
verse alludes, while addressing the Jews, who believed that God
preferred them over all other nations and that they were His friends to
the exclusion of other people:

***"Say, ‘O Jews! If you claim that you are God’s favorites to the
exclusion of other people, then long for death, should you be truthful.
Yet they will never long for it because of what their hands have sent
ahead, and God knows best the wrongdoers.”***[^1] This is a litmus test
to gauge the truthfulness of their claim.

Lack of preparation for the hereafter results from getting wedded to the
world, therefore, this is the principal factor that causes fear of
death. Something to this effect has been related from Imam al-Sadiq
(as): *“He who loves the world is humiliated”.*[^2] This narration could
be analyzed and interpreted in this way: love for the world and
attachment to it is among the causes of uneasiness towards death, and
the two are in fact two sides of a single issue; he who loves the world
becomes afraid of death.

Whoever fears death is humiliated because he does not have the ability
to take a stand on a bold resolution, and when a man is unable to do so
he becomes a compliant tool whose actions are dependent on those of the
arrogant powers: This is the humiliation which Imam al-Sadiq (as) speaks
about in this narration.

This is a precise yardstick by which a person’s readiness for the
hereafter, in this world, may be known. The more one’s attachment to the
life of this world is, the less his preparation for the next; and the
less one’s preparation for the hereafter is, the more his apprehension
about death. Someone said to Abu Dharr (may God be pleased with him):
“Why do we dislike death?” He replied: “Because you have built this
world and demolished your hereafter; so you dislike moving from a
refurbished place to ruins.”

Then he asked: “How do you consider our meeting God?” “The good doer
will [meet Him] like someone who has been away and now returns to his
family, the wrongdoer will [meet God] like the slave who had run away
and now returns to his master.” The questioner added: “How do you see
our condition with God?***”*** He replied: “Put your works before the
Book of God, the Blessed, the Sublime [for He says]: ***"Indeed the
pious shall be amid bliss, and indeed the vicious shall be in
hell”***[^3] then the man said: *“So where is God’s mercy?”* Abu Dharr
answered: ***"Indeed God’s mercy is close to the
virtuous.”***[^4]*,*[^5]

The Stand
---------

Strength, courage and audacity certainly constitute one of the two
elements that make a stand, the other being political awareness. Since
fear of death weakens man, it inevitably deprives him of the power to
take a practical stand on difficult questions. Man’s worth in the field
of encounter does not lie in his intention alone; it rests on his stand
as well.

A large number of Muslims during the time of Imam Husayn (as) were not
pleased with Yazid and his actions; they hated him very much, but Husayn
translated that hatred and rejection to action. The value of Imam
Husayn’s work lies here, for a stand is the embodiment of opinion and
affiliation; bringing out views, affiliations, loyalty or repudiation
from the mind to the arena of confrontation.

All people do not approve of injustice but some openly declare their
disapproval either by civil disobedience, demonstrations and strikes or
by revolution. Of course, the disapproval which remains in the mind
unexpressed will not cost the disapprover anything. It is practical
stand taken on the field of confrontation that costs one dear and proves
a burden.

It is this action that requires struggle and sacrifice, and imposes the
consequences on the one who takes it. It is essential to note that
passive resistance and armchair opposition cannot change the course of
history; what does is the action of those who take the bold decision.
Rejection and dislike which one leaves in his mind does not make any
difference in political and social realities nor does it stir people; it
is positive action that moves people and brings about political and
social changes. In the end, confrontation and encounter is the real
stand.

Changing From A Position Of No Stand To That Of A Contrary Stand
----------------------------------------------------------------

Civilizational conflicts do not tolerate non-stands so if a man cannot
cope with the difficult stand and is too weak to take the right stand,
he cannot remain neutral to the last; non-stands get transformed into
contrary stands. The reason why non-stands turn into contrary stands is
exactly why stands change into non-stands, i.e. fear of death.

What disables man from taking the right position will surely disable him
from slipping into falsehood, and in this way he will be classified
within the front of falsehood. As we said, the field of confrontation
will not leave one alone without classifying him. If he does not align
himself with the party of truth in which he believes, the battlefield
will sooner or later enlist him into the ruling order, at which time he
will be among the army of the rebellious [to God] (taghut), even if his
heart and mind are with the truth.

Here one is split into two opposing halves: his view (his mind) and his
sentiment (his heart) taking the direction of truth and his outward
stand and declared position (his will) taking the side of falsehood.
This is a clear case of schizophrenia in which a person is split into
two contradictory parts with the result that his personality loses its
harmony and his outward actions are in conflict with his internal
situation.

This is the issue to which Imam Husayn (as) called the attention of Ibn
Ziyad’s army in Karbala on the day of Ashura, saying: “You have drawn on
us the sword we placed in your right hands”[^6] Indeed this sword that
is mentioned by the Imam denotes power and authority and it was Islam
that gave them this power [as a whole].

The Arabs were a weak nation isolated in the desert. The Messenger of
God (S) brought them Islam from God. With these people, he set up a
formidable force to conquer east and west, overthrew the thrones of
despots and oppressors, liberated oppressed peoples, set free God’s
servants from the yoke of oppression and servitude and directed them
away from servitude to man towards servitude to the One, the
Irresistible. Surely, the Messenger of God (S) entrusted them with this
power.

One of the achievements of the Messenger of God (S) made possible
through the support of Almighty God was to make this nation a great and
miraculous force. This is what is intended by this precise statement
which expresses the depth of the tragedy: ‘the sword we gave you, which
is in your right hands’.

What was appropriate for them was to draw that sword on the enemies of
God and His messenger, but they used it against the Prophet’s Household
and his successors. They were supposed to use the sword to fight the
leaders of oppression and polytheism but they used it on the leaders of
monotheism and justice, in support of the leaders of polytheism and
injustice.

This is the depth of the tragedy which befell this nation during the
time of the Umayyad rulers. This is also the correct description of the
Kufans which was given by al-Farazdaq when Imam Husayn (as) asked him
about the situation he left behind in Kufa, for the majority of the
Kufans were Alids and the hearts of the Alids were with Husayn although
their swords had turned against him.

Many of those who came out with Ibn Ziyad’s army to fight Imam Husayn
(as) loved him before; they were among those who wrote to him requesting
him to join them. What identifies man is his opinion, love, hate and
stand: Whenever these three elements are complete and harmonious man is
strong, but when they are opposed and contradictory he becomes weak and,
as a result, turns into a pliant tool in the hands of the oppressors.

The Last Stage Of Apostacy
--------------------------

Al-Farazdaq did not say-although he should have said-that the first and
second stages of man’s renegation are from a stand to a non-stand and
then from a non-stand to a contrary stand. The third stage is reached
when the stand which is contrary to the truth overpowers man’s thought
and opinion and directs him towards the opinion of the opponent by
adorning it till he completely contradicts the first opinion [the
truth].

Then his view turns into its antithesis: love turns into hate and hate
into love. This is the final stage of renegation which al-Farazdaq did
not mention. This final stage could well have been hidden to him but the
Qur’an has recorded it most clearly: ***“Then the fate of those who
committed misdeeds was that they denied the signs of God and they used
to deride them”(Qur’an-30:10)***

It is a blatant commission of misdeed for a believing man to wield a
sword against God, His messenger (S) and His friends and fight them in
defense of *taghut*. Should one do this, God Almighty will remove faith,
awareness and the ability to have a stand from him so that he will deny
the signs of God, and when he denies God’s signs, His messengers and His
friends, he ends up treating them as enemies and hating them. This
completes the apostasy.

Realignment On The Opposing Side And A Turnabout
------------------------------------------------

Thus the three centres of human personality-the mind, the heart and the
will (or opinion, sympathy and stand) once again realign after getting
split up, and are filled with confusion and anxiety. The human
personality regains harmony but in the opposite direction altogether; a
negative one which is inclined to disobedience of God, His messenger (S)
and His friends.

Three States In Man’s Life
--------------------------

State one: Harmony between hearts and swords in the direction of truth.

State two: Conflict between hearts and swords and between truth and
false hood.

State three: Harmony between hearts and swords in the direction of
falsehood.

### The first state

The condition whereby hearts and swords are in harmony represents the
sound natural state in which the three centres, the mind, the heart and
the will meet, so that opinion joins love and hate and they are
connected with a stand. This state is that of harmony, perseverance and
strength because the coming together of these three centres imbues man
with strength. This condition is a natural and innate one where mutual
influence exists between these three factors. The effects of this
condition on man are that he lives a tranquil life that does not know
anxiety, because psychological comfort does not stem from external peace
and comfort but from internal mental harmony. With this condition man
develops in a balanced way.

### The second state

This is a situation in which hearts and swords contradict each other and
that is when man’s will succumbs to the agents of enticement and terror
which are applied by *taghut.* *Taghut* aims at occupying the three
centres of human personality altogether; however, the first to be
terrorized is the will. This is where the fall starts and it is the
first stage of apostasy, although the mind and the heart still remain
unchanged. The situations we mentioned above are now reversed: one loses
comfort, tranquility and mental equilibrium, and instead, suffers from
anxiety and disorder and his personality becomes deprived of ***‘the
baptism of God.’***[^7]

This is the stage at which the degradation of man’s personality begins
and the conscience struggles to restore harmony and balance inside
itself. If it succeeds, then the personality will surely regain its
balance and harmony. At this stage, people fall into two groups: one
with the type of al-Hurr’s personality, who had a strong and sound
conscience, which brought him **b**ack to God again, and another group
with a personality like that of Umar ibn Sa’ad, who lacked such strong
conscience and descended to the last stage of degradation.

### The third stage

At this stage harmony among the three seats of human personality returns
once again but in the direction of disrepute. Internally, man seeks
order, so if he is unable to get it in the right direction due to his
weak conscience which cannot harmonize the personality on the side of
truth, order returns him to the side of falsehood. Man’s heart and mind
will now realign with his [now untoward] will and action.

This is level zero of man’s degradation, in which taghut and worldly
desire drain the conscience and take over both mind and heart. When this
happens *taghut* occupies all the three forts of human personality and
empties the conscience of whatever power of struggle God Almighty has
endowed it with. There upon, God’s mercy on man comes to a halt because
mercy descends on the conscience, the heart, the mind and the will, and
when they are all drained away there remains no place for mercy to
descend on. This is a state of unbelief.

There exists a more abased state: the state of hypocrisy in which the
swords return to the side of truth but not in compliance with it but to
conspire against it. Because of this, God Almighty says: ***"Indeed
the*** ***hypocrites will be in the lowest reach of the fire…”***[^8]

After this passage about the stages of man’s degradation we shall now
return to our discussion about defying death and fearing death.

The Effects Of Fear Of Death On Society
---------------------------------------

Fear of death leaves wide ranging negative effects on human life; it
robs people of the power to resist and makes them easy prey for tyrants,
who deplete the resistance Almighty God has bestowed their consciences,
the strength He has endowed their will and the awareness He has given
their minds. As a result, all the values, morals, will and resistance
which God has given them is drained off.

This state of total draining-away and depletion is the despicable
condition which God Almighty mentioned as part of the way the despots
treat their people: “So he despised his people and they obeyed him.”

Pharaoh would not have been able to subjugate the people to his will and
power without draining their values, morals, power of resistance, will
and conscience which God had bestowed on them. [The verse refers to
Pharaoh and his people.] Man becomes inconsequential as a result of
total submission to tyrants. The instrument which is preferred most by
the arrogant is terrorising, because the fear of death makes it easy for
anyone to sow the seeds of terror in any society.

Educative Methods For Fighting This Situation
---------------------------------------------

1. Curtailing expectations from life in this world.

2. Remembering God and yearning to meet Him.

### First Method

Curtailing one’s expectation from worldly life and weakening one’s
relationship with it.

A firm attachment to the world and too much hope in it are among the
greatest fetters that hamper man’s progress towards God. When one frees
oneself from them, he becomes less encumbered for the journey towards
God Almighty and is never frightened by death. In fact he becomes
indifferent to it, never worrying whether it falls on him or he falls on
it, as Ali Akbar (as) said to his father as they approached Karbala:
‘Dear Father! In that case we do not fear to die, being on the right.’
Imam Husayn (as) replied: ‘May God reward you with the best of what He
rewards a son for serving his father!”[^9]

### Second Method

Remembering God and making firm one’s longing to meet Him through death.

Death is, to the believer, a way of meeting God, and, meeting Him is the
greatest joy. The life of this world screens one from experiencing the
presence of God, and when death overtakes him the covering leaves his
eyes ***"We have removed your veil from you, and so your sight is acute
today”***[^10] At that time, the believer will behold the beautiful
names and attributes of God, and His sublimity, beauty, omnipotence and
greatness. To the believer, this represents the highest pleasure which
is incomparable to paradise and its *houri*s and all the blessings God
has created in it.

It is recorded in Makarim al-Akhlaq that the Messenger of God (S) has
said: “O Ibn Mas’ud! Curtail your hopes; when morning comes, say: ‘I may
not see evening’ and when evening comes, say: ‘I may not see morning’.
Resolve on leaving the world and love to meet God and do not dislike to
meet him, for indeed God loves to meet those who love to meet Him and he
dislikes meeting those who dislike meeting Him.”[^11]

The Messenger of God (S) also said: “When light enters the chest it
expands.” He was asked: ‘Does that have a sign by which it may be
known?” “Yes”, he replied. “Withdrawing from the house of deception,
returning to the everlasting house and making preparation for death
before it descends”[^12]

Ali (as) is reported to have said: “Arouse the desire for the delights
of paradise in yourselves and you will love death and loathe
living”[^13]

Some Scenes Of Confronting Death In Al-Taff
-------------------------------------------

In what follows I will recount one out of many scenes of al-Taff [the
bank of the Euphrates where the battle of Ashura’ took place] where
death was held in contempt and even positively sought for, and the
longing to meet God exhibited. This was one of the most beautiful scenes
that history has recorded in that regard.

The Imam gathered his companions and family on the night before the
tenth of Muharram and asked them to go wherever they wanted and leave
him alone. He wanted them to be fully aware of their situation. He said
to them:

“I commend God with the best commendation and praise Him for both ease
and difficulty. O Lord! I praise you for the honour you granted us
through prophethood; You gave us hearing, sight and hearts; and taught
us the Qur’an and made us comprehend religion. So include us among the
grateful.

“I do not know of any companions more loyal and better than mine; nor a
family kinder and more devoted. May God bless you all for my sake.
Listen! I think our appointment with these enemies is tomorrow and I
permit you all to go away and leave me; you are free and you [no longer]
have any duty towards me. The night has provided you with cover so avail
yourselves of it. Let each one of you hold the hand of [i.e. go with]
one of my family (may God reward you all!) and disperse in the rural and
urban areas of the land [and take refuge there] till God brings relief.
These people are only after me; should they get me, they will forget the
rest.”[^14]

His family’s reply:

The Imam had hardly finished his speech when that select group of his
noble family declared that they would choose the way he took. They would
follow him and never take a different course. So they all stood up with
tearful eyes and said: “Why should we do that? The worst thing that can
happen to us is to remain alive after your death? May God we do not live
to see that day!”

His brother Abu al-Fadl al-Abbas was the first to reply, then the noble
ones of the Prophet’s family followed suit. Then the Imam turned to the
sons of his uncle Aqil and said:

“The killing of Muslim [ibn Aqil] suffices you a share, so you can go,
for I allow you.”

The noble men of Aqil’s family started up and spoke passionately:

“What do we say to the people? Do we say: ‘we have left alone our leader
and our cousins, who are the best of cousins, without having shot any
arrows together with them, nor getting pierced by a spear, nor struck by
a sword, and without knowing what they had done to be killed?! Never! By
God we will not do that. Instead, we will sacrifice our lives, wealth
and families for your sake; we will fight on your side till we reach the
same destination as you. Abominable indeed, is life after you!”[^15]

His Companions’ Reply
---------------------

With tears running down his cheeks, Muslim ibn Awsajah sprung up and
addressed the Imam in these words:

“Should we abandon you? What will be our plea with God for our inability
to discharge our duty to you? I swear by God that I will never forsake
you; rather I will pierce their chests with my spear and strike them
with my sword as long as its hilt remains in my hand. If I will have no
arms with which to fight them I will pelt them with stones till I die on
your side.”

Then Sa’ad ibn Abdullah al-Hanafi said:

“By God we will not abandon you. [We will remain with you] till God
ascertains that we have kept our duty toward His Messenger in your
regard. By God if I know that I will be killed and then revived, then
burnt, then [my ashes] blown away, then the whole process repeated
seventy times, I will not abandon you, till I meet my death in your
defense! How can I not do that [i.e persevere]when it is but a single
death after which I will meet everlasting honour?”[^16]

Zuhayr said: “By God, I would like to be killed, then revived, then
killed again till I am killed a thousand times in this way, if only God
the Almighty and Sublime will ward off death from you and these noble
souls of your family as a result.”

The rest of the Imam’s companions also declared their readiness to die
sacrificing themselves for his sake. So he expressed his gratitude to
them all and stressed that they would all meet their death the next day.
Oh hearing this, they answered in chorus:

“Praise be to God who honoured us by making us your helpers to be
martyred along with you. Will you not be pleased that we should be
together with you in your station, O son of the daughter of the
Messenger of God (S)?[^17]

The Imam had tested these people and found them to be the most loyal of
men whose souls had been enlightened with the light of faith, who had
freed themselves of all worldly concerns and who, as the historians
inform us, were martyrdom-thirsty and poised to earn the blessings of
the hereafter.

When Muhammad ibn Bashir al-Hadrami was informed that his son had been
captured at the frontiers of al-Rayy he complained: I do not want my son
to remain in captivity while I live after him. The Imam got the
impression that the man wanted to get his son released from captivity so
he allowed him to leave, saying: “You are free to go and work for the
release of your son.” Al-Hadrami replied: “May wild beasts devour me if
I leave you …”[^18]

Al-Qasim ibn al-Hasan, an adolescent who had not reached puberty, said
to Husayn (as) “Am I among those who will be killed?” Touched by this,
he said: “How do you consider death, my son?” “Sweeter than honey,
Uncle!” he replied. On hearing this, the Imam said: “Surely, by God, may
your uncle be your ransom! Certainly you will be killed along with the
men with me after you meet a tough ordeal. My son Abdullah [the suckling
child][^19] will also meet the same fate.

[^1]: - Qur’an Ch: 62, Vs: 6 – 7.

[^2]: - Bihar al-Anwar 6: 128 (hadith 14)

[^3]: - Qur’an Ch: 8, Vs: 13-14

[^4]: - Qur’an Ch: 7 Vs: 56.

[^5]: - Bihar al-Anwar 6:137 (hadith 72)

[^6]: - Al-Muqarram’s Maqtal al-Al-Husayn (a.s.): 286.

[^7]: . Qur’an, Ch: 2, Vs: 138.

[^8]: . Qur’an, Ch: 4, Vs: 145.

[^9]: . Sheikh al-Samawi’s Ibsar al-Ayn fi Ansar al-Husayn (a.s) pg
21-22.

[^10]: . Qur’an Ch: 50, Vs: 2 . Makarim al-Akhlaq: 2.

[^11]: . Makarim al-Akhlaq: 452.

[^12]: . Kanz al-Ummal i: 76 (hadith 302).

[^13]: . Ghurar al-Hikam: 413 (Ch: 42 No. 25)

[^14]: . Ibn al-Athir’s Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh 4: 57, Beirut ed. 1965. In
Al-Muntazam, Ibn al-Jawzi has recorded another version of the Imam’s
speech: ‘It is recorded in Sayyid al-Muqarram’s Maqtal al-Husayn (a.s)
that he said: “You are free from your oath of allegiance to me so join
your clans and clients” And he said to His family: “You are permitted to
leave me for you cannot stand them by virtue of their great numbers and
strength, and no one is wanted except me. The Sublime and Mighty God
will support me and never deprive me of His good watch as was His wont
with our good forebears.” A group of people left his camp and then his
family said to him: “We will not part from you. Whatever grieves you
should grieve us and whatever befalls you should befall us, we shall be
nearest to God when we are with you.’ He said to them: If you have
prepared yourselves for what I have prepared myself then know that God
bestows honourable stations for His servants only because they bear
adversities, and that God has conferred on me and on my family, of whom
I am the last to stay in the world, such honours that will make it easy
for me to bear adversities. I ndeed you have a portion of God’s honours.
Know that the sweet and the bitter of this world are but a dream and the
hereafter is the place for waking up, and the successful is the one who
succeeds in it and the damned is the one who is damned in it”.

[^15]: . Ibn Athir’s Al-Tarikh, 4:58.

[^16]: . Al-Muntazam 5: 179; Tarikh al-Tabari 6: 239.

[^17]: . Bihar al-Anwar 44: 298; Al-Bahrani’s Al-Awalim: 350.

[^18]: . Tarikh Ibn Asakir 13: 54; Tahdhib al-Tahdhib 1:150,
al-Maqarram’s Maqtal al-Husayn (a.s) 165-170.

[^19]: . Al-Muhaddith al-Qummi’s Nafas al-Mahmum 230.


