Some Instances Of Loyalty In The Supplication: Ziyarat Al-Warith
================================================================

Three aspects of loyalty are portrayed in this supplication

1- Salutation: that is “Peace be on you, O heir to Adam, God’s chosen
one.”

2- Testimony: that is “I bear witness that you are the pious and devout
Imam”

3- Stand: that is “My heart is in submission to your heart and my
actions follow yours.

In the following passages we will discuss these three aspects of loyalty
which appear in this supplication.

First Aspect: Salutation
------------------------

This is the first manifestation of loyalty which has three parts:

First: Peace be on you, O heir to Adam, God’s chosen one!

Second: Peace be on you, O son of Muhammad, the chosen one!

Third: Peace be on you, O God’s avenger, the son of God’s avenger!

Among the elements of loyalty are salutation and submission i.e, not
disputing and differing with the leadership, both in the mind and in
behaviour. By submission we mean practical obedience and compliance.
However, this obedience stems from internal harmony and love for the
leader and not from coercion. The relationship of the community with its
leaders is that of firmly rooted submission that is visible in
behaviour.

This relationship is exhibited at the end of the formal prayer in the
form of salutation: “Peace and God’s mercy and blessings be on you, O
Prophet.” The fruit reaped by the servant when he soars toward God in
prayer is obedience and love for the [God-appointed] leaders. Islam has
prescribed the word ‘peace’ as the faithfuls’ salutation for one
another. This general greeting: ‘Peace be on us and on God’s righteous
servants’ is the closing part on which the worshippers finish their
prayers.

The importance given to spreading peace arises from the emphasis that is
laid on the type of relationship that should exist between Muslims. This
relationship is established on the basis of eschewing discord and
disagreement among Muslims; removing hatred, malice and ill-will from
minds; establishing love and fellow feeling in hearts and cooperation
and concord in action.

Second Aspect: Testimony
------------------------

Testimony is a declaration of trust, faith and loyalty, and such a
testimony must be coupled with submission so that they complement one
another.

In this supplication, testimony appears in three parts:

1. Testifying to the message and movement of Husayn (as): “I bear
witness that you established the prayer, paid the *zakat*, enjoined what
is good and forbade the bad and obeyed God and His messenger (S) till
you died”

To establish the prayer is not just to perform it, because the latter is
only a personal duty stemming from individual obligation, whereas the
former carries a message in the life of the believers. Establishing the
prayer means to firmly establish worship and the relationship with God
in people’s lives. It also involves urging the people to keep up prayer
for God’s sake by openly declaring this obligation that has been
enjoined on them.

“You enjoined the good and forbade the bad”: When Husayn (as) revolted
against Yazid he was not after kingship, power or position, rather, he
sought to establish good deeds and uproot evil i.e. establish loyalty to
God and destroy *taghut*.

On the day of Ashura, Husayn (as) addressed the people saying: “Do you
not see that truth is not acted upon and falsehood is not being
forbidden? Let the believer desire to meet God. [As for me] I consider
death to be nothing but a source of bliss and living with oppressors
only a vexation.”[^1]

At the station of Al-Baydah, Husayn addressed al-Hurr’s companions in
these words: “O you people! The Messenger of God (S) has said: Whoever
watches an unjust ruler who violates what God declares sacrosanct,
breaks His covenant, contradicts the tradition of the Messenger of God
(S) and rules the people in a way characterized by sin and
transgression, and, does not oppose him by word or deed, God has the
right to make him share his doom. Certainly, these people [Yazid and
co.] have sworn obedience to Satan, leaving aside obedience to the
Merciful; they have engaged in corruption openly and suspended the legal
punishments; they have monopolized the treasury and they have permitted
what God prohibited and disallowed what He permitted.”[^2]

Thus Husayn (as) was not after power and wealth, but he saw that a
despot was spreading corruption in the land, wreaking havoc, making
permissible what God forbade and transgressing His limits. So he rose up
against Yazid in Karbala, with his faithful group which welcomed his
call for bidding the good, forbidding the bad, reinstituting what is
right, and extirpating what is wrong.

2. Testifying to the fact that the Imam was immaculate both internally
and in his behaviour. God has exclusively endowed the Ahl al-Bayt (as)
with this purity. The Most High says: ***"Indeed God desires to repel
all impurity from you, O people of the Household, and purify you with a
thorough purification."***[^3]

In addition, testifying that this virtuousness was passed on from father
to son and God Most High destined this purity to be preserved within
this noble line throughout the eras of ignorance that came to pass in
human history Over the different ages God Most High has chosen this
blessed line for the office of Imamate in the life of man. ***"Indeed
God chose Adam and Noah, and the progeny of Abraham and the progeny of
Imran above all nations. Some of them are descendants of others, and God
is All-hearing, All-knowing."***[^4]

Let us look at this section of the supplication of Ziyarat al-Warith: “I
bear witness that you were a light in noble loins and pure wombs. The
era of ignorance did not soil you by its impurities nor did it clothe
you in its garments of darkness.”

I do not want to pass on without pointing to this beautiful expression
of purity of this house; the result of the fecundation brought about by
noble loins and purified wombs: loins of men who were above worldly
things that people scramble for; and wombs of women who were chaste and
free from the scum of civilizations of the ages of ignorance seen by
man.

3- Testifying to the position which was taken by Husayn (as) with regard
to what the nation was experiencing; the leadership role assigned to him
by God in the form of Imamate and guardianship over the Muslims; and the
fact that God had commissioned him to guide the community. Coupled with
this, was the position of his offspring in leading and guiding the
Muslims towards God Almighty.

We also read in it: “I bear witness that you are among the pillars of
religion and the pivots of believers. I bear witness that you are the
pious, the obedient, the chaste, the guided and the guide. I bear
witness that the Imams from your offspring are the epitome of piety, the
milestones of guidance, the stronghold and proof over the people of the
world.”

Third Aspect: Stand
-------------------

This is the stage for asserting loyalty, which comes after submission
and testimony. Here stand pertains to both faith and action. Faith is
eloquently described through these words: “I believe in you and in your
return, I have firm faith in the rules of my religion, and my heart is
submissive to your hearts”, in the supplication of Ziyarat al-Warith.
The practical part of this stand consists in deference and obedience to
them: “And my actions follow yours.”

A compelling indication of the sincerity of one’s stand is one’s
submission to the Imams with respect to the rules of religion and the
final deeds of one’s life. Nothing is as dear as the religious rules by
which one worships God Almighty and the last acts in life, for acts done
in the beginning or middle parts of one’s lifetime can be compensated
for by repentance, soul searching and correction, unlike those done at
the closing part. One’s last deeds determine one’s fate.

The best proof of having trust in the Imams (as) and being sincerely
loyal to them is for one to receive from them the rules of religion and
take inspiration from them for what one does at the end of one’s life.
That unrestricted submission as described above is of the highest type
because it is untainted by the least resistance or misgiving in the
heart, that is the submission of the heart to the heart: “and my heart
is in submission to your hearts.” This is when the hearts get into
contact and mutual understanding.

Similarly, one’s stand as regards to action is described thus: “And my
actions follow your actions.” This represents complete obedience and
submission to the commands of God.

Therefore, the stand means complete faith, unrestricted submission and
absolute trust, followed by total commitment and obedience with regard
to action. In a special *ziyarah* of Imam Husayn (as) on the day of
Arafat, the following section occurs: “I am at peace with the one who is
at peace with you, at war with the one who is at war with you, hostile
to the one who is hostile to you and friend to the one who is friend to
you. [In this way shall I remain] till the day of Resurrection.”

In the special *Ziyarat al-Arba’in* prayer we read:

“I bear witness that I believe in you and your return, I have firm faith
in the rules of my religion and will have till the final call of death,
my heart is submissive to your hearts, my actions follow your actions
and my support for you is ready till the time God grants permission [for
action]. So I am fully on your side and not on the side of your enemy.
God’s blessings be on you, both your souls and bodies, on the present
and the absent ones among you”.

This is a declaration of total readiness for support, after which comes
this beautiful rendition of loyalty: “With you! With you! with your
enemy, never!” By repeating togetherness: ‘With you, with you’, the
covenant of loyalty is emphasized just as it is through affirming and
negating i.e. expressing loyalty to the Imams and repudiating their
enemies: ‘With your enemy, never!’

Similarly, the supplication on the first of Rajab conveys this
expression of loyalty to the one who stood up in Karbala on the day of
Ashura’ inviting mankind to God, to strive against the forces that were
rebellious towards Him and break their arrogance and direct them to
serve God alone. It reads: “At your service, O inviter towards God! If
my body did not respond to you when you sought help [on the day of
Ashura] or my tongue when you called for support, surely my heart
responds to you”.

The best response indeed is that of the heart. We have missed the chance
to respond to the call of the caller to God in Karbala physically, but
our hearts, which God has filled with loyalty to Him and His friends
(the Imams) (as), will ever comply with the Imam (as). We shall always
respond to his call to fight the oppressors and break their power and
strength; to bring the people over to the service of God, establish His
law and uphold the divine limits in human life; and free mankind from
the axis of the rebellious (*taghut*) and direct them towards loyalty to
Almighty God.

Repudiation: The Other Face Of Loyalty
--------------------------------------

After this, comes repudiation, which is the other face of loyalty, for
there can be no loyalty without repudiation: they are two faces of the
same issue, two parts of a single reality, and any stand is made up of
these two.

One’s promise of loyalty is fulfilled through his repudiation because a
declaration of loyalty alone does not cost one much. Most of the
troubles that one may suffer come as a result of repudiation. It is only
too easy for one to live with all in a friendly and peaceful environment
by respecting the feelings and sensibilities of everybody. One can play
a double game and guard against collusion with all. One can smile at
everybody in order to gain their acceptance. Such a person can live in
peace and comfort, earn the love and sympathy of all and live free from
problems and inconveniences.

However, he cannot be part of the circle of those loyal to God, His
messengers, His friends and the believers; he cannot join this obedient
family which pledges its loyalty to God, His messenger (S) and His
friends; he cannot have a stand; he cannot love, hate or resent
sincerely; and in his political and social relationships, he cannot go
beyond mere formality. Without loyalty there can be no sincerity in
relations or stand, and no sincerity is possible without repudiation.
But repudiation entails many demands on one’s social relations with
family and society, and on one’s comfort, well-being and stability.

The price of being loyal is to be able to repudiate, and the price for
repudiation is to accept difficulties, inconveniences and troubles.
These are equations God has established by virtue of His inexorable
norms that govern human life. Abu Ja’far al-Baqir (as) is reported to
have said: “There are ten things which help enter paradise when one
meets God:

1- To bear witness that there is no deity except God

2- To bear witness that Muhammad (S) is the Messenger of God

3- To affirm whatever comes from God

4- To establish the prayer

5- To pay the alms (*zakat*)

6- To fast in the month of Ramadan

7- To perform the pilgrimage to the House

8- To be loyal to God’s friends

9- To repudiate God’s enemies

10- To avoid all intoxicants.”[^5]

The Prophet (S) wrote to the bishop of Najran, “I summon you to worship
God and to shun the worship of His servants; I invite you to loyalty to
God instead of His servants. If you reject this then you must pay the
tribute and if you reject this, then know that I am declaring war on
you”[^6] Therefore, the boundary between Islam and unbelief is the
declaration of loyalty and repudiation.

The Messenger of God (S) said: “Surely the strongest bond of faith is to
love or hate for the sake of God, to be loyal to God’s friends and to be
hostile to His enemies.”[^7]

Imam al-Rida (as) said**:** “It has been reported that God communicated
to a devout among the Children of Israel whose heart was entertaining a
thought, saying: As for your devotion to Me you are taking pride in Me
and as for your asceticism, it is a deferment of comfort. Now have you
befriended my friend and shown enmity to my enemy?”[^8]It is related
that someone came to the Commander of the Faithful and said: ‘O
Commander of the Faithful! I love you and also love so-and-so’, and he
mentioned one of his enemies. He answered: “Now you are one-eyed: either
become blind or have complete sight.”[^9]

A one-eyed man’s sight is weak for he can only see with one eye. One’s
loyalty is similar to this when he does not repudiate the enemy or
cannot dare to do it because he wants to be accepted by everybody. Such
people do not remain one-eyed with half-sight for ever; either God
guides them so that they have full sight or they lose that half sight
and become blind, thereby completely losing their loyalty. It was said
to Imam al-Sadiq (as) that “so-and-so person is loyal to you but finds
it difficult to repudiate your enemy” to which he replied *“Never! He
lies who claims to love us but does not repudiate our enemy!”*[^10]

The questioner in this narration set his question precisely: there was
no doubt that the person about whom the question was put was loyal but
he was unable to repudiate, and this inability rendered his loyalty weak
and shaky. He did not have enough courage to declare his stand and
establish or sever relationships in an open and decisive manner.
Therefore, the Imam (as) replied that true loyalty can in no way be
separated from repudiation as its consequence, and whoever is weak in
repudiation must be weak in loyalty as well.

In al-A’mash’s narration, Imam Sadiq (as) is reported to have said: “To
love God’s friends (the Imams) is obligatory, loyalty to them is
obligatory and to repudiate their enemies is also obligatory. To
repudiate the perfidious, (al-Nakithun), the unjust (al-qasitun) and the
renegades (al-mariqun) is obligatory. To repudiate the idols (al-ansab)
and the divination arrows (al-azlam), who are leaders in deviation and
injustice is obligatory. [It is obligatory to repudiate] all these
people, the first of them and the last.”[^11]

From Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Askari (as), from his forefathers (as):
one day the Messenger of God (S) said to a companion of his: “*O servant
of God! Love for God’s sake and hate for His sake, give your loyalty for
His sake and be hostile for His sake, for you will not earn His
friendship except that way. No one will taste faith, even though he
might have performed abundant prayers and fasts, except that way.*
*Nowadays, most of the people’s fraternity is based on the world: they
love or hate one another for its sake. This will not avail them anything
in the sight of God.*”

The man said to him: “How do I know that my loyalty and hostility are
for the sake of God, the Mighty and Sublime? And who is God’s friend to
whom I must be loyal, and who is His enemy against whom I must be
hostile?”

Then the Messenger of God,(S) pointed to Ali (as) and said: ‘*Do you see
him?*’ ‘Yes’, the man replied. Then he said: “The friend of this man is
a friend to God so befriend him, and his enemy is God’s enemy, so be
hostile to him. Be a partisan to this man even if he killed your father
and your son, and show enmity to his enemy even if he was your father
and your son.”[^12]

A more emphatic version of this issue has been related in the famous
hadith of al-Ghadir where the Messenger of God (S) said: ‘For whomsoever
I am master and authority (*mawla*) Ali is master and authority. O God!
Befriend his friends and be enemy to his enemies and help his helpers
and forsake those who forsake him.”

The hadith of al-Ghadir is one of the most explicit narrations which
describe the deep connotations of loyalty (*wilayah*) and bring out its
positive dimensions i.e. being loyal and its negative dimension i.e.
repudiating its antithesis. Al-Allamah al-Amini opens his impressive
work *Al-Ghadir* with a hadith from the Messenger of God (S) which
pertains to this topic *and we will like to close our discussion on
loyalty and repudiation with it.*

The Messenger of God (S) said: “Whoever is pleased to live the way I
live, die the way I die and dwell in the garden of Eden which is made
known by my Lord, let him be loyal to Ali after me and also be loyal to
his friends and let him believe in the Imams after me, for they are my
family. They have been created out of my stuff and endowed with
understanding and knowledge. Woe unto those of my nation who belie their
merit, who violate my kinship with respect to them. May God not extend
my intercession to such violators.”

After this long discussion on repudiation we shall return to our talk on
Ziyarat al-Warith to study the repudiations and curses that appear in
it.

The Groups That Are Cursed In Ziyarat Al-Warith
-----------------------------------------------

In this supplication three groups of people have been cursed and
repudiated:

“May God curse the people who killed you. May God curse the people who
oppressed you. May God curse the people who hear about this and are
pleased with it.”

The first group consists of those who were directly responsible for
killing Husayn (as): “May God curse a people who saddled and bridled
[their animals],and prepared and traveled in order to kill you, O my
master, O Abu Abdullah!”[^13]

The second group comprises all those who oppressed Husayn (as) and acted
unjustly toward him, who facilitated the tragedy, supported and paid
allegiance to his enemy and openly opposed him. This group includes all
those who made preparations to fight Husayn (as) or facilitated it,
abandoned him, supported his adversaries, contributed in their
equipment, assisted the tyrant in fighting him, and all the followers of
these people.

Different wordings of repudiation and curse on this group are found in
both general and special prayers on visiting (*ziyarat*) Imam Husayn’s
tomb in Karbala (as). In the specific Z*iyarat-e-Ashura* we read: “May
God curse the people who killed you. May God curse those who prepared
the ground for them by facilitating the means for fighting you; I turn
to God and to you and repudiate them and their adherents and followers.”

In the general *Ziyarat-e-Ashura* also we have: “I turn to God and His
messenger (S) in repudiation of those who laid down the foundations for
injustice and oppression against you and the people of the Household,
built their unjust system on it and continued on the path of their
injustice and oppression against you and your adherents. I denounce
them, taking recourse to God and to you.”

In the second special *Ziyarat-e-Ashura* which is narrated in *Al-Mazar
al-Qadim*, we read: “May God curse the people who laid down the
foundations of injustice against you, prepared the ground for
oppressing, molesting and harming you, and perpetrated the same in your
houses and among your adherents. I turn to God the Mighty and Sublime
and to you, and repudiate them and their adherents and followers.”

This group was large, for it included all those who contributed in
fighting Husayn (as) or facilitated the war against him, prepared for
it, pledged allegiance to the tyrant for fighting him, mobilized and
assisted in any other way in the campaign along with their adherents and
followers.

The third group consisted of those that heard about the tragedy and
approved of it. The issue of this group demands pondering. Who are those
people who heard about this incident and approved of it? For sure, they
were not those who participated in the battle or in oppressing the
victims directly, otherwise they would have been classified among the
first two groups, then there would have been no need for mentioning a
third.

Therefore, this group definitely included those who heard Husayn’s (as)
call for help but did not help him, choosing their well-being instead of
supporting the Lord of the Martyrs (as) in the battle of Al-Taff. They
are those who abandoned him on the day of Ashura. Certainly, this group
approved of what happened on the day of Ashura, because had they not
been pleased with it, this betrayal of the grandson of the Messenger of
God (as) would not have been possible.

Their failure to join Husayn (as) and support him, and their preference
for this world over the next concealed their approval of Yazid’s
actions, otherwise, such glaring negligence and opting for personal
peace invariably leads to an approval of injustice. In other texts this
group is described as having betrayed Abu Abdillah Husayn (as) and
preferred their well-being to supporting him. In the second general
*ziyarah* we read:

“May God’s curse be on the people who killed you, the people who opposed
you, the people who denied your leadership, the people who supported
your enemies, and the people who witnessed this but did not martyr
themselves [in your defence].” The relevant part of this *ziyarah* is
‘and the people who witnessed this but did not martyr themselves.”

In the seventh general *ziyarah*, this passage appears: “I bear witness
that your killers are in the fire. It is part of my duty to God to
profess the repudiation of those who killed you, those who fought you,
those who rallied support against you, those who mobilized people
against you and those who heard your voice but did not help you.” The
relevant part is ‘and those who heard your voice but did not help you.’

The following passage appears in the *ziyarah* of the Night of Qadr
(destiny) and the nights before the two festivals [of the 1st of Shawwal
and the l0th of Dhu al-Hijjah]: “I bear witness that those who opposed
and fought you, those who abandoned you and those who killed you are
cursed on the tongue of the Unlettered Prophet (S).”

It is obvious from this text that the three accursed groups are: the
group which fought Husayn (as), the group which helped and supported the
first, the group which forsook Husayn (as) and neither answered his call
nor helped him. Indeed the battle of Al-Taff was a real one that had
ideological, political and cultural dimensions and as such, it required
real stances in terms of loyalty and repudiation, both before and now.
It does not accept a position of reluctance and indifference today just
as it rejected that in the past; it deems such an attitude to be no
better than the hostile stand.

What Conflicts Of Civilization Do To Man
----------------------------------------

Ideological conflicts group people into two, one affirming a given
direction and the other negating it. This dichotomy and divergence later
continues for ages, and the more deep-seated in people’s conscience such
a question is, the wider and more pronounced the resultant ideological
effects become.

The battle of Al-Taff is among the foremost of such conflicts by virtue
of a number of factors;

1- The political and ideological confrontation of civilization that took
place on that battlefield.

2- The unmistakable cultural and ethical dissimilarity between the two
camps. The status of Husayn, the son of the Messenger of God’s daughter
(as) and Lord of the youths of paradise is known to all Muslims, just as
Yazid ibn Muawiya, the son of the liver-eating woman [Yazid’s
grandmother chewed the liver of Hamza, her arch-enemy, when he fell in
the battle of Uhud] and a descendant of the tree which is cursed in the
Qur’an is known to all. No one from that date till today has ever
doubted the true nature of the two contending parties and no one doubts
who among them was calling towards God and who was inviting towards
hell.

3- The painful tragedy which befell the grandson of God’s Messenger (S)
and his family and companions in Karbala on the day of Ashura.

These and other factors make the question of Al-Taff a distinct
historical event which has inevitable significance. It classifies the
people into two distinct groups; a conformist group which is a member,
supporter and loyal to Imam Husayn, and another one which is hostile and
in opposition. No one is allowed to stand on the fence watching the
battle without its dust affecting him. So there has to be a clear stand
and an act of loyalty and an act of repudiation. No one conversant with
the circumstances of this battle will confuse truth with falsehood.

### The First Day of Separation

We said before that this conflict classified men, with respect to
loyalty and repudiation, into two distinct groups, right from the year
61 A.H till today, and this distinction will continue for a long time to
come.

The Holy Qur’an calls this conflict separation, and that is what
separates the people into distinct groups with respect to loyalty and
repudiation. The first day of separation in Islamic history is the day
of Badr. The Most High says*:* ***"On the Day of separation, the day
when the two armies met…"***[^14]

 It is thus designated because it was the first day in which the Muslims
met the polytheists in a decisive military encounter which grouped the
people into two distinct parties based on the question of loyalty and
repudiation. It was the first armed confrontation between monotheism and
polytheism in the history of Islam, on the result of which depended the
destiny of mankind and the direction to be taken by human civilization.
It is true that the people who fought on the side of the Messenger of
God at Badr were three hundred or a little more and the Quraysh army
which fought him were a thousand or a little more but that confrontation
had more profound and far reaching consequences than what appears from
the history of the valley of Badr in the second year after Hegira.
Behind the Quraysh polytheists who fought in Badr stood an extensive
front of the polytheists of the Arabian Peninsula and even beyond.

The intensity of events in the wake of that encounter is proof of this
fact. With his small group, the Messenger of God (S) faced that large
front of polytheism and God Almighty gave him victory over it. Had God
not made that group victorious on the day of Badr, He would not have
been worshipped and no one on earth would have mentioned His
name.Therefore, the day of Badr has separated mankind into two distinct
groups based on their loyalties: one group of three hundred and thirteen
fighters and another consisting of the wide front of polytheism with all
its vast powers. Surely, it was the first day of separation in Islam’s
history.

A simplistic look at the battle field of Badr in the second Hegira year
will only see these two fighting forces, but on scrutiny will find two
entities, two civilizations, two ideologies locked in a fierce struggle
for existence. The contest was not over a few articles of trade carried
by Quraysh merchants as the historical reports apparently suggest. These
two camps represent vast frontlines of people throughout history; they
are not limited, they extend to endless periods. The day of Badr is not
only the day of separation which grouped the people in the year 2 A.H.
on the basis of loyalty and repudiation, but it will remain as *the day
of separation* for all periods of Islamic history.

### The Second Day of Separation

**The Second Day of Separation**[^15]

Just as the day of Badr is the first day of separation in the history of
Islam, the day of Ashura is the second. In this unequal but decisive
battle Husayn (as) and a small band consisting of his family and
companions stood on one side of the line. On the other was Ibn Ziyad at
the head of a large army and behind him was Yazid with his vast power,
great wealth, army and capabilities. A

lso in their support were all those loyal to Yazid, all those who were
benefiting from him, all those who deviated because of him, all those
who fought on his side, including those who stood on the fence in the
political field and preferred their well-being and watched from a
distance while the conflict went on, and, all the followers of those
people.

Therefore, for the day of Ashura the quality of separation was quite
obvious: it had grouped the people into two distinguishable groups based
on loyalty, repudiation, ethics, thought, inclination and ideology. That
day still remains a means of separation in the history of Islam. It
divides the people on the basis of loyalty and repudiation to the
present day and forever.

### The Third Day of Separation

After mentioning two days of separation in Islamic history, that is Badr
and Ashura, we must not close this discussion without mentioning the
third day of separation, an extension of Badr and Ashura. This is the
day of the victory of the contemporary Islamic Revolution which happened
in 1399 A.H. It was one of God’s days in history, in which the Pahlavi
regime fell and the great Islamic Revolution became victorious under the
leadership of Imam Khomeini (may God sanctify his soul).

This day does not only mean the fall of the Pahlavi dynasty in Iranian
history but the end of one stage in Islamic history and the beginning of
a new epoch. The historical value of the fall of the Pahlavi dynasty and
the establishment of the Islamic Republic lies in two things;

1: The end of a period of apathy, weakness and despair; ready acceptance
of western or eastern tutelage; backwardness in intellectual,
scientific, political, military and economic matters; subservience to
arrogant powers of the world and defeatism in the face of surging
western civilization.

2: The beginning of a new movement in the direction of Islam and the
establishment of God’s religion on earth; removing the shackles and
fetters off hands and feet; and breaking the yoke that had been imposed
by western and eastern imperialism in the political, economic, military
and scientific arenas. This new beginning paved the way for a return to
God and to Islam; induced mankind to the service of God; empowered God’s
law in human life; and restored Islamic norms, values, morals and limits
in the practical life of people. In a nutshell, it began a new epoch in
history.

This day is a true extension of the day of Ashura, just as the latter
was a real continuation of the day of Badr. The main elements that
constituted the civilizational values of the great and comprehensive
Islamic government which was actualized on that day are also the values
of the glorious Islamic Revolution that succeeded against world
imperialism:

1- This revolution is a revolution based on principles in the true
meaning of the term. It is a new type of activism and revolutionary work
in contemporary history and in the contemporary political milieu that is
unfamiliar with this kind of movement. It is the revolution of
monotheism against polytheism in the sense we explained in the present
chapter: monotheism and polytheism with regard to loyalty.

This uprising aims at severing the Muslim’s relationship with *taghut*
dressed in the garb of eastern and western imperialism and their stooges
in this region, and also severing the relationship with other focal
points of loyalty (nationalism, patriotism, tribalism, factionalism,
etc) that are paraded as substitutes to monotheism. This revolution aims
at binding Muslim loyalty to God Almighty, His Messenger (S) and His
friends, and also unifying all loyalty for God alone, and boycotting and
confronting all other centres of attraction that are working to extract
allegiance from the people.

It is not a revolt against backwardness in science and technology, nor a
revolt against poverty and economic backwardness, nor a revolt against
colonialism and exploitation, nor an uprising to free oil wells from the
grip of oil barons, nor a class struggle, nor yet a revolt of the
oppressed against the oppressors like the Negro revolt in Islamic
history, although the Islamic revolution mirrored all these issues and
succeeded in achieving all the results that such revolts aim at.

The Islamic revolution is essentially a different thing. It is a
revolution of loyalty to God against all spurious alternative centers of
loyalty, a revolt of monotheism in the face of polytheism, a revolt of
Islam against ungodliness (*jahiliyyah*).

When this revolution achieves its aims on this earth it will wipe out
scientific, technological and cultural backwardness; remove poverty and
economic backwardness; uproot exploitation and colonialism; stop
colonial oil companies from exploiting oil wells and the abuse of Muslim
wealth and resources; end oppression and arrogance and the domination
and oppression by one class of another.

This revolution will achieve these aims and in fact other goals that are
more extensive and loftier, under condition that it maintains its real
essence and remains a revolt of monotheism against polytheism, without
getting derailed towards its secondary objectives.

The first and distinguishing feature of this revolution is its divine
nature. It is this quality that links it to Badr, Siffin and Ashura, to
the movement of the prophets (as) and to the path of the righteous
friends of God. Should this revolution be divested of this feature and
become satisfied with secondary aims and mottos it will lose the support
God Most High bestows on it.

This revolution is fundamentally different from all modern revolutions
such as the French revolution, the October revolution and the
revolutions that took place in Africa and Asia since the Second World
War. All of these revolutions were at best rebellions of one class
against another or an uprising for freedom from foreign domination or
from despots. No revolution of contemporary times can be regarded as an
exception with regard to these principles.

On the other hand, the Islamic revolution is that of monotheism which
sprung up from a starting point that is essentially different from those
of all other revolutions. It starts in the direction of freeing mankind
from human pivots of loyalty of whatever type, except those linked to
loyalty to God, inducing man to the service of God, empowering His law
in human life and strengthening loyalty to Him in all aspects of man’s
life.

2- This revolution is the outcome of the cumulative effect of the great
efforts of all those who work for God, past and present, and the
vanguard of Islamic activity, those who understood the backwardness of
the Muslim nation, accepted responsibility, and faced the difficulties
they met along the difficult path. They work for the pleasure of God in
different regions of the Islamic world and at various levels of
knowledge and culture.

All these people together, whether they are our contemporaries or of
earlier periods, share the role of putting up the foundations of this
revolution, making this divine movement a reality and stirring this
strong human wave that shook the very pillars of tyranny. The
theological student who invited his fellow students towards God, His
Messenger (S) and the establishment of God’s law; the speaker who
addressed the people in the mosques and other gatherings to propagate
Islamic guidance and awareness; the scholar; the writer, the poet, and
man of letters; teachers, workers, doctors,… both men and women; all
those who conveyed the Islamic vision; all those who laid a stone to
make the foundation of this revolution, wherever they may be; … all
these people played a role in this blessed revolution and have a claim
on it and God’s reward for it.

This prodigious revolution which shook the ground from under the feet of
the tyrants and threatened their existence and interests is not the
outcome of a short span of time or the efforts of a limited number of
Islamic workers and activists; it is the fruit of generations of Islamic
activity. If this revolution suffers serious damage from whatever cause,
the loss the Muslim nation will suffer will be very great indeed; the
effect of such damage will not be limited to the Iranian pole or their
Islamic leaders.

On a different plane, the revolution carries with it all the pain,
deprivation, tyranny, suffering and difficulties endured by the Muslims
during the period of weakness, apathy and defeatism in their history.
All those who endured oppression for God’s sake, who were beaten in
dungeons; all the tears, the blood, the cries of pain; all orphanhood,
bereavement and widowhood; and all those who migrated for the sake of
God also contributed to this revolution.

This revolution symbolises all that pain and suffering in concrete form.
However, if the second factor i.e., pain and suffering had been all that
the revolution stood for, it would have seen mob action, destruction and
emotion become the overriding feature of the uprising. But the presence
of the first factor i.e., the ideology and its power and effectiveness
in actualizing this blessed revolution was the main factor that directed
the revolution and made sure it maintained its course free from
deviations.

The purposeful efforts rendered during that period by God-oriented
activists fell within the pure Islamic line, that is, the line of the
jurisconsult which was personified by Imam Khomeini, and which later
came to be known as the Imam’s line. Certainly there were groups that
deviated to the right or to the left but they did not represent the main
current of the Islamic movement. This current was moving in the
direction of the pure Islamic line. The jurists, the scholars and the
well-guided Islamic authorities played an important role in steering
this current, organizing and maintaining the course it took.

Unlike what the enemies of Islam try to show or what some simple-minded
Muslims get deceived into believing, the Islamic revolution is not a
regional affair or just an Iranian Islamic revolution; it is an Islamic
revolution for which God Most High decreed that Iran should be its
launching pad. Any effort to give it a national colour and remove it
from the feelings of all Muslims is surely an act of treason against
Islam and the Muslims if it comes from the enemies of this nation who
stay in wait for evil to befall it.

When such actions come from Muslims then they must be due to naivety and
ignorance led astray by some act of treason. The purpose of this treason
is to isolate the revolution from Muslim feelings and Muslim public
opinion in order to cordon it off and subsequently destroy it. It is our
duty as Muslims to confront these conspiracies with awareness in an
atmosphere of Islamic responsibility.

All subsequent revolutions that will take place in Islamic lands taking
direction from this will be regarded as different stages of a single
all- encompassing revolution. They are not other revolutions in place of
this one, and not even extensions of it; they are but different stages
of one comprehensive revolution, the first of which has been destined by
God to happen in Iran at the hands of this brave and sacrificing Muslim
people.

It is like an earthquake which starts from a point and then extends
along the fault line to wide areas, as a result of some hidden
geological reactions deep down in the earth. This revolution is similar
to this. In the depths of the Muslim nation, strong and wide ranging
interactions have taken place under the influence of action (the first
factor) and reaction (the second factor), away from the eyes of world
imperialism.

When the imperialists were taking pride in their great victories over
the Muslim world and were power drunk on that account, those
interactions were set in motion in the depths of the Muslim nation till
they reached their peak. Then came the earthquake that shook the ground
beneath the feet of the rulers in the White House, the Kremlin and
Elysée palace, and those tyrants did not regain their sobriety until
after the tremor. The starting point was Iran but the fault line is a
long unbreakable chain starting from Tehran to Baghdad, to Quds to Kabul
and Central Asia.

Indeed what happened in Iran was a phenomenon much greater than our
limited political imagination; it was an actualization of what God, the
Glorious and Sublime promised his oppressed righteous servants in this
verse: ***"And we desired to show favour to those who were oppressed in
the land and make them leaders and to make them the heirs, and to
establish them in the land…"***[^16]

Before anything else we have to understand the true dimensions of this
revolution and then spread this awareness among the Muslims in order to
foil the plots that are being hatched by the enemies of Islam who aim at
making the contemporary Islamic revolution a regional affair. They
intend to limit it to Iran and Persian nationalism and subsequently
isolate it from Muslim public opinion and sympathy.

When one follows the speeches of Imam Khomeini, the leader of the
revolution, (may God sanctify his soul), one will notice a deep
understanding of these conspiracies and wise efforts to thwart them.
Because of the comprehensive nature of this revolution the idea of
exporting it started with its birth and from the words of the leader
himself. He who is acquainted with the nature and roots of this
revolution knows very well that it does not admit of national or
geographical boundaries nor does it stop at the boundaries to seek
permission from the gatekeepers so that they may grant it passage.

This revolution is a current that does not seek permission, nor pause,
nor recognize boundaries, nor wait, nor hesitate!

Awareness of these realities is necessary to protect and support the
revolution instead of limiting its horizon to a national affair. We are
presenting these facts to Islamic thinkers and workers so that they may
assume their responsibilities before God Most High with respect to this
revolution.

3- This revolution is one of the days of separation in Islamic history
and it has grouped the people, with regard to their opinion, into two
groups: supporters and adversaries.

Since the first days of the emergence of this revolution faithful hearts
and conscientious souls began to flock around it and they spent the
hours that preceded its birth in great anxiety. History held its breath,
as it were, to follow up this great birth which meant the revival of the
divine civilization, the return of Islamic leadership on earth and the
rule of God in man’s life after going through a barren period in which
apathy, weakness and psychological defeat were ripe, when the Muslim
world experienced degrading assimilation into the ungodly systems of
eastern and western arrogant powers, with the result that global
unbelief controlled our nation, land and resources.

As opposed to this, the unjust and arrogant people who had sold their
souls to the devil sensed danger. They had detected in it a rebirth as
large as history itself. What was going on in Tehran was not like other
incidents that happen here and there, it was, in fact, the end of one
stage of history and the beginning of another. They felt a hazardous
development taking them unawares so they immediately declared their
hostility to the revolution and did not hide their fear of it from the
very beginning.

This revolution has been received differently by the two groups. One
greeted it with sympathy and love, and prayed for God’s support and
waited for its victory with self-abandon. The other group received it
with malice and apprehension. They could not hide their fear even at the
inception of this blessed government after the victory of the
revolution. This division on the question of loyalty or support,
repudiation or opposition is a feature of the days of separation in
history which the revolution will face through its different phases.

4- It is quite natural for the birth of this power to be a declaration
of long-lasting contest between Islam and anti-Islam (*jahiliyah*)
because this revolution will seek to overthrow the forts of *jahiliyah*
and arrogance throughout the world to free the hands of the oppressed
from their shackles and throw off their yokes; and break the awe of the
great powers from the minds of Muslims. Therefore it is impossible for
world arrogance to keep silent in the face of this divine wave without
stirring trouble and difficulty for this revolutionary call, without
seeking to isolate it and obstruct its way.

He who comprehends God’s norms in history will be able to understand
clearly the inevitability of conflict between these two forces: the
growing Islamic force and the force of global unbelief. This conflict
will prove to be the hardest, the longest and the most permanent
because, as we have said, it is a struggle for existence and such a
struggle is always long drawn, severe and permanent. It is not a contest
for a piece of land or for mineral resources such as oil, iron or copper
that can admit mutual understanding.

This revolution started in a region which was completely under the
influence of the great powers and it is now working to break the
blockade from the whole Muslim world. It is only natural for the forces
of imperialism to confront this revolution in its infant state through
all forms of pressure and conspiracy, both internally and externally, in
order to muzzle and isolate it till it wears out.

The Iran-Iraq war was part of this awful imperialist plot and a part of
the conflict we talked about. The Iraqi regime was not the antagonist in
this war; it was only a channel for the will of the great powers. The
real antagonists in the conflict were the imperialists who divide the
oppressed peoples of the world among themselves and control them.

The Islamic revolution must face this long and severe confrontation as
this is part of God’s norms that cannot be altered. The revolution
cannot carry out great achievements or prepare its people to perform
great feats and face difficult challenges if they do not exercise
enduring confrontation.

5- The outcome of this struggle will be in favour of the God-fearing and
this is the last thing we may doubt. A believing nation does not defend
itself rather it defends God’s religion, His law and the limits He has
set. It does not face its own enemies but God’s, and it does not fight
with its own power and strength but with the power and strength of God.

When a nation fulfils these conditions, puts its trust in God, presents
itself to Him, lessens its attachment to the world, fortifies itself
against inordinate desires and then rises up for the sake of God
individually or in groups; surely God Most High will grant it victory,
sooner or later. This is God’s promise and He does not break his word.
Let us listen to some verses from the book of God:

***"Certainly Our decree has gone before in favour of Our servants, the
apostles, that they will indeed receive [God’s] help, and indeed Our
hosts will be the victors.*** ***"***[^17]

***"… and it was a must for us to help the faithful.*** ***"***[^18]

***"Indeed we shall help Our apostles and those who have faith in the
life of the world…"***[^19]

***“The confederates of God are indeed the victorious”***[^20]

***“… and God suffices as guardian, and God suffices as helper.”***[^21]

***“… and your Lord suffices as helper and guide.”***[^22]

***“O, you who have faith! If you help God, He will help you and make
your feet firm”***[^23]

When war becomes protracted and severe God will not leave us at the
mercy of our enemies, He does not go back on His word and abandon His
faithful servants. Blessed is He and greatly exalted above that!

***“This is what God and his apostle had promised us.”***[^24]

If the struggle is prolonged it is so that God may put his servants’
hearts to test in order to separate the steadfast among them from the
weak-hearted; so that he may give the believers a firm footing on the
battlefield; so that the believers may find it easy to detach themselves
from the love of this world in order to face the struggle; so that they
may gain more certainty with God in the middle of the struggle, for one
is bestowed with certainty at the time of tribulation more than at times
of peace and comfort; so that believers might learn through experience
how to confront mighty challenges and difficulties on God’s path and
thereby increase their fortitude, strength and bravery; so that loyalty
and repudiation may be firmer in the hearts of believers, for loyalty is
through sacrifice and service, and repudiation [of the adversary] is
more vigorous during confrontation and war.

This struggle and its attending difficulties are not exclusive to this
revolution or this religion, they are a divine norm which God applies in
the lives of His righteous servants whom he selects for His mercy, those
whom God Most High will allow to live in paradise together with His
truthful servants.

***“Do you suppose that you will be let off while God has not yet
ascertained those of you who wage jihad and those who do not take,
besides God and His Apostle and the faithful,*** ***anyone as [their]
confidant? God is well aware of what you do.”***[^25]

***“Do you suppose that you shall enter paradise though there has not
yet come to you the like of [what befell] those who went before you?
Stress and distress befell them…”***[^26]

We like to pick the fruits of victory by the shortest route with the
least means, without our religion expecting anything from us. We want to
simply extend our hands and attain victory, leadership and vicegerency
[*imamah* and *khilafah*] over the world.

However, the wise God knows that victory that comes without difficulties
cannot qualify man to be the leader and vicegerent of God on earth.
Therefore, God wants us to face confrontation by treading the difficult
path and gain strength and actualize the dominion of God’s religion in
our lives.

***“… and you were eager that it should be the one that was unarmed
[lit. ‘one that was free of thorns’]. But God desires to confirm the
truth with His words and to root out the faithless, so that he may
confirm the truth and bring falsehood to naught, though the guilty
should be averse.”***[^27]

Let us pay attention to the following clear verses of God’s Book in
Surah Al Imran, which explain, in eloquent style, the norms of God with
regard to struggle, distress, trial, help and conquest.

***“Do not weaken or grieve: you shall have the upper hand, should you
be faithful. If a wound afflicts you, a like wound has already afflicted
those people; and We make such vicissitudes rotate among mankind to
ascertain those who have faith that We may take witnesses from among
you, and God does not like the wrongdoers. Also, He wishes to purge
those who have faith and wipe out the faithless. Do you suppose that you
can enter paradise while God has not yet ascertained those of you who
have waged jihad and not ascertained the steadfast?”***[^28]

In these blessed verses from the chapter Al Imran there are clear
answers to all the questions that may arise in the believers’ minds
about this terrible confrontation between Islam and unbelief. The
Muslims thought that after God had granted them victory at Badr success
would always be on the side of the faithful group; as long as they
believed in God and His apostle and struggled along His path they would
never fail to achieve victory, whatever the circumstances.

When God made them test the bitterness of defeat at Uhud, where they
suffered a reverse when the archers disobeyed the command of God’s
Messenger (S) and left their positions to gather the spoils, the
believers’ hearts quivered and their confidence in victory was shaken.
They began to have misgivings as to whether the outcome of the affair
would be in their favour.

Weakness overwhelmed them and they were seized by grief for the leading
personalities who were martyred in the battle, and for the select group
of believers who fulfilled their promise to God and were sincere to Him
in deeds and jihad.

Then God Most High returned to their hearts the confidence for victory
and reassured them that the outcome would be in favour of the believers
however much the injuries, pains, drawbacks and difficulties along the
tough road might be. God removed from their minds all feebleness and
grief, and convinced their hearts of victory. *"Do not weaken or grieve:
you shall have the upper hand, should you be faithful.”*

Then God Most High reminded the people that the wounds they sustained
during the war were also sustained by their enemies; they were not
exclusive to them. The wounds, the hardships, the troubles and the
losses are demands of war to be extracted from both parties, and no
battle takes place without pain and wounds.

The divine norm is such that vicissitudes rotate among mankind, one day
in favour of the believers and bitter for the infidels, and another in
favour of the infidels and bitter for the faithful. Thus will victory be
rotated among them but the ultimate outcome will always be in favour of
the faithful. This alternation does not change God's decree that the
outcome is to be in favour of the God-wary. Vicissitudes are rotated in
this way and the faithful are made to test hardship and ease; victory at
one time and the bitterness of defeat at another, in order to sort out
the believers from the hypocrites.

Had the mission always been associated with victory and spoils, and
coupled with ease and comfort, hypocritical elements would have flocked
around it, people who are only good at sitting on the fence and being
absent during battle, only to return when the spoils are distributed and
press for choice portions of it. ***"So when there is panic, you see
them observing you, their eyes rolling, like someone fainting at
death.”***[^29]

If the course of this mission were to be free of adversities and
drawbacks hypocrites and the weak-hearted would flock around and taken
up sensitive positions. If this were to happen, the mission's leadership
role in men's life would be suspended and it would lose its power of
bringing about change.

The mission would leave the tough path that confronts *taghut* and take
the comfortable course awash with pleasures and worldly wares. It would
then lose its capacity for change and action similar to what happened at
the time of the Umayyads and Abbasids.

Therefore this journey needs, from time to time, a strong uprising that
can push aside the hypocrites and the weak-hearted and sort out the
people with strong faith who keep their word with God and are sincere to
Him in their works. The course taken by this mission is unlike what the
people are accustomed to with respect to other systems and governments
which seek a life of comfort and ease that is free from all
shortcomings.

Nothing harms this mission like a calm, comfortable and pompous life. In
such a situation, this call will have lost its most important feature,
since God Most High has made the period of distress and adversity a
means of making the mission's environment clear of such feeble minded
people who usually opt for a calm, comfortable life. When the journey
suffers adversities, hardships and reverses the field is left solely for
the believers. The journey then belongs to the sincere group only and
the faithful are distinguished from others *"so that God may ascertain
those who have faith.”*

This is not the only benefit of vicissitudes and the rotation of victory
and defeat, hardship and ease on the believers. Another benefit is that
God may take witnesses, exemplars and leaders on earth. It is through
these hardships, drawbacks, war-inflicted wounds and the pains of
confrontation that witnesses are produced in this nation, ***"Thus we
have made you a middle nation that you may be witnesses to the
people…*****”**[^30], as well as leaders and models of perseverance,
patience and faith.

Unique models in faith that adorn human history are not made in a calm
and cozy life; they are made in the thick of difficulties, in the midst
of action, amidst blood and tears. This journey also needs these
singular models of faith and perseverance selected by God during trying
and difficult circumstances, ***"…that He may take witnesses from among
you."***[^31]

Thirdly, these vicissitudes help in the making of this nation and the
appraisal of its personalities. These wounds, pain and difficulties
purge the believers, cleanse them and purify their hearts from doubt and
selfish desires, and free them of their weaknesses. Many a believer’s
internal points of weakness remain hidden from him, but during
tribulation they appear so that he can correct them, for many a weakness
of the mind cannot be corrected during peace time; only hardship and
difficulties can put them right.

Just as hardships and difficulties sort out believers from hypocrites,
they also clear the believer’s soul from weaknesses and doubts; they
purge the faithful. As for the infidels, tribulations and hardship
efface and ruin them completely; therefore, they cannot struggle against
difficulties and adversities. *"So that God may purge those who have
faith and that He may wipe out the faithless.”*

As such it is not correct to think that whoever proclaims the two
testimonies [i.e. to the oneness of God and the prophethood of Muhammad
(S)], becomes a Muslim and will enter paradise, for among the people are
hypocrites whose testimonies do not descend from their lips into their
hearts. Believers are at different levels of faith; they do not occupy
the same position in terms of belief and good works. There are believers
who prefer wellbeing to striving and fighting in the way of God.

Then there are striving (*mujahidun*) believers. Then there are striving
believers who are patient. It will be a mistake to think that everyone
will have the same rank in paradise, for each will have his own rank and
position as seen by God. These ranks and position are determined only
during trying circumstances, when the believer is distinguished from the
hypocrite, the striving believer from the ordinary one and the patient,
striving believer from the impatient one.

6- This blessed revolution marks the beginning of a major turning point
in man's history and civilization; it is a matter of great consequence
with regard to the life and future of mankind. Whoever examines the
narrations that are related from the Messenger of God, (S) and his
family, will not doubt the fact that this revolution, given its salient
features and its leadership, will prepare the ground for the greatest
revolution in human history and the appearance of Imam al-Mahdi of the
family of Muhammad (S), may God hasten his appearance.

Surely the promised day which God and His Apostle have promised us; the
establishment of the great Islamic power, the empowering of the
oppressed over the land and Imam al-Mahdi's great revolution is close at
hand, God willing. The present revolution paves the way for the coming
one and prepares the Muslim community for the reappearance and rising of
one who undertakes the office of the Imamate (*al-Qa‘im*) from the
family of Muhammad (as). The following is an assortment from those
narrations:

From Abdullah ibn Mas'ud who said: "We came to see God's Messenger and
found him delighted, his face showing his happiness. Whatever we asked
of him he told us and whenever we were silent he initiated a topic. Then
some Hashimite youths among whom were Hasan and Husayn (as) passed by.
When he saw them he looked at them persistently and his eyes welled up,
so we said to him: O Messenger of God! We see in your face signs of
pain. Then he said:

"We are a household for whom God chose the hereafter instead of the
world. After me my family will be expelled and dispersed in the land
till the time black standards rise from the east. [The standard bearers]
will ask for their right but they will be denied it, then they will ask
for it again but they will be denied it again, then they will ask for it
again, fight [for it] and be victorious. He who meets this situation
from among you or among your descendants, let him come to the Imam
(leader) from my family even if he has to crawl on ice, for those
[standards] are standards of guidance which they will hand over to a man
from my family whose name will be the same as mine and his title [Abul
Qasim] the same as mine. He will fill the earth with equity and justice,
as it will be filled with inequity and oppression.”[^32]

In Bihar al-Anwar Allamah al-Majlisi narrates that Imam al-Baqir (as)
said: "It is as if I am together with some people who have come from the
east. They will request for their right but they will be denied it, then
they will request for it again. When they realize that, they will
brandish their swords and [consequently] they will be granted their
request but they will not accept it till they rise up. They will not
hand over their [standards] except to your companion (i.e. al-Mahdi
(as). Those who are killed among them will be martyrs. Indeed if I were
to witness that time I would keep myself at the disposal of the leader
of this affair."[^33]

It is reported in Al-Bihar that Abu al-Hasan al-Rida (as) has said: "A
man from the people of Qum will invite the people to the truth and a
group of people [who are tough] like pieces of iron will rally around
him. Storms will not cause them to slip, they will be undaunted by war
and never get tired of it, they will depend on God and the outcome will
be in favour of the God-wary.”[^34]

It is also related in Al-Bihar, from Ali ibn Maymun al-Sa’igh, from Imam
al-Sadiq (as) who said: "A time will come when the city of Qum and its
people shall be a proof against mankind. That will be at the time of
occultation of the one from us who will rise (al-Qa'im) till the time of
[his] appearance. Had it not been for that, the earth would swallow up
its inhabitants.”[^35]

Through other chains of transmission, it is reported that Imam al-Sadiq
(as) said about Kufa: "Kufa shall become empty of the faithful and
knowledge shall diminish in it and recoil as a snake recoils. Knowledge
shall [then] appear in a town known as Qum which will become a source of
learning and culture [and it will spread] until there remains no one
abased concerning the religion [i.e. on account of their ignorance of
it], not even women who are secluded in their quarters. This will happen
when the appearance of our Qa'im draws near and God will make Qum and
its people serve as the proof.

Otherwise, the earth will swallow up its people and no proof will have
remained on earth. So knowledge will flow from it [Qum] to other lands
in the east and west and God's proof against mankind will then be
complete, till there remains no one on earth to whom religion and
knowledge has not reached. After that the Qa'im will appear and become
the cause of God's punishment and anger on the servants, for God does
not punish the servants till after they deny his proof."

Commenting on the saying of God the Exalted: ***"…And if you turn away
He will replace you with another people and they will not be like you."
(Qur'an Ch: 47, Vs: 38),*** Al-Zamakhshari the author of *Tafsir
al-Kashshaf* said: The Messenger of God was asked about those people
while Salman was sitting by his side. He patted him on the thigh and
said: *'This one and his people. I swear by the One in whose hand is my
soul, if faith were to be suspended at the Pleiades some men from the
Persians will attain it.*”[^36]

These assorted narrations indicate that this blessed revolution will God
willing last till the appearance of Imam al-Mahdi of the family of
Muhammad (as), and prepare the world for him, may God hasten his
appearance.[^37]

[^1]: . Abu Nu’aym’s Hilyat al-Awliya 2: 39.

[^2]: . Tarikh al-Tabari, 6: 229.

[^3]: . Qur’an Ch: 33, Vs: 33.

[^4]: . Qur’an Ch: 3, Vs: 33- 34.

[^5]: . Al-Saduq’s Al-Khisal 2: 52; Bihar al-Anwar 27: 53.

[^6]: . Al-Ahmadi al-Mayaniji’s Makatib al-Rasul: 120.

[^7]: . Al-Barqi’s Al-Mahasin: 165; Bihar al-Anwar 27: 52.

[^8]: . Fiqh al-Rida 51; Bihar al-Anwar 27: 52.

[^9]: . Bihar al-Anwar 27: 58.

[^10]: . Bihar al-Anwar 27: 58.

[^11]: . Al-Khisal 2: 153-154; Bihar al-Anwar 27: 52.

[^12]: . Tafsir al-Imam al-Askari . 18; Ma’ani al-Akhbar 113; Uyun
al-Akhbar 161;Ilal al-Sharaya’ 58; all quoted in Bihar al-Anwar 27: 54.

[^13]: . It is taken from the general Ziyarat al-Warith and the special
Ziyarat Ashura with slight differences.

[^14]: . Qur’an Ch: 8, Vs: 41.

[^15]: . From another direction, Siffin could be considered the Second
day of Separation in Islam and Ashura could be the third.

[^16]: . Qur’an Ch: 28, Vs: 5-6.

[^17]: . Qur’an, Ch: 34 Vs: 171-173.

[^18]: . Qur’an, Ch: 30, Vs: 47.

[^19]: . Qur’an, Ch: 40, Vs: 51.

[^20]: . Qur’an, Ch: 5, Vs: 56.

[^21]: . Qur’an, Ch: 4, Vs: 45.

[^22]: . Quran, Ch: 25, Vs: 31

[^23]: . Qur’an Ch: 45, Vs: 7.

[^24]: Qur’an, Ch: 33, Vs: 22.

[^25]: . Qur’an, Ch: 9, Vs: 16.

[^26]: . Qur’an, Ch: 2, Vs: 214.

[^27]: . Qur’an, Ch: 8, Vs: 7-8.

[^28]: Qur’an Ch:3 vs:139-142

[^29]: Qur'an Ch: 33, Vs: 19.

[^30]: . Qur'an, Ch: 2, Vs: 143.

[^31]: . Qur'an, Ch: 3, Vs: 140.

[^32]: . Al-Mustadrak ala al-Sahihayn 4: 464.

[^33]: . Bihar al-Anwar, 51: 83; 52:43.

[^34]: . Bihar al-Anwar, 60: 216, 446.

[^35]: . Bihar al-Anwar, 60: 213.

[^36]: . Tafsir al-Kashshaf, 4: 331.

[^37]: . We refer the reader to Sheikh Ali al-Kurani's Al-Mumahhidun li
al-Mahdi for explanation and analysis of these narrations and also how
they fit the present context of the blessed Islamic Revolution.


