Loyalty And Repudiation In The Supplication Of Ziyarat Ashura
=============================================================

*Ziyarat Ashura* is among the soundly transmitted supplications that
come down to us from the Ahl al-Bayt (as) and are recited at visitations
to the holy burial places of the Chosen Ones (as) and other occasions.
It has been related by Ibn Qulawayh (may God have mercy on him) in
*Kamil al-Ziyarat* through an acceptable chain of transmission, a
standard which he maintained throughout the narrations of his book. It
has also been reported by Sheikh al-Tusi (may God have mercy on him) and
other veritable narrators of hadith.

It is the persistent practice of the faithful to recite this
supplication throughout the year, and with it declare their association
with the school of the Ahl al-Bayt (as) and their disassociation with
their enemies. Through this supplication the faithful openly show their
loyalty to Husayn (as) and his family, and repudiate their adversaries
in the decisive battle that took place in Karbala in 61 A.H. between
Husayn (as), his family and companions on one side and the Umayyads on
the other. This supplication is replete with the concepts of loyalty and
repudiation, association and separation, greetings of peace and cursing.

Loyalty And Repudiation: The Most Prominent Features Of The Day Of Ashura
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

The day of Ashura was a day full of faith, sincerity, service and
values, but the most prominent feature of this day was loyalty to God,
His Messenger (S) and those vested with authority, and also a
repudiation of their enemies. This loyalty and repudiation was
demonstrated by Husayn's companions through their rare act of sacrifice
in Karbala. This place witnessed the most marvelous scenes of sacrifice,
freedom, resistance and struggle in history which were the fruits of
loyalty and repudiation.

In this rare and wonderful scene of loyalty and repudiation we also
witness rare instances which depict values and morals that are
responsible for drawing the attention of the people to the event for the
last thirteen centuries. The morals and values depicted include faith,
monotheism, freedom, love for God and struggle for His sake, hate for
God's sake, remembrance [of God], renouncing of the world, sincerity,
gratitude, piety, altruism, allegiance, self-esteem, strength, courage,
patience, far-sightedness, acute discernment and much more that we are
not aware of, which history recorded for us concerning the blessed party
that accompanied Husayn (as) on his journey to God on the day of Ashura
and prior to that.

Beauty attracts man wherever it may be: in nature, in society, in forms
and figures or in values, morals and meaning. It is amazing that we find
loyalty and repudiation in the camp that was opposed to Husayn (as) as
well, although in a completely opposite direction: loyalty to *taghut*
and repudiation of God's friends, and loyalty to the party of Satan and
repudiation of the party of God.

As loyalty and repudiation are reversed, values and morals follow suit;
both follow God's norms. Thus we witness these opposites within the camp
that fought Husayn (as): heedlessness to God as opposed to remembering
him, polytheism as opposed to monotheism, selfishness as opposed to
altruism, cowardice as opposed to courage, weakness as opposed to
strength, ingratitude as opposed to gratefulness, sin as opposed to
piety, love for God's enemies and hate for His friends as opposed to
love for God and for His sake and hate for His sake, egocentrism as
opposed to concern for others, meanness as opposed to generosity,
humiliation as opposed to self-esteem and honour, anxiety as opposed to
patience, treachery as opposed to loyalty.

We witness these and other negative values of that camp as opposed to
the positive ones that abound in Husayn's camp. In this camp, after his
right hand had been cut off by the enemy, al-Abbas raises this battle
cry.

**‘By God if they cut off my right hand, I will forever defend my
religion,**

**And [defend] the Imam who is certain in faith.’**

From the other camp we read that when Shimr, the killer of Husayn (as)
met Ibn Ziyad and, requested a prize, said:

‘Make my mount heavy with silver or with gold, [for] I have killed the
cultured lord.

I have killed the man with the best father and mother, and the best of
men when genealogies are mentioned.’[^1]

These two opposing loyalties and repudiations that we see on the day of
Ashura in Karbala, issuing from the two contending camps will continue
throughout history among the supporters of Husayn and the supporters of
the Umayyads.

We read in history that some people endure all kinds of suffering and
tyranny, and the distress of travel in order to visit the grave of
Husayn (as). Others demolished the structures in its precincts and also
inundated it, so that the signs which mark the resting place of Husayn
(as) might be effaced. In addition, they killed the pilgrims and cut off
their hands to prevent people from visiting the tomb of Husayn (as) in
the past, [and blow them up today with bombs].

The Three Peculiarities of the Al-Taff Battle Theatre
-----------------------------------------------------

The most prominent peculiarities of this arena with regard to loyalty
and repudiation are three:

It was a field which inherited loyalty and repudiation. These two were
not new to this theatre; it inherited them from earlier theatres in the
long struggle between the prophets and their followers on one side and
the despots on the other. Secondly, it was a separating theatre that
classified the people since 61 A.H., into two distinct groups that are
opposed on the question of loyalty and repudiation.

Thirdly, it was a legator from which we inherit loyalty and repudiation.
Had it not been for this legacy which we received from Karbala these
twin concepts would not have been preserved for us. The Umayyads
corrupted loyalty and repudiation just as they corrupted many of the
fundamentals and laws of religion. They robbed the people of their
loyalty and repudiation by deflecting their courses. Through his death
and the death of that band of his family members and companions, Husayn
(as) restored the two to their rightful places. Below is an exposition
of these three peculiarities:

### An Inherited Theatre

The battle theatre of Al-Taff was that of confrontation between truth
and falsehood, monotheism and polytheism; a call towards servitude and
submission to God, and an invitation to *taghut,* and empowering it over
the people by enslaving them. This was the fiercest and the most
desperate type of confrontation in history because it was a struggle on
the question of loyalty and repudiation between loyalty to God and
repudiation of *taghut* on one side and loyalty to *taghut* on the
other.

This encounter was not new that started in Karbala in 61 A.H, rather it
was an extension of the contest of civilizations that run along the
lines of accepting and denouncing, with the prophets and their followers
on one side and despots, dictators and their courtiers on the other.

Husayn (as) was in the line of the prophets and their followers while
the Umayyads, their helpers and governors took the path of the
oppressors and despotic rulers. Historians inform us that when Imam
Husayn (as) was leaving Medina he was repeatedly mentioning John, the
son of Zachariah, and his murder.

The values which distinguished Husayn's camp at Karbala were the same
values and norms which characterized the prophets’ camp in history.
These values were belief in monotheism, remembrance of God, piety,
sincerity, denouncing the world and its glory; perseverance and
sacrifice in the path of God, establishing the prayer, paying *zakat*,
bidding the good and forbidding the bad, waging *jihad* on the
oppressors, justice and kindness.

By contrast, the traits that characterized the Umayyad camp in Karbala
were the same traits of the camp of oppressors, despots and dictators
throughout history. Husayn's (as) companions spent the night before the
10th of Muharram droning like bees [on account of their worship]. Some
were standing, some sitting, some bowing and some prostrating
themselves.[^2]

‘On them were signs of devouts who were humble before God as dawn came
over them.

And when morning came the glitter of sharp swords testified to their
being freemen.’

Fatima daughter of Husayn (as) said: "My aunt Zaynab spent all that
night standing in her prayer niche pleading for succour from her Lord.
By God our eyes did not find sleep nor did the sounds [of our prayers]
abate."[^3]

Such was the case in Husayn's (as) camp. They were yearning to meet God,
denouncing the world and its vanities, and they were glad because they
were going to meet martyrdom in God's way. Their eagerness reached the
extent that one of them was cracking jokes with his friends on that
night. Burayr cracked a joke with Abdurrahman al-Ansari and the latter
said to him: This is no time to jest. Burayr replied: “My people know
that I never liked to jest, neither as a middle-aged man nor as a young
man, but [it is because] I am delighted by what we shall meet. By God,
there is nothing between us and the houris except their swords. I wish
that they would attack us now.”[^4]

The only concern of the other party was to get gold, silver,
governorships and presents in exchange for fighting the son of the
daughter of God's Messenger (S). Umar ibn Sa'ad undertook the fight with
an eye on the governorship of Al-Rayy. Al-Yafi’i says: And he promised
the said governor (Umar ibn Sa'ad) to make him ruler of the city of
al-Rayy and the sinner sold guidance in exchange for error.

These are two attitudes, two cultures, two methods in life. They are two
ways of acting and two norms, and they are distinct from one another
throughout the history of confrontation between the party of God and the
party of *taghut.* Despite the fact that as time passes the features and
forms of methods and practices do change but the essence of these two
norms, cultures and methods remain the same. These two norms are the
norm of God's friends and their methodology and that of *taghut* and its
methodology.

We find this great disparity between these two methods, cultures and
norms clearly portrayed in the theatre of Karbala in a confrontation
between two camps only a few metres apart. We read in the supplication
of the Commander of the Faithful (as) which is known as *Ziyarat Amin
Allah*:

“[O God] Make my soul assured with Your decree, pleased with what You
predestined, [make it] follow the ways of Your friends, and separate me
from the character of your enemies.”

They are two norms and two methods. We pray to God the Exalted to make
us follow the practice of His friends and separate us from the norms of
His enemies. Surely the battle theatre of Al-Taff was an extension of
the arena of confrontation in the history of the prophets, and Husayn
(as) took the positions taken by the prophets, testamentary legatees
(*awsiya’*) and God's friends, while the Umayyads took the positions of
the imperious despots of history. So the loyalty was the same and the
repudiation was also the same.

This arena truly inherited the theatre in the strictest sense of the
term. All values and their contraries, all loyalty and repudiation had
been transported from the depth of history to the time of Husayn (as).
The more deep-rooted loyalty and repudiation are, the deeper, firmer,
stronger and more intense a product of awareness they become. Indeed
loyalty and repudiation in Husayn's (as) camp in Karbala carried all the
strength and awareness of the loyalty and repudiation that accumulated
during the history of the prophets.

It is for a specific reason that the greetings of peace to Husayn (as)
in *Ziyarat al-Warith* took this wonderful wording that depicts his
position in Karbala. It came with the expression ‘heir of the prophets’:

Peace be on you O heir of Adam, God's chosen one!

Peace be on you O heir of Noah, God's prophet.

Peace be on you O heir of Abraham, God's friend.

Peace be on you O heir of Moses, the interlocutor of God.

Peace be on you O heir of Jesus, spirit of God.

Peace be on you O heir of Muhammad, the beloved of God.

### A Separating Theatre

The day of Ashura was a day of separation in history. The greatest days
of separation for this nation are Badr, Siffin and Al-Taff. The days of
separation divide the people into two spheres of confrontation and spare
no one. On the day of Al-Taff the people were well-informed about truth
and falsehood, guidance and deviation with respect to the conflict; the
matter was not ambiguous to anyone on the battle field. The matter was
too clear for the Umayyads to have been able to obfuscate it by their
propaganda. Whoever took to deviation on that day must have followed
misguidance with full knowledge and no one got misguided because of
having confused truth with falsehood.

On the day of Ashura, Husayn (as) stood between the battle lines and
addressed the Umayyad army saying:

"O people! Tell me: who am I? Then search your souls and rebuke
yourselves, and see whether it is permissible for you to kill me and
violate my sanctity. Am I not the son of the daughter of your Prophet
(S) and the son of his legatee who was his cousin, the first believer in
God who accepted what His Messenger brought from his Lord? Was not
Hamza, Lord of the martyrs, my [father's] uncle? Was Ja'far al-Tayyar
not my uncle? Has not the saying of God's Messenger about me and my
brother saying ‘These two are lords of the youths of paradise’, reached
you? If you believe what I say [well and good]– and it is the truth, for
by God I have never told a lie since I knew that God detests the one who
lies and that it harms its fabricator –.

"If you disbelieve me, there are among you those who will tell you if
you ask. Ask Jabir ibn Abdillah al-Ansari, Abu Sa'id al-Khidri, Sahl ibn
Sa'ad al-Sa'idi, Zayd ibn Arqam and Anas ibn Malik. They will tell you
that they have heard this saying of God's Messenger (S) concerning me
and my brother. Is this not deterent enough for you against spilling my
blood?"

Then Shimr said: ‘I must be worshipping God on a fringe if I know what
he is saying.’

Habib ibn Muzahir said to him: ‘By God, I think you are worshipping God
on seventy fringes. I bear witness that you are saying the truth that
you do not know what he is saying, for God has put a seal on your
heart.’[^5]

The plainness of truth and falsehood, and also guidance and deviation in
this arena had divided it on that day into two groups, on the basis of
loyalty and repudiation. Whoever stood by Husayn (as), his family and
companions was showing loyalty to God, His Messenger (S) and the Imams
(as) of the Muslims after him, and repudiating Yazid and his governors,
soldiers and courtiers.

Whoever did not stand by Husayn (as) on that day, his loyalty must have
been for Yazid and his repudiation against God's party. The pretext of
confusion or ignorance could be accepted from no one. The pretext of one
who sat on the fence, who was indifferent to what was happening on the
battlefield, could also not be accepted.

Therefore whoever knew that Husayn (as) had sought for help in order to
support God's religion and heard his call but neither supported him nor
got enraged and aggrieved on account of him, nor attempted to defend
him, must have in fact been pleased with those people's action and
automatically fell within the sphere of those to be cursed and
repudiated. In *Ziarat Warith* we read:

May God curse the people who killed you…

May God curse the people who oppressed you …

May God curse the people who heard of that and accepted it.

These are part of the peculiarities of the days of separation in history
which separate the people completely. The dividing line here is loyalty
and repudiation which divides the people into two camps and does not
accept the position of spectators who stand on the periphery of the
battlefield, preferring their well-being. Those who remain observers
when conflicts break out might think that they can escape their religion
if they avoid both camps, but they do not know that they are entering
headlong into predicament! God the Exalted said: ***"Look! They have
already fallen into predicament…"***[^6]

May God have mercy on Zuhayr ibn al-Qayn for he had full awareness and
insight on the day he went out towards them [the enemy] riding his
long-tailed horse and well-armed. He said: "O people of Kufa! Beware of
God's punishment! Beware! Indeed it is the duty on a Muslim to advice
his brother Muslim and we are still brothers following one religion, so
long as the sword has not come down between us. You deserve our
admonition, but when the sword descends [all] bonds will be severed and
we will become one nation and you another.

God has tested us and you with the descendants of His prophet Muhammad
(S) to see our action and yours. We are inviting you to help them and
abandon these despots Yazid and Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad for you will not
get anything from them except harm, as long as their power lasts. They
will gorge out your eyes, cut off your hands and feet, mutilate you and
hang you on the trunks of palm trees. They will kill your exemplars and
those versed in the Qur'an among you, like Hujr ibn 'Adi, and Hani ibn
Urwa and their types."

The people reviled him and praised Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad and added: "We
shall not depart until we kill your man and those who are with him or
unless we send him along with his companions to Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad in
submission."

Then Zuhayr said: "Servants of God! The son of Fatima is more entitled
to love and support than the son of Sumayyah. But if you do not help
them, I commend you to God's care that you should not kill them. Open
the way between the man and Yazid, for by my life, Yazid will be
contented with your obedience without you killing al-Husayn (as).

Then Shimr shot an arrow at him and said: "Keep quiet! May God silence
your noise! We are fed up with your prattle."

Zuhayr said: "O son of the one who urinates on his heels! I am not
talking to you because you are only an animal. I do not think that you
have learnt even two verses of the Book of God. Know that the
humiliation of the Day of Resurrection and a painful chastisement awaits
you. Then he [Zuhayr] turned to the people and said loudly:

"Servants of God! Do not be seduced into leaving your religion for that
uncouth man and his ilk. By God, the intercession of Muhammad (S) will
not include a people who spill the blood of his descendants and his
family and kill those who help them and defend their women folk."

Then a man from his camp called Zuhayr saying: "Abu Abdillah [i.e. Imam
Husayn] is saying: Come back. By my life, you have advised these people,
as if a believer of Pharaoh’s people had admonished his people and
intensified his plea, if only advice and conveyance [of information] is
of any avail."[^7]

### A Legator Theatre

We inherited loyalty and repudiation from the battle theatre of Al-Taff
on the day of Ashura. Had it not been for Ashura we ourselves would not
have been acquainted with loyalty and repudiation except loyalty for the
rulers and the kings however they might be; and repudiation of their
enemies whoever they were, since loyalty would then have been the
prerogative of the man who handled the whip even if he was unjust, and
repudiation would have been against the one who opposed him even if he
invited people to God and His Messenger (S).

Certainly, the Umayyads had corrupted the concepts of loyalty and
repudiation which caused the corruption and destruction of everything in
this nation. A nation is, according to the soundest definition, nothing
but loyalty and repudiation. The Umayyads knew this fact very well and
they also knew the effect an attack on these two pillars would have on
the nation's existence.

May God have mercy on al-Farazdaq! When the Imam met him on the way and
asked him about the people he left behind, he replied: "You have asked
the one who is conversant with the issue. Their hearts are with you but
their swords are against you."

This is the first step towards destroying loyalty and repudiation and
the next one is when the corrupting and destroying shifts from the
swords and external stances to the hearts; to love and hate, and this
means everything with regard to loyalty and repudiation.

The Umayyads had aimed at the most important things for a nation's
existence and corrupted them and robbed the people of them.To ruin the
loyalty and repudiation of the people they had to rob them of their
conscience, their will and also their resistance, and when people lose
these three things nothing will remain of them except dross.

The story of this assault is long and we will not go into detail here.
We have done that in our book *Warith al-Anbiya’*.

Husayn (as) had envisaged this painful and unfortunate situation when he
said in a speech that was all grief and pain, as he described the
tragedy of the Muslims of that period: "The world has changed beyond
recognition: its good has turned away and nothing remains of it except
the drops [that remain in a container when it is emptied of its water]
and a despicable life like unwholesome pasture. Don’t you see that truth
is not acted upon and falsehood is not refrained from?"

Husayn (as) had no option but to fight the despots himself, with his
family and companions even if they were few in number. Through his
tragic death he was able to achieve two important things for Islam and
the Muslims. These achievements were:

- Restoration of awareness, will and resistance in Muslim minds.

- Stripping Umayyad rule of legitimacy.

Indeed the death of al-Husayn (as) together with that blessed party
comprising his family and companions had caused a deep jolt on the
languid Muslim souls of that day. Those people had left Husayn (as) with
only a small band of his family and companions, and looked on as the
awful war broke out between him and the despots, without taking the
slightest action.

The tragic way in which Husayn died, jolted the Muslim conscience which
had been suspended by Umayyad misrule. It restored their will, awareness
and resistance, and this was the greater of the two achievements. The
second one is that it stripped Umayyad government of legitimacy. They
were ruling the Muslims from the position of Successor (*khalifah*) to
the Messenger of God (S) and it was from that position that they derived
their legitimacy. They also distorted the laws, values and principles of
this religion by invoking this very position.

When Husayn (as) went out to fight that tyrant and was martyred by the
forces of the Umayyads the people came to know that God's Messenger (S),
His religion and his nation all denounced the Umayyads. Although Umayyad
rule continued even after Husayn's death it became like any other ruling
family or temporal rulers and kings: they no longer represented
vicegerency to the Messenger of God (S) in the minds of the Muslims.

Since that date the Muslims recognized two different lines: the line of
the jurists and the line of the rulers. In the opinion of the Muslims,
the line of the jurists was the legitimate one, except when they obeyed
the rulers. This is as far as the Sunni sphere is concerned. With the
followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (as) the issue was much clearer.

Were it not for Husayn's death, the people would not have known the
religion except through the palaces of the Umayyads which were filled
with luxury, sports, music, oppression and murder. If the martyrdom of
Husayn and his family and companions had not taken place nothing would
have remained of Islam but its name. It is just like what Husayn (as)
said to Marwan on the day he invited him to pay allegiance to Yazid:

"Farewell to Islam if the nation is put to test with [the rule of] a
herdsman like Yazid"

Emotional Co-Existence With The Al-Taff Tragedy As Expressed In Ziyarat Ashura
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The text that is known as *Ziyarat Ashura* forcefully and clearly
embodies loyalty and repudiation as it should be and crystallizes all
the loyalty and repudiation that abounded in the battlefield of Al-Taff
and has drawn people towards it since that wonderful historic day in the
year 61 A.H. When one reads the text of *Ziyarat Ashura* one strongly
senses a feeling of coexistence with it since that very day, and it is a
feeling that is known and felt by those who are accustomed to and
constantly read this text. The tragic words that appear in this
*ziyarah* truly, precisely and subtly convey our emotional and
transparent coexistence with the tragedy of Al-Taff:

“The calamity is surely grievous; very heavy and distressing indeed is
your tribulation on us and on all the people of Islam; heavy and
distressing indeed is your tribulation on the heavens and on all its
inhabitants…– How great a tribulation it is and how great a calamity it
is for Islam, for all the heavens and the earth!”

It is on purpose that the Ahl al-Bayt (as) and the scholars of their
school emphasize the constant recitation of this *ziyarah.* Reading this
text transports us to the Ashura environment and conveys to us the
meanings of loyalty and repudiation that abound in Ashura. It also
conveys to us the values that overflow from them and consolidate those
concepts in our souls. Loyalty and repudiation draws the distantly
related near and pushes close relations away.

The ideas I am putting down in this discussion are some meditations
about loyalty and repudiation as they appear in *Ziyarat Ashura*, in the
hope that God may bestow on us their flavour and the lofty concepts
which this *ziyarah* is full of. The following ideas derived from it
have been meditated upon:

Scenes of Loyalty and Repudiation in Ziyarat Ashura
---------------------------------------------------

Loyalty and repudiation cover the whole scope of man's life, time, place
and geography. I do not know of a situation that covers man's life the
way this one does. They divide history into two parts, a part for God's
friends and another part for God's enemies.

We are now living with Abraham (as), Noah (as), Moses (as), Jesus (as),
God's Messenger (S) and the Imams (as) from his family who came after
him, the guided, the guides. We pay allegiance to them and follow their
guidance the same way as if we were living with them in their own times,
and we hope to remain together with them both here and in the hereafter.
On the other hand we turn to God in repudiation of Pharaoh, Haman,
Nimrod, the Sabbath-breakers, Men of the Ditch and the murderers of the
Israeli prophets, and we also repudiate Abu Sufyan, Abu Jahl, Muawiyya
and Yazid, as though we were present during their times.

The interposing centuries and epochs of history do not obscure our
loyalty to the first group nor our repudiation of the second. It is a
peculiarity of loyalty and repudiation that they transcend epochs and
centuries to join the ends of a single journey over the ages. We feel
today the grief for Husayn (as)'s ordeals and death in Karbala as if the
tragic incident happened in our own lives.

Similarly, these two issues transcend geography. Today we are partners
to the Muslims of Palestine, Kashmir, Bosnia, Chechnya, Pakistan and
Iraq in the tyranny, suffering, murder and deprivation which they are
enduring at the hands of God's enemies, as if these things are happening
to us and our families. In the same vein, we are hostile to Israel and
America as if they are carrying out aggression against our own families
and homes.

Indeed loyalty and repudiation draws near the distant ones and separates
those who are near one another. Many a brother is hostile towards his
full brother but loyal and sympathetic to his brothers in religion,
although not in blood, in faraway parts of the earth without seeing
them, knowing their names or even seeing their pictures. Loyalty and
repudiation joins Salman al-Farisi with the Prophetic Household and
separates Abu Lahab from it, expelling and condemning him. ***"Perish
the hands of Abu Lahab and Perish he!"***[^8]

Thus loyalty and repudiation transcend time and place and cover the
domains of history and geography. They also cover the scope of man's
life: his soul, his heart, his intellect, his education, his social
relations, his political life, his war and his peace. No aspect of his
life, his behaviour, personality and thought, his love, hate and desire
and all that surrounds him, remains outside the scope of loyalty and
repudiation.

In Ziyarat Ashura we meet wonderful scenes of loyalty and repudiation
that spread over all dimensions of man's life. Some examples of them are
cited below:

Loyalty, Repudiation And Hostility
----------------------------------

This is an extensive topic that affects maintaining or severing of
relationships, love and hate. It is mentioned repeatedly in *Ziyarat
Ashura*:

"I am seeking proximity to God through paying allegiance to you and
repudiating those who fought you and declared war on you. I am friendly
to the one who is loyal to you and hostile to the one who is hostile to
you."

The contrast between loyalty and repudiation, and loyalty and hostility
accurately explains a believer's stand in the theatre of confrontation
that extends over the ages till today. Loyalty to the family of God's
Messenger (S) and hostility to their enemies— the matter could not have
been more explicit!

Greetings Of Peace And Cursing
------------------------------

This loyalty turns into peace in social relations and also into pleas of
expulsion from the sphere of God's mercy and severing of social
relations. In *Ziyarat Ashura* we read: "Peace be on you, O son of the
Messenger of God (S)! Peace be on you, O son of the Commander of the
Faithful (as)! Peace be on you, O son of Fatima al-Zahra (as)! May God
curse the people who laid the foundation of inequity and oppression
against you, the Ahl al-Bayt (as). May God curse the people who pushed
you away from your positions and removed you from the ranks which God
has assigned you."

Greetings are a declaration of love, affection, cooperation and acting
peaceably toward a person. A curse is a declaration of separation and
severing of ties and expulsion.

Peace And War
-------------

Loyalty and repudiation are an amazing affair. They start from
intentions, hearts, culture, publicity, literature, poetry and literary
contests and extend to confrontation and battlefields. It is said in
*Ziyarat Ashura*:

"I am at peace with whoever is at peace with you and at war with whoever
fights you, to the day of Resurrection."

The duration of this peace or war will not end till the Day of
Resurrection when God will separate the people.

Another section reads:

"I am at peace with whoever is at peace with you, at war with whoever is
at war with you, loyal to whoever is loyal to you and hostile to whoever
is enemy to you."

This repetition, emphasis and careful wording are surely done for some
significant reason. The question of loyalty and repudiation constitute
the essence and spirit of this religion. Therefore, a believer must
consider these two issues carefully with respect to all areas of his
life. Without this his faith will not be complete.

Association And Disassociation
------------------------------

Among the instances of loyalty and repudiation in this *ziyarah* there
is the question of association, a complete association in both this and
the next world, and also that of separation. We read from this
*ziyarah*:

"So I pray to God to let me be with you in this world and the next, and
to confirm for me a good standing with you…"

There are two forms of association: a true one and a false one. The
second type of companionship is that of the believer who is seen
conversing with the man with two gardens (Qur'an 18: 32-44) and this is
not the required type of association. The required one is the one which
proves true both in ease and in difficulty.

In the same *ziyarah* there is this prayer: "And make firm for me a good
standing with You together with Husayn (as) and those companions who
laid down their lives in his defense."

Firmness and good standing with God is to be coupled with being together
with Husayn (as) as the section quoted above shows: 'with God' and
'together with Husayn." It cannot be otherwise, for every good standing
with God must necessarily be together with God's righteous servants and
friends, and conversely, every good standing with God's friends will
necessarily be with God.

This companionship (*ma‘iyyah*) is for the righteous servants of God who
are true to their word in ease as well as in difficulty, and God has
commanded us to cultivate it:

***"O, you who have faith! Be wary of God and be with the
truthful."***[^9]

But this companionship requires patience and forbearance.

***"Content yourself with the company of those who pray to their Lord
morning and evening, desiring His Face, and do not lose sight of Him by
desiring the glitter of the life of this world. And do not obey him
whose heart we have made oblivious to Our remembrance, who follows his
own desires and whose conduct is [mere] profligacy."***[^10]

This companionship is the one that is maintained on the long and arduous
road of obedience to God and His Messenger (S), so he who obeys them is
together with God's righteous servants.

***"Whoever obeys God and the Apostle (S), are with those whom God has
blessed: the prophets, the truthful, the witnesses and the***
***righteous, and what excellent companions they are!"***[^11]

What wonderful company this is, and what wonderful companions they
really are! "… and excellent companions they are!" This companionship is
an all-inclusive one in this world and the next, in life and in death.
We pray to God in *Ziyarat Ashura*:

"O God! Make my life like the life of Muhammad and the Family of
Muhammad (as) and my death like the death of Muhammad and the Family of
Muhammad (as)."

This is among the best short supplications, for no life is better than
the life of Muhammad (S) and the Family of Muhammad (as) and no death is
better than their death, and no companionship is better than being with
Muhammad (S) and the Family of Muhammad (as).

In the *qunut* (supplication which is recited while standing in prayer)
of the prayer of Id al-Fitr (the festival ending the month of Ramadan)
we read:

"I beseech you, for the sake of this day… bless Muhammad (S) and the
Family of Muhammad (as) and admit me into all the good into which you
admitted Muhammad (S) and the Family of Muhammad (as) and bring me out
from all evil from which you brought out Muhammad and the Family of
Muhammad, May Your blessings be on him and on them all."

This is the best thing a servant can seek from God the Exalted when he
prays.

In contrast to this companionship is the total separation from the
enemies of God, His Messenger (S) and His friends, in their moments of
sadness and joy, their customs, their social gatherings and their
culture, norms and ethics.

In *Ziyarat Ashura* we denounce the enemy's feelings of happiness, joy
and delight on account of their success against the Household of God's
Messenger (S) and the death of al-Husayn (as) and his family. We part
ways with them in terms of feelings, sentiments and emotions. Ponder
over this section:

"O God! This is a day (Ashura day) in which the Umayyads and the son of
the liver-eating woman found delight. This is a day with which the
family of Ziyad and the family of Marwan were pleased because they
killed Husayn (as)… O God! Compound Your curse on them and subject them
to a painful chastisement.”

"O God! I am seeking proximity to you on this day; at this my place and
all my life, by repudiating and cursing them, and through pledging
allegiance to Your prophet and the Family of Your prophet (on whom and
them be peace)." This total separation and complete association are the
outcome of repudiation and loyalty in man's life.

Distress And Vengeance
----------------------

Another instance of loyalty and repudiation that is exhibited in this
*ziyarah* is the distress that is felt because of what befell Husayn
(as) and his family, and the plea for success in taking revenge on his
enemies and killers, may God curse them. But who are the killers of
Husayn against whom we may seek to take vengeance? The answer is: Every
oppressor who is pleased with Husayn's death is a partner to his
killers, wherever he is placed by history, whether in our time or before
it. The horror we experience on account of Husayn's death is among the
effects of loyalty in our lives, and there can be no true loyalty
without joining the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) in their tribulations and what
they tasted at the hands of the oppressors, by way of these emotions and
sentiments.

Let us ponder over this section of *Ziyarat Ashura*:

"Indeed the loss is very agonizing; your disaster is momentous and
agonizing to us and to all the adherents of Islam. Your disaster is
indeed momentous and agonizing in the heavens and to all the inhabitants
of the heavens. It is a disaster that is so great, and the loss in its
wake is so great, for Islam and for all the heavens and the earth."

It has been reported in a sound hadith that if any believer grieves on
what has befallen Husayn and his companions God will give him a reward
similar to theirs and gather them together. In contrast to this grief
and sadness for the death of Husayn (as), there is supplication for
success in punishing the killers of Husayn. Though we were not beside
Husayn (as) on the day of Ashura in 61 A.H. in Karbala, we shall not
miss the chance to avenge the blood of Husayn (as) and his companions on
the killers and those who are inclined to them, by God's will.

Let us consider this part of *Ziyarat Ashura*:

"I pray to God who has honoured you and honoured me through you, to
bestow on me the ability to avenge you[r blood] together with the
Expected Imam from the Household of Muhammad (S)."

One may ask: where do you find those who killed or oppressed Husayn (as)
to exact vengeance on them? Let us allow the Qur'an to supply the
answer, for in it there is light and insight: Concerning the Jews who
were contemporary with the Messenger of God (S) when they requested him
to bring them an offering that would be consumed by fire, as a condition
for their belief in him, the Most High says:

***“[To] those who say 'God has pledged us not to believe in any apostle
unless he brings us an offering consumed by[heavenly] fire, say,
'Apostles before me certainly brought you manifest signs and what you
speak of. Then why did you kill them, if you were truthful?”***[^12]

However, the Jews at the time of the Prophet (may God bless him and his
family) did not kill any prophet, so why did God the Exalted ascribe the
killing of the prophets to them? :*"Then why did you kill them, if you
were truthful?"*

The explanation of this in the Book of God is that these people accepted
the action of their forefathers, and because of that God held them
accountable for the crimes of those people and condemned them
accordingly. We shall throw more light on this point when we discuss
generalizations on loyalty and repudiation, God willing.

Based on this Qur'anic way of viewing things, every oppressor, murderer
or criminal, every tyrant who is delighted at the death of Husayn (as)
is partner to his killing. Every despot who causes havoc in the land by
killing, tyrannizing and oppressing God's servants must necessarily be
pleased with the murder of Husayn (as) and have a part in it.

Loyalty And Repudiation Are Two Faces Of The Same Question
----------------------------------------------------------

Loyalty and repudiation are two faces of a single issue and it is
through repudiation that loyalty is found. A pledge of loyalty that is
not coupled with repudiation does not cost anything. It is not a burden
at all to treat all contending parties with courtesy and pretense of
love with the aim of earning their friendship and respect and also to
save oneself from the inconveniencies of opposition.

However, this action remains no more than mere courtesy and a show of
affection; that has no value in terms of loyalty. Loyalty is to belong
and not a ceremony or pretense of love, and one cannot belong to a cause
without separating from its antithesis. Association in the arena of
conflict cannot take place without a separation.

The Messenger of God (S) said to Ali (as): "Loyalty to you will not be
accepted unless [it is coupled] with repudiating your enemies. This is
what Gabriel communicated to me. So let anyone who wishes, believe it,
and let anyone who wishes, disbelieve it.”[^13]

Imam al-Sadiq (as) said to al-Safwan: "Know that loyalty is incomplete,
affection impure and friendship not reliable unless it is coupled with
repudiating their [the Ahl al-Bayt] adversary whether he is close or
distant.”[^14]

There is a strong emphasis on the motto ‘loyalty and repudiation’ in a
number of places in *Ziarat Ashura,* “I am seeking proximity to God, His
Messenger, the Commander of Faithful, Fatima, al-Hasan and you (as)
through being loyal to you and repudiating anyone who fought you and
declared war on you, and through repudiating anyone who laid the
foundation of oppression and injustice against you."

"I seek proximity to God, then to you by pledging allegiance to you and
repudiating your enemies and those who declared war on you, and by
repudiating their followers."

The purpose of this emphasis is so that the people may not incline
towards their comfort and well-being and only voice their allegiance and
leave out the repudiation, since on the battlefield loyalty has no
meaning without repudiation.

Loyalty And Repudiation: Blessing And Honour That God Bestowed On Man
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Life has been a theatre for conflict ever since man inhabited the earth…
and this is history. History is the story of the contention between the
axes of monotheism and polytheism and all mankind fall into two
sections: One section considers allegiance to God to be their focal
point and they are the callers towards monotheism. The others pay
allegiance to *taghut* as their centre and they are the polytheists. God
the Exalted brings the first group out of darkness into light, and the
second group is driven out of the light and led into darkness by
*taghut*.

***"God is the patron of the faithful: He brings them out of darkness
into the light. As for the faithless, their patrons are the taghut
(rebels) who drive them out of the light into darkness. They shall be
the inmates of the Fire and they shall remain in it forever,”***[^15]

Both centres spread in different directions through different extensions
in life. The first centre extends through the Messenger of God (S),
those vested with authority (ulu al-amr), and the believers.

***"Obey God and obey the Apostle and those vested with authority among
you.”***[^16]

***"Your patron is only God, His Apostle and the faithful who maintain
the prayer and give the zakat while bowing down.”***[^17]

The centre of rebellion also possesses a domain of love. It comprises
the community of *taghut* and its extensions. Every nation is a
close-knit group that is united by a set of organic relationships which
the Holy Qur'an describes in these precise terms: *"They are alike”
“They are comrades of one another”.* Believers are a single nation. God
the Exalted says: **"The faithful men and women, are comrades of one
another”**[^18] and ***“… those who give them shelter and help, it is
they who are truly the faithful.”***[^19] The faithless and the
hypocrites are also one nation: **“*****The faithless are associates of
one another*****”**[^20]

Thus human society consists of two sections, two nations, two axes, and
for each there is a loyalty and repudiation, a connection and a
separation, an association and an estrangement.

Loyalty and repudiation divides the scene of life into two distinct and
opposing groups. Now where is one's position in this chart? To which
axis does one belong? With which group will one be classified? These are
among the most important and most momentous questions that face mankind,
and their value lies here.The value of man resides in the position one
occupies and the stand one takes on this chart: is it with God, His
prophets and His friends, or with *taghut* and base desires?

It is indeed miserable for a person to live this life without knowing
where he stands, with whom he stands, to which axis he belongs, whom to
fight, with whom to live peacefully and support? The least to be said
about such people is that they live a life of confusion, and the most
grievous ruin and confusion takes place in the theatre of confrontation
when one is forced to determine one’s stand in it.

Man certainly lives this life in a theatre of conflict from which there
is no escape. Therefore one cannot but determine his stand vis-à-vis
this conflict. The most dangerous thing is for one not to know where he
stands in this contest: that is, to live in confusion in the midst of
this conflict.

Such people will, most certainly, slip into the camp that opposes
monotheism for they cannot stay long in their confusion. They will soon
take the position that is unfriendly and hostile to God's friends.
Surely to have loyalty to God, His Messenger (S) and His friends, and
repudiate His enemies is a form of awareness and knowledge; it is the
most sublime type of knowledge and awareness. God has honoured us with
this knowledge and saved us from loss, confusion and darkness.

God's blessings are many and great and the greatest blessing which He
has honoured us with is that of knowledge, loyalty and repudiation.
*Ziyarat Ashura* points to this blessing of God to us:

“So I pray to God who gave me the honour of knowing you and knowing your
friends, and endowed me with repudiating your enemies, to put me in your
company both in this and the next world.”

Indeed God the Exalted has bestowed us with immense gifts and blessings
among the greatest of which is loyalty. From Abu Ja’far al-Baqir (as)
who said: “Islam is built on five things: prayer, fasting, *zakat*,
pilgrimage and loyalty (*wilayah*).” Zurarah said: I asked: Which is the
best among these things? He said: “Loyalty is the best because it is the
key to the rest and the one to whom loyalty is to be pledged (*al-wali*)
is their guide.” Then he added: “The peak of the affair, the door of
[all] things and the [source] of earning the pleasure of the Merciful is
to obey the Imam after knowing him.”[^21]

From Ja’far ibn Muhammad, from his father, from Ali (as) or al-Hasan ibn
Ali (as) who said: God has made five duties obligatory and he did not
make anything obligatory but the good and beautiful. [They are]: prayer,
fasting, zakat, pilgrimage, and loyalty to us, we the Ahl al-Bayt. The
people discharged four of them and treated the fifth one lightly. By God
they will not have the four completely until they complete them with the
fifth.”[^22]

Without loyalty and repudiation, man will remain confused with no focus
or line of action which may put his life in order. When he pays
allegiance to God, His Messenger (S) and His friends whom He commands us
to be loyal to, and repudiates their adversaries, he finds a position in
this life and remains in it.

Generalising (*ta‘mim*) loyalty and repudiation is among the known
aspects of this religion. By virtue of this generalization the bases of
loyalty and repudiation are extended greatly. Loyalty covers those whom
God made it obligatory for the believers to pay allegiance to, be loyal
to, love and be pleased with them in all ages. Repudiation covers God’s
enemies whom He commanded us to denounce, and all those who befriend
them and accept their actions for all time.

The extension also includes reward and punishment, condemnation and
protest. Some people who were not present in the jihad and did not
suffer hunger and oppression, nor were they touched by the sword will
also be rewarded because they loved the fighters and were pleased with
their actions. Similarly, punishment will include some people who did
not commit any murder but loved the killers and were pleased with their
deeds. Therefore, God will punish them for the crimes of the killers.

The cause of these extensions is the issue of approval and anger.
Approval arises from love while anger stems from hate. When a person is
pleased with a people’s action he is deemed a partner to them and
rewarded if the action is good or punished if it is bad. When a person
is angry with a people he repudiates them.

Love and approval join one to those whom he loves or approves of.
Similarly, hate and anger separates one from those whom he hates or is
angry with. It is a factor that causes association or separation. Since
those Jews who were contemporaries to the Messenger of God (S) accepted
the action of their forefathers of killing the prophets, God Almighty
considered them responsible for their forefather’s crimes, condemned
them for it, forced the proof for it against them, although they did not
live in their times, much less have a role in their killing.

From Muhammad ibn al-Arqat, from Abu Abdillah al-Sadiq (as) who said:
“Do you stop over at Kufa?” “Yes”, I replied. “Then you do see the
killers of Husayn among you?”, he asked. I said to him: “May I be your
ransom! I have not seen a single person from them.” He said: “Then you
do not consider as killer anyone but the person who killed or the one
who ordered it? Have you not heard the saying of God: “*Apostles before
me have certainly brought you manifest signs. Then why did you kill
them, if you were truthful?”*? What apostle did those living with
Muhammad (S) kill, since there was no apostle between him and Jesus
(as)? However, they did approve their killing and because of that they
are called killers.[^23]

To approve of a thing makes the one who approves a partner in the action
of the one who is given the approval, whether the action is good or bad,
whether the approver also does the action or not. This partnership
extends to all the outcomes of the action: reward, punishment,
responsibility and condemnation.

The Commander of the Faithful (as) (according to the version of Sharif
al-Radi in Nahj al-Balaghah) said: “O people! What brings people
together is consent (al-rida) and resentment (al-sakhat). Thamud’s
she-camel was killed by one man but God included them [all] in
punishment since they all consented to it.” The Glorious God said: ‘But
they hamstrung her whereupon they became regretful’ It was not long
before their land sank with a sound like that of a hot plough sinking
into quicksand”[^24]

The Commander of the Faithful (as) said: “He who accepts the action of a
people is like one who takes part in it along with them. Anyone who
takes part in falsehood commits two sins: The sin of the action and the
sin of approving.”[^25]

Some general supplications on visitations (*ziyarat*) of the Imams (as)
read:

“We bear witness with our intentions and hearts that we are partners of
your friends and supporters of the past in shedding the blood of the
Perfidious (*al-Nakithun*), the Unjust (*al-Qasitun*), the Apostates
(*al-Mariqun*) and the killers of Abu Abdillah (as), the Lord of the
youths of paradise, and we regret having missed those battles.”

This is a wonderful text which can be comprehended only by the learned
one who has insight into God’s norms in history and society. This is an
extensive topic of religious knowledge in Islam; it is the knowledge of
consent (*al-rida*) and resentment (*al-sakha*t).

Based on this way of knowing, we have been partners of Abraham (as), the
vanguard of monotheism, in inviting people towards it, breaking the
idols and struggling against Nimrod, the despot of his time. Likewise,
we have been associates of Moses (as) and Jesus (as) in their call to
monotheism and rejection of tyrants. We have also been partners of the
Messenger of God (S) in the wars he fought.

We join all the righteous, the saints, the Imams of Monotheism and
guided callers [to religion] and those who glorify the name of God the
Exalted, throughout history. We join them in inviting the people to God,
treating God’s servants with sincerity, in remembering God and
glorifying Him, in pain and anxiety, in the shedding of the oppressors’
blood, in their blood being shed by the oppressors, in demolishing the
bastions of injustice and polytheism and in erecting the pillars of
monotheism, justice…”[^26]

Generalizations Of Loyalty In Ziyarat Ashura
--------------------------------------------

There are three stages and generalizations on loyalty in this *ziyarah*:

In the first stage we declare our allegiance to Husayn (as) with regard
to the war he fought with the Umayyads; the second stage extends the
loyalty to include, in addition to the Imam, the souls who rallied
around him in Karbala and sacrificed themselves in support and defense
of the son of the daughter of God’s messenger (S); the third stage
extends to the people who are loyal to his supporters. This level of
loyalty includes all those who are loyal to them in all ages, and anyone
who pays allegiance to them is covered by this loyalty.

“I am seeking proximity to God, then to you through allegiance to you
and allegiance to your allies.”

This last generalization of loyalty is all-inclusive and it extends over
time and place. From what Imam al-Rida (as) wrote to al-Ma’mun about
pure Islam, the section on loyalty (*wilayah*) we read:

“Wilayah is for the believers who followed the way of their Prophet (S)
and did not change or alter [anything], people like Salman al-Farisi,
Abu Dharr al-Ghifari and al-Miqdad. Wilayah is also for their followers
and partisans who follow their guidance and walk along their path.”[^27]

Generalizations Of Repudiation In Ziyarat Ashura
------------------------------------------------

Similar to loyalty, repudiation also has a number of extensions.

The first extension of repudiation takes the form of denouncing the
killers, those who declared war on Husayn (as) and those who paved the
way and enabled them to fight him.

“May God curse the family of Ziyad and the family of Marwan. May God
curse the Umayyads dynasty. May God curse the son of Marjanah. May God
curse Umar ibn Sa’ad. May God curse Shimr. May God curse the people who
saddled and bridled [their mounts] and traversed the land in order to
fight you. O God! Curse that band which fought Husayn, which rallied
together, paid allegiance to one another and concurred on killing him.”

In the second extension of repudiation we denounce their partisans,
their followers and their allies, and those who pledge allegiance to
them and those who are pleased with them.This is an extensive
generalization that spreads along with time and space.

“I turn to God and to you in repudiating them, their supporters, their
followers and their allies. I seek proximity to God through allegiance
to you and repudiating your enemies and those who declared war on you by
repudiating their supporters and followers.”

The third extension of repudiation includes those who laid the
foundation of injustice on the Ahl al-Bayt (as), those who laid the
foundations of this monstrous injustice against the Family of the
Prophet (as).

“I turn to God and to His Messenger (S) in repudiating everyone who laid
the foundations of inequity and oppression on you.”

The fourth extension includes not only those who oppressed the Ahl
al-Bayt (as) but also the people who acted unjustly toward their
supporters and followers down the centuries up to the present day, for
oppressing these people stems from oppression and inequity against the
Ahl al-Bayt (as) themselves.

“And I turn to God and His Messenger in repudiation of anyone who laid
down the foundation of that, built its structures upon it, and went on
with his oppression and inequity against you and your supporters. I turn
to God and to you in repudiating them.”

The fifth extension is the most inclusive and most extensive of all.

“O God! Curse the first man to cheat Muhammad (S) and the Family of
Muhammad (S)of their right, and the last man to follow him in that act…”

This generalization comprises all those who oppressed them and those who
condone the injustice, from the first day to the last, from the first
person to the last. This is among the most all-inclusive generalizations
of repudiation.

**\* \* \***

Monotheism And Purity Of Faith Depicted In Loyalty
--------------------------------------------------

### Loyalty comes under the concept of Monotheism

This is one of the important principles of Islam and the Qur’an is
replete with the expressions of this fact. God the Exalted says
**“Judgment belongs only to God; He expounds the truth and He is the
best of judges.”**[^28] ***“Sovereignty belongs to God. He has commanded
you to worship none except Him.”***[^29]

There are many verses expressing the same truth.

No loyalty can be correct except that which comes within the extension
of loyalty to God and by His permission and command. God says:

***“Your authority (wali) is only God, His Apostle and the faithful who
maintain the prayer and give alms –zakat- while bowing down (in
prayer).”***[^30]

Any loyalty that is outside the range of loyalty to God is baseless and
unacceptable in Islam. God the Exalted says:

***“Have they taken guardians (awliya’) besides Him? It is God who is
the Guardian (al-wali)”***[^31]’[^32]

***“Say, ‘Shall I take for guardian [anyone] other than God, the
originator of the heavens and the earth…?”***[^33]

***“.. Nor do you have besides God any guardian or any helper.”***[^34]

The Holy Qur’an explicitly affirms this reality. Here are some blessed
verses from the Wise Book of God which explain this fact.

***“Do you not know that to God belongs the kingdom of the heavens and
the earth? And besides God you do not have any guardian or any
helper.”***[^35]

The holy verse affirms that the kingdom of the heavens and the earth
belongs to God and anyone other than Him does not possess anything of
them. From this fact, it is clear that absolute guardianship over
mankind must necessarily belong to Him and man has no right to take
anyone other than God as guardian.

To the Glorious God belongs absolute guardianship and control over all
that pertains to man, both his actions and his beliefs; no one other God
has the right to man’s guardianship except by His permission and
command, and within the extension of His guardianship. The holy verse
conveys the restriction of guardianship to God alone from two angles:

(a) The fact that the heavens and the earth belong to God alone and
therefore, the guardianship over mankind should be only His, to the
exclusion of all His creatures.

(b) The literal meaning since the pair of articles *ma…illa* is one of
the articles which denote restriction [of a subject to a predicate or
vice versa] in Arabic language.[^36]

*Ghayr* can replace *illa* so that it becomes permissible to ‘restrict’
with the pair *ma--* *ghayr.*[^37] One can say *Ma ja’ani ahadun ghayr
Muhammad* (No one came to me except Muhammad). The word *duna* (besides)
in the holy verse: “And besides God you do not have any guardian or any
helper”, means *ghayr*. Based on this, the verse employs a restrictive
phrasing which, whether viewed from form of expression or from import,
restricts guardianship to God alone.Restriction (*hasr*) often involves
negating and affirming, so it serves to negate the guardianship of
anyone other than God and affirm His guardianship. Numerous verses of
the Book of God can be quoted. God the Exalted says:

***"And warn by its means those who fear being mustered toward their
Lord, besides whom (dunahu) they shall have neither any guardian nor any
intercessor, so that they may be God-wary".***[^38]

He says:

"Leave alone those who take their religion for play and diversion and
whom the life of this world has deceived, and admonish with it lest
***any soul should perish because of what it has earned: for it shall
not have any guardian besides God nor any intercessor…”.***[^39]

He also says:

***"Indeed to God belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He
gives life and brings death. And besides God you do not have any
guardian or helper”.***[^40]

In Surat al-Sajdah, the Qur’an says: ***"It is God who created the
heavens and the earth and whatever is between them in six days, and then
He settled on the Throne. You do not have besides him any guardian or
intercessor. Will you not then take admonition?”***[^41]

This holy verse clearly indicates the relationship between God's power
over the heavens and the earth and His guardianship over creation and
His legislative guardianship on man. It indicates also the restriction
of guardianship to God, to the exclusion of others whom the people
regard as guardians apart from Him..[^42]

Just as loyalty to the friends of God derives from the concept of
monotheism, it also comes under purity of faith (*ikhlas*) by virtue of
the same reason. Thus, loyalty to God's friends and taking them as
guardians is correct only where it is done for God's sake, where a
person seeks nearness to God through it. Otherwise, such loyalty will
have no value. Therefore, loyalty comes under the concepts of monotheism
and purity of faith.

From Abu Khalid al-Kabuli who said: A group of people came to Ali ibn
Husayn ibn Ali (as) and said: "Our cousins [lit, sons of our uncle]
called on Mu'awiya ibn Abi Sufyan seeking his support and grants while
we call on you to pay our respects to [the kinsmen of] the Messenger of
God, may God bless him and his family,"

Ali ibn Husayn (as) said: "Anyone who loves us, not for anything worldly
that he may get from us, and is hostile to our enemy, not because of an
old grudge between them, will come to God on the Day of Resurrection
together with Muhammad, Abraham and Ali (as).”

True loyalty is that by which a person seeks proximity to God, and one
cannot approach God except by doing the things He commands. Therefore,
loyalty cannot be truely correct unless it is commanded by God the
Exalted. Loyalty to the Messenger of God (S) and his Ahl al-Bayt is a
thing that is commanded by God and His Messenger (S). Imam al-Sadiq (as)
is reported to have said: *“God has bound together obedience to the one
He vested with authority with obedience to His Messenger, and obedience
to His Messenger with obedience to Him.*.."

Therefore, we seek closeness to God through this loyalty; we do not
consider loyalty to the Ahl al-Bayt (as) as a way of seeking worldly
gains and the pleasure of the rulers, but that of earning God's pleasure
and nearness to Him, Sublime is He."

Monotheism And Purity Of Faith Depicted In Repudiation
------------------------------------------------------

Purity of Faith as depicted in Repudiation:

This idea has been hinted at in Ziyarat Ashura:

"And I seek proximity to God and His Messenger… by repudiating those who
fought you and declared war against you."

It has been shown that real faith means to love and hate for God's sake.

It has been reported from Abu Muhammad al-Askari (as), from his
forefathers, that the Messenger of God (S) one day said to one of his
companions:

"Servant of God! Love for God's sake, hate for God's sake, befriend for
God's sake and be hostile for God's sake, for you will not gain loyalty
to God except this way. A man cannot have the taste of faith, even if he
prays and fasts much, till he acts that way. Today most of the
friendships between the people have turned into worldly concerns, they
love one another because of it and hate one another because of it, and
this [attitude] will not gain them anything before God."[^43]

In another hadith, the Messenger of God (S) one day said to one of his
companions: "Servant of God! Love for God's sake, hate for God's sake,
befriend for God's sake and be hostile for God's sake, for loyalty to
God cannot be attained except in this way. A man will not get the taste
of faith, even if he prays and fasts much, till he acts that way.”[^44]

From Abu Abdillah as-Sadiq (as) who said: "The firmest bond of faith is
that you love for God's sake, hate for God's sake, give for God's sake
and withhold for the sake of God, the Mighty and Sublime.”[^45]
Therefore, no one can attain loyalty to God unless he makes his heart
sincere to Him so that his loving and hating, his nearness and
remoteness [in social relations] and his loyalty and repudiation are all
for God's sake. Among the many ties of faith there is none as firm as
loving and hating for the sake of God.

From Abu Abdillah as-Sadiq (as): “He who loves an infidel has hated God
and he who hates an infidel has loved God.” Then he added: “A friend to
God’s enemy is an enemy of God.”[^46]

From Abu Ja’far al-Jawad (as): “God has communicated to a prophet
[saying]: Your asceticism [only] serves to expedite your rest and your
complete turning to Me [is a form of] taking shelter with Me. So have
you treated with hostility an enemy of mine or with friendship a friend
of mine?”[^47]

From Abu Abdillah as-Sadiq (as): “Anyone who loves for God’s sake, hates
for God’s sake, gives for God’s sake, and withholds for God’s sake, has
attained complete faith.”[^48]

From Abu Ja’far al-Baqir (as), from the Messenger of God (S): “A
believer’s affection for a fellow believer for God’s sake is one of the
greatest branches of faith. Surely anyone who loves for God’s sake,
hates for God’s sake, gives for God’s sake and withholds for God’s sake,
is among the chosen ones of God.”[^49]

From Abu Abdillah as-Sadiq (as): “The Messenger of God (S) asked his
companions: “Which among the bonds of faith is the firmest?”

They said: ‘God and his Messenger know best’. Some said: ‘It is prayer’,
others said: ‘It is fasting’, a third group said: ‘It is pilgrimage’ and
a fourth said: ‘It is jihad.’

Then the Messenger of God (S) said: “All what you said is meritorious
but it is not that. The firmest bond of faith is to love for God’s sake,
to hate for God’s sake, to be loyal to God’s friends and to repudiate
God’s enemies.”[^50]

From Abu Ja’far al-Baqir (as): “If you want to know whether there is any
good in you, you should check your heart. If it loves the people who are
obedient to God, the Mighty and Sublime, and hate those who sin against
Him then there is good in you and God loves you. But if it hates the
people who are obedient to God and loves those who sin against him, then
there is no good in you and God hates you. A man is an associate of the
one he loves.”[^51]

For the purpose of emphasis, this notion has appeared a number of times
in *Ziyarat Ashura*:

“O God! I am seeking proximity to you on this day, in this place and
[all] the days of my life, by repudiating the enemies of Muhammad and
his Family (S) and cursing them.”

Therefore, to repudiate the enemies of God and His friends, like
loyalty, is a form of expressing monotheism and purity of faith.

Two Loyalties Cannot Meet In The Heart Of A Faithful Person.
------------------------------------------------------------

The heart of the faithful cannot contain two loyalties because, as we
said before, loyalty comes under the concept of monotheism. True loyalty
is for God and for those God has commanded us to pay allegiance to, and
any form of loyalty that falls within this range is true loyalty. On the
other hand, any loyalty that is not to God, not to what he commands and
not within the extension of his loyalty is invalid loyalty.

True loyalties are associated with one another and they all occur within
the range of loyalty to God, which is in fact a single loyalty. Two
different loyalties cannot meet in a sound heart because a single heart
cannot bear more than one loyalty and one attachment, and man has but
one heart. This can only be possible where the heart or the loyalty is
corrupted. God the Exalted says: ***“God has not put two hearts within
any man…”***[^52]

In Ziyarat al-Jami’ah we read: “With you, with you, never with other
than you”.[^53]

The repetition of ‘with you’ i.e. in their company (as) in this section
of the *ziyarah* coupled with rejecting the company of anyone else
serves to emphasize the notion of the unity of loyalty which we
indicated above. Every form of loyalty apart from loyalty to them is
invalid and this is because the only true loyalty is loyalty to God and
what lies within its spectrum, among which, of course, is loyalty to
God’s prophets, His messengers, their successors and the believers.
Whatever is not allegiance to God, His messengers, His friends and the
believers is a different loyalty entirely and two loyalties do not
converge in one heart.

Concerning God’s saying: “God has not put two hearts within any man”,
Abu Ja’far al-Baqir (as) said: **“**So that he [man] may love with one
and hate with the other. Having love for us makes [a person’s] love
purely for us, the way fire purifies gold from impurities. He who wants
to know our love let him test his heart; if the love for our enemy
shares the heart with our love then he has disowned us and we have
disowned him.”[^54]

Thus one cannot have two loyalties in his heart for then either the
loyalty is defective or the heart is diseased just as the man who came
to the Commander of the Faithful (as) and said: ‘O Commander of the
Faithful! I love you as well as so-and-so’, and mentioned one of his
enemies. He replied: “*As for now you are one-eyed; you will either
become blind or gain complete sight.*”[^55] It has been related that
after the demise of the Messenger of God (S) the people found a slip in
the scabbard of his sword in which was written: “*May God … curse him
who allies himself with other than his [rightful] patrons.*”[^56]

Ascension Points Of Loyalty And Repudiation In Ziyarat Ashura
-------------------------------------------------------------

Nothing purifies monotheism and purity of faith like loyalty and
repudiation and this is because to repudiate is to face the most severe
test on one’s monotheism and sincerity. One’s level in these two matters
cannot be tested by a better method than through loyalty and
repudiation.

This twin method exposes to what level one is truly a monotheist and
truly sincere. It is not all those who claim a pure monotheistic faith
that turn out to be true to their belief in monotheism and sincere in
it. They will have to undergo a divine test in loyalty and repudiation
at the theatre of confrontation so that God may ascertain the sincerity
of their love, hate, support and sacrifice for the sake of the people
God has obliged them to pay allegiance; in struggle, perseverance and
enduring suffering and tyranny for His sake; in loving those He loves
and detesting those He detests; and in dissociating themselves from
those who fight and hate His allies even if they are harmed by doing
this. There is no better and stricter test of one’s monotheism and
sincerity in this world than through loyalty and repudiation.

Belief in monotheism and having purity of faith cannot be known for
certain in peace time or by theorizing, and remain mere claims till the
believer enters the field of confrontation where he will be required to
exhibit loyalty, repudiation, support, sacrifice and service; and also
to bear sufferings, persecution, loss of children and wealth and to face
other hazards. It is then that God will ascertain and sort out the
truthful.

For this reason God the Exalted has made loyalty and repudiation one of
the greatest points of descent for His mercy in man’s life. These points
always commensurate with the level of purity of monotheism and faith
since loyalty and repudiation in the theatre of confrontation constitute
the crystallization of the highest level of monotheism and sincerity.

In all places and at all times God’s mercy descends but there are points
of descent for mercy that are distinguished from others by place, time
or situation. By time I mean particular days, nights and hours that
induce God’s mercy to descend. The night of Destiny and the month of
Ramadan are examples. By place I mean places that attract God’s mercy
more than others. Such places include the Grand Mosque at Mecca, the
Prophet’s mosque, the valley of Arafat and the precincts of Imam
Husayn’s mausoleum. By situations, those conditions intended attract
God’s mercy, such as conditions of supplicating, experiencing the dire
need of God, ecstasy, weeping for fear of God, and meekly entreating
Him. These conditions invite God’s mercy more than others.

True loyalty and repudiation are among the best conditions that attract
God’s mercy and therefore, one of the best points at which God’s mercy
descends. In it prayers are answered, mercy and blessings come down on
mankind and hearts are softened. The points at which mercy descends are
also man’s stairways to God; his supplication, his glorification of
God’s name, his love, his yearning, his sincerity, his monotheism and
his entreaty to God all ascend from these points.

Loyalty to the Ahl al-Bayt (as) and repudiating their adversaries is
among the best points of descent for mercy and the points of man’s
ascent towards God Almighty. By way of loyalty and repudiation God the
Exalted has taught us the signs of our religion, brought us out of
ignorance and delivered us from ruin.

In *Ziyarat al-Jami’ah*, there is an allusion to some of these points of
descent and points of assent:

“Through loyalty to you, God has taught us the signs of our religion and
set right what had been corrupted of it. Through loyalty to you the word
became complete, the blessing became great and disunity turned into
harmony. Through loyalty to you the obedience that is enjoined is
accepted. It is through you that God brought us out of humiliation,
expelled our worries and hardships and saved us from the precipice of
destruction and from the Fire. Whoever befriends you is felicitous, who
is hostile to you is ruined, who rejects you is lost, who separates from
you is deviated, who is devoted to you succeeds, who takes refuge with
you is secure, who affirms you is saved, who resorts to you is guided…”

Now let us ponder over mercy’s points of descent and man’s points of
ascent to God in the issue of loyalty and repudiation in *Ziyarat
Ashura.*

Honour And Distinction
----------------------

The first point of descent is where God honoured us with knowing the Ahl
al-Bayt and being loyal to them and repudiating their enemies. Through
them He bestows on us this honour and distinction both here and in the
hereafter, and what an honour and distinction it is in the sight of God!
*“I pray to God who honoured your position and honoured me through
you.”* Surely God has honoured us through Husayn (as) and as he honoured
Husayn (as), he has also honoured us by showing loyalty to him and by
denouncing his enemies.

Among those points of descent and ascent is to have distinction with God
both here and in the hereafter. This is a rank that every truthful
believer and every martyr hopes for***.***

“O God make me through Husayn (as) a noble person before You both here
and in the hereafter.”

Avenging The Death Of Husayn (as)
---------------------------------

This is another honour. We beseech God the Exalted to enable us avenge
the death of Husayn (as), for his death in Karbala was a continuous
transgression perpetrated against monotheism and justice and against the
Messenger of God (S). The avenger of this blood is God Himself. He is
the first avenger of it and also of the blood spilled by the accursed
Abdurrahman ibn Muljam in the prayer niche of the mosque in Kufa. Thus
God, the Glorious and Exalted is the first avenger of the blood of
Husayn and his father (as): *“Peace be on you, O avenged one of God, son
of His avenged one, [the victim of] the injustice which is not yet
avenged.”* Then the bearers of the message of monotheism and justice in
turn, assume the responsibility to avenge the pure blood that was
unjustly shed in Karbala.

To avenge is in fact an extension of the spirit of martyrdom. Martyrdom
is sacrifice, mission and avenging. Husayn (as), his family and his
companions accomplished the first part, leaving for us the second and
third, that is, upholding the mission of this blood and avenging it.
This duty constitutes the best and most important point in man’s life
where mercy descends and from which loyalty and repudiation ascend.

The movement to avenge the death of the Imam (as) started almost
immediately after his martyrdom and it will continue till the Mahdi of
the Family of Muhammad (may God hasten his appearance) takes over. He
will surely avenge this sacred blood and, all the unjustly spilt blood
of the defenders of monotheism and justice. He shall be the seal of the
avengers of this pure blood.

In this *ziyarah* we pray to God to bestow upon us the ability to avenge
the blood of Husayn (as) in the company of his descendant, the Supported
Guide, the Guided one from the Family of Muhammad (may God expedite his
appearance).

“I pray to God who honoured your rank and honoured me through you, to
bestow on me [the ability] to avenge your death, in the company of the
Supported Imam of the Family of Muhammad (as). I also beseech Him to
make me attain your laudable station that is with God, and to give me
the ability to avenge you, in the company of the Imam of guidance, the
victor among you who will declare the truth.”

To Be in the Company of the Ahl Al-Bayt (as) And Attain A Good Standing With Them
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Company of the truthful

God the Exalted has commanded us in His Book: ***“… and be with the***
***truthful.”***[^57] And the company of those having loyalty is as God
the Exalted says: ***“Whoever obeys God and the Apostle-they are with
those whom God has blessed including the prophets and the truthful, the
witnesses and the righteous, and what excellent companions they
are!”***[^58]

This association is in fact an onerous and difficult one. The supporters
of the prophets were being threatened by the people, of dispossession of
their lands and of being driven away from their families, if they did
not disassociate themselves from the prophets. ***“They say: ‘Should we
follow the guidance with you we will be dispossessed of our
territory.”***[^59]

It is for this reason that God Almighty ordered His Prophet and the
believers who were with him to be steadfast and patient: ***“So be
steadfast, just as you have been commanded – [you] and whoever has***
***turned [to God] with you.”***[^60] ***“Content yourself with the
company*** ***of those who pray to God morning and evening, desiring His
face, and do not lose sight of them, desiring the glitter of the life of
this world.”***[^61]

The association that is based on loyalty and repudiation is one of the
most difficult types of association to maintain and, therefore, it
requires patience, steadfastness and firmness. So long as one is not
sincere in loyalty, so long as one has no firm footing, one cannot
continue this hard march along the difficult path. Concerning the
companions of the Messenger of God (S), who were true to their word and
stood firm in loyalty and repudiation, God Most High says: ***“… and
those who are with him are hard against the faithless and merciful
amongst themselves.”***[^62]

This companionship has two dimensions: loyalty and repudiation: merciful
amongst themselves and hard against the faithless. And with regard to
the people who were firm in their promise to the prophets, God says:
***“How many a prophet there has been with whom a multitude of godly men
fought. They did not falter for what befell them in the way of God,
neither did they weaken, nor did they abase themselves; and God loves
the steadfast.”***[^63]

A companionship based on loyalty entails patience, steadfastness and
sincerity in one’s stand. This is honourable but difficult, and loyalty
and repudiation prepare one who possesses them for this firm
association, by receiving courage, steadfastness and sincerity from God
.

Ziyarat Ashura contains these words: “I pray to God to put me in your
company both here and in the hereafter, and to establish for me a strong
footing with you in this and the next world.” Companionship in this
world at times of distress and misery will necessarily be followed by
another companionship in the hereafter, ‘in the abode of truthfulness
with an Omnipotent King’ (Qur’an-54:55), the second being the outcome of
the first. ***“Our lord, we believe in what you have sent down and we
follow the apostle, so write us among the*** ***witnesses.”***[^64]

The Laudable Station
--------------------

In Ziyarat Ashura we read: “And I pray to Him to make me attain the
laudable station that you have with God.”

The laudable station is the highest rank which is unparalleled by any
other. In it one will deserve praise by everyone without exception and
all blame on him will have been dropped completely. This is among the
high positions in the hereafter. In Surah Al-Isra’ it has been mentioned
among the things God will bestow on those who keep the night vigil:
***“And keep vigil for a part of the night as a supererogatory devotion.
It may be that your Lord will raise you to a praiseworthy
station.”***[^65]

Some exegetes hold that laudable station refers to what we said
above[^66] while others take it to mean the position of intercession as
well.[^67] The laudable station is one of the ranks of the Ahl al-Bayt
(as) with God. Through loyalty and repudiation man soars up to reach
this lofty laudable position which God has awarded them. The believer’s
stairway by which he ascends to this position is loyalty, repudiation
and the night vigil.

Sincerity To God In Life And Death
----------------------------------

The way the Family of Muhammad (as) live and die is the best way for
anyone to live and die; their way in both issues represents the clearest
embodiment of God’s saying: ***“Say, ‘Indeed my prayer and my worship,
my life and my death are for*** ***the sake of God, the Lord*** ***of
all the worlds.”***[^68]

The Family of Muhammad (as) devoted not only their prayer and worship
but also their entire life and death to God. In *Ziyarat-e- Ashura* we
supplicate to God, in the environment of loyalty and repudiation, to
make our life and our death like the life and death of Muhammad (S) and
Family of Muhammad (as) as it is the best way to live and die.

The position from which man can ascend to this high rank and devote all
his life and death to God is loyalty and repudiation because when man
gives all his loyalty to God and all his repudiation for His sake then
he has devoted his life and death for God. He who knows the significance
of loyalty and repudiation will not be surprised, for if his entire life
and death constitute loyalty and repudiation, his life and death will be
completely for God. Such a life and a death are like the life and death
of Muhammad (S) and the Family of Muhammad (as).

Unlimited Reward From God
-------------------------

Loyalty and repudiation are among the points of descent of trial and
patience. When a person is sincere and resolute in them without being
ceremonial about them, trials and tribulations converge on him and God
subjects him to all sorts of afflictions; hardly will he come out of one
ordeal before he enters another. God the Glorious whose speech is the
most truthful, says in His Perfect Book:

***“Do the people suppose that they will be let off because they say,
‘We have faith’, and they will not be tested? Certainly We have tested
those who were before them. So God shall surely ascertain those who are
truthful and He shall surely ascertain the liars.”***[^69]

***“Do you suppose that you shall enter paradise though there has not
yet come to you the like of what befell those who went before you?
Stress and distress befell them and they were convulsed until the
apostle and the faithful who were with him said, ‘When will God’s help
come?’ Look! God’s help is indeed near!”***[^70]

***“… So that God may ascertain those who have faith, and that he may
take witnesses from among you and God does not like the wrongdoers. And
so that God may purge those who have faith and that*** ***he may wipe
out the faithless.”***[^71]

***“Do you suppose that you will be let off while God has not yet
ascertained those of you who wage jihad and those who do not take
besides God and His Apostle and the faithful anyone as confidant? God is
well aware of what you do”.***[^72]

Trials and tribulations are points where reward and mercy descend in
life. The hardest trials on the believers are those misfortunes which
affect them, their families and their wealth in the way of God.
Tribulations constitute a major point of descent for mercy and of ascent
to the position of honour with God. When one is sincere and steadfast
with no compromise or engaging in courtesy, no relenting, no weakening
and no despair, one will never be free from tribulations.

Trials and tribulation along with their attendant miseries are among the
greatest points of descent for mercy, if one remains steadfast and
patient. God the Exalted has said: ***“We will surely test you with a
measure of fear and hunger and loss of wealth, lives and fruits; and
give good news to the patient. Those, who, when an affliction visits
them, say, ‘Indeed, we belong to God, and to Him do we return. It is
they who receive the blessings of their Lord and [His] mercy, and it is
they who are the [rightly] guided.”***[^73]

God has indeed tested us with this test twice: misfortunes have visited
us because of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) and we have also endured the
distress of what has befallen them. Indeed we have borne, both
concerning them and because of them, untold trials and sufferings: we
have seen adversities because of them and tasted calamities on account
of them. We praise God for both. We hope that God will reward us for our
adversities, both with regard to the tribulations of the *Ahl al-Bayt*
(as) and for their sake, with the best of what He rewards the
distressed. In *Ziyarat Ashura* we read:

“I supplicate God, for the sake of your honour and for the sake of your
position with Him, to give me, in view of the calamity I endure on
account of your tribulations, the best reward He gives to a distressed
person on account of his distress… What a great calamity it is and what
a great loss for Islam!”

It may be that God will reward us for of these calamities without
reckoning*.* ***“Indeed the*** ***patient will be paid in full their
reward without any reckoning”***[^74] There is no limit to the reward
and recompense that come from God for patience.

Calamities are among the greatest points of descent for mercy and ascent
towards honour and proximity to God. During adversities man’s prayers
are granted and mercy descends on him from God more than at any other
times. Because of this we find that in *Ziyarat Ashura* the supplication
is repeated every time the tragedy of Husayn (as) and our distress on
that account is made: *“A calamity… What a great calamity it is and what
a great loss for Islam and for all the heavens and the earth! O God,
place me among those on whom your blessings and mercy descend.”*

 God the Exalted says: ***“Those who, when an affliction visits them,
say, ‘Indeed we belong to God and to Him do we indeed return. It is they
who receive the blessings of their Lord and [His] mercy, and it is they
who are the [rightly] guided.*****”**[^75]

Blessing (*as-salat*) from God refers to the mercy that descends from
Him, while invoking blessings (*as-salat*) by the servants means
requesting for God’s mercy. The kind of mercy that God showers on such
occasions is a special one; it pertains only to His patient and
righteous servants.

God’s mercy is of two kinds: general and special. The former is the one
which covers all creation: man, animal, plant and lifeless objects
***“My mercy embraces all things.”***[^76] “***Our Lord! You encompass
all*** ***things in mercy and knowledge.*****”**[^77] This is the
general mercy, which is the kind that is intended by the word
*al-Rahman.*

Special mercy is that which applies to believers exclusively, where God
says: “-it is they who expect God’s mercy and God is All-forgiving,
All-merciful” and “…God has graced those, who wage jihad over those who
sit back, with a great reward: ranks, forgiveness and mercy, and God is
All-forgiving, All-merciful.” This kind of mercy is the one which is
intended by the word al-Rahim and it extends only to the faithful
servants of God. The blessing alluded to in this verse refers to the
special kind of mercy. In the words of the Ahl al-Bayt (as) a
distinction is made between these two kinds of mercy: as al-Rahman and
al-Rahim.

Imam al-Sadiq (as) is reported to have said: *“Al-Rahman is a specific
name given to a general quality and al-Rahim is general name given to a
specific quality.**”*** Our present discussion will not allow for
further exposition of this point.

Stairways For Getting Proximity To God
--------------------------------------

For gaining nearness to God, various stairways, paths and means are open
to the people, but the best of them is loyalty and repudiation. Among
all these paths and stairways which raise man towards God, none requires
as much effort, the endurance of sufferings and oppression, sincerity
and spending in the way of God as do loyalty and repudiation. They are,
therefore, the best means of man’s ascension to God; with them man soars
towards him and attains His pleasure.

Attaining proximity to God should be the end for every move, every word
and every stand in man’s life. We consider being loyal to the Ahl
al-Bayt (as) and repudiating their enemies an effective means for
gaining nearness to God, therefore, we seek nearness to the Sublime One
by doing these two things.

[^1]: . Al-Yafi'i's Mir'at al-Jinan 1: 132.

[^2]: . Sayyid Abdulrazzaq al-Muqarram's Maqtal al-Husayn (a.s.): 238.

[^3]: . Muthir al-Ahzan 56.

[^4]: . Tarikh al-Tabari 6: 341.

[^5]: . Tarikh al-Tabari 6: 223.

[^6]: . Qur'an, Ch: 9, Vs: 49.

[^7]: . Tarikh al-Tabari, 6: 243.

[^8]: . Qur'an, Ch: 111, VS: 1.

[^9]: .Qur'an, Ch: 9, Vs: 119

[^10]: . Qur'an, Ch: 18, Vs: 28.

[^11]: . Qur'an, Ch: 4, Vs: 69.

[^12]: . Qur'an, Ch: 3, Vs: 183.

[^13]: . Bihar al-Anwar, 27: 63.

[^14]: . Bihar al-Anwar, 27:58.

[^15]: . Qur'an, Ch: 2, Vs:257.

[^16]: . Qur'an, Ch: 4, Vs:59.

[^17]: . Qur'an, Ch: 5, Vs:55.

[^18]: . Qur'an, Ch: 9, Vs:71.

[^19]: . Qur'an, Ch: 8, Vs:74.

[^20]: . Qur'an, Ch: 8, Vs:73.

[^21]: . Bihar al-Anwar, 68: 332.

[^22]: . Bihar al-Anwar 23: 105.

[^23]: . Tafsir al-Burhan 1:328.

[^24]: . Nahj al-Balaghah 2: 207.

[^25]: . Nahj al-Balaghah 3:191

[^26]: . Al-Hijrat wa al-Wila’ (by the author): 164 – 167.

[^27]: . Bihar al-Anwar 10:358

[^28]: . Qur’an Ch: 12, Vs: 40.

[^29]: . Qur’an, Ch: 12, Vsw: 67.

[^30]: . Qur’an, Ch: 5, Vs: 55.

[^31]: . Qur’an Ch: 42, Vs: 9.

[^32]: . There is no need to shift the intended meaning of al-wali since
the verbal noun al-wilayah is univocal. Even if we consider it a homonym
in its al-wali form [which, therefore, carries various meanings],the
subsequent verses we cite adequately establish the concept of unity of
loyalty.

[^33]: . Qur’an Ch: 6, Vs: 14.

[^34]: . Qur’an Ch: 29, Vs: 22.

[^35]: . Qur’an , Ch: 2, Vs: 107.

[^36]: . Al-Jurjani’s Dala’il al-I’jaz: 260.

[^37]: . Ibid, 268.

[^38]: . Qur'an, Ch: 6, Vs: 51.

[^39]: . Qur'an, Ch: 6, Vs: 70.

[^40]: . Qur'an, Ch: 9, Vs: 116.

[^41]: . Qur'an, Ch: 32, Vs: 7.

[^42]: . The Author's Al-Wailayah wa al-Bara'ah: 93-95.

[^43]: . Bihar al-Anwar, 24: 54.

[^44]: . Al-Saduq's Al-Amali: 8.

[^45]: . Al-Saduq's Al-Amali: 345.

[^46]: . Al-Saduq’s Al-Amali: 360.

[^47]: . Tuhaf al-Uqul: 479.

[^48]: .Al-Mahasin: 263.

[^49]: . Usul al-Kafi 2: 125.

[^50]: . Usul al-Kafi 2: 125.

[^51]: . Usul al-Kafi, 2: 126.

[^52]: . Qur’an, Ch: 33, Vs: 4

[^53]: . As appears in some copies of Ziyarat al-Jami’ah.

[^54]: . Bihar al-Anwar 278:51, Hadith no 1.

[^55]: . Bihar al-Anwar, 27: 58.

[^56]: . Bihar al-Anwar 27: 64.

[^57]: . Qur’an Ch: 9, Vs: 119.

[^58]: . Qur’an, Ch: 4, Vs: 69.

[^59]: . Qur’an, Ch: 28, Vs: 57.

[^60]: . Qur’an, Ch: 11, Vs: 112.

[^61]: . Qur’an, Ch: 18, Vs: 28.

[^62]: . Qur’an, Ch: 49, Vs: 29.

[^63]: . Qur’an, Ch: 3, Vs: 146.

[^64]: . Qur’an, Ch: 3, Vs: 53.

[^65]: . Qur’an, Ch: 17, Vs: 79.

[^66]: . Tafsir al-Mizan 13: 176.

[^67]: . Ibid.

[^68]: . Qur’an Ch:6 vs:162

[^69]: . Qur’an Ch: 29, vs:2-3.

[^70]: . Qur’an Ch: 29, Vs: 214.

[^71]: . Qur’an, Ch: 3, Vs: 14-141.

[^72]: . Qur’an, Ch: 9, Vs: 16.

[^73]: . Qur’an, Ch: 2, Vs: 155-157.

[^74]: . Qur’an, Ch: 39, Vs: 10.

[^75]: . Qur’an, Ch: 2, Vs: 156-157.

[^76]: . Qur’an, Ch: 7, Vs: 156.

[^77]: . Qur’an, Ch: 40, Vs: 7.


