[Bennabi]
=========

As for the question of the existence of democracy within Islam, Bennabi
argues that this is dependent on the provision of what he earlier refers
to as the general conditions of the democratic sentiment. He then puts
forward a set of questions: Does Islam provide and guarantee these
objective and subjective conditions, in the sense that it creates a
sentiment toward the 'ego' and toward the 'other' that is compatible
with the democratic sentiment? And does it create the appropriate social
circumstances for the development of such a sentiment? Does Islam truly
reduce the quantity and intensity of the negative motives and of the
anti-democratic tendencies that characterize the conduct of the
oppressed and the conduct of the oppressor? He suggests that any project
aimed at founding a democracy should be considered an educational
enterprise for the whole community, administered through the
implementation of a comprehensive curriculum that encompasses
psychological, ethical, social and political aspects. 'Democracy', he
asserts, 'is not - as is superficially understood by the common usage of
its etymology - a mere political process; a process whereby powers are
handed over to the masses . But is the generation of a sentiment, and of
objective and subjective responses and standards, that collectively lay
the foundations upon which democracy, prior to being stated in any
constitution, stands in the conscience of the people. The constitution
is usually nothing but the formal outcome of the democratic enterprise
once transformed into a political reality indicated by a text that is
inspired by customs and traditions, and dictated by a sentiment
generated in a given circumstance. Such a text will have no meaning if
not preceded by the customs and traditions that inspire it, or in other
words the historical justifications that necessitate it.' He then warns
that the answer to the question 'Is there democracy within Islam?' is
not necessarily pertinent to a fiqh (jurisprudence) rule deduced from
the Sunnah or the Qur'an, but is one which is related to the essence of
Islam as a whole. 'In this sense', he argues, 'Islam should be viewed
not as a constitution that proclaims the sovereignty of a given
community, or that states the rights or liberties of a certain people,
but as a democratic enterprise that is the product of an exercise,
through which the position of a Muslim vis-Ã -vis his or her encompassing
society is defined, along the path toward accomplishing democratic
values and norms provided a Muslim's temporal activity is tied to the
general principles endorsed by Islam in the form of a seed sown in the
Islamic conscience, and in the form of a general sentiment, and of
motives, that constitute the Islamic equilibrium within every member of
the community.'[^64]

Speaking of models of democracy - 'Western' in Europe, 'popular' in the
East and 'new' in China - that differ from one another in the way they
express their new symbolic evaluation of man, Bennabi sees that an
Islamic model of democracy is attainable. Whereas in the other models
the main objective is to endow man with political rights, enjoyed by the
'citizen' in Western countries, or social securities, enjoyed by the
'comrade' in Eastern countries, 'Islam', is distinguishable, according
to Bennabi, because it 'endows man with a value that surpasses every
political or social value'. He explains that the declaration in the
Qur'anic verse 70 of Chapter 17, (We have honored the children of Adam),
endows man with more than just rights or securities. 'This verse was
revealed as if to lay the foundations for a democratic model that is
above every other model, where the divine element within man is taken
into consideration and not just the human or social aspects as in the
other models. Thus, a kind of sanctity is endowed upon man raising his
value above whatever value other models give to him.'[^65]

However, Bennabi is keen to distinguish between what Islam has the
potential to offer and the prevalent state of the Muslims. He concludes
that democracy exists within Islam, not during the era when Islamic
traditions petrify and lose their brilliancy such as nowadays, but
during the era of their making and when society is developing, such as
during the first 40 years of Islamic history.[^66]

Bennabi's analysis was revolutionary during his time, when Islamists in
much of the Arab world, especially in the Middle East, were influenced
by Qutb's thoughts and made an enemy out of democracy without ever
understanding it. It was primarily thanks to his disciples such as
Rachid Ghannouchi and other North African thinkers that mainstream
Islamic movements gradually, though sometimes reluctantly, relinquished
old positions on this matter. Malik Bennabi, who according to
Ghannouchi, 'undoubtedly represents an element of the Islamic culture of
rationalism and particularly a revival of Ibn Khaldun's historical
culture of rationalism', had a profound influence on the Tunisian
Islamic group. The two men's first encounter came when, on his way back
from Paris to Tunis, Ghannouchi traveled by land through Spain, Morocco
and Algeria where he visited Bennabi before entering Tunisia. He had
read his books in Damascus when he, as he put it, returned to
Islam.[^67] Having read Sayyid Qutb during his student years in Syria
and France, and having been greatly influenced by his thoughts during
that initial period of self- searching, he listened attentively to
Bennabi as he strongly criticized Qutb. The latter had actually referred
to Bennabi in one of his writings without mentioning his name: 'An
Algerian writer who writes on Islam believes that Islam is one thing and
civilization is another.' Bennabi was seemingly offended by Qutb's
remark that he believed was demeaning. After listening to the critique,
Ghannouchi concluded that Bennabi had deeper knowledge and a better
understanding of civilization than Qutb. Bennabi believed that 'whereas
civilization is the transformation of any good idea into a reality,
Islam is a set of guidelines, a way of life, or a project, that creates
a civilization only when put into practice; when its adherents carry it
and move through the world positively influencing man, material and
time. Therefore, a Muslim may be uncivilized just as a non-Muslim may be
civilized.'[^68] On the other hand, Qutb insisted that civility is a
synonym of Islam; that a Muslim is civilized and a non-Muslim is not.
'This belief', Ghannouchi comments, 'would inevitably lead to Takfir'
(that is charging someone with unbelief), and goes on to say, 'Qutb
seemed to have borrowed the belief of the Al-Khawarij that a person is
not a Muslim unless he or she is sinless and applied it to the question
of civility; that is a person is not a Muslim unless he is perfectly
civilized, and therefore all those backward Muslims are infidels!'[^69]


