[Introduction]
==============

Democracy has preoccupied Arab political thinkers since the dawn of the
modern Arab renaissance about two centuries ago. Since then, the concept
of democracy has changed and developed under the influence of a variety
of social and political developments.[^1] The discussion of democracy in
Arab Islamic literature can be traced back to Rifa'a Tahtawi,[^2] the
father of Egyptian democracy according to Lewis Awad,[^3] who shortly
after his return to Cairo from Paris published his first book, Takhlis
Al-Ibriz Ila Talkhis Bariz, in 1834. The book summahrized his
observations of the manners and customs of the modern French,[^4] and
praised the concept of democracy as he saw it in France and as he
witnessed its defence and reassertion through the 1830 Revolution
against King Charles X.[^5] Tahtawi tried to show that the democratic
concept he was explaining to his readers was compatible with the law of
Islam. He compared political pluralism to forms of ideological and
jurisprudential pluralism that existed in the Islamic experience:

Religious freedom is the freedom of belief, of opinion and of sect,
provided it does not contradict the fundamentals of religion . The same
would apply to the freedom of political practice and opinion by leading
administrators, who endeavor to interpret and apply rules and provisions
in accordance with the laws of their own countries. Kings and ministers
are licensed in the realm of politics to pursue various routes that in
the end serve one purpose: good administration and justice.[^6]


