[Khairuddin At-Tunisi (1810-99)]
================================

One important landmark in this regard was the contribution of Khairuddin
At-Tunisi (1810-99), leader of the 19th-century reform movement in
Tunisia, who, in 1867, formulated a general plan for reform in a book
entitled Aqwam Al-Masalik Fi Taqwim Al- Mamalik (The Straight Path to
Reforming Governments). The main preoccupation of the book was in
tackling the question of political reform in the Arab world. While
appealing to politicians and scholars of his time to seek all possible
means in order to improve the status of the community and develop its
civility, he warned the general Muslim public against shunning the
experiences of other nations on the basis of the misconception that all
the writings, inventions, experiences or attitudes of non-Muslims should
be rejected or disregarded. Khairuddin further called for an end to
absolutist rule, which he blamed for the oppression of nations and the
destruction of civilizations.[^7]

Ghannouchi believes that neither Khairuddin nor any of the Islamic
scholars of his time had intended to cast doubt on Islam or introduce
changes to it. They only sought to understand Islam better and explore
new means and methods to implement it, relying on the explanations of
both ancient and contemporary scholars. They sought to legitimize
borrowing from the West on the basis that ' . wisdom (or knowledge) is a
believer's long-cherished objective', that ' . religion has been
revealed for the benefit of the creation', and that ' . [the] Shariâ€™ah
and the vital interests of the community are fully compatible'.[^8] To
implement his reform plan, Khairuddin established the As-Sadiqiyah
School for teaching modern arts and sciences within an Islamic
framework. The purpose of the School, according to the founding
declaration, was: 'To teach the Qur'an, writing and useful knowledge,
i.e. juridical sciences, foreign languages, and the rational sciences
that might be of use to Muslims being at the same time not contrary to
the faith. The professors must inculcate in the students love of the
faith by showing them its beauties and excellence, in telling them the
deeds of the Prophet, the miracles accomplished by him, the virtues of
the holy men . .'[^9] Khairuddin At-Tunisi believed that ' . kindling
the Ummahh's potential liberty through the adoption of sound
administrative procedures and enabling it to have a say in political
affairs, would put it on a faster track toward civilization, would limit
the rule of despotism, and would stop the influx of European
civilization that is sweeping everything along its path.'[^10]


