[Jamal ad-Din Al-Afghani (1838-97)]
===================================

In his search for the causes of decline in the Muslim world, Jamal
ad-Din Al-Afghani (1838-97) diagnosed that it was due to the absence of
'adl (justice) and shura (council) and non-adherence by the government
to the constitution.[^11]

One of his main demands was that the people should be allowed to assume
their political and social rule by participating in governing through
shura and elections.[^12] In an article entitled 'The Despotic
Government', published in Misr on 14 February 1879, Al-Afghani
attributed the decline to despotism which is the reason why thinkers in
the Eastern (Muslim) countries could not enlighten the public about the
essence and virtues of the 'republican government'. 'For those governed
by it', he stresses, 'it is a source of happiness and pride'. He goes
further, to insist that ' . those governed by a republican form of
government, alone deserve to be called human; for a true human being is
only subdued by a true law that is based on the foundations of justice
and that is designed to govern man's moves, actions, transactions and
relations with others in a manner that elevates him to the pinnacle of
true happiness.'[^13] To Al-Afghani, a republican government is a
'restricted government' that is accountable to the public, and that is
thus the antithesis of the absolutist one. It is a government that
consults the governed, relieves them of the burdens laid upon them by
despotic governments and lifts them from the state of decay to the first
level of perfection.[^14]


