[Abdurrahman Al-Kawakibi (1849-1903)]
=====================================

Abdurrahman Al-Kawakibi (1849-1903) wrote two books on the subject,
Taba'i' Al- Istibdad (The Characteristics of Tyranny) and Umm Al-Qura
(The Mother of Villages). The first is dedicated to defining despotism
and explaining the various forms it may take, with much of the
discussion focusing on political despotism. The relationship between
religion and despotism and what he calls the 'inseparable tie' between
politics and religion are also discussed. While stressing that Islam as
a religion is not responsible for the forms of despotic government that
have emerged and reigned in its name, Al-Kawakibi concludes that 'Allah,
the omni wise, has intended nations to be responsible for the actions of
those whom they choose to be governed by. When a nation fails in its
duty, God causes it to be subdued by another nation that will govern it,
just as happens in a court of law when a minor or an incompetent is put
under the care of a curator. When, on the other hand, a nation matures
and appreciates the value of liberty, it will restore its might; and
this is only fair.'[^17] The entire book is an attempt to explain the
reasons why the Muslim ummahh declined and became easy prey for
19th-century colonial powers. Like Al-Afghani and Abduh, Al-Kawakibi
attributed the success of Western nations to ' . the adoption of logical
and well-practiced rules that have become social duties in these
advanced nations which are not harmed by what appears to be a division
into parties and groups, because such a division is only over the
methods of applying the rules and not over them.'[^18] In his other
book, Al-Kawakibi constructs a series of dialogues involving fictional
characters whom he describes as thinkers each belonging to a known town
in the Muslim world, all summoned to a conference organized in Makka
(Umm al-Qura) during the pilgrimage (hajj) season to discuss the causes
of decline of the Muslim ummahh. One character, Al-Baligh Al-Qudsi,
says: 'It seems to me that the cause of tepidity is the change in the
nature of Islamic politics. It was parliamentary and socialist, that is
perfectly democratic. But due to the escalation of internal feuds, after
the Guided ones (the first four Caliphs) it was transformed into a
monarchy restrained by the basic rules of Shariâ€™ah, and then it became
almost completely absolute.' Ar-Rumi says: 'The calamity has been our
loss of liberty.' In conclusion, Al-Kawakibi stresses that progress is
linked to accountability while regress is linked to despotism.[^19]


