[Muhammad Rashid Rida (1865-1935)]
==================================

Muhammad Rashid Rida (1865-1935) saw that the reason for the
backwardness of the ummah was that ' . the Muslims have lost the truth
of their religion, and this has been encouraged by bad political rulers,
for the true Islam involves two things, acceptance of the unity of God
and consultation in matters of State, and despotic rulers have tried to
make Muslims forget the second by encouraging them to abandon the
first.'[^20] He stressed that the greatest lesson the people of the
Orient can learn from Europeans is to know what government should be
like.[^21] In his book Al-Khilafa (The Caliphate) he stresses that Islam
is guidance, mercy and social-civic policy. About the latter, which he
seems to use as a synonym for politics, he says: 'As for the
social-civic policy, Islam has laid its foundations and set forth its
rules, and has sanctioned the exertion of opinion and the pursuit of
Ijtihad in matters related to it because it changes with time and place
and develops as architecture and all other aspects of knowledge develop.
Its foundations include that authority belongs to the ummah, that
decision-making is through shura, that the government is a form of a
republic, that the ruler is not favored in a court of law to the
layman - for he is only employed to implement Shariâ€™ah and public
opinion, and that the purpose of this policy is to preserve religion and
serve the interests of the public . .'[^22]

Nineteenth-century Islamic political thinkers, who were clearly
influenced by European democratic thought and practice, tried to
establish a resemblance between democracy and the Islamic concept of
shura. Faced with a crisis of government augmented by the autocracy and
corrupt conduct of Muslim rulers, they sought to legitimize the
borrowing of aspects of the Western model they believed were compatible
with Islam and capable of resolving the crisis. However, the trend
changed in the aftermath of the First World War and following the demise
of the Khilafah (Caliphate), whose abrogation, in 1924, shocked the
Muslims in spite of the fact that many of them had suffered greatly at
the hands of some Ottoman rulers. The Khilafah was an administrative
legacy that for many centuries represented a moral shield and a
political entity.[^23] The challenge was no longer despotism. The
Muslims had already lost their symbol of unity, which they had been
trying to reform. The European democracies, which provided inspiration
and were greatly admired by reformists in the East, had colonized much
of the Arab world, dividing its territories among them as booties. The
Western colonizers' endeavors to westernize the Muslims were viewed as a
serious threat to the Arab-Islamic identity, and, thus, liberating
Muslim lands from colonialism became a priority. Hence, one for revival
replaced the call for reform.

During this period, Rashid Rida, Abduh's disciple, published the
Al-Manar Journal that attracted a readership of Islamic intellectuals
who shared Rida's specific additions to the thoughts of his masters
Al-Afghani and Abduh, namely the condemnation of innovations in doctrine
and worship and the acceptance of the rights of reason and public
welfare in matters of social morality. A young man who frequented Rida's
circle and regularly read his Journal, then attempted to carry it on
after Rida's death. His name was Hasan Al-Banna (1904-49).[^24] Trained
by his father Ahmad Al-Banna, a graduate of Al-Azhar University and
author of an encyclopedia of Hadith and Islamic Jurisprudence, young
Hasan grew up to become the founder of the largest and first
international Islamic movement in modern times, the al-Ikhwan
al-Muslimun (Muslim Brotherhood).

Established as a study circle, known as Madrasat at-Tahdhib (The School
of Refinement), in 1928 in the Egyptian port city of Al-Isma'iliyyah -
the headquarters of the Suez Canal Company and the British forces in
Egypt - the group grew rapidly and spread to other parts of the country
within a short period of time. Its growth accelerated by the 1936
Anglo-Egyptian Treaty and the Arab Revolt in Palestine against the
British Mandate and Zionist colonization; the movement quickly
transformed itself into a political entity. By 1939 a series of rasa'il
(messages or articles), mostly authored by Al-Banna, were circulated
explaining the Ikhwan's mission, clarifying its ideas and underlining
its method.[^25] In the first of these articles, entitled Bayn al-Ams
wa'l-Yawm (Between Yesterday and Today), Hasan Al-Banna diagnosed the
situation in the Muslim world as follows:

European power expanded, thanks to discoveries, expeditions, and travels
to far and distant lands as far as many of the remote Islamic countries
like India, as well as some of the neighboring Islamic provinces. Europe
began to work earnestly at dismembering the powerful and far-flung
Islamic state proposing numerous plans toward this end, referring to
them at times as 'the Eastern question' and at others as 'dividing up
the inheritance of the Sick Man of Europe'. Every state began to seize
any opportunity as it arose, adopting the flimsiest of excuses to attack
the peaceful yet careless Islamic state, and to reduce its periphery or
demolish parts of its integral fabric. This onslaught continued over a
long period of time, during which the Ottoman Empire was stripped of
much of its Islamic territory that then fell under European domination,
e.g., Morocco and North Africa. Many non-Islamic areas previously under
Ottoman rule became independent during this time, e.g., Greece and the
Balkan States. The final round of this struggle was the First World War,
from 1914 to 1918, which ended in the defeat of Turkey and her allies,
providing a perfect opportunity for the strongest nations of Europe,
(England and France, and under their patronage, Italy). They laid their
hands on the huge legacy left behind by the Islamic nations, imposing
their rule over them under the various titles of occupation,
colonialism, trusteeship or mandate dividing them up in the following
manner: North Africa (Morocco, Algeria, and Tunis) became French
colonies lying in between a zone of international influence in Tangier
and a Spanish colony in the Rif; Tripoli and Barca became Italian
colonies in which Italy did not wish a single trace of Islam to remain.
She forced Italian citizenship upon the people giving it the name of
'South Italy' and filling it with thousands of hungry families and wild
beasts in human form (Italian outcasts); Egypt and the Sudan fell under
English authority, neither one possessing a shred of independent
authority; Palestine became an English colony, which England took the
liberty of selling to the Jews so that they might establish therein a
national Zionist homeland; Syria became a French colony; Iraq became an
English colony; the Hijaz (the Western Province of Arabia) possessed a
weak, unstable government dependent on charity and clinging to false
treaties and worthless covenants; Yemen possessed an outmoded government
and a poverty stricken populace exposed to attack anywhere and at any
time; the remaining nations of the Arabian peninsula consisted of small
emirates whose rulers lived under the wing of the British consuls and
who fought one another for the crumbs falling from their tables, their
breasts burning with mutual resentment and hatred. This was the case
despite the reassuring promises and binding treaties drawn up by the
Allies with the mightiest monarch of the Peninsula, King Hussein,
stating that they would help him achieve the Arab independence and
support the authority of the Arab Caliphate; Iran and Afghanistan
possessed shaky governments beset by power hungry people on every side,
they would be under the wing of one nation at one time and under that of
another at other times; India was an English colony; Turkistan and the
adjoining regions were Russian colonies, subjected to the bitter
harshness of the Bolshevik authorities. Apart from these, there were
also the Islamic minorities scattered across many countries, knowing no
state to whose protection they might have recourse, nor any well armed
government to defend their nationality, as, e.g., the Muslims in
Ethiopia, China, the Balkans, and the lands of Central, South, East and
West Africa. Under such conditions, Europe won in the political
struggle, and finally accomplished her goal in dismembering the Islamic
empire, annihilating the Islamic state and erasing it politically, from
the list of powerful, living nations.[^26]


