[Hassan Al-Banna]
=================

Al-Banna notes that as each of these nations struggled to regain its
freedom and the right to exist as an independent entity, concepts of
localized nationalism arose, and many states working towards this
revival purposely ignored the idea of unity.[^27] From that moment the
Muslim Brotherhood launched the struggle for the return of the Islamic
empire as a unified state embracing the Muslims that had been scattered
around the world, raising the banner of Islam and carrying its
message.[^28] At this stage, the Europeans ceased to be a model. On the
contrary, they were blamed for the ills of the Muslim ummah. 'The
Europeans', Hasan Al-Banna wrote:

….worked assiduously in trying to immerse (the world) in materialism,
with its corrupting traits and murderous germs, to overwhelm those
Muslim lands that their hands stretched out to . they were able to alter
the basic principles of government, justice, and education, and infuse
in the most powerful Islamic countries, their own peculiar political,
judicial, and cultural systems. They imported their semi-naked women
into these regions, together with their liquors, their theatres, their
dance halls, their amusement arcades, their stories, their newspapers,
their novels, their whims, their silly games, and their vices. Here they
allowed for crimes intolerable in their own countries, and beautified
this tumultuous world to the deluded, naive eyes of wealthy Muslims and
those of rank and authority. This was not enough for them, so they built
schools and scientific cultural institutes, casting doubt and heresy
within the hearts of people. They taught them how to demean themselves,
to vilify their religion and their homeland, to detach themselves from
their beliefs, and to regard anything Western as sacred, in the belief
that only that which is European can be emulated. These schools were
restricted to the upper class, the ruling body, the powerful and the
future leaders. Those who were unsuccessful in such places were sent
abroad to complete their studies. This drastic, well-organised social
campaign was tremendously successful since it appealed to the mind. It
will continue to exert its strong intellectual influence over a long
period of time. Thus, it was far more dangerous than any political or
military campaign. Some Islamic countries went overboard in their
admiration for the European civilization and their dissatisfaction with
the Islamic one, to the point that Turkey declared itself a non-Islamic
state, imitating the Europeans in everything that they did. Aman Allah
Khan, King of Afghanistan, tried this, but the attempt cost him his
throne. In Egypt the manifestations of this mimicry increased and became
so serious that one of her intellectual leaders could openly say that
the only path to progress was to adopt this civilization: good or evil,
bitter or sweet, praiseworthy or reprehensible. From Egypt it spread
with strength and speed into the neighboring countries, to the extent
that it reached Morocco and encircled the holy sanctuaries within the
midst of Hijaz.[^29]

Explaining that his movement's mission is one of reawakening and
deliverance, Al-Banna declared that the goals of his organization were:

1. Freeing the Islamic homeland from all foreign authority, for this is
a natural right belonging to every human being, which only the unjust
oppressor will deny.

2. The establishment of an Islamic state within this homeland, which
acts according to the precepts of Islam, applies its social regulations,
advocates its sound principles, and broadcasts its mission to all of
mankind.[^30]

Al-Banna warned the Muslims, in general, and the members of his group,
in particular: 'As long as this state does not emerge, every Muslim is
sinning and Muslims are responsible before Allah the Almighty for their
failure and slackness to establish it. In these bewildering
circumstances, it is against the interests of humanity that a state
advocating injustice and oppression should arise, while there should be
no one at all working for the advent of a state founded on truth,
justice, and peace. We want to accomplish these two goals in the Nile
Valley and the Arab Kingdom, and in every land which Allah has blessed
with the Islamic creed: uniting all the Muslims.'[^31]

The leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood took a special interest in
stressing that their movement was set up in response to the downfall of
the Khilafah. 'When the Khilafah was brought down', Mustafa Mashhoor,
deputy leader of the Brotherhood explained: 'Imam Hasan Al-Banna rose up
and proclaimed the restoration of the Khilafah to be a religious duty
incumbent upon every single Muslim man and woman.'[^32] In a message
sent to the heads of Muslim states in June 1947, Hasan Al-Banna demanded
that they shoulder their responsibilities and undertake the task of
serving the ummah. The task, he explained, consisted of two parts: the
first, to rid the ummah of its political shackles so as to achieve its
freedom and restore its lost independence and sovereignty; and the
second to rebuild the ummah anew in order to pursue its path among
nations and compete with others for the attainment of social
perfection.[^33] Hence, Hasan Al-Banna's main concern was to mobilize
the public against colonialism and its adverse effects on society. He
called for the re- establishment of Islamic governance on three
foundations: the ruler's accountability to Allah and to the public, the
unity of the ummah within a framework of brotherhood, and respect for
the will of the ummah and its right to check its rulers who are obliged
to respect its will and opinions.[^34] In his analysis of the causes of
European progress, he prognosticated the eventual collapse of Western
civilization due to immorality, usury and political divisions.

In his message Bayn al-Ams wa'l-Yawm (Between Yesterday and Today), he
cites (political) parties as one of the factors that would lead to
European decline.[^35] Although he stood for parliamentary elections
twice, and while stressing that the parliamentary and constitutional
system is in essence compatible with the Islamic system of government,
he was adamant in his opposition to political parties. He regarded them
as a potential threat to Islamic unity, which he deemed was essential
for the re-establishment of the Khilafah. 'They (political parties) are
this homeland's greatest misdeed, the root of social corruption whose
fire is scalding us. They are not genuine parties in the sense by which
parties in any other country of the world are known. They are no more
than a series of dissension caused by personal disagreements among a
number of the children of this ummah. Whose circumstances necessitated
one day that they should speak in its name and demand its national
rights . There is no more room for half solutions and there is no escape
from the inevitability of the dissolution of all these parties. The
forces of the ummah ought to be joined in one party that would have to
work for the restoration of its independence and freedom, and that would
lay down the foundations for general domestic reform.'[^36] Between the
two World Wars, thinkers affiliated with the liberal trend campaigned,
like their 19th-century predecessors for total Westernization. Embracing
secularism, they called for formulating modern constitutions and legal
systems that, just as the Europeans had done, exclude religion and
restrict its rule to the private domain. They hoisted the slogan of
'separating state and religion' and blamed Islam for the backwardness of
the Arabs.[^37]

The abolishment of the Khilafah in 1924 aroused a debate among thinkers
of the time over its importance. Ali Abd Ar-Raziq (1888-1966), an
Al-Azhar graduate who later studied at Oxford, contributed to the debate
with a book that turned out to be among the most controversial works in
modern Islamic history. Abd Ar-Raziq's theory claimed there were no such
things as Islamic political principles. He denied the existence of a
political order in Islam and claimed that the Prophet never established
one and that it was not part of his mission to found a state.[^38]

As Arab societies responded to the challenge of colonialism and rose to
restore their freedom and struggle for their independence, Westernized
elites took over the leadership of national movements that originally
had Islamic inclinations. Despotic single-party regimes or absolute
monarchies replaced the colonial authorities in most of the Arab
countries. Throughout the post-independence era, Islam, its culture and
its heritage came under savage onslaught in the name of modernization.
The Al-Azhar of Egypt was turned into a secular university, the Tunisian
Az-Zaytouna Institute was closed down, awqaf (endowment) institutions
were nationalized, Shari’ah courts were either dissolved or marginalized
and political parties and groups were banned or outlawed. The Ikhwan,
who had already established branches or strong links in many Arab and
Muslim countries, were hit hard by Nassir in Egypt soon after he came to
power in 1952. Following the execution of several of their leaders and
the imprisonment of hundreds of their followers in 1954, they were
driven underground. The challenge had once again changed shape. It was
no more the challenge and struggle for independence and freedom, but
rather the struggle to resist and defend the ummah against what was
perceived as a pernicious onslaught against Islam and the cultural
identity of the ummah not only by foreign colonial powers but also by
post-independence regimes. From then until the early seventies, members
of the Islamic movement were influenced mainly by the works of Mawdudi
and Nadwi and by the writings of Sayyid Qutb.


