Phenomenology and Transcendence: The Problem
============================================

Phenomenology’s relationship with the concept of transcendence is not at
all straightforward. Indeed, phenomenology, from its inception, has had
an ambiguous, uneasy relationship with transcendence, with the wholly
other, with the numinous. Phenomenology, as the French philosopher
Jean-Luc Marion has recently emphasised, is*par excellence* the
philosophy of givenness, reflecting specifically on the ‘givenness’ of
the given, on what Husserl speaks of as the ‘how’ (*Wie* ) or ‘mode’
(*Art* ,*Weise* ) of givenness.[^1] Phenomenology deliberately restricts
itself to describing carefully and without prejudice whatever is*given*
to experience in the manner in which it is so given. Marion frames the
essential question of phenomenology as: ‘Can the givenness in presence
of each thing be realised without any condition of restriction?[^2] But,
if phenomenology is restricted to givenness, what becomes of that which
is withheld or cannot in principle come to givenness? As such, and from
the outset, then, the*epoché* of Husserlian phenomenology brackets the
transcendent, and, specifically, traditional metaphysical or
ontotheological conceptions of God as a transcendent being outside the
world. Is, then, the relation between phenomenology and transcendence
always one of distance and renunciation, or is another way of relating
possible?

In this paper[^3] I want to re-examine the role of the concept of
‘transcendence’ in phenomenology, focusing explicitly on the work of
Edmund Husserl (1859-1938) and Edith Stein (1891-1942), but I shall also
refer briefly to the German philosopher of existence Karl Jaspers
(1883-1969),[^4] precisely because he made transcendence a central theme
of his philosophy, and because of his influence on Martin Heidegger
(1889-1976).[^5] Heidegger’s conception of the transcendental and of
transcendence appears to have come from his*Auseinandersetzung* with his
mentor Husserl,[^6] but also from his close personal relationship during
the 1920s with Karl Jaspers, the medic turned philosopher, who himself
was greatly influenced by Kierkegaard and existential philosophy.
Following a discussion of the Husserlian problematic of transcendence, I
shall examine Edith Stein (1891-1942), specifically her work attempting
to relate phenomenology to Thomistic ontology. Here I shall be
concentrating on her understanding of being as*fullness* and of the*ego*
as the primary sense of being, as somehow encapsulating the mystery of
being. Stein sees a way of combining the insights of Husserlian eidetic
phenomenology with traditional Thomistic talk about the divine, to find
a new way of articulating transcendence. What unites Husserl, Stein,
Jaspers, and Heidegger is that they all accord a special place to the
transcendence of the self, the transcendence of human existence, or the
transcendence of Dasein. The paradox at the centre of their philosophies
is that the most immanent self-experience is precisely that which
reveals transcendence.

Transcendence means literally ‘going beyond’. In one sense,
transcendence refers to the region of ‘otherness’, whatever lies beyond
or is other, especially other than one’s self.[^7] In this regard the
French phenomenologist Natalie Depraz has claimed, for instance, that
phenomenology is*the* philosophy of otherness.[^8] But, in Husserl’s

phenomenology, transcendence as going-beyond is intrinsically related to
a deeper experience of selfhood or ‘self-experience’ (*Selbsterfahrung*
) such that, paradoxically, genuine transcendence has to be discovered
in immanence. The original transcendence, for Husserl, is the living ego
itself, in that it is directly experienced, and is temporally
constituted and hence never completely capturable in a totalising view.
The self is essentially self-transcending. Heidegger makes this
‘transcendence of Dasein’ into an essential part of existential analytic
of human existence.

Both Husserl and Stein begin, as do in their own ways Saint Augustine
and Descartes, with one’s own first-person experience of one’s own
being. Self-experience, as Husserl argues in the*Cartesian Meditations*
[^9] has to be the starting point and the measure for all other
experiences if these experiences are to be captured purely under
the*epoché* . Of course, that is not to say that self-experience ought
to be considered as self-enclosed and solipsistic. Quite the reverse.
Husserl and Stein both saw subjectivity as a one-sided abstraction from
the interrelated nexus of concrete intersubjectivity. On the other hand,
it would be phenomenologically inaccurate to deny that experience is
deeply ‘egoic’ and first-personal in its core originary nature.

Stein received her doctoral training under Edmund Husserl, and was
intimately involved in the theory and practice of Husserlian
phenomenology (at Göttingen); but she later moved to embrace
Catholicism, and in her mature writings offers a very original and
independent re-conceptualisation of the Thomistic heritage illuminated
by her phenomenological background. This work of synthesis between
phenomenology and Thomist metaphysics receives its fullest articulation
in her*Endliches und Ewiges Sein (Finite and Eternal Being* , 1936)[^10]
, a book written, as she said echoing Husserl’s own view of himself as a
phenomenologist, ‘by a beginner for beginners’ (FEB, p. xxvii), to
explain Thomistic philosophy for the modern mind. In this work, Stein
explicitly acknowledges that she wants to use Husserlian phenomenology
as a way of gaining access to Thomistic or ‘scholastic’ thought (FEB, p.
12).*Finite and Eternal Being* , a vast compendium of speculative
commentary on key Aristotelian and Thomistic concepts, including a kind
of new cosmology, is at its core a very deep appreciation of the
experience of being as*fullness* , a concept that unites Husserl and
Aquinas, albeit that Husserl is attempting to approach being precisely
from its experiential meaningfulness as given.

Husserl’s own leanings towards empiricism and his suspicion of Hegelian
invocations of the absolute led him to distrust metaphysical speculation
that was not grounded phenomenologically. Furthermore, when he embraced
the Kantian critical and ‘transcendental’ approach, he further distanced
himself from naïve discussions of the transcendent. But transcendence is
problematic for Husserl for an even more essential reason, namely
because of the methodological strictures phenomenology imposes on itself
with regard to the importation of speculative assumptions. Indeed, it is
one of the explicit functions of Husserl’s ‘bracketing’ or ‘suspension’
(*epoché* ) to exclude consideration of the transcendent, at least in
the sense of that which may in principle be considered apart from
consciousness. If there

is to be transcendence, for the mature Husserl, then this is always
transcendence under the*epoché* ; it is ‘transcendence-within-immanence’
hence not pure ‘transcendence’. As Husserl says in his
programmatic*Ideas* I (1913)[^11] , the eidetic attitude of
phenomenology after the reduction ‘excludes every sort of transcendence’
(*Ideas* I § 86, p. 209; III/1 178). Yet, paradoxically, as Husserl will
attest in his*Formal and Transcendental Logic* (1929)[^12] , it is an
essential part of phenomenology’s brief to explore ‘the sense of
transcendence’ (*Sinn der Transzendenz* , FTL § 93c, p. 230; Hua XVII:
237), that is, the manner in which we have experience of an objective
world as such.

While Husserl always insisted that phenomenology proceeds in immanence,
in an important essay on the relation between Thomism and phenomenology,
Edith Stein points out that Husserl was seeking a region of*genuine
immanence* in the sense of a region of immediate, inviolable
self-givenness, from which all doubt is excluded, but no matter how much
he attempted to transcendentally purify his starting point, ‘traces of
transcendence showed up’[^13] . Stein maintains this is because
Husserl’s ideal of knowledge is in fact divine knowledge, where knowing
and being are one and where there is no transcendence (a version of the
‘view from nowhere’), where knowledge is simply disclosure of the given
without mediation or obstruction or slant. In other words, for Stein in
her critique of Husserl, his philosophy of pure immanence cannot escape
transcendence. The finite and determined has to open up to the infinite,
undetermined and indeterminate.

In thinking of ‘transcendence’, Husserlian phenomenology begins by
rejecting thinking of transcendence framed in Cartesian terms,
paradigmatic in modern epistemology, whereby the central question is how
to*transcend* the closed sphere of subjectivity in order to attain to an
‘external’ objectivity beyond the subject. This conception of
trancendence as objectivity opposed to subjectivity is precisely what
comes to be challenged in Kantian critical philosophy. Consider the
question famously formulated by Immanuel Kant is his*Letter to Markus
Herz* of 21 February 1772 (translated in Zweig, 1967, 70-76), a letter
written some years before the First Critique but still considered to
express the essentials of the transcendental turn. Kant asked:

What is the ground of the relation of that in us which we call
“representation” [*Vorstellung* ] to the object [*Gegenstand* ]? If a
representation is only a way in which the subject [*subiect* ] is
affected by the object, then it is easy to see how the representation is
in conformity with this object, namely, as an effect in accord with its
cause, and it is easy to see how this modification of our mind
can*represent* something, that is, have an object. … In the same way, if
that in us which we call “representation” were active with regard to the
object [*des obiects* ], that is, if the object itself were created by
the representation (as when divine cognitions are conceived as the
archetypes of all things), the conformity of these representations to
their objects could be understood. … However, our understanding, through
its representations, is not the cause of the object (save in the case of
moral ends) nor is the object [*Gegenstand* ] the cause of the
intellectual representations in the mind (*in sensu reali* ). Therefore
the pure concepts of the understanding must not be abstracted from sense
perceptions, nor must

they express the reception of representations through the senses; but
though they must have their origin in the nature of the soul, they are
neither caused by the object [*vom Obiect* ] nor bring the object [*das
obiect* ] itself into being. (Zweig, 1967, 71-2)[^14]

Kant is the source of most twentieth-centurty worries about
transcendence (in so far as ‘things in themselves’ transcend every
possibility of being meaningfully cognised) and his recommendation of a
transcendental turn, whereby we reflect on the subjective conditions
that make transcendent objecthood possible, has dominated post-Kantian
philosophy.

But Kant also recognises the inalienability of the human desire for
transcendence, and this recognition inspired philosophers such as Jacobi
to attempt to find again a place for a faith that grasped the
transcendent in a way inaccessible to reason. As Hegel comments in his
‘Faith and Knowledge’ essay:

Reason, having in this way become mere intellect, acknowledges its own
nothingness by placing that which is better than it in a*faith outside
and above* itself, as a*beyond* [to be believed in]. This is what has
happened in the*philosophies of Kant, Jacobi, and Fichte.* Philosophy
has made itself the handmaid of a faith once more.

Husserl actually tries to find a new way to understand transcendence,
not by assigning it to a suprarational faculty or to faith, but rather
by rethinking it from within the concept of phenomenological*givenness*
, as we shall see.

Both senses of transcendence (as that which cannot be attained but also
as that which must be sought) found in Kant continue to play a
significant role in Husserlian and especially in post-Husserlian
phenomenology (Levinas, Marion, Henry). Emmanuel Levinas (1906-1995),
for instance, speaks of the desire for the absolutely ‘other’,*Autre*
But this tendency in Levinas and recent phenomenology is somewhat at
odds with Husserl and Stein who begin with self-experience. Let us now
examine Husserl in more detail.


