Immanence and Transcendence in Husserl’s Phenomenology
======================================================

There are a number of concepts of transcendence at play in Husserl’s
thought and it is not clear that these different senses of transcendence
ever get fully resolved in his writing. The term ‘transcendence’ does
not occur in the First Edition of the*Logical Investigations* (1900-01).
It appears in his writing more or less simultaneously with his discovery
of the reduction (c. 1905) and is prominent in*The Idea of
Phenomenology* lectures of 1907.[^15] As Stein puts it, Husserl’s
‘absolute starting point’ for phenomenology is the*immanence* of
consciousness to which is contrasted the transcendence of the
world.[^16] But in fact this only a first sense of transcendence. In his
mature publications beginning with*Ideas* I, Husserl explores a deeper
sense of transcendence, as we shall see, whereby corporeal things are
transcendent because their essence contains a kind of infinity that is
never intuitable in a completely adequate and fulfilled way. Every thing
is graspable only through a manifold of ‘adumbrations’ (*Abschattungen*
) and ‘aspects’ (*Aspekte* ), which can never be fully actualised by a
finite cognising mind. Even the corporeal thing, then, is in essence
what Husserl calls a ‘Kantian idea’, a manifold of infinite
perspectives.

As the French phenomenologist Michel Henry has recognised, one of the
first places where Husserl tackles the issue of transcendence and
immanence is in his 1907*Idea of Phenomenology* lectures.[^17] Husserl
begins with the classic epistemological problem – how do I know that I
know? How do I know that my knowledge is secure? Husserl characterises
this classic epistemological problem as the problem of transcendence
(IP, p. 28; Hua II: 36). The ‘riddle’ of knowledge is put in Kantian
terms as the possibility of its contact with the transcendent (IP, p.
33; Hua II: 43). Nothing transcendent can be taken as pre-given; as
Husserl writes: ‘The transcendence of the thing requires that we put the
thing in question’ (IP, p. 38; Hua II: 49)

According to Husserl, the very nature of the*contact* (*Triftigkeit* - a
phrase inherited from Kant) with the transcendent is precisely what the
traditional epistemologist cannot master. Some philosophers have
abandoned the possibility that knowledge can be in contact with the
transcendent and, at that point, what remains to be explained in how the
prejudice has arisen whereby it is assumed that human knowledge does
reach the transcendent. For Husserl, it is Hume who took this latter
route. For Husserl, on the other hand, the epistemological reduction
must be performed whereby every transcendence is excluded, and
intentional connections of meaningfulness are revealed.

*Overcoming the probematic of traditional epistemology, Husserl defines
a new kind of givenness -- ‘absolute givenness’ -- which he attaches to
the very act of conscious experiencing itself, to every ‘thought’ or
cogitatio. This leads Husserl to declare in the Second Lecture of the
Idea of Phenomenology:*

*Every intellectual experience, indeed every experience whatsoever, can
be made into an object of pure seeing and apprehension while it is*

*occurring.* And in this act of seeing, it is an absolute givenness.
(*IP, p. 24; Hua II: 31* )

The stream of experience given in reflection has ‘absolute givenness’.
Husserl goes on to discuss the manner in which the given is immanent in
our experience while at the same time emphasising that there is no
actual thing present or immanent in the actual occurring*Erlebnis* .
This leads to a double meaning for transcendence:

…it can refer to the fact that the known object is not really [*reell* ]
contained in the act of knowing (IP, p. 27; Hua II: 35)

But

…there is*another sense of transcendence* , whose counterpart is an
entirely different kind of immanence, namely,*absolute* and*clear
givenness* ,*self-givenness in the absolute sense* . (IP, p. 27; Hua II:
35)

This absolute self-givenness consists in ‘an immediate act of seeing and
apprehending the meant objectivity itself as it is’. Only the
immanent*cogitatio* is given. The problem now becomes for Husserl how to
safeguard the purity of the phenomenon of the*cogitatio* from
contamination by our prejudices including the psychological reading of
the*cogitatio* (as a psychological fact, a datum in space-time, and so
on). This purification for Husserl goes beyond the epistemological
reduction and he calls it the ‘phenomenological reduction’ (IP, p. 34;
Hua II: 44) whose aim is to purify the ‘psychological’ phenomenon into
the absolute givenness of pure phenomenon. Husserl contrasts this
absolute givenness of the immanent with the ‘quasi-givennesses’
(*Quasi-Gegebenheiten* , Hua II: 45) of transcendent objects. The pure
phenomenon contains an intentional referring beyond itself but that must
be treated precisely as it is given in immanent seeing and this brings
us squarely into the phenomenological perspective, or as Husserl puts
it, ‘and thus we drop anchor on the shore of phenomenology’ (*und so
werfen wir schon Anker an der Küste der Phänomenologie* , IP, p. 34; Hua
II: 45).

Continuing the metaphor Husserl warns that this shore has its share of
rocks, is covered by clouds of obscurity and threatened with the gales
of scepticism. We have what is given absolutely and purely in immanence:

On the other hand, the relation to something transcendent, whether I
question the existence (*Sein* ) of the transcendent object or the
ability of the relation to make contact (*Triftigkeit* ) with it, still
contains something that can be apprehended within the pure phenomenon.
The relating-itself-to-something transcendent (*Das
sich-auf-Transzendentes-beziehen* ), to refer to it in one way or
another, is an inner characteristic of the phenomenon. (IP, p. 35; Hua
II: 46)

It is worth rehearsing Husserl’s first tentative uncovering of the
transcendent at the heart of the immanent in these lectures as a guide
to what is the relation between phenomenology and transcendence. Not
every transcendence is excluded; there is a genuine transcendence
recognised that is the counterpart of the pure immanence of absolute
givenness. But about this genuine transcendence Husserl has little to
say in these years other than to point to the subject-transcending
nature of validity, truth and other values.

From out of the ‘Heraclitean stream of*Erlebnisse* (IP, p. 36; Hua II
47) comes a consciousness of unity, of identity, of transcendence,
objectivity, and so on. How is that possible? Husserl furthermore
acknowledges that the mere apprehension of the*cogitatio* in itself is
of little value, what matters is the turn towards the*eidos* . Indeed,
the possibility of the critique of knowledge depends on the recognition
of forms of givenness other than the singular*hic et nunc* . We already
move beyond these*cogitationes* themselves when we make judgements about
what is true, valid, and so on.

The first genuine transcendence within immanence is then the intuition
of the*eidos* . In later works, specifically*Ideas* I and*Cartesian
Meditations* , Husserl is particularly interested in the manner in which
the givenness of the world transcends the imperfect type of evidences
that display it (CM § 28 Hua I: 61-2) and no imaginable synthesis can
bring the world to adequate evidence. The being of the world necessarily
transcends consciousness; nevertheless the world is inseparable from
transcendental subjectivity.


