Transcendence in Husserl’s Ideas I (1913)
=========================================

In*Ideas* I (1913), transcendence is again discussed in a number of
places from different points of view. As in*The Idea of Phenomenology*
lectures, the transcendence of the physical thing is contrasted with the
‘immanence’ of the conscious experience apprehending it (*Ideas* I § 42,
p. 89; Hua III/1: 76). This transcendence is not merely the fact that
the thing is not ‘inside’ the conscious experience. There is also the
eidetic insight that a physical thing can never be captured by
any*Erlebnis* and this distinguishes it essentially from any episode of
consciousness. This is not the same as the transcendence in which
another person’s conscious experiences are recognised in empathy,
Husserl says.

The physical thing is said to be, in itself, unqualifiedly transcendent.
(*Ideas* I § 42, p. 90; Hua III/1: 77)

There is an essential contrast between the ‘mode of givenness’
(*Gegebenheitsart* ) of something immanent and that of something
transcendent. A physical thing is adumbrated while a mental process is
not. For Husserl, is almost an article of faith that what is absolutely
given in immanent consciousness cannot in principle be given in profiles
or adumbrations.

However, it is at this point that Husserl’s idealist commitments enter
the picture because he goes on to talk about the merely ‘phenomenal
being’ of the transcendent as opposed to the absolute being of the
immanent ((*Ideas* I § 44). A physical thing is ‘undetermined’
(*unbestimmt* ) as to its hidden sides, but it remains infinitely
‘determinable’ (*bestimmbar* ). The thing is graspable in a highly
regulated series of possible perceptions but there always remains a
‘horizon of determinable indeterminateness’ (*ein Horizont bestimmbarer
Unbestimmtheit* ,*Ideas* I § 44, p. 95; III/1 81). No God can alter
that, Husserl remarks. In this sense, the physical thing is really an
‘Idea in the Kantian sense’ (*Ideas* I § 143, p. 342; III/1 297-8). The
idea of a physical thing has ‘dimensions of infinity’ included in it
(III/1 § 143, p. 360; 313).

As Christian Lotz has shown[^18] , Husserl applies the language of
regulative ideas in a rather loose manner, namely, to the constitution
of perceptual objects , to the unity of the*Erlebnisstrom* (*Ideas* I §
83, p. 197, III/1: 166), to the world as such (Hua VII: 276; CM I: 98),
to essences of exact types (Hua III/1: 6; also § 74, p. 166; Hua III/1:
138), and, finally, in a certain sense, to his own philosophy and the
infinity of the phenomenological task. There are therefore many
transcendencies in Husserl but a central intuition is that the
experience of time is intimately wrapped up with the experience of the
transcendent (*Ideas* I § 149).

Essentially correlated with the notion of givenness is the notion of a
possible consciousness perceiving it (*Ideas* I § 142). Husserl more and
more wants to examine the nature of the transcendental ego as that which
is there to apprehend the givenness of thr world. The primary infinity,
for the mature Husserl, is the transcendental ego itself, which he calls
the most basic or ‘original concept’ (*Urbegriff, Hua* XXXV: 261) of
phenomenology. Moreover, as he will put it in the*Cartesian Meditations*
, the science of

transcendental subjectivity is the sphere of ‘absolute phenomenology’
(CM § 35), the ultimate science (FTL § 103). Thus, in 1927, Husserl
could write:

The clarification of the idea of my pure ego and my pure life - of my
psyche in its pure specific essentiality and individual uniqueness is
the basis (*das Fundament* ) for the clarification of all psychological
and phenomenological ideas. (Hua XIV: 438, my translation)

Husserl’s analysis of the ego widened to include a range of related
issues: the unity of consciousness, the nature of self, subjectivity,
and personhood, the ‘communalisation’ of the self (*Vergemeinschaftung*
, Hua I: 149) with the ‘open plurality of other egos’ (FTL§ 104),
amounting to the whole ‘intersubjective cognitive community’ (FTL § 96),
or what Husserl in his ‘reconstruction’(Hua XV: 609) of Leibniz,
calls*monadology* (see CM § 55).

From*Ideas* I onwards, Husserl characterises the ego as an ‘I-pole’
(*Ichpol* ) or ‘I-centre’ (*Ich-Zentrum* ), ‘the centre of all
affections and actions’ (IV 105). It is a ‘centre’ from which
‘radiations’ (*Ausstrahlungen* ) or ‘rays of regard’ stream out
or*towards* which rays of attention are directed. It is the centre of a
‘field of interests’ (*Interessenfeld* ), the ‘substrate of
habitualities’ (CM Hua I: 103), ‘the substrate of the totality of
capacities’ (*Substrat der Allheit der Vermögen* , Hua XXXIV: 200). This
I ‘governs’, it is an ‘I holding sway’ (*das waltende Ich* , Hua XIV:
457) in conscious life (IV 108), yet it is also ‘passively affected’. In
its full concretion’ (Hua XIV: 26), it is a*self* with convictions,
values, an outlook, a history, a style, and so on: ‘The ego constitutes
itself*for itself* in, so to speak, the unity of a history’ (CM IV, p.
75; Hua I: 109). It is present in all conscious experience and ‘cannot
be struck out’ (*undurchsteichbar* ). It is more than a formal principle
of unity (in the sense of Kant’s unity of apperception), since it has a
living, growing, unifying nature. It is also grossly misunderstood if it
is treated as a ‘piece of the world’; it is not a ‘thing’ or*res* at
all, rather it both as*anonymous* source of all meaningfulness and as a
growing, developing self, with a history and a future, in relation to
other selves, possessing*life* in the fullest sense of the word. The
transcendental ego covers ‘the universe of the possible forms of lived
experience’ (CM § 36).

Husserl sees the ‘self-explication’ (*Selbstauslegung* XXXIV 228) of the
transcendental ego as a set of ‘great tasks’ (CM § 29), but it is beset
by paradoxes such as: How can the ego be that which constitutes the
world and also that which is concretised, mundanised and corporealised
in the world? How can the transcendental ego, the source of all meaning
and being, inquire into itself as a meaning- and being-constituting
entity? Part of the complexity stems from the very self-referentiality
of the ego’s self-knowledge. How can I inquire into what founds me as a
self? When I as investigator turn to examine the ego, I am in
fact*doubling* back on myself, inquiring into what constitutes me*as*
functioning self. This necessarily involves a ‘splitting of the ego’
(*Ichspaltung* ), and is extraordinarily difficult to carry out without
lapsing into various forms of transcendental illusion. Indeed, Husserl
acknowledges, even to say that I who reflects is ‘I’ involves a certain
equivocation (VI 188). Yet, there is both identity and difference in
this I. The reflecting ego is in a different attitude and different
temporal

dimension from the ego reflected on, yet there is a consciousness of the
unity or ‘coincidence’ (*Deckung* ) of the two.

Husserl’s transcendental idealism claims that the objectivity of the
transcendent real world outside of us is an achievement of
‘transcendental intersubjectivity’. This is already articulated in his
1910/1911 lectures (e.g. Hua XIII: 184) but it is constantly reiterated
in later works, e.g. the 1928*Amsterdam Lectures* :

Transcendental intersubjectivity is the absolute and only
self-sufficient foundation (*Seinsboden* ). Out of it are created draws
the meaning and validity of everything objective, the totality of
objectively real existent entities, but also every ideal world as well.
An objectively existent thing is from first to last an existent thing
only in a peculiar, relative and incomplete sense. It is an existent
thing, so to speak, only on the basis of a cover-up of its
transcendental constitution that goes unnoticed in the natural
attitude.[^19]

Everything we experience as transcendent has the ‘value’ written on it
‘valid for all’,*für Jedermann* . Everything I experience outwardly is
in principle what someone else could experience. This is the very
meaning of objectivity (note that Husserl reconstrues the assertions of
ideality of LU into the language of intersubjective constitution in
later works). The world of spirit coheres into a unity, for Husserl. It
is a goal-oriented, rational, communicative world, a ‘community of
monads’ (*Monadgemeinschaft* ), a ‘world of development’ (*eine Welt der
Entwicklung* ), where, according to one lecture, as in Aristotelian and
Platonic philosophy, everything takes place for the sake of the
Good.[^20]

According to Husserl, the discovery of the transcendental brings with it
a responsibility to live life on a new level. One remains a ‘child of
the world’ (*Weltkind* , VIII 123; XXXIV 12), but one is also a
disinterested spectator grasping this natural life as the unfolding work
of the transcendental ego. The meditator must live thereafter in the
very splitting of consciousness brought about by the*epoché* . There is
no going back from the*epoché* , no healing of the split in
consciousness. Genuine transcendental idealism requires living*both* in
the natural attitude and in the transcendental philosophical attitude,
and somehow achieving a ‘synthesis’ of these two attitudes (Hua XXXIV:
16-17). For Husserl the adoption of the transcendental attitude is like
a person born blind who recovers his sight as a result of an operation
(Hua VIII: 122). The newly disclosed world looks completely new and one
cannot rely on any of one’s previous habits and convictions with regard
to this entirely new landscape. We have left behind the childhood of
naïve natural existence and have entered, to invoke Husserl’s own
frequent religious imagery, ‘the kingdom of pure spirit’ (*Reich des
reinen Geistes* , Hua VIII: 123).

In the*Cartesian Meditations* it is precisely the realisation that all
being and sense comes from the transcendental ego that provokes the
profound meditation in the Fifth Meditation on the meaning of the
experience of the other. How can the other in principle show itself
within the horizons of my self-experience? Husserl here talks of an
‘immanent transcendence’ (CM V, § 47):

*Within* this “*original sphere* ” (the sphere of original
self-explication) we find also a “transcendent world”… (CM § 47, pp.
104-5; Hua I 135).

The puzzle is that the objective world, the ‘first transcendence’ is
always already there for me as fully formed, but at the same time it is
somehow a result of constitution by the transcendental ego.

As I mentioned at the outset, one of phenomenology’s tasks is to explore
‘the sense of transcendence’ (*Sinn der Transzendenz* , FTL § 93c, p.
230; Hua XVII: 237). Again:

If what is experienced has the sense of ‘transcendent’ being, then it is
the experiencing that constitutes this sense, and does so either by
itself or in the whole motivational nexus pertaining to it and helping
to make up its intentionality. (FTL § 94, p. 233; XVII: 240).

Husserl makes the very important point in*Formal and Transcendental
Logic* § 99 that nothing (neither world nor any existent) comes to me
‘from without’ (he uses the Greek adverb:*thúrathen* ) Rather

Everything outside (*Alles Aussen* ) is what it is in this inside (*in
diesem Innen* ), and gets its true being from the givings of it itself
(*Selbstgebungen* ), and from the verifications (*Bewährungen* ), within
this inside - its true being, which for that very reason is itself
something that itself belongs to this inside: as a pole of unity in my
(and then, intersubjectively, in our) actual and possibile
multiplicities (*Mannigfaltigkeiten* ), with possibilities as my
abilities, as ‘I can go there’, ‘I could perform syntactical operations,
and so on. (FTL § 99, p. 250; XVII 257)

Transcendental phenomenology, according to the*Crisis of European
Sciences* (1936)[^21] even expresses the inner essence of religion
(*Crisis* § 53, Hua VI: 184) and provides Husserl as a deeply religious
in unconventional Christian - with the only philosophically justified
basis for comprehending God, given the ‘absurdity’ of thinking of Him as
an item in the factual world (see*Ideas* I § 51*Anmerkung* ). As he puts
it in FTL:

Even God is for me what he is, in consequence of my own productivity of
consciousness. (FTL § 99, p. 251; Hua XVII: 258).

Husserl goes on to insist that this does not mean that consciousness
‘makes’ or ‘invents’ (*erfinde* ) God, this ‘highest transcendence’
(*diese höchste Transzendenz* , XVII 258).

As we have seen, the concept of the transcendent in Husserl is
multifaceted. In his mature writings it is most often encountered in
relation to discussions of transcendental philosophy. In*Crisis* § 14
for instance, Husserl contrasts traditional objectivism in philosophy
with what he calls ‘transcendentalism’. Here he defines
transcendentalism as follows:

Transcendentalism, on the other hand, says: the ontic meaning of the
pregiven life-world is a subjective structure [*Gebilde* ], it is the
achievment of experiencing, pre-scientific life. In this life the
meaning and the ontic validity [*Seinsgeltung* ] of the world are built
up - of that particular world that is, which is actually valid for the
individual experiencer. As for the “objectively true” world, the world
of science, it is a structure at a higher level, built on prescientific
experiencing and thinking, or rather on its accomplishments of validity
(*Geltungsleistungen* ). Only a radical inquiry back into subjectivity -
and specifically the subjectivity which ultimately

brings about all world-validity, with its content, and in all its
prescientific and scientific modes, and into the “what” and the “how” of
the rational accomplishments - can make objective truth comprehensible
and arrive at the ultimate ontic meaning of the world. (*Crisis* , p.
69).

Husserl sees the traditional, Cartesian problematic of epistemology as
the problem of transcendence (CM IV, p. 81; I 115): how can the
certainties I arrive at in the immanent stream of my conscious life
acquire objective significance? (CM IV, p. 82; I 116). How can evidence
claim to be more than a characteristic of consciousness and actually
build up to the experience of an objective world as a whole? What the
reduction shows is that this is a non-question because all transcendence
is constituted within the domain of transcendental subjectivity:

Transcendence in every form is a within-the-ego self-constituting
being-sense. Every imaginable sense, every imaginable being, whether the
latter is called immanent or transcendent, falls within the domain of
transcendental subjectivity, as the subjectivity that constitutes sense
and being. (CM IV, p. 83-84; Hua I: 117, trans modified).

The transcendental ego is the ‘universe of possible sense’ and hence to
speak of an ‘outside’ is precisely nonsense (CM Hua I: 117).


