Karl Jaspers on Transcendence
=============================

Before moving on to discuss Edith Stein, I want now to turn to another
conception of the transcendent that was being explored in Germany around
the same time Husserl was writing. I am referring of course to Karl
Jaspers who had a huge influence on the Heidegger of*Being and Time* ,
and thereby, indirectly, had an influence on Edith Stein. Jaspers made
transcendence a central issue in relation to the ‘illumination of
existence’ (*Existenzerhellung* ), especially in his massive
three-volume work,*Philosophie* , which, although it did not appear
until 1932, had been in gestation all through the nineteen
twenties.[^22] Indeed, many of Jaspers’ central concepts had already
been articulated*in nuce* in his 1919*Psychology of Worldviews*
(*Psychologie der Weltanschauungen* ), which Heidegger reviewed
critically at a formative stage in his own career.[^23] In his writing
Jaspers outlines various ways of dealing with the individual openness to
transcendence; one can deny or resist it, or seek a way in the world to
accommodate it.[^24] But transcendence continues to intrude on our
individual lives since transcendence is what makes our lives individual
and authentically experienced.

Jaspers begins from the existential starting-point: ‘everything
essentially real is for me only by virtue of the fact that I am I
myself.’[^25] My existence is the ‘arena’ for my
self-realization.*Existenz* (a term he consciously borrowed from
Kierkegaard, who himself found it in Schelling who opposed*Existenz* to
the Hegelian Idea) refers to ‘possible’ individual existence in terms of
its freedom and willing. For Jaspers, the very essence of*Existenz* is
its intentional tending to the other, i.e. its transcendence.[^26]
Jaspers writes:

Just as I do not exist without the world, I am not myself without
transcendence. … I stand before transcendence, which does not occur to
me as existing in the world of phenomenal things but speaks to me as
possible – speaks to me in the voice of whatever exists, and most
decidedly in that of my self-being. The transcendence before which I
stand is the measure of my own depth.[^27]

For Jaspers,*Existenz* is always directed towards transcendence: ‘Its
authentic being consists in the search for transcendence’. Jaspers
writes:

Existence is the self-being that relates to itself and thereby also to
transcendence from which it knows that it has been given to itself and
upon which it is grounded.[^28]

Freedom exists, for Jaspers, only with and by transcendence.[^29] For
Jaspers, transcendence is that which is experienced as beyond the
person; but it cannot be thought of as anything empirically real or
actual. Transcendence*encompasses* individuals, but it cannot be
objectified; it is precisely*beyond* both subjectivity and objectivity.
Transcendence is not something in the world nor is it simply to be
identified with human freedom, but transcendence appears wherever there
is*Existenz* .

Jaspers begins, as does Husserl, with the subject-object relation
familiar to modern philosophy. But for Jaspers, to become aware of the
subject-object relation is already to be moving in the domain of what
Jaspers calls the ‘Encompassing’ (*das Umgreifende* ). For Jaspers, all
thinking involves transcending, beyond the objective and towards the
‘Encompassing’ which

we experience as the ‘horizon of horizons’,[^30] the being which is
beyond our categorizations; ‘The encompassing preserves my freedom
against knowability.’[^31] Jaspers writes:

But the encompassing (*Umgreifende* ) is not the horizon of our
knowledge at any particular moment. Rather, it is the source from which
all new horizons emerge, without itself ever being visible even as a
horizon. The encompassing always merely announces itself - in present
objects and within the horizons - but it*never* becomes an*object* .
Never appearing to us itself, it is that wherein everything else
appears.[^32]

Jaspers and Husserl share this concept of the ‘horizon’ as that in which
objectivity appears as such. The problem for both is that to try to
think of the ‘encompassing’ or of ‘horizonality’ is already to objectify
it. The result is therefore, as Jaspers says, that ‘every proposition
concerning the encompassing thus contains a paradox’.[^33]

Despite the fact that we cannot grasp the ‘encompassing’, nevertheless
Jaspers suggests that we can become aware of it in a lucidity different
from determinate knowledge. Jaspers wants us to philosophize ‘in the
modes of the encompassing’ by detaching oneself from determinate
knowledge.[^34] For Jaspers, transcendence is experienced through
‘cyphers’.*Existenz* is the cypher for transcendence.[^35] These
‘cyphers’ appear in art, religion and in specific aspects of lived human
existence (especially our ‘limit situations’), and, while somehow
pointing towards transcendence, also withhold knowledge of the
transcendent, and indeed they confirm the impossibility of such
knowledge. As consciousness comes to recognise its own limits it takes
on an attitude of foundering or ‘failing’ (*Scheitern* ), an experience
of insufficiency before the transcendent. More specifically, it is my
historicity that makes me aware of transcendence:

Only through historicity do I become aware of the authentic being of
transcendence –and only through transcendence does our ephemeral
existence acquire historical substance.[^36]

My very contingent existing is itself a cypher of transcendence.

Paradoxically, and it is not clear to me what this means, Jaspers
maintains that there is only one transcendence even though there are
many existences. The experience of absolute reality is that it is one
and that it contains no possibility.

*Existenz* is not a self-contained unity. If there is unity it only is
in transcendence.[^37]

Moreover, ‘transcendence is not a matter of proof, but one of
witness’.[^38] For Jaspers, the perennial task is*communication* , but
the transcendent does not communicate directly with humans.
Transcendence is ineffable and incommunicable. It can however somehow
be*experienced* or lived through. Jasper further says that ‘the paradox
of transcendence is that it can only be grasped historically but cannot
be adequately conceived as being itself historical.’[^39]

Paradoxically, given its incommunicability, Jaspers defines
transcendence is defined in relational terms: ‘There is transcendence
only by virtue of the reality of my unconditionality’.[^40] There is no
transcendence except for existence: ‘*Existenz* is either in relation to
transcendence or not at

all’.[^41] ‘I am existentially myself in the act of apprehending
transcendence.’[^42] I experience myself as given to myself not by
myself but by something other, by transcendence.[^43] Jaspers maintains
that the ‘place of transcendence is neither in this world or beyond, but
it is the boundary - the boundary at which I confront transcendence
whenever I am my true self.’[^44] Jaspers has the view that my sense of
being-in-myself is shattered by the experience of transcendence.


