Edith Stein’s Starting-Point: Natural Experience
================================================

For Edith Stein, both phenomenology and Thomism begin with ‘natural
experience as the starting point of every kind of thinking that goes
beyond natural experience’ (FEB, p.333). She continues:

Even though not all knowledge rests exclusively on experience and even
though there is, rather, a valid basis of experience which can be known
by pure reason, it nonetheless remains the aim of all thinking to arrive
at an understanding of the world of experience. Thinking which does not
lead to the establishment of the bases of experience but to the
abrogation of experience … is without any real foundation and inspires
no confidence. (FEB, pp. 333-34)

Stein thinks that Husserl and Thomas both begin from experience and
respect the givens of experience. For Stein, the tacit assumption of
natural experience is that there is a multiplicity of objects (FEB, p.
333). There is an assumption that there is a natural world. But,
following Husserl, Stein points out that this concept of ‘nature’ is
actually partly constituted by culture; it emerges from an ‘interlacing’
(*Verflechtung* ) with mind (FEB, p. 334) The natural world is always
already united with intellect, but, Stein goes on, not just finite minds
but also refers to infinite mind:

The worlds of nature and mind, however, do not exhaust all that which is
if by “world of the mind” we mean only a world of finite minds and of
structures created by finite minds. The totality of the created world
refers back … to those eternal and non-become archetypes [*Urbilder* ]
of all created things (essences or pure forms) that we have designated
as divine ideas. All real being (which comes to be and passes away) is
anchored in the essential being of these divine ideas. (FEB, p. 334-5)

Here Husserlian essentialism is wedded to Thomistic reflections on the
relation between the finite, created order and its infinite ground.

It is important to emphasise that, in*Finite and Eternal Being* , Stein
is emphatic that her inquiry is philosophical and not dependent on
revealed truth, nevertheless, she recognises, at the same time, that her
inquiry has to be constrained by revealed truth. For her, theological
knowledge gives philosophy the distinction between essence and existence
or between person and substance (FEB, pp. 23-24). Philosophy uses
theology but is not the same as theology. The philosopher who borrows
from theology is concerned with revealed truth but not with that
truth*qua revealed* (FEB, p. 24). On the other hand, the ultimate ground
of our existence is unfathomable, and hence philosophy needs to be,
following Erich Przywara who strongly influences her thinking in this
regard, ‘reduction to the mystery’ (*reductio as mysterium* ). Stein
recognised, as did Husserl (in*Philosophy as a Rigorous Science* and in
the*Crisis* ) that a purely methodological conception of philosophy
could not satisfy the age. People seek truth, they need meaning in their
lives; they seek a ‘philosophy of life’.[^45] Both Stein and Heidegger
agreed on this point. They further agreed that the existing philosophies
of life were flights into irrationalism.

With regard to the religious orientation of Husserl’s own thinking,
Edith Stein reports (albeit in fictional form in her dialogue between
Husserl and Aquinas) Husserl as saying:

It never occurred to me to contest the right of faith. It (along with
other religious acts that come to mind, for I have always left open the
possibility of seeing visions as a source of religious experience) is
the proper approach in religion as are the senses in the area of
external experience.[^46]

But knowledge through faith or the faith-intuition is different from
rational reflection on faith. Aquinas on the other hand, believes faith
makes truths accessible which elude the grasp of reason; and that reason
can ‘analye’ these truths and ‘put them to use’.[^47] Stein’s point,
which she puts in the mouth of Aquinas, is that natural reason is not
able to set bounds on itself.[^48] Faith, for Stein and Aquinas, on the
other hand, provides its own guarantee.


