Phenomenology and the Meaning of Being
======================================

Edith Stein claims--paralleling Heidegger--that the Greeks’ great
question concerned the nature of being. Modern philosophy, however, has
lost interest in being and turned instead to epistemology. However,
Stein says, again in agreement with Heidegger, ontology was revived by
Husserl with his ‘philosophy of essence’ (*Wesensphilosophie* ), and
thereafter by Heidegger with his*Existenzphilosophie* , and by Hedwig
Conrad Martius with her ‘ontology of the real’ (*Realontologie* , FEB,
p. 6). Stein in fact sees phenomenology as deeply concerned with the
sense of being. She defends Husserl’s ‘doctrine of essences’
(*Wesenslehre* ) against some Neo-Scholastic misconceptions. For her,
the lesson is that factual being requires a timeless ground:

Nothing temporal can exist without a timeless formal structure
(*Gestalt* ) which regulates the particular course of the temporal
sequence of events and is thereby actualised in time. (FEB, p. 102)

Stein takes a traditional view of the divine nature as a self-contained
timeless plenitude (*Fülle* ), but she also emphasises the divine as
Person and uses typically phenomenological ways of articulating both
this plenitude and the concepts of personhood and subjectivity, taking
her beyond her Thomistic beginnings and into an interesting elaboration
of Husserian phenomenology. Being, for Stein, is to be understood as
plenitude or ‘fullness’:

Being is one … Its full meaning corresponds to the fullness of all
existents. And when we speak of*being* , we*mean* this total fullness.
(FEB, p. 332)

Stein grasps this meaning of being in intentional terms. When we refer
to, intend or mean (*meinen* ) something, we mean the whole thing, even
if we are only presented with one side or aspect of that thing. Hence
Stein concludes that our aim is to approximate to fullness:

To approximate the apperception of this fullness is the infinite task
and goal of human knowledge. (FEB, p. 332)

All plenitude of meaning is contained in the divine being. This for
Stein is one possible interpretation of the opening sentence of the
Prologue of John,*en arche en ho logos:* ‘in the beginning was the
meaning (*Sinn* )’ (FEB, p. 106). Interestingly, Husserl took makes use
of the concept of plenitude or ‘fullness’ in his own description of the
manner in which an object is intended as a whole while at the same time
is seen only in part. For Stein, however, to recognise this timeless
ground of temporal entities is not to assert that humans have direct
intellectual cognition of the purely intellectual or spiritual sphere.
Stein denies, with Kant and Husserl, that we can have knowledge of
‘things in themselves’ (FEB, p. 104). Our knowledge of essences is
always ‘fragmentary’ (FEB, p. 104).


