Publisher's Preface
===================

**Publisher's**[^1] **Preface**

***In the Name of Allah the Most Beneficent and Merciful***

In our everyday lives we use many such words that we do not fully
comprehend. We speak such words; read such words; listen to such words
whose source and broad meanings are not clear to us. "Wilayat" is one of
those words. It is not a stranger to the Shi'ahs. It has been used
profusely in our religious speeches, books and supplications and still
is. But most of the people do not know its meanings. They are unaware of
its true and broad sense. Almost all the people think of Wilayat as
affection.

The term "Wilayat al-Faqih" became known in our society after the
Islamic revolution and establishment of the government based on Wilayat
al-Faqih in Iran. However, since not enough work was done on explaining
the concept, the political, economic and communal aspects of Wilayat
remained hidden and the association with Wilayat stayed limited to
reverence for the Wali al-Faqih.

"Wilayat" is a term that carries extremely wide-ranging connotation
covering government, sponsorship, attachment, relationship, linkage,
intertwining together of two things and a group of people having Wilayat
for each other, sticking together as if they are forming a steel wall.

This book on the subject of "Wilayat" is a collection of six speeches by
Ayatullah Sayyid Ali Khameneâ€™i, the leader of the Islamic revolution.
The speeches were delivered in the month of Ramadan four months before
the success of the Islamic revolution at Masjid Imam Hasan Mujtaba in
venerated Mashhad.

The great leader has explained different meanings of Wilayat in these
speeches. He has shed light on different manifestations of Wilayat in
the society and has mentioned such meanings of Wilayat that are
generally not talked about in our conversations. Furthermore, while
expressing his opinion on the importance of Wilayat, its benefits and
its absolute necessity in the Shi'ah and Islamic society, he has
declared imperative, efforts to establish a society for Muslims that
holds Allah's Wilayat instead of Satan's.

We hope that just like our other publications, this book will be well
received by the people of knowledge. In the end as always, we look
forward to useful opinions, advices, suggestions and donations from the
readers.

[^1]: This book was translated to Urdu from Farsi by Late Sayyid Saeed
Haider Zaidi and published by Darus Saqalain, KaraCh.i, Pakistan in
August 2007. It was translated from Urdu to English by Sayyid Saeed
Haider Kazmi. For any queries about the English translation he may be
contacted via email: skazmi.re@gmail.com For brevity's sake "peace be
upon him and his progeny" has been omitted from wherever the names of
the fourteen Infallibles have been mentioned but it is implied.


