Speech 2: Relationships of Muslim Nation (Ummah)
================================================

Internal and External Relationships
-----------------------------------

Islamic society has been designed to act as the Nation of Islam and is
to be run according to divine thought and laws under the delegated
authority of God through enactment and implementation of these laws. If
this Islamic society aspires to be driven by Wilayat in the Qur'anic
context and wants to manage it as we discussed in the previous speech,
then it is imperative that it takes care of two relationships - one: the
intra Islamic society and the other: between Islamic society and the
other nations of the world.

In regards to the intra relationships the Islamic Nation will be a
bearer of Wilayat in the Qur'anic context when it has adhesion and
bonding between its ranks; there is total unity and agreement between
its various members and groups; there is no disunity and conflict in the
Nation of Islam and there are no groupings within the Nation.

If two groups within the Nation of Islam are at loggerheads with each
other, Quran says that the remaining Muslims should try their best to
create peace and harmony between the warring groups.

If they find that one of the combating groups is ready for peace but the
other is not; or one is just and the other is not; and the group at
fault is not ready to accept what is right, then at this point the whole
World of Islam should unite against the oppressor and fight against it
until it throws in the towel.

In the 9th verse of Surah Hujarat[^1] Lord of the universe says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اِنْ طَآئِفَتٰنِ مِنَ الْمُومِنِيْنَ اقْتَتَلُوْا فَاَصْلِحُوْا
بَيْنَہُمَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***If two groups of Muslims fight, you make peace between them.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فاِنْ بَغَتْ اِحْداٰہُمَا عَلَي الْاُخْرٰي فَقَاتِلُوا الَّتِيْ
تَبْغِيْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***If one of the two groups has oppressed the other, fight against
it.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتّٰي تَفِيْئَ اِلٰي اَمْرِ الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Until it is forced to accept the writ of God.***

This order from God of the universe is to preserve unity and harmony
within the Islamic society.

In the context of external relationships the Nation of Islam should
develop liaison with the non-Muslim world and the people outside the
Islamic World in such a way that it is absolutely not under their
control and must not be influenced by their ideology; and it must not
surrender its independence by accepting even slight influence of their
politics.

It is prohibited for Muslims to join their camp and develop ties with
them as a nation.

There is a famous legend that has been mentioned in reliable Shi'ah
books and belongs to the era of Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq or Imam Muhammad
Al-Baqir. At that time the coin of Islamic world used to be minted in
Rome. In this context Rome made some threats that created a problem for
Muslims. At this juncture the Imam guided the khalifa (ruler) of the
time. It is odd. We have seen only one or two instances where the Imams
have extended cooperation to the rulers. This is one of those occasions
where the Imam guided the administration on how to mint the coin as
those people did not know how to mint silver coins.

So in the context of external relationships it is prohibited to accept
even slight influence from the enemies of Islam. The Islamic society and
the Nation of Islam has no right to establish relationships with
non-Muslim world except one of dominance over them. In other words if
there is such a contact between the Nation of Islam and the non-Islamic
government that results in subjugation of the Islamic nation as happened
in the tobacco case you have all heard and read about, then the Islamic
World does not have the right to establish such an association.
Similarly the kings and Mughal Emperors of India allowed foreign
countries to come and establish their companies in India; this act was
wrong and against the Wilayat of Islamic World. They should have known
and everyone should know that when companies like East India Company
enter their land what calamities they bring upon the local residents and
establish imperialism in the veins of this great continent. The World of
Islam has not been allowed to develop this sort of relationships and
associations.

We should keep in mind that when we talk about not establishing
relationships with the non-Muslim governments and nations it does not
mean that the Islamic World should be detached politically from the rest
of the world. This is a not a matter of political isolation. One should
not think that the World of Islam should neither have trade relations
with others nor political nor diplomatic; neither should it send its
ambassadors to other countries nor accept theirs. No, this is not it. It
should maintain its liaison with others but should not have Wilayat with
them; should not have bondage with them; should not have such a
relationship that will allow others to have sway over the Islamic World.

So the Qur'anic Wilayat has two manifestations. One is that all elements
in the Islamic society should have one purpose, one direction and one
path. And the other is that the Nation of Islam should break ties from
all external elements and groups opposed to Islam.

At this moment there is a subtle point that tells us that the
interpretation of Wilayat according to Qur'an is the same as what
Shi'ahs believe in.

The importance given in Shi'ah to the association with Imam; the way we
enforce order of an Imam in all facets of social life; what is it for
and what is the basis for it?

Here the Glorious Qur'an tells us that if a society and a nation wants
to practice Qur'anic Wilayat; in other words if it wants all its
internal powers focused in one direction, one purpose and one path; if
it wants all its internal powers ready to combat with the external
forces opposing Islam; then it needs to have a central point of power in
the Islamic society; it needs a focal point that all the internal powers
are linked to and from whom they seek guidance, listen to and follow.
Furthermore, that focal point should be mindful of what is good for the
nation and what can be harmful to the nation so that as a strong,
far-sighted and sagacious commander he can assign his troops on the
battlefield for the right tasks.

There needs to be a guardian, a commander and a central power who knows
what you can do, what I can do and what others can do, so he can assign
responsibilities based on capabilities. As an example, have you seen a
carpet-weaving factory? A number of people work in the factory. Every
young and old weaves with a thread. If all of them are not in sync with
each other; if there is no one authority supervising them, who tells
them about the design of the carpet, who issues instructions so they
know what thread to use, how to weave and how to move forward, can you
imagine what sort of a carpet will come out?

You will see that the right portion will be of Eastern style, the left
portion Western style; one side will be Kurdish and the other Turkish.
The outcome will be a disorderly ugly thing with strange features. A
specific style, balance and order you see in a carpet is because clear
instructions were in place for its preparation and there was someone
continuously directing the workers towards these instructions.

The Qualities of a Wali (Guardian)
----------------------------------

If a society wants to have all its powers focused on one point and does
not want its energies wasted, it needs to have one central power - one
heart.

However, this focal point or the heart needs to have certain qualities.
He should be extremely wise; should have a strong willpower; should have
a certain ideology; should not be afraid of anything in the path of God;
and if need arises, be willing to sacrifice his life.

What do we call such a personality?

We call him Imam.

Imam, a ruler and a guardian, who has been appointed by the Lord of the
World for this society. It is just like the Sublime Master says about
Abraham:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنِّيْ جَاعِلُکَ لِلنَّاسِ اِمَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***I have appointed you Imam for people**.* [^2]

When we say that the Imam should be appointed by God, there are two
aspects to it. Either He appoints an Imam by name and qualities just the
way the Prophet of Islam appointed the Commander of the faithful -
Ali -, Hasan, Husayn and others as Imams; or the Sublime Master does not
appoint by name but only by qualities. As Imam says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاَمّا مَنْ کٰانَ مِنَ الْفُقَھٰائِ صٰائِناً لِنَفْسِہِ حٰافِظاً
لِدِيِنِہِ مُخٰالِفاً عَليٰ ھُوٰاہُ مُطِيعاً لاَ مْرِمَوْلاٰہُ
فَلِلْعَوامِ اَنْ يُقَلِّدُوہُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Among the scholars of religion one who controls his inner self, defends
his religion, has crushed his carnal desires and obeys God's commands,
people should follow him.* [^3]

In this tradition the Imam has prescribed the qualities and signposts of
a guardian and a leader; whoever meets this criterion, will be the
guardian and the leader.

We wish to explain the meanings of the word, "Imam". Imam is a guide, a
ruler, someone people should follow; someone from God; who is just; who
is a judge; who is religious; who has a strong willpower; and other
similar characteristics pertaining to the Imam that we do not have the
time to delve into in detail.

According to the Qur'anic principle of Wilayat the presence of an Imam
is imperative. If this great entity called the Nation of Islam needs to
stay alive, successful, and always strong and powerful, then it has to
have a link with this vibrant, exciting, always strong and resourceful
core.

The second aspect of Wilayat is that every member of the Islamic Nation
must have a strong link with this nucleus of the nation. This link
should be based on ideology and practice. Declaring the Imam as a role
model, adopting his ideology and exactly following his footsteps in all
matters and activities is Wilayat.

So having the Wilayat of Imam Ali implies that in your ideology and
actions you are a follower of Ali; there is a strong and unbreakable
bond between you and Ali; you are not detached from Ali; these are the
meanings of Wilayat. At this point we can understand the following
tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وِلاٰيَۃُ عَليِّ ابْنِ اَبيطالبٍ حِصْني فَمَنْ دَخَلَ حِصْنِي اَمِنَ
مِنْ عَذابي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The Wilayat of Ali is a fort; whoever gets in will be safe from the
wrath of God.*

This is an exquisite tradition. If the Muslims and followers of the
Glorious Qur'an are attached to Ali in their ideology, actions,
struggles and activities, they will be safe from God's punishment.

How can someone who thinks that Qur'an is incomprehensible claim that he
has Wilayat of Ali Ibn Abi Talib and is affiliated with Ali's ideology?
Imam Ali says in one of his sermons in Nahjul Balagha:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْلَمُوا اَنَّ ھٰذَا الْقُرْنَ ھُوَالنّٰا صفحُ الَّذِي لاٰ يَغُشُّ‘
وَالْھادِي الَّذِي لاٰ يُضِلُّ ‘وَالْمُحَدِّثُ الَّذِي لاٰ يَکْذِبُ‘
وَمٰاجَالَسَ ھٰذَا الْقُرنَ اَحَد اِلّا قٰامَ عَنْہُ بِزِيٰادَۃٍ
اَوْنُقْصٰانٍ‘ زِيٰادَۃٍ في ھُديً وَنُقْصٰانٍ مِنْ عَميً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*You should know that Qur'an is such a counselor that does not deceive;
is such a guardian who does not make you go astray; is such a speaker
who does not lie. Whoever sat with this Qur'an, got up with a boost in
guidance and a decrease in ignorance.* [^4]

Ali introduces Qur'an in such a fashion and draws people towards it. If
someone says that Qur'an is incomprehensible, does he have Wilayat of
Ali Ibn Abi Talib? Of course not.

Ali is ready to sacrifice his life in the path of Allah (swt). Such is
the character of Ali. When someone is not willing to sacrifice his
wealth, his life, his stature in the society, his comfort and his
leadership, does he have Ali 's Wilayat?

An individual who possesses Ali's Wilayat is someone who maintains an
unbreakable tie with Ali in both ideology and practice.

If you ponder correctly, the meanings we have provided for Wilayat are
the deepest and the most lucid.

We are presenting a few verses from Chapter al-Ma’idah[^5] for you to
reflect on. These verses address the establishment of internal
relationships as well the breaking of external relationships as viewed
by Wilayat.

Furthermore, these verses describe the bond and connection with the
Wali - the hub, the heart, the ruler and the Imam.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يٰاَيُّھَا الَّذِيْنَ ٰامَنُوْا لا تَتَّخِذُوا الْيَہُودَ وَ
النَّصٰرٰي اَوْلِيَآئَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O' believers! Don't make the Jews and Christians your guardians
(aulia).***

اَوْلِيَآئ Aulia is the plural form of Wali. The word Wali comes from
Wilayat. As explained before Wilayat means a bond. Don't develop a bond
with Jews and Christians. Don't connect with them. Don't adopt their
ways for yourselves.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَعْضُہُمْ اَوْلِيَآئُ بَعْض
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They are connected to each other.***

Don't think that they belong to separate groups. In the language of
Qur'an they are one in opposing your religion.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَنْ يَّتَوَلَّہُمْ مِّنْکُمْ فَاِنَّہ مِنْہُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever affiliates with them, indeed will become part of them.*

**Tawalla - accepting Wilayat.** Whoever will enter the circle of their
Wilayat and will connect with them, will become part of them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّ الله لايَہْدِي الْقَوْمَ الظّٰلِمِيْن
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed God will not guide the oppressors***

External Relationships
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَرَي الَّذِيْنَ فِيْ قُلُوْبِہِمْ مَّرَض يُّسَارِعُوْنَ فِيْہِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***You see these people whose hearts are diseased; they run to join the
camp of your religion's enemy.***

They do not contend with just a normal walk, they run to it. It is not
enough for them to just get close, they join their ranks. If you ask
them, "why are you mingling so closely with the enemies of the religion
and why are you displaying such affection with them instead of
animosity?" They respond with an excuse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَخْشٰي اَنْ تُصِيْبَنَا دَآئِرَۃ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We are afraid that there may be hardships for us.***

Have we not heard such words before?

God responds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَعَسَي الله اَنْ يَّاْتِيَ بِالْفَتْحِ اَوْ اَمْرٍ مِّنْ عِنْدِہ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***There is hope that God will bring victory to the believers or will
make some incident happen in their favor.***

And when that happens:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَيُصْبِحُوْا عَلٰي مَآ اَسَرُّوْا فِيْ اَنْفُسِہِمْ نٰدِمِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***At that time these cursed people who joined the enemy will regret.***

They will be ashamed. They will say, "What a folly we committed? If we
had known that the believers will garner such success and power, we
would not have joined the enemies of the religion and God; we would not
have disgraced ourselves."

When they had debased themselves by conspiring with the enemies of God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ يَقُوْلُ الَّذِيْنَ ٰامَنُوْاَھٰوُلائِ الَّذِيْنَ اَقْسَمُوْا بِاِ
الله جَہْدَ اَيْمَانِہِمْ اِنَّہُمْ لَمَعَکُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The faithful will say, "Were they those believers - the good appearing
and good looking people - who had sworn big time that they were with
us?" Or whenever we said something, they would say, "We are with you; we
have no difference of opinion with you. We say the same thing as you
do." These people make such statements but later it becomes apparent
that their hearts were sick. Their appearance looks good but their
hearts are polluted, black and tainted with hypocrisy. That day the
faithful say, "How bizarre? How these people used to vow? Are they the
same people?"

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَھٰوُلائِ الَّذِيْنَ اَقْسَمُوْا بِاِ الله جَہْدَ اَيْمَانِہِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Are they the same people who swore so strongly in the name of God?***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّہُمْ لَمَعَکُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily we are with you.***

They used to swear that they were with you - in thought and ideology.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَبِطَتْ اَعْمَالُہُمْ فَاَصْبَحُوْ خٰسِرِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Their deeds are destroyed and they are among the big losers.***

So far these verses[^6] were about the external relationships.

Internal Relationships
----------------------

In continuation of the same verses ponder over the internal
relationships:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يٰاَيُّھَا الَّذِيْنَ ٰامَنُوْا مَنْ يَّرْتَدَّ مِنْکُمْ عَنْ دِيْنِہ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O' believers! If some of you revert from your religion***

You had accepted the responsibility of propagating God's religion when
you accepted faith in God; if you want to renege and avoid carrying this
responsibility to its destination, don't think that this consignment
will not reach its destination. This is a misconception you have; this
honor will go to some other nation.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ يَّرْتَدَّ مِنْکُمْ عَنْ دِيْنِہ فَسَوْف يَاْتِي الله بِقَوْمٍ
يُّحِبُّہُمْ وَ يُحِبُّوْنَہ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***If someone among you regresses from the religion and becomes an
unbeliever, God will create such people who will be loved by God and
they will love God.***

Are we among those who love God?

Many times we utter such words that express our love for God. Do these
words prove that we love God?

In this context the Glorious Qur'an makes a point. Exalted Allah says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ اِنْ کُنْتُمْ تُحِبُّوْنَ الله فَاتَّبِعُوْنِيْ يُحْبِبْکُمُ
اللّٰہُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"O' Prophet! Say, "if you love God, obey me so that God will also
love you."*** [^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُّحِبُّہُمْ وَ يُحِبُّوْنَہ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He loves them and they love Him.***

They will show their love to God by being completely subservient to the
commands of Allah and Allah will also love them; it will go both ways.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَذِلَّۃٍ عَلَي الْمُومِنِيْن
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They are humble towards the believers.***

One of the qualities of these people is that they show humility towards
the believers. This is a sign of their extremely deep bond and
relationship with the believers. These people do not have any vanity,
eccentricity and undue pride in front of Muslims. When they come to the
people, they become a part of them; they stand shoulder to shoulder with
them; they become their companions and do not isolate from them. It is
not like they keep a distance and show occasional sympathy.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَذِلَّۃٍ عَلَي الْمُومِنِيْن
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They are humble towards the believers.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَعِزَّۃٍ عَلَي الْکٰفِرِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They stand up to the enemies of Islam and Qur'an.***

In other words they are not impressed by them. They keep their heads
high in front of them and they have drawn such a circle of Islamic
ideology around them that they are never awed by the non-believers.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُجَاہِدُوْنَ فِيْ سَبِيْلِ الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They fight in the path of Allah.***

One of their qualities is that they fight in the path of Allah with
extreme valor and bravado. As the verse says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لا يَخَافُوْنَ لَوْمَۃَ لاَئِمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They are not afraid of someone censuring them.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذٰلِکَ فَضْلُ الله يوْتِيْہِ مَنْ يَّشَآئُ وَ الله وَاسِع عَلِيْم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***This is a blessing from Allah that He bestows upon whoever He
pleases; He encompasses*** ***all and He knows everything**.* [^8]

The latter verse addresses the relationship between different parts of
the Islamic society and the nucleus - the Imam and the leader.

Ponder hard so you know that the issues considered not Qur'anic, are
being articulated by Qur'an in such eloquence and clarity.

The Glorious Qur'an discussed the external and internal relationships.
Now it talks about the core of the internal relationships - the Imam,
the Leader and the Guide.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّمَا وَلِيُّکُمُ الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Most certainly Allah is the Guardian and Owner of commandments.***

Allah has to be the Hub of all activities of the Islamic nation and
society and all instructions related to the Islamic society and the
nation should be sought from Him. There is God but God cannot acquire a
body and come in the middle of people to stop them from doing evil and
exhort them to do good. Then who is this nucleus?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ رَسُوْلُہ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And the Prophet*

It is obvious that there is no strife between Allah and the Prophet. The
Prophet is the representative of Allah.

But as Qur'an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّکَ مَيِّت وَّ اِنَّہُمْ مَّيِّتُوْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O' Prophet! You are going to die and verily they are all going to
die**.* [^9]

Prophet will not be there forever. So it should be made clear who will
be responsible after the Prophet. The Lord of the World introduces those
personalities:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِيْن امَنُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And those who believe.***

Is it enough to declare faith? The answer is in the negative. He must
have other qualities.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِيْنَ يُقِيْمُوْنَ الصَّلٰوۃَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those who establish prayer.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ يُوتُوْنَ الزَّکٰوۃَ وَ ہُمْ رَاکِعُوْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those who pay alms while kneeling (during prayer).***

Imam Ali, the Role Model
------------------------

Based on the sum of the above-mentioned signs, Imam Ali has been
appointed as the Guardian (Wali). However, if there is a doubt that Ali
is not the intended personality in the verse and the verse points to all
believers who possess these qualities, then the question arises, "who
among them can be chosen as the role model for this school of thought?"
In Islamic society we cannot find any personality other than Ali Ibn Abi
Talib. Let us suppose that the verse is not referring to Ali, even then
there was no example of such strong faith other than Ali Ibn Abi Talib
in the Islamic society of the time.

It is important to point out at this point that when we talk about
Wilayat with Shi’ah in mind, we are looking at the positive aspect and
not the negative one. And as we have stated several times, we consider
it important that Shi'ahs recognize themselves; get to know their
ideology and fortify their belief. At the same time we believe that
Shi'ahs should stop confronting with Sunni brothers as there exists an
external enemy of Muslims.

In this conversation we want to support Shi’ah but do not intend to
negate others. We do not wish to advance the differences in beliefs and
practices for no reason. However, it is important for you to understand
how you know Shi’ah. The Shi’ah we are talking about is not an entity
separate from Islam. Shi’ah is not alien to Islam. The viewpoint Shi’ah
holds about Islam and Qur'an is correct, logical, just and sensible.

Please pay attention to the fact that we are describing an Islamic
principle and our conversation is about Islam's ideological principle.
We don't think that you would have a different opinion and we are
focusing only on the positive aspect of the issue. We are describing
Islam the way the School of Shi’ah understands it. There may be other
groups of people who may have different ideas and we are not concerned
about that and we are not interested in discussing that; we have no
quarrel with them. We are all brothers and we extend a hand of
friendship towards them. Why? Because we have a common enemy in front of
us; because the enemy is upon us. In such circumstances we have no right
to insult each other. This is also our creed that we wanted to relate.

The purpose of conversation about Shi’ah is due to its truthfulness and
virtue; because we are believers in Shi’ah and look at Islam through the
lens of Shi’ah. It is not to invent differences between Shi'ahs and
Sunnis; absolutely it is not our purpose; we consider promoting
differences unlawful (haram).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّمَا وَلِيُّکُمُ الله وَ رَسُوْلُہ وَ الَّذِيْنَ ٰامَنُوا
الَّذِيْنَ يُقِيْمُوْنَ الصَّلٰوۃَ وَ يُوْتُوْنَ الزَّکٰوۃَ وَ ہُمْ
رَاکِعُوْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Your Guardian and Owner of commandments is God, His Prophet and the
believers who establish prayers and give alms while kneeling in
prayers.*** [^10]

This verse has been explained in detail and here it has been reproduced
again.

Now we should see that if we keep Wilayat in our mind what is going to
happen; is it going to have an impact on us?

We have recounted three features of Wilayat - protecting internal
relationships, breaking affiliation with the opposing external centers
of power and guarding the everlasting and deep bond with the heart of
the Islamic body and nation - the Imam and the Guide.

If we stick to these characteristics, what may happen? The Glorious
Qur'an in the next verse responds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَنْ يَّتَوَلَّ الله وَ رَسُوْلَہ وَ الَّذِيْنَ ٰامَنُوْا فَاِنَّ
حِزْبَ الله ہُمُ الْغٰلِبُوْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those who will accept the Wilayat of God, His Prophet and the
believers; take care of this relationship and defend it; they will
succeed and dominate; and they are the most*** ***successful of all and
they will subdue other groups**.* [^11]

[^1]: Al-Hujurat, Ch.apter 49.

[^2]: Ch. 2 Sura Baqara, verse 124.

[^3]: Wasayl ush-Shi’a, vol 18, p 95.

[^4]: Nahjul Balagha, sermon 174.

[^5]: Ch.apter n. 5.

[^6]: Ch. 5 Ma’idah, verses 51-53.

[^7]: Ch. 3 Aale Imran, verse 31.

[^8]: Ch. 5 Ma'ida, verse 54.

[^9]: Ch. 39 Zumar, verse 30.

[^10]: Ch. 5 Ma’idah. verse 55.

[^11]: Ch. 5 Ma’idah. verse 56.


