Speech 4: Practical Establishment of Wilayat
============================================

Different Aspects of Wilayat
----------------------------

In continuation of previous discussions our objective is to explain the
expected difficulties related to Wilayat. Our discussion is about
Wilayat. What is Wilayat; where does Glorious Qur'an talk about Wilayat;
and what dimensions, angles and aspects does it consist of? We have
described these things before. There are some subjects that are
considered part of Wilayat, although each of these subjects has a
principle and a dimension in its own right. We should benefit from these
matters in order to set the direction of the society based on Islam and
to point towards the line of action for the Islamic society. In the next
few lines we will describe these topics one by one.

First of all we have proved through Glorious Qur'an that in order to
preserve the internal unity and bonding of the Islamic society and to
secure it from external affiliations it is imperative that there should
be present a central force in the Islamic society. This force should
oversee all the activities of the society; it should direct its
direction in all fields as well as its policies; and it should organize
and guide different groups and associations in the society. We had
declared this force the Wali or the Ruler - in other words, a
personality that all forces seek guidance from and who is turned to in
all matters. In brief he is a person who controls the reigns of the
Islamic society in both ideology and practice; he is called a "Wali".

Who can this individual be?

If you tell us, "we want to identify the Wali", do we have a short
answer? We have answered this question several times in our previous
talks and you know it. However, we wish to assess it from logical point
of view and through the natural flow of this point.

In response to this question the Glorious Qur'an has a verse that says,
"The real Wali of the society is God." There is no Ruler of the Islamic
society except God. Monotheism tells us the same thing and prophethood
also proves the same principle.

Now you see Wilayat tells us the same thing. Basically the principles of
a school of thought and faith should be such that every principle
produces the same result that others are providing. It should not be
that the conclusion we draw from one principle should be contrary to
what we draw from other principles.

It is a pity that the Islam currently in the minds of the simple
Muslims, leads to opposing inferences from different principles. So the
entity that has the right to *enjoin what is right and forbid what is
wrong,* to set the direction of the Islamic society and to implement the
commandments; in short has the right to rule in all aspects of the human
life is God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ الله وَلِيُّ الْمُوْمِنينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Allah is the Wali of the Faithful.**

We have pondered over the verses that have the word Wali or Walis in
them and have studied them all briefly. We have observed that **God is
Islamic Society's Wali, there is no helper for the faithful other than
God and God should be the Ruler over all affairs of mankind** is a
subject that is consistently upheld in the Glorious Qur'an.

The meanings may be confusing to some people and we want to remind them
that our discussion is not about Lord of the Worlds' Innate Rule i.e.,
Rule by Creation. It is a fact that the Lord manages the movement of the
earth and the skies with His Controlling Will. Our talk relates to the
fact that the laws in the peoples' lives and the individual and the
community relationships in the Islamic society should be based on the
Commandments from God. In other words the legal Ruler of the Islamic and
Qur'anic society under the Islamic system and that of Imam Ali could
only be God and only God.
Now a question arises, "what is meant by **the Ruler is God**?"

The Sublime Lord is not going to come to the people to implement His
commandments.

Furthermore, only a human being can rule over other humans. It is vital
that the control of people's affairs should be in the hands of a person.
However, when we talk about a person, it does not imply that we are
emphasizing a single individual and negating plural leadership. What we
are saying is that there is a need for an individual who can take the
reins of people's affairs in his hands, otherwise, if there is law in a
society - it may even be God's law - but there is no commander, ruler or
a committee; in short, if there is no administrator to implement the law
in a human society, its systems will not function.

Who can such an individual be?

Who is that individual or individuals with the right to rule over the
society; who have been recognized as the Wali of the society; who have
to take the responsibility of Wilayat.

There have been several answers to this question. Historical facts also
give several answers.

Some have said, اَلْمُلْکُ لَمِنْ غَلَب - *whoever takes charge will be
the ruler of the state.* In other words, rule of the jungle. Some have
stated *whoever is shrewd deserves to rule*. Others have decreed *one
who has support of people should rule*. Still others have declared *one
who belongs to a certain tribe is eligible to rule*. Some other people
have expressed other logic and ideas.

The religion and school of thought has answered,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّمَا وَلِيُّکُمُ الله وَ رَسُوْلُہ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**verily Allah and His Prophet are your Walis.**

So practically speaking the one who has been given the responsibility of
enforcing the law and enjoining good and forbidding evil in the society
is the Prophet. So when a Prophet arrives in a society, there is no room
for anyone else to rule in his presence. Prophet is the one who should
have the power in the society.

However, when the Prophet passes away just like others, who will be the
next ruler?

The Qur'anic verse responds, وَالَّذِيْنَ ٰامَنُو - ***the believers are
your walis*****.**

What believers?

Can every faithful who believes in the religion and the school of
thought be the Wali and the ruler of the Islamic society? In this
situation there will be as many rulers as the believers.

The Qur'anic verse in addition to identifying a known and appointed
individual according to legislation as the rightful ruler, rationalizes
the selection and provides a measure. It says, وَالَّذِيْنَ ٰامَنُو -
*those who believe.* And who really believe. These words are for those
who have validated their belief through action. So وَالَّذِيْنَ
ٰامَنُو - the first condition is that they are truly believers. There
are other conditions too. الَّذِيْنَ يُقِيْمُوْنَ الصَّلٰوۃَ - *those
who establish prayer.* It does not say, "those who pray." It is one
thing to pray and another to establish prayer. If the objective was to
just pray, then يصلّون - *pray* would have been a short message.
Establishing prayer in a society means that the soul of the prayer in
the society is alive; praying is common in the society. And you know
that praying society implies a society in which remembrance of God is
present in all its corners.

You know that in a society that is filled with remembrance of God, no
crime or evil happens. In such a society the human values are not
debased. A society that has all its members remembering God has its
compass pointed towards God and all peoples' deeds are for God.

The only reason for the presence of evil in a society and bowing to
tyranny and oppression is forgetting God. A society in which God is
remembered, has its ruler like Ali Ibn Abi Talib who does not oppress,
rather eradicates oppression. It has commoners like Abu Dharr Ghaffari
who do not bow to subjugation in spite of physical abuse, deportation,
terrorization and helplessness. They do not leave the path of God. This
is a society that remembers God. This is a society where prayer is
established. A believer who establishes prayer in the society, i.e,
directs the society towards God and fosters remembrance of God in the
society is among الَّذِيْنَ يُقِيْمُوْنَ الصَّلٰوۃَ - *those who
establish prayer*.

The discourse does not stop here. Next وَ يُوتُوْنَ الزَّکٰوۃَ - ***they
pay alms; they spend in the way of Allah; they distribute wealth
justly.*** Then He says, وَ ہُمْ رَاکِعُوْنَ - ***in the state of bowing
(pay alms)**.* This is an allusion towards a special event and an
anecdote. Some commentators say that وَ ہُمْ رَاکِعُوْنَ - means that
these people are always kneeling and it does not refer to any special
incident.

However, knowledge of Arabic language discards this conjecture and tells
us that this phrase means that someone likes equality so much; he is so
eager to give in the way of God; it pains him so much to see poverty and
a needy that he just cannot wait to finish his prayer. This person is so
intensely inclined towards spending in the way of God and he is so
involved in this activity that he just cannot wait; has no patience.
When he looks at a poor person, he sees a picture that is not
appreciated by God and he himself does not like it; at that moment all
he has is a ring, so he just takes it off in the state of prayer and
hands it over to the needy. This is a known historical incident that
occurred in the hands of the Commander of the believers, Imam Ali: while
he was praying, a needy person came and the Imam gave him his ring, at
this point this verse was revealed.

So as you observed, this verse is hinting towards appointing Ali Ibn Abi
Talib as the Wali. It is not doing it the same way as some individuals
in history were forced upon people. As an example, when Mu’awiyyah wants
to appoint his son as his successor, he says, "My successor is my son
and he is going to rule after me." The sublime Lord is not appointing
the successor of the Prophet the same way. However, since the qualities
in a head of the government - total faith in God, establishment of
prayer and the fondness for charity to the extent of forgetting
oneself - are found in Imam Ali Ibn Abi Talib, the magnificent Lord,
while selecting the Imam as the Caliph, is explaining the yardstick and
the wisdom behind the criterion for the caliphate. On these grounds the
Wali in Islam is an individual sent by God and chosen by God.

The concept is that according to the makeup of this world no one
individual has the right to rule over another individual and the only
entity that has this right is God; so He can delegate this right to
someone based on what is good for the people. And we know that God's
work is for the welfare of human beings and not based on force. So He
appoints and we should accept His appointments.

The Lord of the worlds appoints the Prophet and the Imams. He also
defines certain characteristics for the rulers to come after the Imams
and says that those who bear these qualities will be the rulers of
Islamic society after the infallible Imams. So He appoints Walis. He
Himself is a Wali; his Prophet is a Wali and the twelve Imams coming
after the Prophet are Walis. The Imams have been appointed from the
family of the Prophet and their count is twelve. For later time periods
those who meet the specific criteria have been appointed as rulers.

This was one verse that we described for you. There are other verses in
Glorious Qur'an, some of them we have referred to in our speeches and
the others you should look for yourselves. There are scores of such
verses.

Islam underscores the fact that the reign of people should not be in the
hands of such people who would push the ordinary people into hell.

Has the history not pointed it out? Have we not seen what was done to
the Islamic society after the glorious initial period of Islam? What
tribulation it went through? It became such a society where pious people
were not appreciated. It became a society where people would change the
measure of piety and goodness and would not recognize their
well-wishers, true advisers and reformers. What amount of work was done
to bring the members of the society to such a level?

The venomous propaganda by the tyrannical and oppressive rulers in the
Islamic society changed the awareness and attitude of people so much
that they started calling black white and white black. So when one
studies the history of the second and third Hijri century and observes
the apathy of people towards the atrocities committed by the repressive
khilafat and government, he becomes a picture of hopelessness and
desperation. He wonders if they are the same people who had lost
patience with Uthman, had put a siege on him and terminated his khilafat
in such a brutal manner. Are they the same people who sat motionless
while huge sums of money were wasted on the wedding night of the Abbasid
Khalifa - the money that could have been spent on improving the
condition of a large portion of the Islamic populace. They watched the
wealth being squandered on frivolous pleasures but did not utter a word.
Money belonging to Muslims was being frittered away on personal affairs
and they expressed no concern about its legitimacy.

If someone spends funds belonging to a thousand people on himself, not
on luxuries but prayer and fasting, even then is it right?

People used to see such things happening in the midst of the Islamic
society and would be least bothered.

We might have related this incident in the past in relevance to some
other matter. The most favorite minister, Ja’far Barmaki, of Haroon
Rasheed married at the age of 28 or 30. Since Haroon Rasheed loved him
very much, the honorable guests at the wedding ceremony noticed that
instead of sweets something else was being thrown to the poor above the
heads of the bride and groom. All the guests jumped to grab as much as
they could. When they looked closely, they found that these were small
sachets of the size of one third of the finger made of pure gold. When
they opened them, a very fine piece of paper came out. When they opened
the paper, in total amazement they found that the paper was an
entitlement to land in some part of the country.

In just one night entitlements to God knows 500, 800 or 1000 pieces of
land written on exquisite paper packed in gold sachets were sacrificed
for the bride and groom and were picked up by people whom the khalifa
did not even know. Suppose that a certain orchard or a piece of land
came in the hands of a child or a rascal or some other mean person. The
khalifa did not know these people, he just threw the sachets. The pieces
of land actually belonged to some innocent people. Just imagine the
oppression committed; how much wealth was dissipated; rights of how many
people were pummeled. It was not important for them and they did not
think about these things.

In the same time period when such generosities were being committed,
Yahya Alvi was fighting in the hills of Tabristan. His condition was
such that he had only one piece of cloth to cover up for him and his
wife. Husband and wife would take turns in covering themselves with this
piece of cloth during prayers. The family of the Prophet was fighting
against oppression under such circumstances and the people at the time
were indifferent while watching all this.

Our objective is not to complain about Haroon. If Haroon does not act
like this, he is not Haroon. This is expected from the class of Haroon.
As long as such a class is present, such deeds will be committed; so we
have no grievance against them. Our grumble and moan is against those
people who were no longer as sensitive as they were in the early period
of Islam. They had given up the acumen and awareness that existed in the
early days of Islam and had lost the sense of responsibility to face
such a situation. They did not feel sorry about the circumstances.

What happened to these people?

The reason was that there was a constant barrage of extremely harmful,
disturbing and mean propaganda from different centers that was working
on the minds of people.

For years and years work was done on the minds, souls and psychology of
people in different classes of the Islamic society and the state that
culminated in this situation.

Now you see the importance a ruler in an Islamic society has. How
important it is to decide who the ruler should be. The ruler of the
Islamic society should be one appointed by God.

Another verse of Glorious Qur'an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَطِيْعُو الله وَ اَطِيْعُوا الرَّسُوْلَ وَ اُولِي الْاَمْرِ مِنْکُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Obey God and His Prophet and those charged with authority among
you.***[^1]

Who are the people charged with authority?

The ignorant and foolish Muslims of the time used to think that "those
charged with authority" referred to anyone who became a ruler and who
could issue commands.

We say, no; not every person is a holder of authority. If every ruler
has this authority and has the legal status according to Qur'an, then
there are examples of certain scoundrels ruling on certain lands with
complete authority; have they been charged with authority by God?

The holder of authority Shi'ahs believe in, is a person who has been
given the right to rule by God; he is an individual who is just like
other human beings, except he has received Wilayat from God since God is
the Owner of the Grand Wilayat.

Now with such behavior of unlimited grants, extravagant spending and
killings of people (one day he killed the same Ja’far Barmaki and a
large number of his household; furthermore he killed many believers and
performed other similar acts) can Haroon Rasheed be declared someone
charged with authority (a Wali)?

The Mufti (grand cleric of the ruler's court) of the time used to say
that Haroon was the holder of authority; and the source of quarrel
between such people and Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq was that they used to
question the Imam why he was against this holder of authority.

So in this case the viewpoint of Shi’ah is very solid and deep. Shi’ah
in addition to proving with Glorious Qur'an that one charged with
authority is appointed by God, provides standards so people don't get
deceived. So the people won't say that Ali Ibn Abi Talib is close to our
heart but Haroon Rasheed is also sacred to us. Mansoor Abbasi used to
say, "I consider Imam Hasan a Caliph but (God forbid) he sold caliphate
for money. And we have wrestled caliphate from those whom he had sold it
to, so it is ours now." That is the sort of things they used to say.
Apparently they believed in the caliphate of Imam Ali but accepted
Mansoor Abbasi as his successor; they did not see any inconsistency.

However, Shi'ahs say that this is not right. If you accept Ali, then you
have to accept the standard of caliphate and Wilayat. You have to accept
the fact that since Ali Ibn Abi Talib met all the standards, he was
selected as the Wali.

So if someone does not meet the standards or has contradicting
qualities, you do not have the right to declare him a successor of Ali
Ibn Abi Talib. Such an individual does not have the right to call
himself a Wali of Shi'ahs and no one has the right to accept this
individual in such a capacity. This is the very first point to be
considered on the issue of Wilayat. However, we have pointed towards the
second point as well and have recited a verse in this context.

If someone asks you on what grounds do you say that Wilayat is in the
hands of God and it belongs to Him? The answer is that this claim is
based on innate wisdom that lies in the Islamic view of the universe.
According to the Islamic view of the universe the source of everything
in the universe is the Power of God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَہ مَا سَکَنَ فِي الَّيْلِ وَ النَّہَار
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whatever is there in the day and night is from God.*** [^2]

When He is the owner of the whole creation and has real control over
everything, then the administration according to the law of the land
should also be in His jurisdiction. There is no other way around it.

This was the second point; now we come to some additional points.

Now let us look at the later verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انَّ الله يَاْمُرُکُمْ اَنْ تُودُّوا الْاَمٰنٰتِ اِلٰي اَہْلِہَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily God orders you to return the trusts to their owners.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اِذَا حَکَمْتُمْ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ اَنْ تَحْکُمُوْا بِالْعَدْلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when you rule over people or pass judgments or decide between
them, do it with justice.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّ الله نِعِمَّا يَعِظُکُمْ بِہ اِنَّ الله کَانَ سَمِيْعًا
بَصِيْرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily, Lord gives you the best advice as no doubt He watches and
listens.*** [^3]

So the basis on what He orders is His Absolute Listening, Knowing and
all Encompassing Knowledge and Wisdom. Since He is aware of your
internal needs and wants as well as your future, whatever you need He
provides.

In the first verse trusts have been discussed and it has been stated to
hand over the trusts to their owners; and the truth of the matter is it
lays the ground for the next verse.

We should be cognizant that a trust is not just that I give you a dollar
and you return my dollar. The most important manifestation and example
of a trust is that one should return God's possession that is currently
among people to its rightful place and owner. "Obeying Lord" is the pact
of a human being with God and must be acted upon in full. A man should
obey God and obey one whom God has ordered mankind to obey. This is the
best evidence of trustworthiness.

In the next verse[^4] God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يٰاَيُّھَا الَّذِيْنَٰ امَنُوْآَ اَطِيْعُو الله وَاَطِيْعُواالرَّسُوْل
وَاُولِي الْاَمْرِ مِنْکم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O' believers obey Allah, obey Allah's Prophet and obey those who have
been given the charge.***

"Wali with the charge over Muslims" implements God's commandment
----------------------------------------------------------------

Here we see the distinction as well as difference of the Islamic
ideology from other viewpoints. Islamic ideology does not say that there
would be a day when no government will be required and does not predict
a day when there will be no government in the society. Whereas, some
other schools of thought foretell such a day when the society will
become an ideal society and one of the qualities of such a society will
be that there will be no government. Islam does not envisage such a
happening.

Khawarij raised the slogan "rule of Allah" and said that Ali Ibn Abi
Talib should not be the ruler. They used to say, لاٰحُکْمَ
اِلاَّللّٰہ‘ - *Governing is the right of God only.* In response
Commander of the Faithful used to say, [^5]کَلَمِۃُ حَقٍّ يُرٰادُ
بِھَاالْبٰاطِل - *What they are saying is correct but their purpose is
evil.*

They are right and the real ruler is God. The One who defines the
commandments and holds the reins of all affairs of life is God. Rule and
law belong to God but who is going to execute the law? Are you saying
that no one other than God should implement the law? In response Imam
Ali said, لاٰ بُدَّلِلنّا سِ مِنْ اَميرٍ - *For a human society there is
a need for a ruler.*

The human nature is such that it requires someone to put the law into
practice for the communal life. It is not enough to have the law; it is
essential to have someone who delivers the law and then keeps an eye on
its proper execution and this individual is the "Wali with charge" from
you.

However, does it allude to anyone who is in authority? Is it alright to
have anybody who grabs power? It has been observed many a times that two
people at the same place issue orders opposite to each other. In such a
situation are they both Walis with charge? Or it has happened so many
times that one individual has issued a command that defies logic; will
this ruler be a Wali with charge? This is a place where there is a
fundamental difference between us and the Sunnis. We say that the Wali
with charge and ruler should be a person who meets the criteria laid
down by God, whereas, Sunnis do not accept such a condition and do not
act accordingly.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاِنْ تَنَازَعْتُمْ فِيْ شَيْئٍ فَرُدُّوْہُ اِلَي الله وَ الرَّسُوْلِ
اِنْ کُنْتُمْ تُومِنُوْنَ بِاِ الله وَ الْيَوْمِ الْاٰخِرِذٰلِکَ خَيْر
وَّ اَحْسَنُ تَاْوِيْلااً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If there is a conflict and difference of opinion on a certain issue,
revert it to God and His Prophet if you believe in God and the Dooms
Day. It is good for you and will produce the best result.*

This verse draws people's attention towards the good results of the rule
of competent rulers and the poor results of the rein of incompetent
rulers. In a later verse those people who turned away from this command
have been condemned.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلَمْ تَرَ اِلَي الَّذِيْنَ يَزْعُمُوْنَ اَنَّہُمْ ٰامَنُوْا بِمَآ
اُنْزِلَ اِلَيْکَ وَ مَآ اُنْزِلَ مِنْ قَبْلِکَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Have you not seen people who think that they believe in you and what
has been revealed to you?*

They think that they are believers, whereas, they commit such deeds that
go against the faith in God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُرِيْدُوْنَ اَنْ يَّتَحَاکَمُوْآ اِلَي الطَّاغُوْت
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And in spite of that they turn to Satan for getting decisions.*

In other words they look towards Evil for solutions to their problems;
get Evil's opinion; seek orders from Evil and spend their lives
according to the dictates of Evil. Their such action goes against faith.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ قَدْ اُمِرُوْآ اَنْ يَّکْفُرُوْا بِہ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whereas they have been commanded to refute evil.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ يُرِيْدُ الشَّيْطٰنُ اَنْ يُّضِلَّہُمْ ضَلٰلااً بَعِيْدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And this is Satan's wish to pull them deep into ignorance.*** [^6]

In our opinion here Satan and evil are the same object.

These people want to follow evil and are ignorant of the fact that the
Satan mentioned in Glorious Qur'an as evil pulls them away from the
straight path and pushes them towards the valleys of ignorance. The
Satan takes them so far away from the straight path that it is no longer
easy for them to come back to it. As a matter of fact, it requires a lot
of struggle and hardship to come back to the straight and guided path.

The latter point is about the Wilayat of God and the basis for accepting
it is the wisdom set in the Islamic view of the world; so it is a
natural phenomenon.

When we say that one should obey God and God is the Wali with Charge,
there is a natural and clear wisdom behind it, because everything
belongs to God and the Qur'anic verse وَ لَہ مَا سَکَنَ فِي الَّيْلِ وَ
النَّہَارِ - ***Whatever is in day and night belongs to Him*** **-**
explains this point clearly.

[^1]: Ch.4, An-Nisa’, verse 59.

[^2]: Ch. 6 Al-An’aam, verse 13.

[^3]: Ch. 4 Nisaa, verse 58.

[^4]: Ch. 4 Nisaa, verse 59.

[^5]: Nahjul Balagha, speeCh. 40.

[^6]: Ch.4, An-Nisa’, verse 60.


