Speech 5: Wilayat of Someone Other than God
===========================================

From all the discussion so far what we have understood is that very
Muslim and every person who claims to be a servant of God, should
declare his Wali, ruler and guide in all matters of this world someone
who has been appointed by God; he should hand over himself to the Lord's
chosen Wali and should take his oath of allegiance on the hand of the
God's Wali. In short for all his worldly activities he should consider
Lord of the Worlds and His appointee his ruler.

However, we have discussed this point - who are those people who have
been selected by God to represent Him - and that in the first phase it
is the Prophets and then the Walis who deserve this station. The bottom
line is that the Wali and the God appointed ruler is chosen by name or
certain signs; or is appointed not by name but only by signs.

These were some of the points that we have already made clear.

The point to be addressed today is that if someone does not accept God's
Wilayat and chooses the supremacy of someone other than God; the first
thing is what is God's ruling for such an individual? What will this
action be called? And thirdly, what will be the consequences of such an
action?

These are the questions that come up in conversations regarding Wilayat.
Once we accept them after debates and discussions and our minds agree on
them, then they will be counted as the proven principles of Islam.
Although these issues are included in the discussion about the principle
of Wilayat, yet they stand on their own as principles.

The Glorious Qur'an renders every Wilayat other than that of God as the
Wilayat of taghut and says that anyone who is not in the Wilayat of God
is in the Wilayat of taghut.

What is meant by Taghut?

The source of the word, taghut, is tughyan - to rebel and get out of the
physical and natural life cycle of a human being. As an example, suppose
that a human being has been created to achieve perfection, if someone
keeps an individual from achieving perfection then he is a taghut.

It behooves human beings to live their lives according to the laws of
God. It is in line with the nature of human beings. If someone nurtures
human beings in such a way and forces them to act in such a way that
they spend their lives following a constitution other than that of God,
then he is taghut.

Man should be constantly struggling to make his presence useful; hence,
any action that incites him to non-seriousness, laziness, seeking
excessive pleasure and prosperity is taghut.

Man should obey the Godly instructions. Everything that keeps him away
from obeying God and makes him rebellious to God is taghut.

So taghut is not a proper noun. And it is incorrect to think that it is
the name of an idol. Yes, there was an idol by the name of taghut.
However, it is not a fixed entity. Sometimes we ourselves are taghut;
sometimes it is our wealth; sometimes it is our luxurious lifestyle;
sometimes it is our desires; sometimes it is someone whom we give our
hand and close our eyes so he can take us anywhere he wants to;
sometimes it is gold and silver; and sometimes it is the collective
system and the law. So taghut is not one specific thing.

Wilayat of Taghut and Wilayat of Satan
--------------------------------------

Whoever has left the Wilayat of God has definitely entered the Wilayat
of Taghut and Satan. However, what is the relationship between Satan and
Taghut?

There is more than a relationship between them; Satan is Taghut and
Taghut is Satan. As Glorious Qur'an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلَّذِيْنَ ٰامَنُوْا يُقَاتِلُوْنَ فِيْ سَبِيْلِ الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The believers fight in the path of Allah.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ الَّذِيْنَ کَفَرُوْا يُقَاتِلُوْنَ فِيْ سَبِيْلِ الطَّاغُوْتِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And the non-believers fight in the path of Taghut.***

Then it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَاتِلُوْآ اَوْلِيَآئَ الشَّيْطٰنِ اِنَّ کَيْدَ الشَّيْطٰنِ کَانَ
ضَعِيْفًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So you fight with the Satan's companions; certainly, the tactics of
Satan are very weak.*** [^1]

In these verses we see that the names of Satan and Taghut have been used
interchangeably. So Satan is an entity that instigates man from outside
to create trouble, ruin, disgrace, oppression, evil and ignorance.

Satans are humans as well as jinns. There are satans who are among
relatives, wives and ancestors. One example of a satan is Iblis who
raised a standard against Prophet Adam and did certain things that we
read about. All of us curse this particular Satan all our lives,
whereas, he is not the only satan. Perhaps he may not be the only first
and last satan. There are many satans in the world who can be felt
through hands, eyes and sometimes they are even our companions. On the
whole every Wilayat other than that of God is the Wilayat of satan and
taghut.

Someone who is not spending his life under the rule of the real Wali
should know that he is passing his life under the rein of Taghut and
Satan.

You may ask what is wrong with living under the rein of Satan and Taghut
and following their commandments.

This is one of the points addressed in the verses. The Glorious Qur'an
gives us some answers in this regard. The first answer is that if you
accept the Wilayat of Satan, he will gain control over all your
constructive, creative and useful powers. Once you willingly accept the
subjugation of Satan and Taghut, then you will never be able to get rid
of it. It does not matter what productive and creative capabilities you
have, Taghut and Satan will take over you; and once he is in control, he
will drag you to wherever he wants to. It is obvious that Satan and
Taghut will not guide a man towards light, cognizance, goodness and
spiritual existence; these are not his objectives. In fact, the primary
goal of Satan and Taghut is his personal interests and he wants to
achieve them; so he uses you for that purpose.

If you think about these few sentences, you will notice a hidden message
that is verified by the historical facts.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حلقه ای در گردنم افکنده دوست
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
می کشد هر جا که خاطر خواه اوست
  </p>
</blockquote>

*This friend has put a leash on my neck and drags me wherever he
pleases.*

The following verse of Chapter Nisa deserves our utmost attention and
pondering.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
’’وَ مَنْ يُّشَاقِقِ الرَّسُوْلَ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا تَبَيَّنَ لَہُ
الْہُداٰي وَ يَتَّبِعْ غَيْرَ سَبِيْلِ الْمُومِنِيْنَ نُوَلِّہ مَا
تَوَلّٰي۔‘‘
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And if someone opposes the Prophet after clear guidance and follows a
path other than*** ***that of the believers, we let him go wherever he
wants to go*****.** [^2]

He will separate himself from the Muslims. Then we will tighten the
leash he has put on. We will entangle him in the same Wilayat that he
has accepted and the same group that he has joined.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّ الله لا يُغَيِّرُ مَا بِقَوْمٍ حَتّٰي يُغَيِّرُوْا مَا
بِاَنْفُسِہِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And the Lord does not change the condition of a nation until it
changes itself.*** [^3]

You have given your leash in the hands of the Satan, now it will remain
there. This is the tradition of God or the law of creation.

So far in this verse it was related to this world; then moving forward
it talks about the next world.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنُصْلِہ جَہَنَّمَ وَ سَآئَتْ مَصِيْرًا۔
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He will go directly from here to hell and receive the permanent
punishment and wrath of God.*** [^4]

When one looks over history, this is exactly what he finds. It is one of
the very important communal issues. Very little work has been done about
Qur'anic viewpoint on these issues and we have not overlaid them with
the Islamic history. It would be so good if those interested in the
Glorious Qur'an, those interested in the communal issues and,
especially, those interested in the historical issues of Qur'an should
deeply ponder on these issues and superimpose them with the historical
facts.

In order to further elaborate on this verse we wish to go over some
history.

A Look at the Kufi Society
--------------------------

Kufa is considered one of the strangest cities in the Islamic history.
In your mind you will have a myriad of ideas about Kufa. Whatever we say
will not be new to you.

Kufa is a city that the Commander of the Faithful, Imam Ali, chose for
his seat of government even though there were several other cities in
the great Islamic empire of the time. This was one distinction for Kufa.
Another distinction for this city was that the residents of Kufa
accompanied the Commander of the Faithful in several battles. They were
with him in the Battle of the Camel, Battle of Nahrvan and the Battle of
Siffin. The residents of Kufa and the tribes from nearby areas
participated in these wars.

They were the same Kufis that the Commander of Believers used to
complain to. He used to admonish them that when he asked them to come
out to fight, they would not come out. Later it was the same Kufa whose
elders wrote letters, visited Imam Hasan Mujaba and asked him, "Our
lord! please come; we hand over this city to you." But Imam Hasan did
not go there. Then it was the same city whose distinguished
personalities wrote to Imam Husayn Ibn Ali, "We do not have an Imam and
a Leader. We do not have a Ruler and a Guide. And now that God has
destroyed this taghut, you should come." People such as Sulaiman Ibn
Saro, Habib Ibn Mazahir, Muslim Ibn Awsaja, etc, were telling the truth.

Then they were the same Kufians who lined up against Husayn Ibn Ali and
the great tragedy of Karbala took place.

After a short while a historical event took place in the hands of the
same people; an event that is considered a very unique and most elegant
happening in the history of Islam. This is the incident of Tawwabeen
(those who repented) who took a stand by sacrificing their lives in
order to repent and to compensate for not coming to the aid of Imam
Husayn on the day of Ashura. It was the same city where seeds were sown
for many revolts against Umayyads and Abbassids that took root and
blossomed. People from this city gave many sacrifices; countless were
killed; many achieved great successes.

Then there were those dwellers of Kufa who showed lethargy, weakness and
cowardice. What was the reason?

Did the people of Kufa have two souls and two faces?

Figuring out Kufa is an important subject.

In our opinion a study of Kufa and an evaluation of the psychology of
Kufians will be a very interesting discussion. Those who have the
capability - the experts, sociologists and psychologists - should sit
together and talk about Kufa; should reflect, discuss and observe how
bizarre this phenomenon is that on one hand there is a display of mind
boggling human acts and on the other hand there is extreme lack of
conscience, laziness, wickedness and disgrace.

Why is it so?

Kufa is a city whose people got their grooming through the strong and
eloquent words of the Commander of the believers; the Imam polished
their personalities; this is why some of the greatest and bravest
personalities in the history of Shi'ahs belonged to this city of Kufa.
Their number is bigger than even those from Madina. The reason was the
few years of Imam Ali's sermons and instructions (during his time in
khilafat). The rein of the Commander of the believers Imam Ali Ibn Abi
Talib on this city was not an ordinary occurrence. It is true that this
government during its four years did not achieve success at the Islamic
world level; however, for sure it succeeded at the city of Kufa level
and developed astonishing influences. Kufa turned into the cradle of
Shii'at - full of Shi'ah attributes and blessings. Nonetheless, any
place that rears superior qualities and blessings does not necessarily
guaranty that all its residents will display such excellence and be
ideal people.

It always so happens that in a society full of passion and vigor there
is only a subset of people who truly represent this sentiment. Sometimes
out of a population of millions, only a few thousand actually partake in
the struggle and because of their action the place becomes known in the
world for fervor and struggle.

Kufa too had just a group of extraordinary people; otherwise, the
average residents were regular people just like any other place and were
not any worse. They were just like the people of Mashhad or Tehran or
Isfahan or Madina or any other areas. However, this small group in this
corner of the Islamic world was a source of terror for the rulers at the
time. This is why these governments always appointed the most despicable
governors, the meanest servants and executioners in this city. These
people would employ terrorizing means and venomous propaganda and foster
poverty among these people so they would slip unconsciously towards evil
and decadence with great vigor.

The reason for such treatment towards the Kufians was that unlike other
cities here existed a defiant and notable group. The purpose of these
governments was to totally eliminate all those supportive and helpful
qualities from the ordinary people that this pious, noble and warrior
group could take advantage of. So they would do false propaganda, keep
people under pressure and suffocated and weaken them from worldly point
of view. In short, they would use a variety of means to coerce the Kufa
dwellers. Such was not the case of other cities. This is why immoral
deeds happened in the hands of the people of Kufa. However, the reason
for such depravity was not that these people were bad people.

In any case it was a short explanation of Kufa. If some people study her
history and reflect on it, they will come across some interesting
observations.

Ummayad khalifa Abdul Malik Bin Marwan knew that no one other than
Hajjaj Bin Yusuf could handle the revolutionary and fighting people of
Kufa. So he appointed his most vicious and meanest servant as the
governor of Kufa. Hajjaj entered the city at midnight with a group of
sword bearing people. No one knew about his arrival. Apparently the
people of Kufa had expelled the former governor or made him lame duck.
Hajjaj came at midnight and went straight to the mosque. At this hour
voices could be heard of pious people - people praying and those praying
the night prayer.

Upon his arrival at the mosque he gave instructions to his servants,
appointed each one at a certain spot and then entered the mosque in such
a manner that no one knew. Suddenly he got up in the midst of people and
sat on the pulpit.

As the Kufa mosque was rather large, initially people did not notice.
But then slowly people started noticing that someone was sitting quietly
on the pulpit in a strange manner. Hajjaj had a red turban on and had
wrapped his face up to his nose with one end. In this condition only his
eyes were visible and he looked a bizarre sight.

Just imagine a sword bearing individual wearing a red turban sitting
quietly on the pulpit of Kufa mosque. Suddenly someone looks up and
finds this man in a strange appearance. He asks someone sitting next to
him, "who is that?" Gradually everyone starts asking everyone else the
same question. Eventually the whispers become louder and the people
start gazing at the pulpit.

Think about it. A verse of Qur'an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نُوَلِّہ مَا تَوَلّٰي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We will further tighten the noose around the neck of a person who
strays from the path of*** ***faith and the faithful**.*[^5]

You were a Muslim and you saw someone sitting on the pulpit of your
mosque whom you did not know. Why did you sit quietly after seeing him?
You should have gone up to him and asked him who he was and that he
should introduce himself. Then a second person and a third person should
have gone and all should have asked the same question. If everyone had
asked the same question, situation would have been different. But people
showed lethargy and proved to be cowards and courage-less. They just
waited for him to speak.

When Hajjaj noticed that everyone's attention was towards him he spoke,
"I think people of Kufa do not recognize me."

People started looking at each other making it very clear that they did
not know him. Then Hajjaj said, "OK, I will introduce myself." He took
off his turban, uncovered his face, looked at people and then read a
couplet in Arabic:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَنَابْنُ جَلاٰوَطَلَاعِ الثَّنايٰا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذٰانَزَعَ الْعَمَامَۃَ تَعْرِفُوني
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When I take off my turban, you will recognize me.*

Since Hajjaj had visited Kufa once before, a few people said, they
thought he was Hajjaj. And then whispers, "Hajjaj, Hajjaj" started
sounding. When it became clear that Hajjaj was sitting in front of them,
they became terror stricken. Hajjaj saw this and said, "Yes, you have
recognized me correctly; I am Hajjaj."

People were awe struck. None of them thought, "Hajjaj is a person just
like me. The only difference is that he is sitting up and I am sitting
below. Whatever he has, I have too." These people became cowards.

Hajjaj said, "O' residents of Kufa! I am looking at such heads on
shoulders that are ready to be taken down like ripe fruit. I can see
that some heads need to be severed from their bodies."

People got even more frightened with such shallow talk. After all Hajjaj
did not come to Kufa with an atomic bomb. Even if he had such a bomb, he
could not have exploded it, as no one would have survived that he could
rule over. It was necessary that some people should live. He could not
have killed everyone. If he had killed all, whom would he have ruled
over? He could not have ruled over doors and walls.

But people were not thinking.

After saying the sentence that he was looking at some heads whose time
had come to be removed from their bodies said, "Now I will decide whose
heads will be removed." Then he called his servant. The servant got up.
Hajjaj said, "Read them the letter from the commander of the believers."
You know that he called Abdul Malik Bin Marwan commander of the
believers. The servant opened the letter from Abdul Malik Bin Marwan and
started to read it. The first sentence of the letter was:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْم الله الرَّحْمٰنِ الرَّحيمِ‘مِنْ اَمِيرِالْمُوْمِنينَ
عَبْدِالْمَلِکِ بْنِ مَرْوان عَليٰ اَھْلِ الْکُوفَۃِ ۔ يٰااَھْلَ
الْکُوفَۃِ سَلاٰم عَلَيْکُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*In the name of Allah, the most Gracious, most Merciful. From the
commander of the believers, Abdul Malik Bin Marwan, to the inhabitants
of Kufa. O' Kufians, peace be on you.*

When the servant read this much, suddenly Hajjaj turned towards him and
said, "Stop. Be quiet." Then he turned towards the Kufians and said,
"You people have become very un-courteous. The commander of the
believers gives you his regards and you don't even respond. O' servant!
read it over." The servant started reading again:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْم الله الرَّحْمٰنِ الرَّحيمِ‘مِنْ اَمِيرِالْمُوْمِنينَ
عَبْدِالْمَلِکِ بْنِ مَرْوان عَليٰ اَھْلِ الْکُوفَۃِ ۔ يٰااَھْلَ
الْکُوفَۃِ سَلاٰم عَلَيْکُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*In the name of Allah, the most Gracious, most Merciful. From the
commander of the believers, Abdul Malik Bin Marwan, to the inhabitants
of Kufa. O' Kufians, peace be on you.*

At this point there was a loud sound:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَليٰ اَمِيرِالْمُوْمِنين السَّلام
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And peace be on you, o' commander of the faithful.*

On hearing this a big smile surfaced on the face of Hajjaj and he said
in his mind, "the game is over." And as a matter of fact that was the
end of Kufians. They responded to the greetings of the commander of the
believers, who in reality was the commander of the non-believers and
debauchers. In other words these people by responding to the greetings
of Hajjaj finished themselves off.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَنْ يُّشَاقِقِ الرَّسُوْلَ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا تَبَيَّنَ لَہُ
الْہُداٰي وَ يَتَّبِعْ غَيْرَ سَبِيْلِ الْمُوْمِنِيْنَ نُوَلِّہ مَا
تَوَلّٰي۔
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A person who quarrels with the Prophet and parts from him after the
guided path becomes clear to him; and follows a path other than that of
believers. Whosoever's Wilayat one accepts, we make that person his Wali
and ruler.*

Now that you responded to his call; you have agreed with him, so Hajjaj
is your ruler. You have opened the door for Hajjaj. God will not use a
miracle to finish Hajjaj off and put Imam Zain Ul Abideen in his place.
Now Hajjaj is in control of you and until you express your hatred for
Hajjaj and throw him out, your whole life, thinking and soul will stay
subservient to him. This is the tradition of this world and that of
history.

After the letter reading was over, Hajjaj got off the pulpit and went to
the Governor's house. There he said, "Since some of the inhabitants of
Kufa have sided with a rebel (apparently Muhammad Bin Ash'as), all
Kufians should come and plead guilty that they have turned non-believers
and need to become believers again."

All residents of Kufa (in other words all go-with-the-flow ordinary
people; otherwise, for sure there were some who did not succumb to it;
some of them stayed at home; others took up arms or adopted other means)
went to the governor's house in droves to plead their guilt. What they
had to do was to admit that they had gone out of the religion of God and
were now outside the circle of Islam. Then they had to say, "we repent
and God willing, the commander will accept our penitence so we could
become Muslims again."

An old man walked up to Hajjaj. Hajjaj thought that the man had some
honor left in him. He said, "old man! It appears that you have some
doubt about your infidelity." What he meant was, "if you have any doubt,
then I can take care of it with my sword." Because everyone who did not
accept his infidelity, was killed. The old man immediately responded,
"no sir, I am more infidel than all infidels."

This is the history. History is a lesson.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خوشتر ان باشد که وصف دلبران
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
گفته اید در حدیث دیگران
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It is more joyful to witness praise for the lovers*

*Mentioned in the story of others*

History is a commentary on Qur'an; search Qur'an in history.

Know that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مرد خردمند جهان دیده را
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عمر دو با یست دراین روزگار
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تابه یکی تجربه اندوختن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بادگری تجربه بردن به کار
  </p>
</blockquote>

*For the wise man who has seen the world*

*In this era, there is a need for two lives;*

*One to gain experience*

*And the other to put the experience to work*

History is our past. Ponder over it. Develop a liking for history and
discover what is hidden in it. Don't be content with just reciting
poetry and stories; instead see what lesson history wants to teach us.
What does the anecdote of Hajjaj tell us? There is no harm in mentioning
that the same Hajjaj was brutally murdered by the same people for whom
he had tyrannized people. Similarly it does not hurt to know that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ اَعٰانَ ظٰالِماًسَلَّطَہُ الله عَلَيْہِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*One who helps an oppressor, God forces the same oppressor on him.* This
is also a tradition.

Study history. See, what lessons it has for us. What guidance does it
have for us? What message and advice does it have for us? Survey history
with intense scrutiny. You will see that meanings of Qur'anic verses are
being illustrated for us.

We have related to you the earlier part of history; we have left it up
to you to establish a link with the present. Now we revert back to the
Qur'anic verses and start the process over.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاِذَا قَرَاْتَ الْقُرْاٰنَ فَاسْتَعِذْ بِاِ الله مِنَ الشَّيْطٰنِ
الرَّجِيْمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Once you have read Qur'an, seek refuge of God from the mischief of
cursed Satan**.* [^6]

Now that you have read Qur'an and understood the Sciences of Islam, take
yourself to the sanctuary of God out of harm's away from Satan. Satan
does not want you to learn Qur'an; he does not want you to comprehend
Qur'an. So try to ensure that Satan does not take way the knowledge you
gain from Qur'an and prevent you from gaining more understanding and
acting on it. So move to the safe haven of God to guard against the evil
of cursed Satan.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّہ لَيْسَ لَہ سُلْطٰن عَلَي الَّذِيْنَ ٰامَنُوْا وَ عَلٰي
رَبِّہِمْ يَتَوَکَّلُوْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely strife-creating Satan cannot overpower those who are believers
and have faith and trust in Allah.*** [^7]

Satan does not have control over those who keep themselves sheltered
under the Wilayat of God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّمَا سُلْطٰنُہ عَلَي الَّذِيْنَ يَتَوَلَّوْنَہ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely Satan subjugates only those who accept his Wilayat.***

Those who have handed over their neck's leash themselves to Satan.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّمَا سُلْطٰنُہ عَلَي الَّذِيْنَ يَتَوَلَّوْنَہ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Satan is able to control only those who consent to his Wilayat.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ الَّذِيْنَ ہُمْ بِہ مُشْرِکُوْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And those who believe in the plurality of Allah.*** [^8]

As we described earlier what is in Chapter Nisa.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَنْ يُّشَاقِقِ الرَّسُوْلَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***A person who quarrels with the Prophet and parts from him.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا تَبَيَّنَ لَہُ الْہُداٰي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***After the guided path becomes clear to him.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ يَتَّبِعْ غَيْرَ سَبِيْلِ الْمُومِنِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And follows a path other than that of believers.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نُوَلِّہ مَا تَوَلّٰي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whosoever's Wilayat one accepts, we make that person his Wali and
ruler.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ نُصْلِہ جَہَنَّمَ وَ سَآئَتْ مَصِيْرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And we throw him in hell and what a horrible ending it is.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّ الله لا يَغْفِرُ اَنْ يُّشْرَکَ بِہ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***God does not forgive someone who makes up a partner with Him.*** [^9]

Here we come back to the meanings of Oneness of God and polytheism so
that we know what polytheism is and what Oneness of God is; and what sin
God does not forgive.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّ الله لا يَغْفِرُ اَنْ يُّشْرَکَ بِہ
  </p>
</blockquote>

God does not forgive a person who has accepted a partner with Him in
Wilayat. He does not pardon someone who has turned polytheist, who has
handed over the sphere of God's rule to someone other than God. The
wound that has been inflicted to his soul due to this sin, disobedience,
vice and misfortune will never heal. In other words he will never be
exonerated. If you are in the Wilayat of someone other than God, the
remission of sins - healing of the wound caused by defiance, mistakes,
slipping and ignorance - will not happen; the blemish and discoloration
left by this sin will never go.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ يَغْفِرُ مَا دُوْنَ ذٰلِکَ لِمَنْ يَّشَآئُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***However, if man wishes, the sins lower than polytheism will be
pardoned.***

Allah will exonerate a person who comes back to Him through penitence
and remediation.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَنْ يُّشْرِکْ بِاِ الله فَقَدْ ضَلَّ ضَلٰلااً بَعِيْدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whoever declares a partner with God, he is gone very far from the
guided path and has gone astray.*** [^10]

Sometimes it happens that you are lost in wilderness but you are only 1
km away from the right way. And sometimes you are lost and gone tens of
kilometers away from the desired route; so far that it is no easier to
come back and it requires a lot of struggle and cleverness and a strong
guide is needed. Those people, who have created a God's partner, have
gone very far from the straight and guided way.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَدْ ضَلَّ ضَلٰلااً بَعِيْدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They are way off-track.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنْ يَّدْعُوْنَ مِنْ دُوْنِہ اِلَّاآ اِٰنثًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***There are a few women whom they call other than God.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اِنْ يَّدْعُوْنَ اِلَّا شَيْطٰنًا مَّرِيْدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They do not call anyone other than the defiant Satan who is bereft of
goodness and blessing.***[^11]

Curse of God on the God-expelled Satan. Right from the beginning he has
vowed to oppose God. And fundamentally there cannot be peace between God
and Satan. At this point the Glorious Qur'an describes the devilish
people and the nature of the satans of this world.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ قَالَ لااَ َاتَّخِذَنَّ مِنْ عِبَادِکَ نَصِيْبًا مَّفْرُوْضًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Satan has sworn and said, "I will pull a certain segment of the
servants of God to my side."***

In other words, "I will drag some of God's servants from the right path
to ignorance; I will seize their intellect; I will trash their prudence;
I will carry them into my Wilayat and obedience instead of Yours."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَّ لااَضِلَّنَّہُمْ وَ لااَمَنِّيَنَّہُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***I will completely trap them in far out desires and wants.***

Just focus on the word " وَ لااَمَنِّيَنَّہُمْ ". This word contains all
far-fetched wants and all those things that keep an individual from
struggling in the way of God.

Ten years more of life with greater happiness, comfort and luxury;
seeing the oldest son as a groom; marrying daughters; enlarging the
current small house and the small shop; becoming the head of a certain
organization; earning a certain amount of money; wishing to see the son
as an engineer are some of the aspirations that weigh down one's neck;
that bring the person to his knees; that make him powerless. If you
cleanse your heart of such desires, you will be a free man. You will
live a life of freedom and will not feel a prisoner to anyone.

So the Satan says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لااَمَنِّيَنَّہُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***I will trap them in far out desires and wants.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لااَمُرَنَّہُمْ فَلَيُبَتِّکُنَّ اٰذَانَ الْاَنْعَامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***I will command them to cut the ears of animals.***

This is an allusion to one of the bad traditions of the ignorance era.
However, it is possible that there is some secret hidden in this
sentence that I have not researched much and have not had the
opportunity to study what has been written on this subject. Apparently
the issue was that during the time of the Prophet of Islam there was a
ritual of ignorance that they would cut the ears of animals and/or would
make holes in them so they could be blessed with sustenance and peace.
This was a tradition of the age of ignorance. The Glorious Qur'an
mentions it as a sign of un-Godly traditions, ideas, ways and rituals.

See how comical and shallow it is. Fundamentally all satanic rituals and
traditions are like this one.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لااَٰمُرَنَّہُمْ فَلَيُغَيِّرُنَّ خَلْقَ الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Glorious Qur'an further relates the talk of the Satan. "I will order
those who follow my directions to make changes in the divine creation,
nature and disposition. There will be people whom I will hunt in Your
area of government and Wilayat and bring them to my desolate area of
Wilayat. I will command and incite such people to let go of creation and
Godly nature and get away from the path You have decreed for them. I
will make laws against nature and put in front of them a path that goes
against nature - a path that takes them some place other than the
natural destination of man.

This is the Satan's promise to Allah. This promise shows his antagonism
and animosity towards God. All satans have the same line of action and
plan. All satans of this world do the same thing. Keep in mind that if
people want to spend their lives according to God given nature and
intellect, Satan would not get in their way. As a matter of fact Satan
drags away from the God given nature and disposition those who accept
his Wilayat and control because without it he is helpless; his work does
not proceed forward and his satanism fails.

After this God addresses us:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يَّتَّخِذِ الشَّيْطٰنَ وَلِيًّا مِّنْ دُوْنِ الله فَقَدْ خَسِرَ
خُسْرَانًا مُّبِيْنًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whoever accepts the Wilayat of Satan instead of God's Wilayat, will
be at a loss that is manifest.*** [^12]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَعِدُہُمْ وَ يُمَنِّيْہِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The Satan makes promises to them and indulges them in far out desires
and longings.*** [^13]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا يَعِدُہُمُ الشَّيْطٰنُ اِلَّا غُرُوْرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whatever promises Satan makes, they are nothing but deception,
trickery and lies.*** [^14]

[^1]: Ch.4, An-Nisa’, verse 76.

[^2]: Ch.4, An-Nisa’, verse 115.

[^3]: Ch. 13 Raad, verse 11.

[^4]: Ch.4, An-Nisa’, verse 115.

[^5]: Ch. 4, an-Nisa’, verse 115.

[^6]: Ch. 16 Nahl, verse 98.

[^7]: Ch. 16 Nahl, verse 99.

[^8]: Ch. 16 Nahl, verse 100.

[^9]: Ch.4, An-Nisa’, verse 115, 116.

[^10]: Ch.4, An-Nisa’, verse 116.

[^11]: Ch.4, An-Nisa’, verse 117.

[^12]: Ch. 4 Nisa verses 119-120.

[^13]: Ch. 4 Nisa verses 119-120.

[^14]: Ch. 4 Nisa verses 119-120.


