Speech 6: Wilayat and Migration
===============================

Migration is one of the issues related to broad meanings of Wilayat as
presented before. In our previous speeches we had submitted that Wilayat
means establishment of a strong and durable bond in the ranks of
believers, elimination of every type of linkage between groups of
believers and non-believers and in the later stages a very strong
connection of all members in the ranks of believers with that central
and dynamic power - the Wali, Ruler and Imam - who is responsible for
setting up the Islamic society.

We also discussed who can be the Wali and Ruler of the Islamic society
and received the answer from the Glorious Qur'an that says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
’’اِنَّمَا وَلِيُّکُمُ الله وَ رَسُوْلُہ وَ الَّذِيْنَ ٰامَنُو
الَّذِيْنَ يُقِيْمُوْنَ الصَّلٰوۃَ وَ يوْتُوْنَ الزَّکٰوۃَ وَ ہُمْ
رَاکِعُوْنَ۔‘‘
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Your only Walis are God, His Prophet and those believers who
establish prayer and give elms while kneeling in prayer.*** [^1]

With the reference of this verse we have alluded to the anecdote of the
Commander of the Faithful.

If we comprehend Wilayat in such a broad spectrum and not relegate it to
supplementary or secondary level, migration may be one of the issues
facing us after accepting Wilayat. If we submit to the Wilayat of God
and accept the fact that all physical, intellectual and spiritual forces
and capabilities of a person ought to be utilized according to the
wishes of God's Wali; in short a human being should be a servant of God
with all the elements in his existence and not the servant of evil; then
we will also have to accept that if at some point our being, our self
and all our faculties are not subservient to God's Wilayat and are
obedient to the Wilayat of evil and Satan, our attachment to God
behooves on us to liberate ourselves from the yoke of evil and move
under the blessed Wilayat of God. Moving from the Wilayat of an
oppressive ruler to the Wilayat of a just Imam is migration.

You saw that migration is one of the issues related to Wilayat. This is
the fourth point that we are going to talk about in this series of
speeches on the subject of Wilayat.

Individual Migration
--------------------

Why should a person avoid going under the Wilayat of evil and Satan?

The answer to this question is linked to the answer to another question
and we ask you to analyze the second question according to the knowledge
you have, based on the Islamic religious teachings. If your answer is
not similar to the answer we have in our mind, then there will be room
for discussion on this subject.

The question is: Is it not possible to live under the regime of Satan as
a Muslim?
Is it not possible for someone to live under the Wilayat of Satan while
being a servant of the Merciful?

Is it possible or not?

Is it possible that when all facets of a human life are under the rule
of some non-God-centered person; organization, development and
administration of bodies and minds of people is in the hands of a
non-God-centered person; same non-God-centered person is pushing the
emotions and feelings of the society from one direction to another; can
a person despite living his life under the bondage of evil and Satanic
powers still be a servant of God and a Muslim?

Is it possible or not?

You try to find an answer to this question. See if it can happen or not.

To answer this question, it is necessary to analyze the question itself
so that the answer would be obvious.

We have asked, "is it possible that a person could be under the Wilayat
of Satan and still be a Muslim?"

The question has two parts to it and we should analyze both to see what
they mean.

The first part is: "someone is under the Wilayat of Satan."

What does it mean to be under the Wilayat of Satan?

We need to juxtapose the meanings of Wilayat we have extracted from the
Qur'anic verses to the Wilayat of Satan to know what Satan's Wilayat
means.

What Satan's Wilayat means is that Satan dominates all energies,
potentials, creative powers and actions of a person; whatever the
individual does, follows the Satan's defined constitution; whatever he
thinks, is in the direction set by Satan; he is like a person who is in
the way of a flood gushing from the mountains. This person does not like
to collide with the hard and rough rocks that can smash his head; he
does not like to fall in a deep crevice while being dragged by water; he
does not appreciate being suffocated by the waves of water. However,
this is despite the fact that he does not like the swift torrent pulling
him against his will; he even thrashes around; he tries to grab plants
and trees along the way; but the fast surge keeps dragging him.

Wilayat of evil and Satan is something similar.

A Qur'anic verse says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنہُمْاٰ اَئِمَّۃً يَّدْعُوْنَ اِلَي النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***There are such guides and leaders who keep hauling their followers
and underlings towards hellfire and misfortune.*** [^2]

Another Qur'anic verse says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلَمْ تَرَ اِلَي الَّذِيْنَ بَدَّلُوْا نِعْمَتَ الله کُفْرًا وَّ
اَحَلُّوْا قَوْمَہُمْ دَارَ الْبَوَارِ جَہَنَّمَ يَصْلَوْنَہَا وَ
بِئْسَ الْقَرَارُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Have you not seen those people who were ungrateful to the blessing of
God and caused their people to descend to the house of perdition and
into hell? They will burn therein; an evil place to stay in.*** [^3]

Have you not seen those people who were ungrateful to the blessing of
God?
What was the blessing of God that they were ungrateful for?

It was the blessing of divine power that is a manifestation of the
Lord's power - the powers of religion, the blessing of the management of
a person's affairs; blessing of controlling the man's abundant
capabilities, intellect and powers. These are all blessings and assets
that can be a source of good for the man.

Every person who lives under the rule of the people who have been
alluded to in this verse could have become a remarkable and noble
individual and could have reached the highest levels of greatness.
However, these people did not appreciate these blessings and did not
benefit from them for the purpose they should have been used for.

Then Qur'an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَّ اَحَلُّوْا قَوْمَہُمْ دَارَ الْبَوَار
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They hauled their followers and underlings towards hellfire and
misfortune.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جَہَنَّمَ يَصْلَوْنَہَا وَ بِئْسَ الْقَرَارُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They will take them to hell where they will be thrown with faces
down; and what a rotten abode it is.***

Imam Musa Ibn Ja’far recited this verse in front of Harun to remind him
that he was the one who would haul his nation and himself to the most
horrible destination and most torturous adobe.

Harun asked, "Are we infidels?". What he meant was, "did they not
believe in God, the Prophet and the religion?"

Imam responded with this verse to make Harun understand that an infidel
is not just a person who clearly denies the existence of God or refutes
Qur'an or calls the Prophet part of a fiction. It is correct that such a
person is an infidel and is the best of the infidels as he makes a clear
statement. Everyone recognizes him and defines his own position about
this infidel clearly.

Worse than the infidel is a person who is ungrateful for the great
blessings available to him and uses them in the wrong. Such a person
pushes not only himself to hell but others under him as well.

Such is the Wilayat of Satan. A person who spends his life under Satan's
Wilayat, does not have control over himself. We don't mean to say that
he becomes totally powerless. Later as we describe the meanings of the
Qur'anic verse, this point will become clearer. This person is in the
path of the torrent that just pushes him along. He wants to struggle
against it but is unable to do so. He observes that all these people are
going towards hell and they are pulling him along; so he wants to return
from the path to hell. (But he is helpless.)

Have you been stuck in a mob? You want to step aside but the mob just
throws you to the other side like a straw.

A person who lives under the Wilayat of Satan; he wants to become pious;
live a life of holiness; live like a human being; stay a Muslim and die
a Muslim.

However, he cannot.

The society's surge drags him along and tows him in such a way that he
cannot do anything. Even when he thrashes around, all he loses is his
strength. Not only does he fail to struggle, the painful part is that
sometimes he is unable to fathom his situation.

I don't know if you have seen fish being caught in the sea. Sometimes
thousands of fish are trapped in the net and hauled ashore. But none of
those fish knows where it is being taken to. Every one of them imagines
that it is swimming to its destination on its own power. However, it is
powerless. Its destination is where the fisherman is going.

The net of the system of ignorance is a net that cannot be felt; it
pulls a person in a direction set by some who guide the net. Someone
living in this system cannot comprehend where he is going. Sometimes he
thinks that he is on the way to goodness and success; whereas, he does
not know that he is being taken to hell.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جَہَنَّمَ يَصْلَوْنَہَا وَ بِئْسَ الْقَرَارُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They will take them to hell where they will be thrown with faces
down; and what a rotten abode it is.***

**This is the Wilayat of Satan and evil.**

This sentence was part of the two sentences that composed the question
stated earlier. The question was: Is it possible to stay a Muslim while
living under the Wilayat of Satan?

Briefly we have understood life under the Wilayat and government of
Satan. In other words we know what it is like. If we want more details,
we can revert to history.

You know how the Islamic world was progressing by leaps and bounds
during the times of Ummayyads and Abbassids. There was a great wave of
scholastic achievements during that period. How amazing some of the
physicians were. How great translators were produced by the Islamic
world who translated some works of wonder from the old civilizations
into Arabic and published them. Muslims of the time remarkably
distinguished themselves in history, tradition, Physical Sciences,
medicine, astronomy, even arts. Even today if a writer or an orientalist
like Gustave Le Bon of France looks at these superficial things, he
declares the second to fourth centuries of Islamic history as the peak
of Islamic civilization.

Gustave Le Bon has written a book by the name of "History of the Islamic
Civilization in Fourth Century". He calls that civilization a great
civilization and fourth century the century of that great civilization.
Collectively when a European orientalist looks at the second, third and
fourth Islamic calendar centuries he is stunned. The reason is the
astounding activities, talents and faculties shown by the Islamic
society of the time.

But we ask you a question. Did all those activities and capabilities of
that time serve the interests of the Islamic society and humanity?

Today ten centuries have passed and we are not in any way prejudiced
about that era. As compared to the non-Islamic world of the time we can
say that it was the Islamic world that laid the foundation of
universities. It was the Islamic world that put together Philosophy. It
was the Islamic world that achieved a great deal in the fields of
medicine and physical sciences. However, in our own circles can we
truthfully and justifiably say that all that prowess and capabilities
resulted in the betterment of humanity and Islamic society?

After ten centuries what does the Islamic society have from that legacy
and why is it not there?

Why did we not inherit the scholarly and civilized treasure?

Why today in this world are we not brilliant like the glowing society of
ten centuries ago? Is there any reason other than the fact that all
those activities and achievements were under the rule of Satan?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من ان نگین سلیمان به هیچ نستانم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
که گاه گاه بر اودست اهر من باشد
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I see no worth in the ring of Sulaiman,*
*If, time to time, it is worn by the devil*

The misguided leadership of the time played a game with the Muslim
world. They did different things to boost their egos and to have people
talk about how certain achievements were made during the reign of a
certain Abbassid Khalifa.

If these rulers instead of progressing in the fields of physical
sciences, mathematics, astronomy, literature and jurisprudence had only
let Alavi government come to power - establishment of Imam Ja’far
As-Sadiq's rule. If they had allowed Imam As-Sadiq to take over all the
powers and faculties of the Islamic society; if they had let Imam
As-Sadiq determine the activities of the whole Islamic society; even if
the Islamic world had lagged behind by a hundred years in their
scholarly and literary achievements that the whole Islamic world is
proud of, it would have been beneficial to humanity.

Humanity would have progressed; Islam would have prospered; the
resources and powers of Islamic society would have been used in the
right way. The situation would not have been like this that they would
translate the books, reach the heights in the fields of medicine and
science but were so weak in morality on individual and collective level
that the class difference prevailing at that time is still secure in
history. It is just like today's dirty and humiliating society that the
super powers of today take pride in their mind boggling inventions.

As an example, they claim that they invented that particular medicine;
they made progress in another particular scientific field; did this and
did that. However, from human and moral values point of view these
governments are still living the thousand year old history. Today in
spite of immense wealth, monstrous poverty exists along its side. In
this day and age opposite to millions of people in poor countries only
one percent of people are enjoying the fruits of wealth. Even then these
governments are proud of their scientific advancements.

The Islamic society of second, third and fourth Islamic centuries was
facing this situation. There was tremendous scholarly development but
the rich ruled. It was a life of luxury and pleasure for some, yet
ignorance of humanity and human values and differences in classes were
at their peak. Some people were dying of hunger and for others
overeating was the cause of death.

What was the reason the Islamic society of the time, in spite of its
scholastic activities and pleasures, could not become a center of human
values and moral accomplishments?

Certain people of the second and third centuries who can be remembered
with great pride and whom we can present to the world as most
distinguished personalities were those who ferociously fought against
the civilized system of the time. For example, Moalla Bin Khanees who
was hanged in the middle of the market; Yahya Bin Umme Taveel whose
hands and feet were severed and whose tongue was pulled out; Muhammad
Bin Abi Umair who was given four hundred lashes; Yahya Ibn Zaid who was
martyred in the hills of Khurasan at the tender age of eighteen; Zaid
Bin Ali whose body was left hanging for four years.

These are the personalities whose names can be counted among the
noteworthy people of the human world. These people had nothing to do
with the celebrated society of that time that has been mentioned by
Gustave Le Bon; rather, they were against it.

So you see, in those societies where people are ruled by evil and Satan
and whose affairs are run by the Satanic forces, the people powers are
used, their potential is exercised but just like in today's civilized
world they were put to use in the Islamic world of ten to eleven hundred
years ago. All this progress is as worthless as stolen wealth in the
eyes of higher human values. This is the Satanic Wilayat and government.

With such characteristics can someone live the life of a Muslim under a
Satanic government?

Let us see what it means to live the life of a Muslim.

The meanings of living the life of a Muslim are:

• All resources, powers and potentials of a Muslim are under God's
control

• All of his wealth and possessions are under God's control.

• His life is under God's control.

• His ideology and thoughts are under God's control.

Along these lines there are examples of people rebelling against such
Satanic societies, communities and systems and migrating towards God.

The first example is that of the society of Madina during the days of
the Prophet. Madina was a "God's servant" society. It was a Muslim
society. Every step taken was in the path of God. Even the Jews and
Christians who lived under the Islamic government had Islamic lives. In
an Islamic society even the Christians and Jews who pay their dues
follow the Islamic path. In such a society a person may be a Jew
according to his faith and actions but as a member of the society he is
more of a Muslim than a Muslim who lives under an ignorant system.

During the Prophet's time all wealth, spear and sword, ideology and
thoughts, all personal actions and even the emotions and feelings were
in the way of God.

More or less similar was the situation during the time of the Commander
of the Faithful, Imam Ali, as he was no different from the Prophet of
Islam from the point of view of being a ruler and God's Wali. However,
he inherited a rotten society. He inherited difficulties and problems.
And if instead of the Commander of Faithful the Prophet himself had
assumed the reins of government he would have faced the same trials and
tribulations as faced by the Commander of the Faithful.

En-masse Migration
------------------

A historical example of en-masse migration is that of the Shiahs, the
followers of Ahlul Bayt. It is a pity that the month of Ramadan is over
and we could not discuss the Imamat in detail.; otherwise, we would have
talked about Imamat after Wilayat and would have told you the sort of a
group Shiahs were in the days of the Imams. We would have described to
you the sort of relationship the Imam used to have with the Shiahs and
the sort of association the Shiahs had with the society. But due to lack
of time we have no choice but to mention it briefly.

Shiahs lived their lives apparently under the Satanic system. However,
internally they were totally aligned against the Satanic system. In
regards to this an example can be given of a group who was with Husayn
Ibn Ali. These people faced off against a torrent and moved against the
surge that tried to drag them along. This is an example of group
migration and revolution in history. However, an ordinary person cannot
remain a Muslim while living in a Satanic society and his existence, his
assets, his powers and his capabilities cannot remain subservient to the
commands of Allah. This is impossible.

If a Muslim spends his life in a Satanic environment and Satanic system,
part of his Muslimhood will be on the path of Satan; he cannot
completely be a servant of God.

Usule Kafi is one of the most reliable and oldest books of Shiahs. There
is a tradition related several ways in the chapter of Book Al Hujjah,
"About the person who worshipped without an Imam appointed by Allah."

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq says:

> ’’اِنَّ الله لاٰ يَسْتَحِيي اَنْ يُعَذِّبَ اُمّہ دانَتْ بِاِمٰامٍ
> لَيْسَ مِنَ الله وَاِنْ کٰانَتْ فِي اَعْمٰالِھٰا بَرّۃً تَقِيَّۃً
> وَاِنَّ الله لَيَسْتَحْيِي اَنْ يُعَذِّبَ اُمَّۃً دانَتْ بِاِمٰامٍ
> مِنَ الله وَاِنْ کَانَتْ في اَعْمٰالِھٰا ظٰالِمَۃً مَسِيئَۃً۔‘‘54

*God does not feel shame in punishing a nation that obeys an Imam not
appointed by Him* *even though they may be pious and good people. Indeed
God feels shame in punishing a nation that obeys an Imam appointed by
Him even though they may be oppressive and wicked in their actions.*

It is a peculiar tradition. It says that those who spend their lives
under the government of God's Wali will be saved even though
occasionally they commit sins in their individual and collective
actions. And those who live under the government of Satan are evil and
will be punished in spite of the fact that they perform good deeds
individually and collectively. This is rather bizarre. Although the
tradition has been related in several ways, yet their meanings are the
same.

In explaining the meanings of this tradition we always give an example
of a bus that you board to go to Nishapur. If the bus travels to
Nishapur, then for sure you will reach your destination. And if it goes
to Tibs or Qochan, you will definitely not reach your destination
(Nishapur).

If the passengers who boarded Nishapur headed bus maintain good manners
with each other, well and good. And if they don't maintain cordial
relations with each other, even then they will reach Nishapur. They will
reach their destination even though they may have committed some bad
deeds along the way. They will have to face the consequences of their
wicked acts but will still reach their destination. On the other hand
the other bus that should take you to Nishapur, takes you in the
opposite direction. If all of its passengers are respectful, behave
cordially with each other and notice that the bus is going to Qochan
instead of Nishapur, however, in spite of noticing the different
direction, they do not react. Yes, they are good people and very kind to
each other; but will they reach their destination and objective?
Obviously not.

In the first instance the train's driver was a trustworthy person. He
was respected and noble.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِمٰام مِنَ الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A guide appointed by Allah*

He was a guide appointed by Allah who drove them to the destination even
though they were dreadful people.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاِنْ کَانَتْ في اَعْمٰالِھٰا ظٰالِمَۃً مَسِيئَۃً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Even though they may be oppressive and wicked in their actions*

In the other example the driver did not know the route; he was not
trustworthy; he was a worshipper of carnal desires; he was intoxicated;
he was misguided; he had some chore to take care of in Qochan and he put
his own errand ahead of others' wishes. People on this bus will never
reach their destination irrespective of the fact that they were very
kind and well-mannered with each other.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاِنْ کٰانَتْ فِي اَعْمٰالِھٰا بَرّۃً تَقِيَّۃً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Even though they may be pious and good people.*

But they will face God's wrath and will not get to their destination.

So a society whose administration is under the control of Satanic forces
is like a bus that is being driven by an untrustworthy driver. People
living in such a society will not get to their goal and objective and
will not stay Muslims.

Now a question arises, what should Muslims do in such circumstances? A
Qur'anic verse answers the question and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّ الَّذِيْنَ تَوَفّٰہُمُ الْمَلٰئِکَۃُ ظٰلِمِيْ اَنْفُسِہِمْ
قَالُوْا فِيْمَ کُنْتُمْ قَالُوْا کُنَّا مُسْتَضْعَفِيْنَ فِي
الْاَرْضِ قَالُوْآ اَلَمْ تَکُنْ اَرْضُ الله وَاسِعَۃً فَتُہَاجِرُوْا
فِيْھَا فَاُولٰئِکَ مَاْواٰہُمْ جَہَنَّمُ وَ سَآئَتاْ مَصِيْرًا۔
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those who have oppressed themselves, their future and everything else
they own, when their death comes, the angels appointed by God to take
away their souls ask them, "What condition were you in? Where were
you?"*** [^4]

When the divine angel sees the rotten condition of this person; when
like a physician or a surgeon who comes to heal a patient, he notices
the dreadful and hopeless state of the individual, he says, "Where are
you? What happened to you?"

We feel that the angels are surprised at the fateful condition of this
individual, the sorrowful soul, his misfortune and the awaiting torment
and say to him, "Where did you spend your life? Where were you that you
so terribly oppressed yourself and now you are leaving this world
afflicting yourself?"

They respond:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوْا کُنَّا مُسْتَضْعَفِيْنَ فِي الْاَرْضِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We were helpless among the people we were living; we were
powerless.***

The weaklings of the society belong to a group that has no jurisdiction
in the society. They are feeble and dependent. They have no control in
defining the society's policies, its direction, its movement, its peace
and its activities.

As we said earlier, these people move in the direction their master
pulls them by the leash; they have no control over which way they go and
what they do.

Think of children in a nursery class; not those who are seven years old
as today's seven year olds are very aware. Think of four to five years
olds who go to nursery schools as in the old days young children used to
go to a madressa. I still recall my madressa that we used to leave
together at the end of the school day. We really did not know where we
were going. Children did not know where anything was. A monitor or an
older kid would guide us which way to go and which way not to go. We had
no idea where we were going. Suddenly we would find out that we were
standing at the doorstep of our house or that of a friend's house. It
was up to the monitor to take us around town until we would know where
we were standing.

The feeble of the world are those who in spite of living in the society
do not know about the affairs of the society. They do not know what is
where. They have no idea where they are going; where they will reach;
who is taking them and if it is possible not to go with him; and if they
don't go what do they have to do.

They have no clue; they pay no attention and they live like a zombie
oblivious of happenings around them; they are like someone walking on a
treadmill who walks all day and at the end of the day finds out he is at
the same place where he was at day break. He does not know where he
started and where he is headed.

However, this scenario holds for those societies that are not run on the
right lines and do not believe in the value of a human being. It does
not hold for those societies that respect the opinion of a person; it is
not valid for societies that are led by the Prophet. As the Glorious
Qur'an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَشَاوِرْہُمْ فِي الْاَمْر
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And consult with them in the affairs**.* [^5]

Even though he was the Prophet of God and did not need to consult with
people, yet he was ordered to seek people's opinion and to give them
respect and esteem. The public in such a society is not ignorant and
uninformed.

However, in a society that is run on a system of dictatorship,
oppression and ignorance most of the people are pathetic. They say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
کُنَّا مُسْتَضْعَفِيْنَ فِي الْاَرْضِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We were among the weak on earth.***

They pulled us this way, that way and threw us on the ground. They
trampled on us; they humiliated us and we did not know. This is the
excuse they present.

In response the angels say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلَمْ تَکُنْ اَرْضُ الله وَاسِعَۃً فَتُہَاجِرُوْا فِيْھَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Was God's earth not vast that you could have migrated?***

Was the whole world limited to that society where you lived your life as
the trampled ones?

Was the God's earth not vast enough that you could have moved out of
this prison to live on a free land where you could have worshipped Him -
a land where you could have properly utilized your talents?

Was there no such place on the face of earth?

This answer clearly shows that the logic of the angels and that of wise
people is identical. The intellect of humans says the same thing:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلَمْ تَکُنْ اَرْضُ الله وَاسِعَۃً فَتُہَاجِرُوْا فِيْھَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Was God's earth not vast that you could have migrated?*

Now they have no answer. What can these poor souls say as they have no
logical answer? So the Glorious Qur'an says about the end of these
feeble people:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاُولٰئِکَ مَاْواٰہُمْ جَہَنَّمُ وَ سَآئَتاْ مَصِيْرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The final place of those weaklings whose powers and talents were in
the controls of satans is hell and what a terrible abode and ending it
is.***

However, there is an exception here too. Not everyone can migrate. All
the people cannot get out of this prison of the system of ignorance.
There are some frail people; there are old people; there are children;
there are women; such people cannot migrate. So such people are excused.

اِلَّا الْمُسْتَضْعَفِيْنَ مِنَ الرِّجَالِ وَ النِّسَآئِ وَ الْوِلْدَانِ
لا يَسْتَطِيْعُوْنَ حِيْلَۃً وَّ لا يَہْتَدُوْنَ سَبِيْلا

***Except those weak men, women and children who have no choice and
cannot do anything.*** [^6]

They have no way of going towards the land of light, the land of Islam
and the land of God's worship and they cannot do anything.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاُولٰئِکَ عَسَي الله اَنْ يَّعْفُوَ عَنْہُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***May the Lord forgive those who are unable to do anything.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَکَانَ الله عَفُوًّا غَفُوْرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And the Lord blots out sins and forgives.*** [^7]

And for those whose excuses have been taken away by these verses ought
not to think that the migration will bring misfortune and harm to them
and they should not keep asking this question, "What will happen to us?
Will we be able to do anything? Will we gain anything?"
For such people Qur'an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَنْ يُّہَاجِرْ فِيْ سَبِيْلِ الله يَجِدْ فِي الْاَرْضِ مُرَاغَمًا
کَثِيْرًا وَّسَعَۃً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whoever migrates in the path of God finds vastness on earth and
many opportunities.*** [^8]

The world turns into an open sky for his flight and he flies with total
freedom. In the system of ignorance however high we fly, we could not
fly beyond the cage. But now there is an amazingly open and huge horizon
in front of us. In the early stages of Islam the poor Muslims could
barely pray in the mosque. When their motivation was really high, they
would pray two raka's at the Kaaba; afterwards they were severely beaten
up. This was the ultimate for Muslims and nothing more. But after they
migrated and starting living in an Islamic society under God's Wilayat,
they saw that it was a strange place.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُسَارِعُوْنَ فِي الْخَيْرٰتِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They hasten in every good work.*** [^9]

Here the worth and status of people is known and determined by the
Qur'an - piety and worship. Whoever struggles the most in the path of
God; worships Him more; fights and spends in the way of God, gets a
higher rank. In yesterdays' Makkan society if it was known that someone
gave a dirham in God's way, he was tortured with red hot rods; he was
tied up and burned with fire. However, once they migrated in the path of
Allah and moved to Madina, the city of the Prophet, they found it to be
such an open place for flight; now one could fly at his own will.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَنْ يُّہَاجِرْ فِيْ سَبِيْلِ الله يَجِدْ فِي الْاَرْضِ مُرَاغَمًا
کَثِيْرًا وَّسَعَۃً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whoever migrates in the path of God finds vastness on earth and
many opportunities.***

And now when you moved from the land of infidelity towards the land of
immigrants and on the way God took away your life, what will happen?

Qur'an says, "Now your reward and compensation is God's responsibility
because you have done your job. Whatever was your duty, you have
performed it and you tried your best." This is what Islam desires; Islam
wants that one should struggle in the way of God according to his energy
level, his talents and his reach."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَنْ يَّخْرُجْ مِنْ بَيْتِہ مُہَاجِرًا اِلَي الله وَرَسُوْلِہ ثُمَّ
يُدْرِکْہُ الْمَوْتُ فَقَدْ وَقَعَ اَجْرُہ عَلَي الله وَ کَانَ الله
غَفُوْرًا رَّحِيْمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And who leaves his home to migrate towards God and the Prophet and
death comes to him, his rewards lies with Allah and Allah is
Oft-Forgiving and Merciful.*** [^10]

Please note that this conversation is the last on the topic of Wilayat;
the discussion is only half complete; so let us make a point that
migration takes place from the land of infidelity towards the land of
migration - the land of faith; the land under the Wilayat of God, the
Wilayat of the Prophet, the Wilayat of the Imam and the Wilayat of the
Wali of Allah. However, if there is no such place on the face of the
earth, then what should be done?

Should one stay in the land of the unfaithful?

Or should one think about inventing a land of migration?

The Prophet himself migrated but there was no prior land of migration.
He invented such a land by migrating.

Sometimes it is necessary that a group of people lays the foundation of
a land of migration by migrating; by developing a society of Allah and
Islam and then other believers move there.

This is the summation of our discussion on the subject of migration.

[^1]: Ch. 5 Ma'ida verse 55.

[^2]: Ch. 28 Qasas, verse 41.

[^3]: Ch. 14 Ibrahim, verse 28, 29.

[^4]: Ch.4, An-Nisa’, verse 97.

[^5]: Ch. 3 Imran, verse 159.

[^6]: Ch.4, An-Nisa’, verse 98.

[^7]: Ch.4, An-Nisa’, verse 99.

[^8]: Ch.4, An-Nisa’, verse 100.

[^9]: Ch. 23 Mominoon, verse 61.

[^10]: Ch.4, An-Nisa’, verse 100.


