Sura 6 : Surat Al Kafirun the Deniers of Truth
==============================================

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Most Merciful

This surah pertains historically to a time when there was an at­tempt
on the part of some of the unbelievers to enter into an exchange with
the Prophet, salla-llahu alayhi wa alihi wa sallam, in order to draw him
and the Muslims with him back into their old habits of idol­atry. They
proposed to worship Allah for one year, following the teachings of the
Prophet, and the following year they, the Prophet and Muslims included,
would worship the traditional idols. They would thus alternate their
practices until one way proved true to either party. Thus, according to
the kafir way of thinking, if the Prophet's teachings were true, they
would obtain benefit from follow­ing them, but if the kafirun's
practices were true, then they and the Muslims would benefit from
worshipping the idols and most impor­tantly, Islam would no longer be a
threat to them. This surah is the reply of those who have trust and
faith to those who do not.

1 Say: O you who deny the truth!

2 I do not worship what you worship,

This is the affirmative stand of a person who is in a state of 'man,
who has come to trust that he will recognize and taste the mercy of the
One Creator. Therefore, he tells those who are in denial, in kufr, "I do
not worship what you worship." The person in iman, rather, worships that
Source which gives him direct inner nourishment, keeps him safe from the
darknesses which overwhelm others and gives him illumination and
enlightenment. That Source increases him in iman by virtue of his
\`ubadiyah (worship) and protects him from all harm. Worship makes his
journey mu\`abbad (easy, level, offer­ing no resistence). By the
recognition of his humility he is carried closer and closer to the
Source of that spring.

3 And you do not worship what I worship.

In other words, "you have no access to that Source which I wor­ship.
You do not worship that subtle energy from which all these at­tributes
emanate."

4 And I will not worship what you worship,

"Nor will I ever, nor can I ever, having been enlightened, having had
openings, having had knowledge of Allah, look up to or adore that which
you worship."

5 Nor will you worship what I worship.

"Nor will you ever in the future worship the truth which I wor­ship."
This is a prophecy which shows that those who are in kufr will persist
in kufr. There are people who have been created as fuel for the Fire, as
it says repeatedly in the Qur'an, and this fact cannot be al­tered. They
will persist despite attempts to dissuade them, despite all efforts made
to draw them into the light of the din.

6 To you your religion and to me my religion!

The person of faith and trust, who is in a state of perfect equa­nimity
and who knows that everything is in the hands of Allah, says in
conclusion, "You have your way of transacting, the way which you choose
to replenish yourself and interact with other people, with whatever
entity you consider as absolute - and I have my way! " Then those of
faith and firm belief join hands following the perfected meth­od of the
Muhammadi model. They are not illumined from without; their illumination
comes from within. They walk along the shores of the sea of lights and
these shores have their boundaries. This is the way of the mumin, the
way of perfect trust.


