The Hajj
========

The Acts of the Hajj
--------------------

At the beginning, in order to make it easier for the reader to follow
the opinions of the five schools of fiqh about various aspects of Hajj,
we shall briefly outline their sequence as ordained by the Shari'ah.

The Hajj pilgrim coming from a place distant from Mecca assumes
*ihram*[^1] from the *miqat*[^2] on his way, or from a point parallel to
the closest *miqat,* and starts reciting the *talbiyah*.[^3] In this
there is no difference between one performing *\`Umrah* *mufradah*or any
of the three types of Hajj (i.e. *tamattu, ifrad, qiran*)*.* However,
those who live within the haram[^4] of Mecca assume *ihram* from their
houses.'[^5]

On sighting the Holy Ka'bah, he recites *takbir* **اللَّهِ أَكْبَر**
(i.e. \`God is the greatest') and *tahlil* **لا إله إلا الله** (i.e.
\`There is no god except Allah') which is *mustahabb* [^6] (desirable,
though not obligatory). On entering Mecca, he takes a bath, which is
again *mustahabb.* After entering al‑Masjid al‑Haram, first he greets
the Black Stone (*al‑Hajar* *al‑'Aswad*) ‑ if possible kisses it,
otherwise makes a gesture with his hand - then makes the *tawaf* (seven
fold circumambulation of the Ka'bah) of the first entry, which is
*mustahabb* for one performing *Hajj al‑'ifrad* or *Hajj* *al-qiran.*
Then he offers the two *raka'at* of the *tawaf,* again greets the Black
Stone if he can, and leaves al‑Masjid al‑Haram. After this, he remains
in the state of *ihram* in Mecca. On the day of *tarwiyah,* i.e. the
eighth day of the month of Dhu al‑Hijjah, or if he wants a day earlier,
he goes forth towards \`Arafat.

If the pilgrim has come for *\`Umrah* *mufradah*or *Hajj* *al-tamattu;*
he performs the *tawaf* of the entry, which is obligatory (*wajib*) for
him, and prays the two *raka'at* of the *tawaf.* Then he performs the
*sa’y* between Safa and Marwah, and, following it, the *halq* (complete
head shave) or *taqsir* [^7] (partial shortening of the hair of the
head). Then he is relieved of the state of *ihram* and its related
restrictions, and things prohibited in *ihram* become permissible for
him, including sexual intercourse. [^8] Then he proceeds from Mecca
after assuming *ihram* for a second time, early enough to be present at
the *wuquf* (halt) at \`Arafat (referred to as *\`mawqif, ; i*.e. the
place of halting) at noontime on the ninth of Dhu al‑Hijjah. Assumption
of *ihram* on the day of *tarwiyah,* i.e. eighth Dhu al‑Hijjah, is
preferable.

The Hajj pilgrim, irrespective of the type of Hajj he intends to
perform, turns towards \`Arafat, passing through Mina. The period of the
*wufuq* at \`Arafat is, for the Hanafi, Shafi\`i, and Maliki schools,
from the noon of the ninth until the day break of the tenth; for the
Hanbali school, from the daybreak of the ninth until the daybreak of the
tenth; and for the Imamiyyah, from non until sunset on the ninth, and in
exigency until the daybreak of the tenth. [^9] The pilgrim offers
invocations (*dua'*) at \`Arafat, preferably (*istihbaban*) in an
imploring manner.

Then he turns towards Muzdalifah (also called al‑Mash'ar al‑Haram),
where he offers the *Maghrib* and *Isha'* prayers on the night of the
\`Id (i.e. the tenth of Dhu al‑Hijjah). Offering the two prayers
immediately after one another is considered *mustahabb* by all the five
schools. According to the Hanafi, Shafi'i, and Hanbali schools, it is
obligatory to spend this night (i.e. the night of the \`Id) at
Muzdalifah; for the Imamiyyah, it is not obligatory but preferable.
After the daybreak, he makes the *wuquf* at al‑Mash'ar al‑Haram, which
is *wajib* for the Imamiyyah and *mustahabb* for other schools. And at
Muzdalifah, preferably, he picks up seven pebbles to be thrown at Mina.

After this, he turns towards Mina before sunrise on the day of \`Id.
There he performs the ritual throwing of stones, called *ramy,* at
Jamarat al‑\`Aqabah, no matter which of the three kinds of Hajj he is
performing. The *ramy* is performed between sunrise and sunset,
preferably (*istihbaban*)  
 accompanied by *takbir* and *tasbi* **سُبْحَانَ اللَّهِ** *(*i.e.
proclaiming God's glory by saying \`How far God is from every
imperfection!').

Then if a non‑Meccan on *Hajj* *al-tamattu*; he should slaughter the
sacrificial animal (a camel, cow or a sheep), by agreement of all the
five schools. However, it is not obligatory for one on *Hajj al‑'ifrad;*
again by consensus of all the five schools. For one on *Hajj*
*al-qiran*, the sacrifice is obligatory from the viewpoint o the four
Sunni schools, and for the Imamiyyah it is not obligatory except when
the pilgrim brings the sacrificial animal (*al‑hady*) along with him at
the time of assuming *ihram*.

For a Meccan performing *Hajj* *al-tamattu*; the sacrifice is obligatory
from the viewpoint of the Imamiyyah school, but not according to the
four Sunni schools.

After this, he performs the *halq* or *taqsir*, irrespective of the kind
of Hajj he is performing. After *halq* or *taqsir*, everything except
sexual intercourse becomes permissible for him according to the Hanbali,
Shafi'i and Hanafi schools, and according to the Maliki and Imamiyyah
schools, everything except intercourse and perfume.

Then he returns to Mecca on the same day, i.e. the day of the \`Id,
performs the *tawaf* *al‑ziyarah*, prays its related two *raka'at*,
regardless of which kind of Hajj he is performing. After this, according
to the four Sunni schools, he is free from all restrictions including
that of sexual intercourse. Then he performs the *sa’y* between Safa and
Marwah if on *Hajj* *al-tamattu;* by agreement of all the five schools.
For the Imamiyyah school, the *sa’y* after *tawaf* *al‑ziyarah* is also
obligatory for one performing *Hajj* *al-qiran* and *Hajj al‑'ifrad*.
But for other schools, it is not obligatory if the pilgrim had performed
the *sa’y* after the *tawaf* of first entry, otherwise it is.

For the Imamiyyah, it is obligatory for all the types of Hajj to perform
another *tawaf* after this *sa’y*. Without this *tawaf*, called *tawaf*
*al-nisa*; one is not relieved of the interdiction of abstinence from
intercourse.

Then the pilgrim returns to Mina on the same day, i.e. the tenth, where
he sleeps on the night of the eleventh, performs the threefold throwing
of stones (*ramy* *al* *jamarat*) during the interval from the noon
until the sunset of the eleventh‑ by consensus of all the five schools.
For the Imamiyyah, the *ramy* is permissible after sunrise and before
noon. After this, on the day of the twelfth, he does what he had done
the day before. All the legal schools agree that he may now depart from
Mina before sunset. And if he stays there until sunset, he is obliged to
spend the night of the thirteenth there and to perform the threefold
*ramy* on the day of thirteenth.

After the ramy, he returns to Mecca, before or after noon. On entering
Mecca, he performs another *tawaf*, *tawaf* *al‑wada\`* (*the* *tawaf*
of *farewell*), which is *mustahabb* for the Imamiyyah and Maliki
schools and obligatory for the non‑Meccans from the viewpoint of the
remaining three. Here the acts of the Hajj come to conclusion.

The Conditions (Shurut) that make the Hajj Obligatory (Wajib)
-------------------------------------------------------------

### The Proviso of Bulugh

The Hajj is not obligatory for children, regardless of whether a child
is of the age of discretion (*mumayyiz*) or not (*ghayr* *mumayyiz*).
For a *mumayyiz* child, the Hajj is voluntary and valid. However, it
does not relieve him/her of the obligation to perform the obligatory
Hajj (called *hijjat* *ib*) for a Muslim are: maturity (*bulugh*)*,
sanity* (*\`aql*), and \`capability' (*istita'ah*).*al‑'Islam*) later as
an adult possessing *istita'ah*; this, in case he/she does not attain
adulthood before the wuquf. On this all the five schools of fiqh are in
agreement.

It is permissible for the guardian (*wali*) of a *ghayr* *mumayyiz*
child to take him along on the Hajj pilgrimage. In that case, he puts on
the child the dress of *ihram*; instructs him to say the *talbiyah*, if
the child can say it well, or otherwise says it himself on the child's
behalf; and is cautious lest the child commits some act unlawful
(*haram*) for the pilgrims (*hujjaj*). The accompanying guardian also
tells him to perform every act that the child can perform himself, and
what he cannot, the guardian performs it on the child's behalf.

The schools of fiqh differ on two questions relating to the Hajj of a
*mumayyiz* child: firstly, whether his Hajj is valid, irrespective of
the permission of the guardian; secondly, whether he is relieved of the
obligation of Hajj if he attains adulthood before *mawqif*. According to
the Imamiyyah, Hanbali, and Shafi'i schools, the guardian's permission
is a provision for the *ihram* to be valid. According to Abu Hanifah,
the idea of validity is inapplicable to the child's Hajj, even if
*mumayyiz,* and regardless of whether he obtains the permission of the
guardian or not; because, according to him, there is nothing to a
child's Hajj except its significance as an exercise (*Fath al‑Bari,
al‑Mughni, al‑Tadhkirah*)*.*

According to the Imamiyyah, Hanbali and Shafi\`i schools, if the child
attains adulthood before *mawqif,* his obligatory duty of Hajj (*hijjat
al‑'Islam*) is thereby fulfilled. And according to Imamiyyah and Maliki
schools, the duty is fulfilled if he renews *ihram* (as an adult),
otherwise not; which means that he should start the Hajj all over again
from the beginning. (*al‑Tadhkirah*)

### Insanity

Basically the condition of insanity relieves a person of all duties.
Even if he was to perform the Hajj, and presumably in the way expected
of a sane person, it would not fulfil his obligatory duty were he to
return to sanity. If his insanity is periodic, when regained for a
sufficiently long interval it is *wajib* for him to perform the Hajj
with all its conditions and in all its details. However, if the interval
of sanity is not sufficient to perform all the acts of the Hajj, he is
quit of the obligation.

### Istita’ah

All the five schools of fiqh agree that *istita\`ah* is a requirement
for the Hajj duty to become obligatory as mentioned by the Qu’ranic
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 مَنِ اسْتَطَاعَ إِلَيْهِ سَبِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(“… whoever is able to make his way there”). The Qur'an, 3:97***

However, there is disagreement about the meaning of *istita\`ah.* In
hadith it has been defined as consisting of *"al‑zad wa al‑rahilah".
\`Al‑rahilah'* implies the expenses of to and fro journey to Mecca, and
\`*al‑zad*' stands for the expenses required for transport, food,
lodging, passport fees, and the like. Moreover, the funds needed to meet
such expenses must come out of the surplus after paying one's debts,
after arranging for one's family's livelihood, meeting the requirements
of one's source of income (such as land for a farmer, tools for a
craftsman, capital for a tradesman, and so on), and without compromising
the security of his life, property and honour.

All schools agree about it except the Malikis, who say that the duty of
Hajj is obligatory for anyone who can walk. The Malikis also do not
consider the necessity of providing for the living expenses of the
family. Rather, they consider it compulsory for one to sell off his
essential means of life, such as land, livestock, tools, and even books
and unessential clothes. (*al‑Fiqh \`ala al‑madhahib al‑'arba\`ah*).

If a person upon whom the Hajj duty is not obligatory due to absence of
*istita'ah,* takes upon himself the burden and performs the Hajj, in
case he attains *istita'ah* afterwards, is his first Hajj sufficient or
should he perform the Hajj once again? According to the Maliki and
Hanafi schools, yes, repetition is not compulsory. According to the
Hanbali school, yes, but a duty left unattended, such as an unpaid debt,
must be discharged.

According to the Imamiyyah school, it does not suffice the obligation of
Hajj if he attains *istita'ah* afterwards, because the provisional is
inseparable from the provision both in its presence and its absence. The
Hajj performed before the attainment of *istita'ah* is considered
supererogatory (*nafl*)*.* Later, with its realization, repetition of
the Hajj becomes obligatory.

### Immediacy (al‑Fawr)

The Imamiyyah, the Maliki, and the Hanbali schools consider the
obligation (*wujub*) of the Hajj duty to be immediately applicable
(*fawri*)*;* i.e. it is not permissible to delay it from the moment of
its possibility. It is sinful to delay, though the Hajj performed with
delay is correct and fulfils the obligation. The author of *al‑Jawahir*
says:

The immediacy of the obligation of Hajj means that it is necessary to
take initiative to perform the Hajj in the first year of attaining
istita'ah, and failing that at one's next earliest
opportunity....Thereafter, there is no doubt about the sinfulness of the
delay if one were to forgo the first opportunity in the case of absence
of another.

According to the Shafi\`i school, the obligation of Hajj is not
immediate (upon attainment of *istita'ah*)*;* rather one may delay it
and perform it when he wishes.[^10] According to Abu Yusuf, the Hajj is
an immediate obligation. Muhammad ibn al‑Hasan considers delay
(*tarakhi*) permissible. Abu Hanifah has no explicit text on the matter,
though some of his contemporaries state that he implicitly believes in
the immediacy of the obligation.

Secondary Issues Related to Istita\`ah
--------------------------------------

### Women and the Hajj

Are there any additional conditions for women with regard to performance
of the Hajj? All the five schools agree that it is not required that a
woman should obtain the husband's permission for the obligatory Hajj
duty, nor may he prevent her from undertaking it. However, there is a
difference of opinion about whether the Hajj is obligatory upon her or
not if she does not find a husband or a *mahram* [^11] to accompany her
on the journey.

According to the Imamiyyah, Maliki and Shafi\`i schools, the *mahram's*
company or that of the husband is not at all a condition, regardless of
whether she is young or old, married or unmarried; since the *mahram's*
company is a means of her safety, not an end in itself. Accordingly, we
have two cases: either she feels confident of her security on the
journey, or she doesn't. In the first case, the Hajj is obligatory upon
her and the *mahram's* company is irrelevant. In the second case, she
lacks the requirement of *istita'ah,* in spite of the *mahram's*
company.

Accordingly, there is no essential difference between a man and a woman
in this respect.

According to the Hanbali and Hanafi schools, the company of the husband
or *mahram* is a provision for the woman's Hajj, even if she were old.
It is not permissible for her to perform the Hajj without his company.
The Hanafi school further stipulates the condition that her location
should be at a distance of three days' journey from Mecca.

### Bequest (al‑Badhl)

*Al‑Mughni,* a text of Hanbali fiqh, states: "If a person bequeaths
money to another, it is not binding upon him to accept it, and it does
not make the recipient *mustati\`* (possessing *istita'ah*)*,*
irrespective of whether the bequeathed is a relative or a stranger,
regardless of whether the bequest suffices for the expenses of the
journey and food. According to al‑Shafi\`i, if the bequest is made by
one's son, enough to enable him to undertake the Hajj journey, the Hajj
becomes obligatory. This is because it enables him to perform the Hajj
without having to bear a stranger's favour or without any accompanying
encumbrance or harm.

According to the Imamiyyah school, if the bequest is an unconditional
gift made without the provision of performing the Hajj by the recipient,
the Hajj is not binding, irrespective of who makes the bequest. But if
the bequest is made with the condition that one perform the Hajj, the
acceptance of the bequest is binding and may not be rejected, even if
the bequest is made by a stranger; since it makes him *mustati \`* to
undertake the pilgrimage.

### Marriage

What if one has only enough money either to get married or to perform
the Hajj? Which of them is prior? The Hanafi text *Fath al‑qadir* (vol.
II, *"Bab al‑Hajj"*) mentions this question being put to Abu Hanifah,
who, in his reply, considered that priority lies with the Hajj. The
generality (*itlaq*) of this answer in which he gives priority to the
Hajj, taking into consideration that marriage is obligatory under
certain conditions, allows us to conclude that for Abu Hanifah delay in
Hajj is not permissible.

According to the Shafi'i, Hanbali and Imamiyyah scholars, marriage has
priority if there is likelihood of distress (*haraj*)or difficulty
(*mashaqqah*)in refraining from marriage. In that case priority does not
lie with the Hajj. (*Kifayat al‑'akhbar, al‑Mughni, al‑\`Urwat
al‑wuthqa*)

### Khums and Zakat

Payment of the *khums* and *zakat* has priority over the Hajj. The
condition of *istita'ah* is not realized until both are paid off, like
other kinds of debts.

### Istita'ah by Chance

If someone travels to a place in the vicinity of the holy city of Mecca,
on business or for some other purpose, and his stay continues until the
Hajj season, and if it is possible for him to reach the Holy Ka'bah, he
thereby becomes *mustati\`*. And if he were to return home without
performing the Hajj, by consensus of all the schools, he is not relieved
of the obligation.

### Istinabah (Deputation)

The Islamic duties (*\`ibadat*) are divisible into three categories,
depending on a duty's nature whether it mainly involves bodily acts or
financial expenditure.

1. The purely bodily *\`ibadat* are those which, like fasting (*sawm*)
and prayer (*salat*)*,* do not involve any financial aspect. According
to the four Sunni schools, such duties cannot in any circumstance be
delegated to a proxy (*na'ib*)*,* either on behalf of a living or a dead
person. But according to the Imamiyyah school, taking a *na'ib* is
permissible on behalf of a dead person, though not for a living person,
to perform *sawm* and *salat* for him, and under all circumstances.

2. The purely financial *\`ibadat* are those which do not involve bodily
acts, such as *khums* and *zakat.* In such *\`ibadat,* all legal schools
agree, it is permissible to take a *na'ib.* It is permissible for one to
depute another to take out *zakat* and pay other kind of alms
(*sadaqat*) from his assets.

3. The duties which involve both bodily and financial aspects, such as
the Hajj, which requires such bodily acts as *tawaf* (circumambulation
of the Ka'bah), say (to and fro movement between Marwah and Safa),
*ramy* (the symbolic throwing of stones), and financial expenditures
such as for the journey and its accompanying requirements.

All the five legal schools agree that one who is capable of undertaking
the Hajj in person and fulfils all the conditions thereof, should do so
himself in person. It is not permissible for him to depute another to
undertake it, and if he does so it would not relieve him of his
obligation to perform it himself. If he does not do it in his life,
according to the Shafi'i, Hanbali and Imamiyyah schools, he is not
relieved of the duty because of the preponderance of the financial
aspect, and it is obligatory to hire someone to perform the Hajj with a
similar expenditure. In case he does not make a will for the Hajj, the
amount should be taken out from his undivided heritage.[^12]

According to the Hanafi and Maliki schools, he is relieved of the
obligation due to the bodily aspect; but if he mentions it in his will,
the expense is taken out from the one third of his inheritance‑‑like all
other bequests‑‑and if he doesn't, *istinabah* is not obligatory.

### The Physically Incapable (al‑Qadir al‑\`Ajiz)

One who meets all the financial conditions for the Hajj pilgrimage but
is incapable of undertaking it personally due to old age or some
incurable disease, all the legal schools agree, is relieved of the
obligation of performing the Hajj in person, for God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا جَعَلَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِي الدِّينِ مِنْ حَرَجٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

(... and He has laid no impediment in your religion ....).[^13]

However, it is obligatory upon him to hire someone to perform the Hajj
for him. But if he doesn't, is it a negligence of a duty whose
fulfilment continues to remain upon him? All the legal schools, with the
exception of the Maliki, agree that it is obligatory upon him to hire
someone to perform the Hajj for him. The Maliki says that the Hajj is
not obligatory upon one who is incapable of undertaking it in person.
(*al‑Mughni, al‑Tadhkirah*)

Furthermore, if a sick person recovers after deputing someone to perform
his Hajj, is it obligatory upon him on recovery to perform the Hajj in
person? According to the Hanbali school, another Hajj is not obligatory.
But according to the Imamiyyah, Shafi'i and Hanafi schools it is
obligatory, because what was fulfilled was the financial obligation, and
the bodily obligation has remained unfulfilled.

### Istinabah in al‑Hajj al‑Mustahabb

According to the Imamiyyah and Hanafi legal schools; one who has
performed the *Hijjat al‑'Islam,* if he wants to depute another for a
voluntary, *mustahabb* Hajj, may do so, even if he is capable of
undertaking it in person. But according to the Shafi\`i school, it is
not permissible. There are two narrations from Ahmad ibn Hanbal, one
indicating prohibition and the other permission.

According to the Maliki school, it is permissible for an incurable sick
person and for one who has performed the obligatory Hajj to hire another
for the Hajj. The Hajj so performed is valid, though *makruh*
(reprehensible). It is not considered as the Hajj of the hirer
(*mustajir*) and is counted as the *mustahabb* Hajj of the hired
(*ajir*)*.*

The hirer gets the reward for providing assistance in the performance of
the Hajj and shares the blessings of the prayers offered. When the Hajj
is performed for the benefit of a dead person, irrespective of whether
he has asked for it in his will or not, it is counted neither as
fulfilment of the duty (*fard*) nor as a supererogatory (*nafl*)act, nor
does it relieve him of the duty of the obligatory Hajj. (*al‑Fiqh \`ala
al‑madhahib al‑'arba\`ah*).

### The Conditions for the Na'ib

The *na'ib* should fulfil the conditions of: *bulugh* (adulthood),
*\`aql* (sanity), belief in Islam, exemption from the duty of obligatory
Hajj, and ability to perform the Hajj properly. A man may represent a
woman and a‑woman may represent a man, even if both the *na'ib* and the
one whom he represents have not performed the Hajj before.[^14]

Should the *na'ib* commence the journey from his own place or that of
the deceased whom he represents, or from one of the *mawaqit*? According
to the Hanafi and Maliki schools, the *na'ib* should commence the
pilgrimage journey from the place of the deceased, if he has not
specified the starting point; otherwise according to his wish.

According to the Shafi\`i school, the pilgrimage commences from one of
the *mawaqit;* if the deceased person has specified one, then the
*na'ib* must act accordingly, otherwise he is free to choose one of the
*mawaqit.*

According to the Hanbali school, the *na'ib* must start from the place
that the deceased was obliged to begin from if he had performed the Hajj
himself, and not from the place of his death. If the deceased person had
attained *istita'ah* at a place to which he had migrated, later
returning to his own place, the *na'ib* should start from the place of
migration, not from the deceased person's home, except when the distance
(between his home‑town and the place of migration) is less than what is
required for *qasr* in prayers performed by a traveller. [^15]

According to the Imamiyyah school, the Hajj is classified into *miqati*
(i.e. one which starts from one of the *mawaqit*) and *baladi* (i.e. one
which starts from the town of the deceased). If the deceased has
specified one of these two kinds, then the one specified.

If he has not specified, any one of the two may be performed. Otherwise
the Hajj is *miqati* and, if possible, starts from the *miqat* nearest
to Mecca, or else the *miqat* nearest to the town of the deceased. The
cost of *al‑Hijjat al‑miqatiyyah* is taken out from the undivided legacy
in the case of obligatory Hajj, and the expense exceeding the cost of
*al‑Hijjat al‑miqatiyyah* is taken from the one third. (*al‑Jawahir*)

### Delay by the Na'ib

Once the *na'ib* is hired, it is obligatory for him to act with
immediacy. He may not postpone the Hajj beyond the first year. Also, it
is not permissible for him to depute another, since the duty is his own.
If we do not know that he actually went on the pilgrimage and performed
all its essential acts, or if we doubt whether he performed them
correctly and properly or not, or whether he failed to fulfil any of its
obligatory essentials, then we assume that he acted correctly and
properly, unless there is proof to the contrary.

### Change of Purpose by the Na'ib (al‑\`Udal)

According to the Hanafi and Imamiyyah schools, if one species to the
*na'ib* a particular kind of Hajj; such as *Jajj al‑'ifrad,* or *Hajj*
*al-qiran;* then it is not permissible for him to make any change.
However, if a particular town was specified as the starting point and
the *na'ib* starts from another town, the purpose of the one who hires
him is considered as fulfilled if the said specification was not really
intended by the hirer; i.e. if by mentioning the route he meant the Hajj
itself, and not the route specifically. (*al‑Tadhkirah, al‑Fiqh \`ala
al‑madhahib al‑'arba\`ah*).

[^1]: \`Ihram' is the state of pilgrim sanctity, which a pilgrim of Hajj
or \`Umrah assumes on reaching miqat (see note No. 2). A pilgrim in the
state of ihram is called muhrim. (Tr.)

[^2]: Miqat (pl. mawaqit) refers to a number of stations outside Mecca
from where the pilgrims intending Hajj or \`Umrah assume ihram. They
are: (1) Dhu al‑Hulayfah (specifically, Masjid al‑Shajarah); (2)
Yalamlam; (3) Qarn al‑Manazil; (4) al‑Juhfah; (5) three points situated
in the valley of al‑\`Aqiq: al‑Maslakh, al‑Ghamrah, and Dhat al‑\`Irq.
Those pilgrims whose houses are nearer to Mecca than to any of the above
mawaqit, assume ihram from their houses. (Tr.)

[^3]: The talbiyah is wajib according to the Imamiyyah, Hanafi, and
Maliki schools, and mustahabb according to the Hanbalis. Its time is the
moment of beginning of ihram.

[^4]: The area roughly within a radius of six miles, with the Holy
Ka'bah at the centre, is called ‘haram’, the sacred and inviolable
territory of the sanctuary of the Holy Ka'bah. See the brief discussion
under the subheading; "The Limits of the Harams of Mecca and al‑Madinah"
in the present article. (Tr.)

[^5]: According to the Imamiyyah school, Hajj al-tamattu\` is obligatory
for non‑Meccans, and Meccans may choose between Hajj al-qiran and Hajj
al‑'ifrad. According to the four Sunni schools, there is no difference
between a Meccan and a non‑Meccan with regard to choice of any
particular kind of Hajj, except that according to the Hanafi school Hajj
al-tamattu\` and Hajj al-qiran are makruh for the Meccan.

[^6]: The tawaf of the first entry or the arrival (called tawaf
al‑qudum) is mustahabb from the viewpoint of all except the Maliki
school, which regards it as obligatory.

[^7]: According to the Imamiyyah school, one is free to choose between
halq and taqsir if on \`Umrah mufradah'. But a pilgrim on Hajj
al-tamattu\` is required to perform taqsir. Also according to the
Imamiyyah, it is obligatory for one on \`Umrah mufradah to perform,
after the halq or taqsir, a second tawaf, the tawaf al-nisa', before
which sexual intimacy is not permissible to the pilgrim. According to
the four Sunni schools, one is free to choose between halq and taqsir in
both. They do not require the pilgrim of Hajj or ‘Umrah to perform tawaf
al-nisa; and according to the Maliki school halq or taqsir is not
obligatory on one performing \`Umrah mufradah.

[^8]: According to the Imamiyyah school, the mutamatti\` (pilgrim on
Hajj al-tamattu' and its conjugate \`Umrah) acquires tahlil (i.e. relief
from ihram) after taqsir, even when he brings along with him the
sacrificial animal (hady). But according to the other schools, the
mutamatti\` who assumes ihram for \`Umrah from the miqat obtains tahlil
on halq or taqsir when not accompanied by hady, but if he has brought
along with him the hady, he remains in the state of ihram. However,
according to them, the pilgrim of \`Umrah mufradah obtains tahlil
regardless of whether the hady accompanies him or not. The author of
al‑Mughni, after making the above statement, says, "I have not come
across a contrary opinion on this matter."

[^9]: According to the Imamiyyah school, the halt in Arafat is
obligatory for the entire period of time. But according to the other
schools, a moment of halt is sufficient. All the legal schools are in
agreement that offering the zuhr (noon) and \`asr (afternoon) prayers
immediately after one another is mustahabb, because the Prophet (s) had
done so.

[^10]: Although the times have tended to support this opinion, and even
though the traditions in favour of immediacy (al‑fawr) of the duty of
Hajj are open to criticism and controversy, but it leads towards
negligence, and gradually towards abandonment of this sacred rite.
Accordingly, the stress on immediacy is preferable, being more conducive
from the viewpoint of the necessity to preserve the vitality of the
Islamic faith.

[^11]: Mahram is a male relation with whom marriage is not permissible;
viz; father, grandfathers, sons, grandsons, brothers, sons and grandsons
of one's sister or brother, etc.

[^12]: The Imamiyyah, Shafi'i, and Maliki schools permit hiring another
person to perform the Hajj for a fee. The Hanafi and Hanbali schools do
not consider it permissible. Nothing more than the expenses of journey,
food and lodging may be given to the hired, they say.

[^13]: The Qur'an, 22:78.

[^14]: One who has not performed the Hajj before is called sarurah.
According to the Shafi'i and Hanbali schools, if one who has not
performed the Hajj before, undertakes it on behalf of another, the Hajj
performed is considered his own. But according to the Maliki, Hanafi,
and Imamiyyah schools, the Hajj performed depends on his intention
(niyyah).

[^15]: The minimum distance required for qasr in zuhr, 'asr and 'isha'
prayers is 8 parasangs (approximately 44 kms. or 27.5 miles). (Tr.)


