The Dhu al-Hijjah Moon
======================

It happens often that the Dhu al‑Hijjah new moon is established for a
non‑Imami scholar, and he declares its sighting, and the authorities of
al‑Haramayn al‑Sharifayn make it compulsory for all pilgrims to follow
his ruling, regardless of whether the new moon has been established for
an Imami *mujtahid* or not. In such a case, what is an Imami pilgrim to
do about the *wuquf* in \`Arafat and other rites related to specific
dates and times if he cannot act according to his own school of fiqh? Is
his Hajj invalid if he makes the halt with others, performing all the
rites simultaneously with them?

Al‑Sayyid al‑ Hakim, in his *Manahij al‑hajj* (1381 H.), p. 91, says:
"When the non‑Imami authority *(hakim)* rules that the new moon has been
sighted, so that the halt in \`Arafat takes place on the 8th of Dhu
al‑Hijjah and the halt in the Mash'ar on the 9th, then on the principle
of *taqiyyah,* or the fear of being harmed, the halt with others is
valid and relieves one of the duty. The same holds in case of a *na'ib*
undertaking Hajj on another's behalf or one on a *mustahabb* Hajj of
oneself or that of another. Also, there is no difference with respect to
fulfilment of the duty whether he knows or not that the ruling (of the
non‑Imami *hakim)* is contrary to the reality."

Al‑Sayyid al‑Khu'i in *Manasik al‑hajj* (1380 H.), p. 80, says: "When
the new moon is established for a non‑Imami *qadi* and he rules that it
has been sighted, but the sighting of the new moon is not established
for the Shi\`ah \`ulama', to follow others in making the halt is
obligatory and satisfactory of the Hajj duty if there is a probability
of the ruling being correct. One who acts contrary to the dictates of
*taqiyyah* and the possibility of being harmed, thinking that legal
caution lies in acting contrary to them, has committed something
forbidden and his Hajj is invalid.”[^1]

There is no doubt that God desires ease not hardship for His servants,
and there is hardship in repeating the Hajj another time, even for one
who has the means to undertake it more than once. But what should a poor
man do who returns the next year to find the same thing to have occurred
again? Should he keep on repeating the pilgrimage, two, three, or four
times... until it coincides with the ruling of his school? May God's
peace and benedictions be upon Amir al‑Mu'minin, the Sayyid al‑Wasiyyin,
who said:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن الله كلّف يسيراً ، ولم يُكلف عسيراً ، وأعطى على القليل كثيراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

God has assigned duties which are easy to fulfil not difficult to cope
with; and He rewards much for little.

Besides, we know that such kind of things happened during the era of the
Infallible Imams (\`a) and not one of them is known to have commanded
the Shi\`ah to repeat the Hajj. It is on this basis that al‑Sayyid
al‑Hakim, in *Dalil al‑nasikin,* says, "To fall in with the ruling of
the non‑Imami *qadi* is permissible; this is in accordance with
definitive practice from the times of the Imams *(\`a),* which has been
to follow them (i.e. the non‑Imamis) in the halt (at \`Arafat), and no
other alternative has ever been suggested."

However, al‑Sayyid al‑Shahrudi, in his *Manasik al‑hajj,* says, "It is
permissible to follow, in regard to this question, the *fatwa* of the
absolute *mujtahid (al‑mujtahid al‑mutlaq)* who considers it
permissible." To tell the truth, to me this kind of thing is not
digestible when coming from a *mujtahid mutlaq,* although I have read
and heard such things from more than one *mujtahid* whom the common
people follow.

Because, a *mujtahid mutlaq* in his *fatwas* should either take an
affirmative or a negative stand, and if he doesn't, has no right to be a
legal authority (for *taqlid).* Someone may say that it is not a
condition for being *mujtahid mutlaq* that he should never abstain from
giving a definitive *fatwa* or give up caution *(ihtiyat)* in some
matter, for \`caution is the path of salvation' *(al‑'ihtiyat sabil
al‑najat).* In answer I would say, this is an obvious fallacy.

Because, *ihtiyat* in a matter is something, and giving a *fatwa* to
consult someone else is another matter. In fact when the *mujtahid* sees
the necessity of *ihtiyat* in a matter, he does not give a *fatwa* upon
it‑‑as is the practice of legal authorities regarding several issues?

Here we affirm al‑Hakim's position, because we understand from the
necessary grounds for *taqiyyah that* the 9th is a requirement for
*wuquf* in 'Arafat when that requirement can be satisfied in presence of
security and absence of any fear of harm. But in case of insecurity and
fear this condition does not stand, exactly like the requirement for
*sajdah* (prostration) in *salat* that it should be made on something
which is not edible or wearable (*ghayr* *al‑ma'kul* *wa*
*al‑malbus*)‑‑a requirement which applies to conditions when security is
present and which falls in case of insecurity and fear.

[^1]: Our teacher al‑Sayyid al‑Khu'i makes the absence of knowledge
(that the fatwa of the non‑Imami authority about the sighting of the new
moon is contrary to fact) a condition for the Hajj being satisfactory of
the duty. But al‑Sayyid al‑Hakim considers the knowledge of its
contradiction with reality or absence of such knowledge indifferent to
the Hajj (performed on the basis of the non‑Imami faqih's declaration)
being satisfactory of the duty. Here we affirm al‑Hakim's position,
because we understand from the necessary grounds for taqiyyah that the
9th is a requirement for wuquf in 'Arafat when that requirement can be
satisfied in presence of security and absence of any fear of harm. But
in case of insecurity and fear this condition does not stand, exactly
like the requirement for sajdah (prostration) in salat that it should be
made on something which is not edible or wearable (ghayr al‑ma'kul wa
al‑malbus)‑‑a requirement which applies to conditions when security is
present and which falls in case of insecurity and fear.


