Ziyarah of the Greatest Prophet (S)
===================================

The *ziyarah* of the Greatest Prophet‑‑may Allah's peace and
benedictions be upon him and his Family‑‑is a highly *mustahabb* duty.
He is reported to have said, "Whoever visits my grave after my death is
like one who has migrated with me in my life." He also said, "A *salat*
in my mosque is like a thousand ones offered elsewhere with the
exception of al‑Masjid al‑Haram, as to which a *salat* there is equal to
a thousand in my mosque." It is emphasized that the *mustahabb salat* in
the Prophet's Mosque should be offered between his tomb and the
*minbar,* where, a tradition says, is a \`garden of the gardens of
Paradise.'

To visit all other mosques of al‑Madinah, like Masjid Quba, Mashrabat
Umm Ibrahim, Masjid al‑'Ahzab, etc. and also the graves of the martyrs,
in particular that of Hamzah *(\`a)* at Uhud, is also *mustahabb.* Also
*mustahabb* is paying visit to the tombs of the Imams (\`a) buried in
al‑Baqi\`, viz., al‑'Imam al‑Hasan, al‑Imam Zayn al‑\`Abidin, al‑Imam
al‑Baqir, and al‑'Imam al‑Sadiq, who upon whom all be peace and best of
blessings.

As to the *ziyarah* of Fatimah (\`a), the mother of al‑Hasan and
al‑Husayn, it is as important as that of her father, of whom she is a
part *(bid'ah).* There are several reports about the location of her
honoured tomb, of which the most probable seems to be the one according
to which she was buried in her house adjacent to her father's mosque.
When the mosque was extended by the Umayyads, the grave also came to be
included inside it. This is what Ibn Babawayh (al‑Shaykh al‑Saduq)
believed. We think this is highly probable, because it agrees closely
with the tradition that her grave is in a garden between the grave (of
the Prophet) and the *minbar.* Allah alone has knowledge of everything.


