Al‑‘Umrah
=========

The Meaning of \`Umrah
----------------------

The word *\`umrah* in common speech "visit", but in the Shari\`ah it
means paying a visit to the *Bayt Allah al‑Haram* (the Sacred House of
God, i.e. the Holy Ka'bah) in a specific form.

The Kinds of \`Umrah
--------------------

The \`Umrah is of two kinds: the first which is performed independently
of the Hajj (called *al‑\`Umrat al‑mufradah al‑mustaqillah \`an
al‑Hajj*)*,* and the second kind which is performed in conjunction with
the Hajj (*al‑\`Umrat al‑mundammah ila al‑Hajj*)*.* The *al‑\`Umrat
al‑mufradah,* the independent \`Umrah, all the five legal schools agree,
can be performed at all times of the year, though it is meritorious to
perform it during the month of Rajab according to the Imamiyyah, and in
Ramadan according to the four Sunni schools.

The time of the conjugate \`Umrah, which is performed before the Hajj
and in the course of the same journey by the Hujjaj coming to the Holy
Makkah from distant countries, by consensus of all five schools, extends
from Shawwal to Dhul Hijjah. However, there is disagreement among
legists about the month of Dhul Hijjah, whether the entire month or only
the first ten days belong to the Hajj season. Anyone who performs the
conjugate \`Umrah is considered relieved of the obligation to perform
the *al‑\`Umrat al‑mufradah* by those who believe in its being
obligatory.

Difference Between the Two Kinds of \`Umrah
-------------------------------------------

The Imamiyyah scholars make a distinction between *al‑\`Umrat
al‑mufradah* and *\`Umrat al‑tamattu\`, c*iting the following reasons:

1. The *Tawaf* *al-nisa'* (to be explained later) is obligatory in
*al‑\`Umrat al‑mufradah,* not in the *\`Umrat al‑tamattu;* and according
to some jurists is forbidden.

2. The time of *\`Umrat al‑tamattu\`* extends from the first of the
month of Shawwal to the ninth of Dhu al‑Hijjah, whereas *al‑\`Umrat
al‑mufradah* can be performed at all times of the year.

3. The pilgrim (*mu'tamir*) performing the *\`Umrat al‑tamattu\`* is
required to shorten his hair (*al‑taqsir*)*,* whereas the *mu\`tamir* of
*al‑\`Umrat al‑mufradah* can choose between shortening his hair or
completely shaving his head (*al‑halq*)*,* as shall be explained later.

4. The *\`Umrat al‑tamattu\`* and the Hajj occur in the same year, which
is not the case with *al‑\`Umrat al‑mufradah.*

Karrarah, in his book *al‑Din wa al‑Hajj \`ala al‑madhahib al‑'arba'ah,*
says that, according to the Maliki and Shafi\`i schools, for the
*mu'tamir* of *al‑\`Umrat al‑mufradah* all things are permissible, even
sexual intercourse, after the shortening of hair (*al‑taqsir*)or the
head shave (*al‑halq*)*,* irrespective of whether he brings along with
him the sacrificial offering (*al‑hady*) or not. But according to the
Hanbali and Hanafi schools, the *mu'tamir* gets away with *al‑taqsir* or
*al‑halq*, if he does not bring the sacrificial offering; otherwise he
remains in the state of *ihram* until he gets through the Hajj and the
\`Umrah on the day of sacrifice (*yawm al‑nahr*)*.*

The Conditions of the ‘Umrah
----------------------------

The conditions for the \`Umrah are essentially the same as mentioned in
the case of the Hajj.

The Status of \`Umrah
---------------------

According to the Hanafi and Maliki schools, the \`Umrah is not
obligatory but a highly recommended *sunnah* (*sunnah mu'akkadah*)*.*
But according to the Shafi\`i and Hanbali schools and the majority of
Imamiyyah legists, it is obligatory (*wajib*) for one who is
*mustati\`,* and desirable (*mustahabb*) for one who is not *mustati:*
In support, they cite the Qur'anic verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَأَتِمُّوا الْحَجَّ وَالْعُمْرَةَ لِلَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Perform the Hajj and the \`Umrah for Allah.)[^1]

(*Fiqh al‑Sunnah,* vol. V; *al‑Fiqh \`ala al‑madhahib al‑'arba\`ah;
al‑Jawahir; al‑Mughni*)[^2]

The Acts of the \`Umrah
-----------------------

According to *al‑Fiqh \`ala al‑madhahib al‑'arba\`ah,* whatever is
*wajib*or *sunnah* for the Hajj is also *wajib* and *sunnah* for the
\`Umrah. But the \`Umrah does differ from the Hajj in certain respects:
there is no specific time for performing the \`Umrah; it does not
involve the halt (*wuquf*) in the plain of \`Arafat; neither the
departure thenceforth to al‑Muzdalifah; nor the *ramy al‑jamarat*.[^3]

The Imamiyyah book *al‑Jawahir* mentions that: "The obligatory acts
(*af'al* or *a'mal*) of the Hajj are twelve: *ihram;* the *wuquf* at
\`Arafat; the *wuquf* at al‑Mash'ar al‑Haram; the entry into Mina; the
*ramy;* the *dhibh* (sacrifice); its related *taqsir* or *halq;* the
*tawaf* (the sevenfold circumambulation of the Ka'bah), and its related
*raka'at* (units of the length of prayers); the *sa’y*; the *tawaf*
*al-nisa',* and its related *raka'at.* The obligatory acts of
*al‑\`Umrat al‑mufradah* are eight: *niyyah* (intention); *ihram*[^4]
*;* *tawaf* its related *raka'at;* the *sa’y;* the *taqsi;* the *tawaf*
*al-nisa';* and its related *raka'at."*

This indicates that all the legal schools agree that the acts of the
Hajj exceed those of the *‘Umrah* by the acts associated with the
*wuquf.* Moreover, the Imamiyyah school considers it obligatory for the
performer of the *al‑\`Umrat al‑mufradah* to perform a second *tawaf,*
the *tawaf* *al-nisa'.* Similarly the Maliki school differs from others
in considering *halq*or *taqsir* as non‑obligatory for *al‑\`Umrat
al‑mufradah.*

Two Subsidiary Issues
---------------------

1. The obligation (*wujub*) of *al‑\`Umrat al‑mufradah* is not connected
with the *istita\`ah* for the Hajj. If, supposedly, it is possible for a
person to go to Mecca at a time other than that of the Hajj and not
possible at the time of the Hajj, then the \`Umrah instead of the Hajj
becomes obligatory for him. If he dies without performing it, its
expense is taken out from his heritage."[^5]

Similarly, if one has *istita'ah* for *Hajj al‑'ifrad* instead of the
\`Umrah, it becomes obligatory upon him; because each of them is
independent of the other. This applies to *al‑\`Umrat al‑mufradah.* As
to *\`Umrat al‑tamattu\`,* which shall be explained later, its *wujub*
depends upon that of the Hajj, since it is a part of it.

2. According to the Imamiyyah, it is not permissible for one intending
to enter the Holy Mecca to cross the *miqat* or enter its *haram*
(sacred precincts) without getting into the state of *ihram,* even if he
has performed the Hajj and the \`Umrah many times before. Only when the
exit and entry recur several times during month, or when after entering
the city as a *muhrim* he goes out any re‑enters for a second time in
less than thirty days, it is no obligatory. Therefore, *ihram* with
respect to entry into Mecca is comparable to the *wudu'* before touching
the Holy Qur'an. This clearly demonstrates the baselessness of the lie
that the Shi\`ah do not consider al‑Bayt al‑Haram as sacred, and that
they pretend to perform the Hajj for the sake of polluting the holy
sanctuaries. (!)

According to Abu Hanifah, it is not permissible to go beyond the *miqat*
and enter the *haram* without *ihram*, but entry into the remaining area
is permissible without *ihram*. Malik does not agree with this, and two
opinions are ascribed to al‑Shafi'i on the matter.

This much of discussion about the \`Umrah is sufficient for throwing
light upon it, so that the reader may grasp its difference with the
Hajj, though only in some aspects. What we shall say later will offer
further clarification.

[^1]: The Qur'an, 2:196.

[^2]: According to al‑Mughni, Ahmad ibn Hanbal did not consider the
‘Umrah as being obligatory for Meccans, for the reason that the most
important act of the ‘Umrah is tawaf(circumambulation of the Ka'bah)
which they do and it suffices them.

[^3]: In the book al‑Fiqh 'ala al‑madhahib al‑'arba’ah, it is the
author's wont to give the text followed by a commentary and notes. In
the text, he states the points of consensus of all the four Sunni
schools, the different position of each is given in the commentary. What
we have quoted here is taken from the text, not from the commentary.

[^4]: According to al‑Din wa al‑Hajj 'ala al‑madhahib al‑'arba'ah, by
Karrarah, one of the things which distinguishes the ‘Umrah from the Hajj
is that its ihram is not assumed from any of the mawaqit specified for
the Hajj. From the Imamiyyah viewpoint, there is no difference between
the miqat for one performing ‘Umrah and the miqat for one on Hajj with
regard to ihram.

[^5]: The Imamiyyah author of al‑Madarik says: "The better known and
sounder of opinions is that the obligation of ‘Umrah is independent of
the obligation of Hajj." The author of al‑Jawahir states, "The
statements of fuqaha' are not free of confusion... the one which appears
sounder is that those who live far away from Mecca are relieved of the
obligation of ‘Umrah mufradah, and that which is obligatory upon them is
'Umrat al‑tamattu; whose wujub is related to that of Hajj.


