The Forms of Hajj
=================

All the five legal schools agree that there are three kinds of Hajj:
*tamattu\`*, *qiran,* and *ifrad.* They also agree that by *Hajj*
*al-tamattu\`* is meant performance of the acts of the \`Umrah during
the months of the Hajj. The acts of the Hajj itself are performed after
getting through the \`Umrah. They also agree that by *Hajj* *al‑'ifrad*
is meant performing the Hajj first and then, after getting through the
acts of the Hajj, getting into the state of *ihram* for performing the
\`Umrah and its related acts. The four Sunni legal schools agree that
the meaning of the *Hajj* *al-qiran* is to get into *ihram* for the Hajj
and the \`Umrah together. Then the *talbiyyah* uttered by the pilgrim is
**لبيك اللهم بحج وعمرة** .

According to the Imamiyyah school, the *Hajj* *al-qiran* and *Hajj
al‑‘ifrad* are one and the same. There is no difference between them
except when the pilgrim performing the *Hajj* *al-qiran* brings the
*hady* at the time of assuming the *ihram*. Then it is obligatory upon
him to offer what he has brought. But one who performs the *Hajj
al‑‘ifrad* has essentially no obligation to offer the *hady*.

In brief, the Imamiyyah do not consider it permissible to interchange
two different *ihram*'s,[^1] or to perform the Hajj and the \`Umrah with
a single *niyyah* (intention) under any condition; but the other legal
schools permit it in *Hajj* *al-qiran.* They say that it has been named
*\`al‑qiran'* because it involves union between the Hajj and the
\`Umrah. But the Imamiyyah say that it is because of the additional
feature of the *hady* accompanying the pilgrim at the time of
*ihram*.[^2]

According to the four Sunni legal schools, it is permissible for the
pilgrim, Meccan or non‑Meccan, to choose from any of the three forms of
the Hajj: *al‑tamattu*; *al‑qiran,* or *al‑'ifrad*, without involving
any *karahah* (*reprehensibility*). Only Abu Hanifah considers *Hajj*
*al-tamattu\`* and *Hajj* *al-qiran as makruh* for the Meccan.

The four Sunni legal schools also differ as to which of the three kinds
of Hajj is superior to the others. The best according to the Shafi\`i
school is *al‑‘ifrad,* and *al‑tamattu\`* is superior to *al‑qiran.*
According to the Hanafi school, *al‑qiran* has greater merit than the
other two. The best according to the Maliki school is *al‑‘ifrad,* and
according to the Hanbali and Imamiyyah schools is *al‑tamattu\`.*

According to the Imamiyyah school, *Hajj* *al-tamattu*\` is obligatory
upon one living at a distance of over forty‑eight miles from Mecca, and
he may not choose any other kind except in emergency. The *Hajj*
*al-qiran* and *Hajj al‑‘ifrad* are performable by the people of Mecca
and those living around it within a distance of forty‑eight miles, and
it is not permissible for them to perform except one of these two kinds.
The Imamiyyah base their argument on this verse of the Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ تَمَتَّعَ بِالْعُمْرَةِ إِلَى الْحَجِّ فَمَا اسْتَيْسَرَ مِنَ
الْهَدْيِ فَمَنْ لَمْ يَجِدْ فَصِيَامُ ثَلَاثَةِ أَيَّامٍ فِي الْحَجِّ
وَسَبْعَةٍ إِذَا رَجَعْتُمْ تِلْكَ عَشَرَةٌ كَامِلَةٌ ذَٰلِكَ لِمَنْ
لَمْ يَكُنْ أَهْلُهُ حَاضِرِي الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…if any one wishes to continue the 'umra on to the hajj, He must make
an offering, such as he can afford, but if he cannot afford it, He
should fast three days during the hajj and seven days on his return,
Making ten days in all. This is for those whose household is not in (the
precincts of) the Sacred Mosque…..(2:196)***

Moreover, according to the Imamiyyah school, it is not permissible for
one obliged to perform the *Hajj* *al-tamattu\`* to change over to
something else, except for the problem of shortage of time available,
or, in the case of women, due to impending menses. In those cases it is
permissible to change either to *al‑qiran* or *al‑‘ifrad* on condition
that the \`Umrah is performed after the Hajj. The limit of the shortage
of time is failure to be present at the *wuquf* in \`Arafat until noon.

For one whose duty is *al‑qiran* or *al‑‘ifrad,* such as the natives of
Mecca or those from its surrounding region, it is not permissible to
change to *al‑tamattu\`,* except in exigency (such as the fear of
impending menses). After explaining this position of the Imamiyyah
school, the author of *al‑Jawahir* says, "I have not come across any
different opinion on this matter."

And all the five legal schools agree that the *hady* is not compulsory
for one performing H*ajj al‑'ifrad,* though better if performed
voluntarily.

[^1]: According to al‑Jawahir, al‑Madarik, al‑Hada'iq and other
Imamiyyah works on fiqh, it is not permissible for one already in the
state of ihram to assume ihram for another purpose, until he completes
all the acts of the rite (Hajj or ‘Umrah) for which he had assumed
ihram.

[^2]: Ibn 'Aqil is alone among Imamiyyah legists in agreeing with the
Sunni legists in that the acts of both the Hajj and the ‘Umrah may be
performed with a single ihram in Hajj al-qiran.


