Sa'y
====

All the schools agree that *sa’y* follows the *tawaf*, or its
*rak'atayn* for those who consider them *wajib.* So also they agree that
one who performs *sa’y* before *tawaf* should revert and perform his
*tawaf* first and then the *sa’y.* I haven't come across any opinion
holding that the *sa’y* must immediately follow the *tawaf
(muwalat).*[^1]

The Mustahabbat of Sa\`y
------------------------

According to the book *Fiqh al‑Sunnah,* it is *mustahabb* to ascend the
hills of Safa and Marwah, and, facing the Holy Ka'bah, to pray to God
for some religious or secular matter. It is well known that the Prophet
(s), going out from Bab al‑Safa until he could see the Ka'bah. Facing
it, he thrice declared the Unity of God and magnified Him; then praising
God he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا إله إلا الله وحده لا شريك له، له الملك، والله الحمد، يحيي ويمت، وهو
على كل شيءٍ قدير، لا إله إلا الله وحده، أنجز وعده، ونصر عبده، وهزم
الأحزاب وحده
  </p>
</blockquote>

There is no god except Allah. He is One, and has no partner. To Him
belongs the Kingdom and the Praise. He gives life and makes to die and
He is powerful over every thing. There is no god except Allah. He is
One. He has fulfilled His promise and granted victory to His slave,
vanquishing all the parties (of the infidels). He is One.

The *mustahabbat* of *sa’y* according to the Imamiyyah book *al-Jawahir*
are the following: to draw one's hand on the Black Stone; to drink from
the water of Zamzam and to sprinkle it on oneself; to leave [al‑Masjid
al‑Haram] through the door facing the Black Stone; to ascend the Safa;
to face al‑*Rukn* al‑\`Iraqi; to praise God *(hamd)* and magnify Him
*(takbir);* to prolong one's stay al‑Safa; and, after seven *takbirs,*
to say three times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا إله إلا الله وحده، لا شريك له، له الملك، والله، الحمد، يحيي ويميت،
وهوحيٌ لا يموت، بيده الخير، وهو على كل شيءٍ قدير.
  </p>
</blockquote>

After this he recites the prayer recommended by tradition *(al‑du\`a'*
*al‑ma'thur).*

As can be seen from the above, there is no divergence in this matter
between the Shi\`ah and the Sunni schools, except for some difference of
expressions used. Also, I have not come across any jurist who regards
*taharah* (from *hadath* and *khabath)* as obligatory for *sa\`y;* most
of the schools have expressly stated its being only *mustahabb* and the
same is true (except for the Shafi'i) of the drawing of the hand
(*istilam*) on the Black Stone before leaving for *sa’y*.

Also, all the schools are explicit about the *istihbab* of covering the
distance between \`the Milayn' (an expression used by the Hanafis and
Malikis) or \`the intervening distance' *(wasat al‑masafah,* an
expression used by Shafi'is) or \`between the Minaret and the Alley of
the Pharmacists' (as Imamiyyah say) with a fast pace *(harwalah)*. [^2]
Without doubt, an informed guide is necessary to enable the pilgrims to
recognize the points designated as \`Milayn' or \`the Alley of the
Pharmacists' (*Zuqaq* *al‑\`Attarin*), or \`the Minaret'.

The Way of Performing Sa’y
--------------------------

Although there is agreement between the schools about the necessity of
*sa’y,* they disagree about its being an essential part *(rukn)* of the
rites of Hajj. According to the Imami, Shafi\`i, and Maliki schools, it
is a *rukn;* according to Abu Hanifah, it is not a *rukn,* though a
*wajib*. Two different traditions are narrated from Ahmad ibn Hanbal.
*(al‑Tadhkirah, Fiqh al‑Sunnah)*

All are agreed on the number of *ashwat* (sing. *shawt)* being seven,
and that the performer of *sa’y* (i.e. *sa’i)* should begin at Safa
going towards Marwah, and return again to Safa,[^3] covering this
distance seven times. Thus the pilgrim makes four *ashwat* going from
Safa to Marwah and three *ashwat* while returning from Marwah to Safa,
beginning his first *shawt* from Safa and finishing the seventh at
Marwah.

The schools disagree as to the permissibility of making the *sa’y* on a
mount in spite of the ability to walk, and all of them, with the
exception of the Hanbalis, permit it regardless of whether one can walk
or not. The Hanbalis say that it is permissible only for one who cannot
walk.

I have not come across any opinion regarding continuity *(muwalat)*
between the *ashwat* as *wajib*[^4], with the exception of the Hanbalis,
who, as also mentioned by the author of *al‑Fiqh \`ala al‑madhahib
al‑'arba\`ah,* consider it *wajib*. Also, it is said of Malikis that
according to them if the gap between the *ashwat* were to become
inordinate, one should begin *sa’y* afresh; but if the gap were not
prolonged, such as when one discontinues for selling or purchasing
something, it is forgivable.

### Note

Al‑Sayyid Muhsin al‑Hakim, in his book on the rites of Hajj, says, "It
is obligatory, while going and returning, to keep one's face turned
towards one's destination .... Therefore, if someone were to turn his
face away from it or were to walk backwards, or in a lateral way, it is
not correct. However, there is nothing wrong in turning the face this
way and that way while continuing to face the destination in the course
of movement."

He means that it is obligatory that the body should face Marwah while
going and should be toward Safa while returning, and it is not
permissible to make the approach with only a shoulder facing the
direction of the destination‑‑as may happen due to overcrowding of the
pilgrims; also, while moving, the face in particular should remain in
the right direction.

Al‑Sayyid al‑Khu'i makes a similar statement in his work on the rites of
Hajj; his words are: "It is *wajib* to face Marwah while going and to be
towards Safa while returning. Thus if one turns his back towards Marwah
while going and towards Safa while returning, it does not satisfy *(lam
yujzi',* i.e. the conditions for a correct *sa’y*). Also, one should not
turn towards his right or left, neither should he turn back either
during the going *(dhahab)* or during the return (*iyab*).

The Ahkam of Sa’y
-----------------

One who cannot perform the *sa’y,* either on foot or on a mount, may
depute another to perform it on his/her behalf, and the Hajj would be
correct. There is nothing wrong in looking to the right or the left or
turning back to look during the coming and the going.

If someone makes more than seven *ashwat* intentionally, his *sa’y* is
invalid, but not if the lapse was unintentional. If one were to have
doubts about the number of the *ashwat* performed after finishing his
*sa’y,* it is assumed to have been correct and nothing is required of
him. The author of *al‑Jawahir* bases this *hukm* about the doubt after
finishing on the principle of negation of *haraj,* as well as on
tradition.

However, if the doubt were to occur before finishing the *sa’y,* the
author of *al‑Jawahir* says that there is no difference of opinion
about, nor any objection against, the invalidity of the *sa\`y* in case
of any doubt about the number of the *ashwat* performed, whether of
having exceeded or fallen short of the required number. In both cases
the *sa’y* at hand is invalid. If one suspects one's having begun from
Safa, his *sa’y* is correct. But if he thinks that he might have started
from some other place, it is invalid. Also if one suspects the number of
*ashwat* already performed, and does not know how many one has
completed, one's *sa\`y* is invalid.

If one has recorded the number of *ashwat* performed, but doubts whether
one started the first one from Safa or Marwah, he should consider the
number of his present *shawt* and the direction he is facing. If, for
instance, the number is an even one (2, 4, or 6) and he is at Safa or
facing it, his *sa’y* is correct; because this shows that he had begun
at Safa. Similarly, if the number is odd (3, 5, or 7) and he is at
Marwah or facing it. But if the case is reverse, that is in an even
*shawt* he is facing Marwah or in an odd one facing towards Safa, his
*sa’y* is invalid and should be begun anew. *(al‑Jawahir)*

According to the other schools, the rule is to take the minimum one is
certain of having performed, as in the case of *salat. (Kifayat
al‑'akhyar)*

According to Abu Hanifah the Hajj is not invalid even if the *sa\`y* is
omitted altogether, because it is not a *rukn* and can be made good by a
sacrifice. (al‑Shi'rani's *al‑Mizan)*

[^1]: Al‑Sayyid al‑Hakim says: "It is not obligatory to hasten to
perform the sa'y  after finishing the tawaf and its salat, but it is
also not permissible to delay voluntarily until the next day." Al‑Sayyid
al‑Khu'i says, "It is binding on one not to make a considerable delay
without need in performing the sa’y after the tawaf and its salat, and
it is not permissible to delay it intentionally until the next day." I
say, these verdicts of the two scholars are supported by sahih ahadith.

[^2]: Harwalah is a kind of walk which resembles that of a camel when it
wants to pick up speed. According to the Imamiyyah, if the one
performing the sa’y is riding, he should spur it to make the beast walk
faster.

[^3]: The author of al‑Mizan quotes Abu Hanifah to the effect that he
does not see any objection in the converse, i.e. performing of the sa’y
by starting at Marwah and finishing at Saf’a.

[^4]: Al‑Sayyid al‑Hakim in his book on the manasik of Hajj says that
muwalat (continuity of succession) is not required in the ashwal of the
sa’y, and it is permissible to separate or interrupt them‑‑even after a
single shawt‑‑and to pick up the count again after the break.


