Taqsir
======

According to Ahmad ibn Hanbal and Malik, it is necessary to shave
*(halq)* or shorten the hair *(taqsir)* of the entire head. According to
Abu Hanifah the same of a one‑fourth portion of the head is sufficient;
according to al‑Shafi'i cutting of three hairs suffices. (Karrarah's
*al‑Din wa al‑Hajj)*

According to the Imamiyyah, in *taqsir* one has the free choice of
performing it by shortening either the hair of the head, the beard, or
the moustaches or the fingernails.

All the five schools agree that *taqsir* is an obligatory rite, though
not a *rukn.* According to al‑Sayyid al‑Hakim, its relationship to Hajj
is the same as that of the *salam* with respect to the *salat,* because
the *muhrim* is relieved after it of his state of *ihram* in the same
way as one performing the *salat* is after the salam.

The *taqsir* or the *halq,* whatever be the divergence of opinion about
them, is to be performed once during 'Umrah *mufradah* and twice during
*Hajj* *al‑tamattu*’. The details follow.

Taqsir in \`Umrah
-----------------

According to the Imamiyyah, one performing '*Umrat* *al‑tamattu'* has to
perform *taqsir* after the *sa’y*; it is not permissible for him to
perform *halq. After* it everything forbidden to him in the state of
*ihram* becomes permissible. But if he performs *halq, he* should
sacrifice a sheep. However, if he is on 'Umrah *mufradah, he* may choose
between *halq* and *taqsir*, regardless of whether he brings along with
him the *hady* or not.

If the *taqsir* is omitted intentionally, in case one had planned to
perform *Hajj* *al‑tamattu'* and had assumed *ihram* before performing
the *taqsir*, his 'Umrah is invalid and it is then obligatory upon him
to perform *Hajj* *al‑'ifrad: that* is, the rites of Hajj followed by
'*Umrah* *mufradah,* and it is better for him to do Hajj again the next
year.'[^1] [48]

According to non‑Imamiyyah schools, one has a choice between *taqsir*
and *halq after* finishing his *sa’y*. As to relief from the state of
*ihram*, if one were performing a non‑tamattu' 'Umrah, he obtains relief
from *ihram* after *halq* or *taqsir*, regardless of whether the *hady*
accompanies him or not. But if one is performing '*Umrat* *al‑tamattu*;
he is relieved of *ihram* if not accompanied by the *hady; but* if
accompanied he remains in the state of *ihram*. *(al‑Mughni)*

### Taqsir in Hajj

The second type of *taqsir* is a part of the rites of all the various
kinds of Hajj‑tamattu', *qiran,* or ifrad‑‑to be performed by Hajj
pilgrim after the *dhabh* or *nahr* (animal sacrifice) in Mina. All the
schools agree that here one has a choice between *taqsir* and *halq,
halq being* more meritorious. They disagree, however, in regard to one
with matted hair, whether he must shave his head or if, like others, he
also has a choice between *halq* and *taqsir*. The Hanbali, the Shafi'
i, and the Maliki schools prescribe only *halq for* him, but the
Imamiyyah and the Hanafi give him the same choice as others.

All the legal schools agree that women don't have to perform *halq,
rather,* they may perform only *taqsir*.

Abu Hanifah and a group of Imamiyyah legists say that one who is bald,
completely or partially, as when only the frontal portion of the head is
hairless, must nevertheless draw the razor over the [hairless portion of
the] head. The rest only consider it *mustahabb (al‑Hada'iq, Fiqh
al‑Sunnah)*.

According to the Imamiyyah, the *halq* or the *taqsir* is obligatory in
Mina. Therefore, one who departs without *halq* or *taqsir* should
return to perform either of the two, regardless of whether his lapse was
intentional or not, and despite the knowledge or out of ignorance.
However, if it is difficult or infeasible for him to return, he may
perform it wherever he can.

As to the rest, they say that it should be performed within the haram.
*(Fiqh al‑Sunnah)*

All agree that sex is not permitted after the *halq* or the *taqsir*.
The Malikis include perfume as also being impermissible. The Imamiyyah
include with the above two hunting (*sayd*), which is forbidden because
of the respect for the sanctity of the haram. Apart from these three
things, the rest are permissible by the consensus of all the five
schools. For the four Sunni schools, everything, including sex, becomes
permissible after the *tawaf* *al‑ziyarah*. As for the Imamiyyah, sex
and perfume are not allowed until after the *tawaf* *al‑nisa'*.

We conclude this section with the words of al‑'Allamah al‑Hilli in his
*Tadhkirah:*

If [the pilgrim] departs from Mina without *halq* or *taqsir,* he
returns to perform it there‑‑an obligation if within the reach of
possibility. But if his returning is not possible, he performs *halq*
wherever he is, sending his hair to be carried to Mina to be buried
there, which if he cannot there is nothing upon him .... The time for
*halq* is on the day of \`Id, by consensus, for the Almighty has said
[in Qur'an]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..وَلَا تَحْلِقُوا رُءُوسَكُمْ حَتَّىٰ يَبْلُغَ الْهَدْيُ مَحِلَّهُ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And do not shave your head until the sacrifice reaches its
[specified] destination." (2:196);***

and the place of the sacrifice *(hady)* is Mina on the day of \`Id. It
has been recorded that the Prophet (s) performed first *ramy,* then
*nahr,* and then *halq,* at Mina on the \`Id day.

We shall have occasion to refer to the *hukm about* the *ha1q* performed
prior to the *dhabh* while discussing later the rites of Mina.[^2]

[^1]: This agrees with the fatwas of al‑Hakim and al‑Khu'i. Al‑Hakim,
however, distinguishes between one who forgets (nasi) and one who is
ignorant (jahil); he excuses the first not the latter, who is included
with the willful defaulter (\`amid).

[^2]: This agrees with the fatwas of al‑Hakim and al‑Khu'i. Al‑Hakim,
however, distinguishes between one who forgets (nasi) and one who is
ignorant (jahil); he excuses the first not the latter, who is included
with the willful defaulter (\`amid).


