At Mina
=======

All the schools are in agreement that the rites after the halt at
al‑Mash'ar al‑Haram are those of Mina, and that departure from
Muzdalifah is after the sunrise, and one who leaves before sunrise,
passing beyond its limits, according to al‑Khu'i, must sacrifice a sheep
as *kaffarah.*

At Mina one performs several rites which continue from the Day of
Sacrifice *(yawm al‑nahr),* or the day of \`Id, until the morning of the
thirteenth or the night of the twelfth. The *wajibat* of Hajj are
completed in Mina. The three days following the day of \`Id (the 11th,
12th, and the 13th) are called *"ayyam al‑tashriq."*[^1]

Three rites are obligatory at Mina on the day of \`Id: (1) *ramy* of the
Jamrat al‑\`Aqabah; (2) *al‑dhabh* (slaughtering of the sacrificial
animal); (3) *halq* or *taqsir.* Agreeing that the Prophet (s) performed
first the *ramy,* then the *nahr (*or *dhabh)* and then the *taqsir,*
the schools disagree whether this order is obligatory and if it is
impermissible to change that order, or if the order is only *mustahabb*
and may be altered.

According to al‑Shafi\` i and Ahmad ibn Hanbal, there is nothing upon
one who changes the order. Malik says that if someone performs *halq*
before the *nahr* or the *ramy,* he must make a sacrifice; and if he was
performing *Hajj al‑qiran* then two sacrifices. (Ibn Rushd's
*al‑Bidayah).* According to the Imamiyyah, it is a sin to change the
order knowingly and intentionally, although repetition is not required.
The author of *al‑Jawahir* says, "I have not found any difference of
opinion on this point", and *al‑Madarik* states that the jurists are
definite on this point.

Now we shall deal with each one of these rites under a separate heading.

[^1]: There is disagreement about the Ayyam al‑Tashriq as to whether
they comprise two or three days. As to their naming, it is because
during those days the pilgrims used to dry strips of the meat of the
sacrificed animals in the sun.


