Introduction
============

**In the Name of Allah the Compassionate the Merciful**

**All praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of all worlds**

The present work is in large a summarized version of Shi’i Islam:
Origins, Faith and Practices (2003, ICAS Press) by the same author. This
shorter version aims to briefly address main issues related to Islam in
general and Shi’i Islam in particular. These two works represent a
modest attempt to fill some of the gaps that exist in the field of
Islamic studies in general, and Shi’i studies in particular.

Though simply and clearly written, they are outcomes of more than twenty
years of involvement in Islamic studies, and based to some extent on two
series of lectures about Shi’i Islam delivered to English audiences: a
first set of some fifty lectures delivered at Jami’at al-Zahra (the
leading Islamic Seminary for Women) in Qum, Iran in 1995 and 1996, and a
second set of some thirty lectures delivered at the Manchester Islamic
Institute and the Shi’a Welfare Centre in Manchester, England in 1998
and 1999.

The first chapter begins by expounding both the literal and technical
meanings of the term Shi’a”, and references are made to statements of
famous scholars in this regard. Then it proceeds to study the origins of
Shi’i Islam and how it came into existence.

The second chapter studies the sources of Shi’i thought, i.e. the
Qur’an, the Sunnah, the reason and consensus. Discussing the status of
the Qur’an, the chapter goes on to establish that the Shi’a like other
Muslims believe that the Qur’an which is present today is an embodiment
of Divine revelation to the Prophet Muhammad. The chapter continues by
explaining the second most important source, i.e. the Sunnah, which
includes the sayings and actions of the Prophet Muhammad.

The Qur’an itself asks Muslims to take the Prophet as their role model,
to refer to him to judge and settle their conflicts, and speaks of the
Prophet as the one who recites, teaches and explains the Qur’an. In this
chapter there is also a discussion about the household of the Prophet
(Ahlul Bayt) and their role in presenting the Sunnah. Then there follows
a discussion about the importance of the reason and its role in
understanding Islamic beliefs, values and practical laws. Finally there
is a discussion about legal consensus (al-ijm‚’) and how it is viewed
with respect to the Sunnah in the Shi’i perspective.

The third chapter studies fundamental doctrines of the Shi’i faith.
Along with Unity of God, prophethood and resurrection which constitute
the Principles of Religion (Islam and other Divine religions), some
important additional doctrines such as Divine justice and imamate are
studied. These doctrines may partly be shared by other Muslims, but the
Shi’a are those who believe in all of them.

The fourth chapter is a very brief account of Shi’i practices along with
brief reference to the objectives and principles underlying them. These
practices are in principle shared by all Muslims, though there may be
some differences in particulars among different Islamic schools.

The fifth and final chapter is a short discussion about the Shi’a world
today. This chapter starts with a brief account of the latest statistics
about the present Muslim and Shi’i population of the world. There is
also a breakdown of religious affiliations of some countries with a long
history of Shi’i presence therein. Though there are no accurate and
approved statistics on the current Shi’a population in the world,
efforts have been made here to collect the best available.

I should also note that the author is sincerely and wholeheartedly
committed to Islamic unity and hopes that this work can serve as a
modest step towards Muslim brotherhood. In fact, one of the best means
in achieving this unity and brotherhood is to know each other and to
overcome the historical prejudices that prevent objective understanding
between each other. According to an Arabic proverb, “People are enemies
of what they ignore”-.

A careful study of all major Islamic schools shows that what they have
in common is much more than what the y differ. All Muslims believe in
the same God, the same Prophet and the same Qur’an. They all believe in
the Day of Resurrection and Divine rewards and punishments. They all say
their daily prayers towards the same direction, that is, Mecca. They all
fast the whole month of Ramadan.

They all perform pilgrimage to Mecca (hajj) at the same time. They all
believe in giving alms, enjoining the good and prohibiting the bad. They
all believe that they should make friends with the people of faith and
good intention and get away from enemies of God. They all adhere to the
same virtues and values.

According to the Qur’an, all believers are “brothers”. Regardless of
their colour, race, gender, and denomination, there are certain duties
towards each other that faith brothers and sisters must discharge. Once
Mu’alla b. Khunays asked Imam Sadiq about what one Muslim owes another.
Imam replied: “There are seven duties incumbent upon him. Should he
neglect but one of them, he is not a friend or a servant of God, and
truly he has done nothing for the sake of God”. Then Imam mentioned the
following:

a) Wish for your brother what you wish for yourself, and wish that what
you do not desire for yourself should not befall your brother.

b) Do not make your brother angry, but seek to please him and obey his
wishes.

c) Help him with your soul, your tongue, your hands and your feet.

d) Be his eye to see by, his guide and his mirror.

e) Do not eat your fill when he is hungry, nor drink and clothe yourself
when he is thirsty and naked.

f) If he has no servant, but you do, it is incumbent on you to send your
servant to him to wash his clothes, cook his food and spread out his
mattress.

g) Accept his promise and his invitation; visit him when he is sick,
attend his funeral, and see to his needs before he asks you, hurrying to
do them if you can.[^1]

Unfortunately, there have always been some short-sighted people among
each group or sect who have tried to magnify the differences and have
called for separation instead of unity and brotherhood. They hasten to
find some excuses to call anyone who disagrees with them a k‚fir
(disbeliever) or a mushrik (polytheist) and any act that does not please
them bid’ah (heresy). Of course, there are disbelievers and there are
heretics, but one must be very cautious in applying these terms.

Great Islamic leaders and scholars, whether they be Sunni or Shi’a, have
never attached these labels to each other. In this way, they have
represented in their fatwas, sayings and deeds the real spirit of Islam,
this harmonious and universal message of peace, justice, unity and
mercifulness.

Islam brought unity and solidarity for those who suffered a lot from
enmity and hostility (3:103). This act of unifying people is highly
esteemed as a Divine act (8:63). On the contrary, it was the action of
people such as Pharaoh to disunite people (28:4). The Qur’an warns
believers that if they start conflicting each other they will weaken and
they will, therefore, be defeated (8:46). In fact, the call for unity is
not limited to Muslims. The Qur’an invites all people of faith such as
Christians and Jews to unify their efforts and concentrate on their
common ground (3:64).  
 Let us hope and pray that day by day this sense of unity and solidarity
becomes stronger and intensifies.

At the end, I would like to take this opportunity to thank all the
individuals and organisations that have encouraged me, especially
Ayatullah Muhsin Araki, Islamic College for Advanced Studies and the
Ahlul Bayt Assembly of UK and the Republic of Ireland in London. Last
but certainl y not least, I would like to express my feelings of deep
gratitude to God for all His favours that He has bestowed upon us in the
past and in the present.

Mohammad A. Shomali

Ramadan 1423, November 2002

[^1]: Muzaffar, pp. 76 & 77


