Chapter 1: Origins of Shi’i Islam
=================================

The meaning of the term Shi‘a
-----------------------------

In Arabic, the term “Shi’ah” originally means one, two or a group of
followers. In the Glorious Qur'an, this term is used several times in
this sense. For example, in the verse (28:15) God speaks of one of the
followers of Moses as one of his Shi’a. Elsewhere, Abraham is introduced
as a Shi’a of Noah (37:83).

In the beginning of the history of Islam, the term “Shi’a” was used in
its original or literal sense for followers of different people. For
example, some hadiths speak of the Shi’a of Ali b. Abi Talib and others
of the Shi’a of Mu'awiyah b. Abi Sufyan. However, gradually the term
acquired a secondary or technical meaning, i.e. the followers of Ali,
those who believed in his Imamate (divine leadership).

Shahrestani (d. 548 A.H) in his Al-Milal wa al-Nihal, an outstanding
source about different sects in Islam, writes, " Shi’a are those who
followed Ali in particular and believed in his Imamate and caliphate
according to the explicit teachings and will of the Prophet
Muhammad."[^1]

This is a very accurate definition, since the Shi’a themselves believe
that the reason for following Ali is that it was required by the Prophet
and it was not their personal decision to choose whom to follow, unlike
the non- Shi’a who, after the death of the Prophet Muhammad, followed
the one who was chosen at Saqifah and believed that the Prophet had left
it to the people themselves to decide whom to follow.

Of course, Abu Bakr b. Abi Quhafah, the first Caliph, who himself was
chosen in this way, believed that he must appoint his successor. And the
second Caliph, ‘Umar b. Khattab, in turn appointed a council of six
people to choose one amongst themselves according to a very strict
procedure set up by him. It is interesting to note that it was Ali, the
fourth Caliph, who was chosen and indeed forced by nearly all Muslims
after the murder of the third Caliph, 'Uthman b. 'Affan, to undertake
the position of caliphate.

In his Firaq al-Shi'ah, al-Hasan b. Musa al-Nawbakhti (d. 313 A.H), a
well-known Shi’a scholar, writes, “the Shi’a are the party of Ali b. Abi
Talib. They were called ' Shi’a' of Ali during and after the life of the
Prophet and are known as the followers of Ali and believers in his
Imamate”.[^2]

Shaykh al-Mufid (d. 413 A.H), one of the most outstanding early Shi’a
scholars, defines the Shi’a as being those who follow Ali and believe in
his immediate successorship to the Prophet. [^3] Explaining why Shi’a
are also called “Imamiyah”, he says: “This is a title for those who
believe in the necessity of Imamate and its continuit y in all ages, and
that every Imam must be explicitly designated, and must also be
infallible and perfect.”[^4]

Thus, it can be said that Shi’a Muslims are those who have the following
beliefs about the successorship to the Prophet Muhammad:

a. Successorship to the Prophet is a Divine position.

b. As the Prophet was chosen by God, his successor or Imam also must be
chosen by God and then made known by the Prophet.

c. The immediate successor to the Prophet Muhammad was Ali.

When did Shi'ism start?
-----------------------

Naturally the question arises as to when Shi’ism started. There are many
hadiths narrated by both Shi’a and non- Shi’a regarding the issue of
Imamate that will be studied later when discussing Shi’i doctrines. In
what follows, however, we will just study some hadiths in which the
Prophet Muhammad spoke of a group of people as “Shi’a” (followers) of
Ali and then refer to some extra reasons from hadiths and the history of
Islam that can shed more light on the subject at hand.

All hadiths mentioned below are cited from respected Sunni sources.
These are, however, a few of the most important narrations, and there
are many more to be found in the sources mentioned here as well as
others.

(1) Ibn 'Asakir (d. 571 A.H.) narrated from Jabir b. 'Abdullah al-Ansari
that he said:

Once we were with the Prophet Muhammad, when Ali arrived, upon which the
Prophet said, 'I swear by Him who has my life in His hand that surely
this man and his Shi’a will be happy on the Day of Resurrection and then
the verse ***“Surely those who believe and do good deeds are the best***
***of men” (98:7)*** was revealed. Later, whenever the companions of the
Prophet Muhammad saw Ali coming, they would say, “The best of men has
come”.[^5]

(2) Ibn Hajar (d. 974) narrated from Ibn Abbas that when the verse
(98:7) was revealed the Prophet told Ali: “Those are you and your Shi’a.
You and your Shi’a will come on the day of Resurrection while you will
be pleased and well pleasing (to God) and your enemies will come while
they will be angry and seized by their necks”. (Ibn Hajar, Section 11,
Chapter 1, the Verse 11)[^6]

(3) Ibn al-Athir (d. 606) narrated that, addressing Ali, the Prophet
said:

"O Ali! You and your Shi'a will reach God being pleased with Him and
well pleasing Him, and your enemies will reach Him, being angry and will
be seized by their necks". Then the Prophet demonstrated how this would
be by putting his hand on his neck. (Ibn al-Athir, Al-Nihayah, the entry
"qa-ma-ha")

There are other hadiths in which the Prophet Muhammad, addressing Ali,
used the expression "our Shi’a". This is in line with what was asserted
above that the Shi’a are those who follow Ali, in accordance with the
teachings of the Prophet and not because of their own personal decision.
For example, Ibn 'Asakir narrated that the Prophet said:

"Surely there is a spring in Paradise sweeter than nectar, smoother than
butter, cooler than ice, and smells better than musk. In that spring is
the clay (tinah) from which we (my household and me) were created and
our Shi’a are made from the same clay."[^7]

There are yet other hadiths in which the Prophet, addressing Ali, used
the expression " Shi’a of your descendants". This confirms what was
suggested above, that the Shi’a are those who follow Ali because they
believe in the institution of Imamate. As we will see in detail later,
the Shi’a believe that Ali was the first Imam and after him the
institution of Imamate continued in those offspring of Ali and Fatimah
that were chosen by God and introduced by the Prophet.

For example, Zamakhshari (d. 528 A.H.) in his Rabi’ al-Abrar reports
that the Prophet said: "O Ali! When the Day of Resurrection comes I will
hold on to God, you will hold on to me, your descendants will hold on to
you and their Shi'a will hold on to them. Then you will see where we
will be taken."[^8]

It has to be noted that according to the Qur'an, prophethood was also
inherited. The Qur'an says:

***"And surely we have sent Noah and Abraham, and we put prophethood and
the Book in their offspring". (57:26)***

This means that those who were qualified to be chosen as prophets by God
were included in their offspring.

In addition to the above-mentioned hadiths and their like, and those
hadiths on Imamate that will be mentioned later, there are many other
reasons that make the appearance of a group of people such as the Shi’a
in the lifetime of the Prophet a very natural and even necessary
phenomenon.

For example, at the beginning of Islam when the Prophet was asked by God
to start his public invitation to Islam by inviting his close relatives,
he invited his relatives to a meal. After the meal the Prophet expressed
his mission and invited the guests to Islam and said that whoever
believed in Islam among them and assisted him would be his successor.
All kept silent. The only one who accepted the invitation to assist him
was Ali, a teenager at that time.

The Prophet asked him to sit and repeated his invitation for the second
and the third time. Again and again it was just Ali who expressed his
readiness to support the Prophet. The Prophet accepted Ali’s submission
to the will of God and carried out Allah's command to designate him as
his successor. This event is documented in many sources.[^9]

In a very important statement, the Prophet clearly affirmed that Ali was
truthful and free of false beliefs and wrong acts, be it in his personal
conduct or in his speech and judgements, and implicitly asked Muslims to
follow him. Umm Salamah reported that the Prophet said: "Ali is always
with the truth (al-haqq) and the Qur'an and the truth are always with
him, and until the Day of Resurrection they will never separate from
each other".

This particular hadith is narrated by Ibn 'Abbas, Abu Bakr, 'A'ishah,
Abu Sa'id al-Khuddari, Abu Layla, and Abu Ayyub al-Ansari as well.[^10]
The Prophet is also quoted as saying, "May God bless Ali. My Lord, make
the truth always be with him".[^11]

The Prophet also asserted on several occasions that Ali was the most
knowledgeable among his men in matters pertaining to Islamic sciences.
For example, the Prophet said: "Wisdom is divided into ten parts: nine
parts are given to Ali and one part is distributed among the rest of the
people".[^12] Later the second Caliph reaffirmed the sayings of the
Prophet by saying, "May God never afflict me with a difficult task where
Ali is not present".[^13]

One also has to take into account the valuable and vital services and
sacrifices of Ali, in order to be able to realise his position among
Muslims. For example, when the infidels of Mecca planned to kill the
Prophet and God informed him of their plot, the Prophet asked Ali
whether he would be willing to sleep in his place so that the pagans
would think that he is still at home, allowing him to safely leave
Mecca. Ali accepted this task, on the occasion of which the verse was
revealed,  
***“And among people are those who sell their souls to acquire Divine
pleasure”***.

The emigration of the Prophet from Mecca to Medina marks the beginning
of the Islamic Calendar. Ali served the cause of Islam by fighting in
the Battles of Badr, Uhud, Khaybar, Khandaq and Hunayn, in which he
played crucial roles. These are all registered in numerous historical
works and collections of hadiths by non- Shi’a scholars.

As was mentioned earlier, the Prophetic hadiths on the issue of the
Imamate in general, and about Ali in particular, will be studied later.
However, I would like to conclude the discussion here by referring to
the well- known hadith of Ghadir Khumm. Returning from his last
pilgrimage to Mecca, the Prophet asked thousands of Muslims accompanying
him to stop on the way.

He stood on a platform or pulpit made for him out of saddles and said,
"Whoever has adopted me as his master (mawla), Ali now is his master".
Then the people present there, including the first and second Caliphs to
be paid allegiance to Ali and congratulated him. This hadith is
transmitted by more than one hundred sources.  
 For a comprehensive list of non- Shi’a sources of this hadith, see
'Abaqat al-Anwar by Mir Hamid Husayn al-Hindi (d. 1306 A.H.) and
Al-Ghadir by 'Abd al-Husayn al-Amini (d. 1390 A.H.). Having affirmed the
veracity of the hadith, some Sunni writers have interpreted the term
mawl‚ used in this hadith in another way.

According to them, the term mawla here is used in the sense of
friendship. Whether this can be accepted or not, there is no doubt that
this tradition and the event gave Ali a unique and central position
among the Companions of the Prophet.

Thus, it seems that the different sets of hadiths along with the
historical evidence mentioned above leave no doubt that during the
lifetime of the Prophet many Muslims came to love Ali deeply and sought
his company and were determined to follow him after the Prophet. These
people were so frequently and significantly referred to as Shi’a of Ali
that gradually the term “Shi’a” alone became equivalent to the Shi’a of
Ali.

More important than this is the fact that the idea of the Imamate of Ali
certainl y started in the lifetime of the Prophet Muhammad. The demise
of the Prophet naturally brought the issue into focus and distinguished
those who still believed in the necessity of following Ali from other
Muslims, who sooner or later came to believe in the institution of the
caliphate as the successorship to the Prophet in ruling the Islamic
society, and not as a Divine position.

Describing events after the death of the prophet, Al-Mas'udi (d. 345
A.H), a great Sunni historian, writes: "Surely Imam Ali and those of his
Shi’a who were with him stayed in his house at the time that the
allegiance to Abu Bakr was made."[^14]

Later certain events, such as the wars that occurred during the
Caliphate of Ali and the event of Karbal‚ in which Husayn, the third
imam of the Shi’a and 72 people of his family and companions were
killed, made the Shi’a of Ali more recognised and defined Shi’a identity
more sharply.

For example, we find in one of the early works that Ali, condemning
Talhah and Zubayr, said: "Surely the followers of Talhah and Zubayr in
Basra killed my Shi’a and my agents".[^15] Ab˚ Mikhnaf (d. 158 A.H)
reports that after the death of Mu'awiyah the Shi’a gathered at the
house of Sulayman b. Surad and he told them: “Mu'awiyah has died and
Husayn has refused to pay allegiance to the Umayyads and has departed
towards Mecca and you are his Shi’a and the Shi’a of his father”.[^16]

Early Shi‘a
-----------

Naturally Shi’a Islam first started in the Hijaz amongst the companions
of the Prophet. Reference to the Islamic historical and biographical
works shows that the list of the Shi’a among the companions of the
Prophet includes the following well-known bani Hashim (offspring of
Hashim, great-grand father of the Prophet Muhammad): ‘Abdullah b.
al-’Abbas, al-Fadl b. al-Abbas, ‘Ubaydillah b. al- ‘Abbas, Qiththam b.
al-’Abbas, ‘Abd al-Rahman b. al-‘Abbas, Tamam b. al-’Abbas, Aqil b. Abi
Talib, Abu Sufyan b. al-Harth b. ‘Abd al-Mutallib, Naufil b. al-Harth,
‘Abdullah b. Ja’far b. Abi Talib, ‘Awn b. Ja’far, Muhammad b. Ja’far,
Rabi’at b. al-Harth b. ‘Abd al-Mutallib, al-Tufayl b. al-Harth,
al-Mughayrat b. Nawfil b. al-Harith, ‘Abdullah b. al-Harth b. Nawfil,
‘Abdullah b. Abi Sufyan b. al-Harth, al-’Abbas b. Rabi’at b. al-Harth,
al-’Abbas b. ‘Utbah b. Abi Lahab, ‘Abd al-Mutallib b. Rabi’at b.
al-Harth, Ja’far b. Abi Sufyan b. al-Harth.

The list of Shi’a among those companions of the Prophet who were not
bani Hashim includes: Salman, Miqdad, Abu Dharr, ‘Ammar b. Yasir,
Hudhayfah b. al-Yaman, Khuzaymah b. Thabit, Abu Ayyub al-Ansari, Abu al-
Haytham Malik b. al-Tihan, Ubayy b. Ka’b, Qays b. Sa’d b. ‘Ubadah, ‘Adiy
b. Hatam, ‘Ubadah b. al-Samit, Bilal al- Habashi, Abu Rafi’, Hashim b.
‘Utbah, ‘Uthman b. Hunayf, Sahl b. Hunayf, Hakim b. Jibillah al-’Abdi,
Khalid b. Sa’id b. al-’Aas, Ibn Husayb al-Aslami, Hind b. Abi Halah
al-Tamimi, Ju’dah b. Hubayrah, Hujr b. ‘Adiy al-Kindi, ‘Amr b. al-Hamq
al-Khuza’i, Jabir b. ‘Abdullah al-Ansari, Muhammad b. Abi Bakr (the son
of the first Caliph), Aban b. Sa’id b. al-’Asi, Zayd b. Sauhan.[^17]

[^1]: Shahres tani, Vol. 1, p. 146

[^2]: Al-Nawbakhti, p. 17.

[^3]: See al-Mufid, p. 36.

[^4]: Ibid, p. 38.

[^5]: Ibn ‘Asakir, Vol. 2, p. 442 & al-Suyuti, Vol. 6, p. 5890

[^6]: In the same book, Ibn Hajar has also narrated from Umm Salamah
that one night when the Prophet was in her house, his daughter Fatimah
arrived, with Ali following her. Then the Prophet said: .O Ali! You and
your companions are in Heaven. You and your Shi’a are in Heaven..

[^7]: Ibn ‘Asakir, Vol. 1, p. 129, No. 180

[^8]: Cited in S ubhani, Vol, 6, p. 104.

[^9]: Among non-Shi'a sources , one c an refer to Tarikh a l-Uma m wa
al- Muluk by Tabar i (d. 310 A.H.), Vol. 3, pp. 62, 63; Al-Kamil fi al-
Tarik h by I bn al-Athir (d. 630 A.H.), V ol. 2, pp. 40, 41& Musna d by
Ahmad b. Hanabal, Mus nad al-’Asharah al-Mubashshar in bi al- Jannah,
Sakhr serial no. 841.

[^10]: According to Ghafari, p. 10, this tradition has been tr ansm
itted through 15 non-S hi’a channels, s uc h as Musta dark by al-H akim
al- Nishabur i, al-Sa wa’iq by ibn H ajar, Ka nz al-’Ummal and Yanabi’
al- Mawaddah.

[^11]: See, e.g. al-Tirm idhi, Kitab al-Manaq ib, Sakhr ser ial no.
3647.

[^12]: Al-Bidayah wa al-Nihaya h by I bn Kathir (d. 774 A. H), Vol. 7,
p. 359.

[^13]: See for exam ple Al-Isa ba h fi Tamy iz al -Sa haba h by Ibn H
ajar, V ol. 2, p. 509 and Al-Bidaya h wa al-Nihaya h by I bn Kathir ,
Vol. 7, p. 36.

[^14]: Ithba t al-Was iyah, p. 121.

[^15]: Waq'at S effin by Nasr b. Muzahim (d. 212 A.H ).

[^16]: Maqtal al -Imam al -Husayn by Abu Mik hnaf, p. 15.

[^17]: For example, see Buhuth fi al-Milal wa al -Nihal by J. Subhani, V
ol. 6, pp. 109 & 110. Sayyid Ali al-Madani (d. 1120 A.H.) in his Al-
Darjat al-Rafi’a t fi Tabaqa t al-Shi’a al -Imamiya h mentions names of
69 Com panions of the Prophet who were Shi’a. Sayyid ‘Abd al- Husayn
Sharaf al-Din (1377 A.H.) in his Al-Fusul al-Muhimma h fi Ta’l if
al-Umma h mentions names of more than two hundred Companions of the
Prophet Muhamm ad who were Shi’a in an A-Z order star ting with Abu R
afi’ and ending with Yazid b. Hautharah al-Ansar i. Yous uf b. ‘Abdullah
(d. 456) in his Al-Is ti’ab, Ibn al-Athir in his Us d al-Gha bah and Ibn
H ajar (d. 852 A.H.) in his Al-Isaba h are some of the non-Shi’a
scholars who have mentioned some of the S hi’a pioneers.


