Chapter 2: Sources of shi’i thought
===================================

Before studying Shi’a doctrines or practices, it is necessary to know
the sources on which the Shi’a rely for understanding Islam. In what
follows, we will study the four sources of Shi’i thought or in other
words the four sources on which, from a Shi’i point of view any
investigation about Islam has to be based: the Glorious Qur’an, the
Sunnah, the reason and the consensus.

The Glorious Qur‘an
-------------------

Needless to say, the Qur’an is the most important source for all
Muslims, including the Shi’a. The Qur’an also acts as an instrument of
unity among all Muslims. Regardless of their different sectarian and
cultural backgrounds, all Muslims refer to the same book as the Divine
guide to govern their life. As in any other time, today throughout the
Muslim world there exists only one Qur’an without any addition or
alterations. A typical Shi’a standpoint towards the Qur’an can be found
in the following passage:

We believe that the Qur’an was Divinely inspired, and revealed by Allah
on the tongue of His honourable Prophet, making clear everything, an
everlasting miracle. Man is unable to write anything like it because of
its eloquence, clarity, truth and knowledge, and no alteration can be
made to it. The Qur’an we have now is exactly what was sent to the
Prophet, and anyone who claims otherwise is either an evil-doer, a mere
sophist or else a person in error, and all of them have gone astray,
because it is the speech of Allah, and:

***“Falsehood cannot come at it from before it or from behind.”
(41:42)***

We also believe that we must respect and give dignity to the Glorious
Qur’an, and this both in word and in deed. Therefore, it must not be
defiled intentionally, not even one of its letters, and it must not be
touched by one who is not tahir [i.e. ‘pure’]. It is said in the Qur’an:

***“None can touch it save the purified.” (56:79)*** [^1]

### Shi ‘a deny any alteration in the Qur‘an

As mentioned above, the Shi’a deny any alteration in the Qur’an and
believe that the Qur’an available today is the same one that was
revealed to the Prophet Muhammad. The Qur’an is complete. No one has
ever seen a copy of the Qur’an different from the standard one in any
part of the Islamic world. There are manuscripts of the Qur’an available
today that go back to the time of Shi’a Imams and they are exactly the
same as the current ones.

The Glorious Qur'an itself explicitly says that God Himself preserves
the Qur'an from any alteration and mutilation:

***Surely We have revealed the Reminder and We will most surely be its
preserver. (15:9)***[^2]

Regarding this verse, \`Allamah Tabataba'i in his renowned Al-Mizan fi
Tafsir al-Qur’an, one of the greatest commentaries of the Qur’an,
states:

…the Qur’an is a living and eternal Reminder which will never die and
fall into oblivion. It is immune from any addition and loss. It is
immune from and secure against any alterations in form and style which
could affect its character and role, that is, as, "the Reminder of Allah
which expresses divine truth and knowledge". For this reason, the
aforesaid verse indicates that the Divine Book has always been and will
continue to be guarded against any mutilation and alteration.

The Sunnah
----------

After the Glorious Qur’an, the most important source for understanding
Islam and therefore Shi’i thought is the Sunnah of the Prophet Muhammad,
including his sayings and his deeds. The Qur’an itself clearly gives
such a high position to the Prophet, as he is referred to as the one who
is responsible for explaining the Qur’an (16:44) and teaching the Qur’an
and wisdom (62:2).  
 The Prophet is a perfect example for the believers (33:21). He never
speaks out of his own wishes (53:3). Muslims are asked to hold on to
whatever he gives them and refrain from whatever he prohibits (59:7).

Knowing the above verses and many other verses on the status of the
Prophet and taking into account the significance of acting as a divine
messenger chosen directly by God and spoken to by Him, the Shi’a, along
with other Muslims, cultivated a state of sincere love for and devotion
to the Prophet Muhammad.

The household of the Prophet
----------------------------

There seems to be no disagreement among Muslims about the validity of
following the teachings of the household of the Prophet in understanding
Islam, especially according to the Sunni view which considers even all
the companions of the Prophet as reliable sources of understanding
Islam.[^3] There is no doubt, then, that the household of the Prophet
are reliable and trustworthy in presenting Islam.

This fact becomes even clearer when we refer to the traditions from the
Prophet about his household, and examine sayings of Sunni scholars about
the knowledge of Ali and members of the household of the Prophet. For
example, Imam Malik says: “No eyes have seen, no ears have heard, and
nothing has come to the heart of any human being better than Ja’far b.
Muhammad in his knowledge, in his piety, in his asceticism and in his
servitude to God.” This is what Ibn Taymiyah reports from Imam Malik in
his book. [^4]

In a survey about those people who narrated from Imam Sadiq, Shaykh
al-Mufid (d.413) in his al-Irshad asserts that those who were
trustworthy among them from different schools of thought were 4000 in
number. Thus, there is no ambiguity here and this is why many Sunny
scholars such as the late Shaykh Shaltut have clearly pointed out that
every Muslim is allowed to act according to one of the five Islamic
schools of fiqh: Ja’fari, Hanafi, Hanbali, Maliki and Shafi’i.

The reason is clear, because if Imam Ja’far Sadiq or other members of
the household of the Prophet did not possess more knowledge or better
access to the knowledge of the

Prophet than the rest, then one has to admit that he must have been at
least equal to others, especially if he is to have taught them such as
Abu Hanifah, the Imam of Hanafi Muslims who attended Imam Sadiq’s
lectures for two years. People who are educated or who are seeking the
truth are expected, therefore, to examine all Islamic sources available,
and thereby come to a conclusion about the ways Muslims can lead
exemplary lives. Certainly one rich source is the teachings of the
household of the Prophet.

Now, let us see whether it is necessary to refer to the household of the
Prophet in understanding Islam or not. To provide an answer I will just
focus on some traditions from the Prophet narrated by great Sunni
narrationists and accepted by both Sunni and Shi’a scholars. But prior
to that it has to be noted that all the teachings of the household of
the Prophet were always based on the Glorious Qur’an and the Sunnah of
the Prophet.

No one should think that for example Imam Sadiq was saying something
according to his own opinion about Islam. Whatever they uttered was
exactly what they had themselves received from the Prophet. There are
many traditions in this regard. For example, in Usul al-Kafi we find
that Imam Sadiq said that whatever he said was what he had received
through his forefathers from the Prophet.

One of these traditions is the famous tradition of Thaqalayn. This
tradition was uttered by the Prophet on different occasions, including
the day of ‘Arafah in his last pilgrimage and the 18t h of Dhu’l-Hijjah
in Ghadir Khum. Despite minor differences in the wording the essence
remains the same in all versions of the tradition.

For example, in one version of the tradition the Prophet said:  
 “Oh people! I leave among you two precious things: the Book of God and
my household. As long as you hold on to them you will not go astray.”

Or in another tradition the Prophet said:  
 “I leave among you two precious things, which if you hold on to you
will not go astray after me: the Book of God which is like a rope
extended between the heaven and the earth, and my household. These two
things will not separate from each other until they reach me near the
fountain on the Day of Judgement. Look and be careful how you treat them
after me.”

This shows that the Prophet was worried about the way that Muslims, or
at least some of them, would treat the Qur’an and his household. In
another tradition he said:  
 “I leave two successors: first the Book of God which is like a rope
extended between heaven and the earth and second my household. They will
not separate from each other until they come to me near the fountain of
Kawthar.”

The above traditions can be found in major Sunni sources, such as: Sahih
Muslim (Vol. 8, p. 25, No. 2408), Musnad by Imam Ahmad (Vol. 3, p.388,
No.10720), Sunan by Darimi (Vol. 2, p. 432), and Sahih by Tirmidhi (Vol.
5, p. 6432, No. 3788).

They are also mentioned in books such as Usd al-Ghabah by Ibn Athir
(Vol. 2, p. 13), Al-Sunan al-Kubra by Bayhaqi (Vol. 2, p. 198) and Kanz
al-’Ummal (Vol. 1, p. 44).

Now let us reflect on the content of the hadith, i.e. the fact that the
Prophet has left among Muslims two weighty things: the Qur’an and his
household and that as long as people hold on to them both, they will not
go astray. This shows that these two things must always be in harmony
with each other, and that they never contradict each other. Otherwise,
the Prophet would not have given the instruction to follow both of them.

Moreover, the people would get puzzled about what to do if the household
of the Prophet were to tell them to go in one direction and the Book of
God says to go in another. Although this fact is implicitly
understandable from the beginning of hadith, the Prophet himself later
explicitly confirmed this fact by saying, “They will not separate from
each other until they come to me near the fountain of Kawthar”.

Thus, this hadith in all versions indicates that:

• From the time of the Prophet until the end of the world the Book of
God and the household of the Prophet will always be together.

• No one can say that the book of God is enough, and that we do not need
the household of the Prophet, or vice versa, for the Prophet clearly
said: I leave two precious things that you must grasp and if you do so
you will not be misled.

• The household of the Prophet would never make mistakes and they are
always truthful.

• It is also interesting that according to this hadith the household of
the Prophet, like the Qur’an itself, is held to be continuous,
persisting until the Day of Judgement and Paradise. Thus, the household
of the Prophet will never disappear, even for a short period of time.

The other hadith is the hadith of Safinah (ship). All Muslims have
narrated that the Prophet said:

“Be aware that surely the example of my household among you is like the
example of the ship of Noah. Whoever boarded the ship of Noah was saved
and whoever refused to enter the ship of Noah was drowned.”

The hadith of Safinah in its different versions emphasises the same fact
and can be found in different Sunni books. For example, it can be found
in Mustadrak by Hakim Nishaburi, Vol. 3, pp. 149&151, Arba’in Hadith by
Nabahani, al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah by Ibn Hajar amongst other sources.

Thus, according to these sets of traditions the appeal to the guidance
of the household of the Prophet is of the utmost necessity.

Note: The tradition of thaqalayn is mentioned in both Sunni and Shi’a
sources so it is a matter of agreement among all Muslims. However, there
is a version of the hadith in which the Prophet is quoted as saying ‘my
Sunnah’ instead of ‘my household’. Although this version can only be
found in some Sunni sources, there is no difficulty in understanding
what this tradition means, provided that this version too can be
authenticated.

The Prophet in many traditions narrated by all Muslims has said: “I am
leaving two precious things and those are the glorious Qur’an and my
household” and in a few traditions narrated only by a particular group
of Muslims has said: “the glorious Qur’an and my Sunnah.” Obviously the
result would be that as one side of the comparison is the same, i.e. The
Qur’an, the other side too must be identical.

Therefore, ‘my Sunnah’ and ‘my household’ also must be identical;
otherwise one has to say that there is no harmony in what the Prophet
said. Thus, the very act of resorting to the teachings and advice of the
household of the Prophet is the very act of resorting to the Sunnah of
the Prophet. Thus, the only way to reach the Sunnah of the Prophet and
to understand exactly what his Sunnah was, is to refer to these people
who have had the closest relationship with him and who knew better than
anyone else what he said or did or approved.

### Who constitute the house hold of the Prophet?

The other question concerns the exact meaning of “the household”.
According to many traditions, we are told to refer to the household of
the Prophet: “Ahlul Bayt” or “’Itrah”. What do these terms refer to?
There is no doubt about the status of the household of the Prophet in
Islam, but there may be a need to investigate the referent of the term
to see whether it includes anyone who was a relative of the Prophet or
not.

Of course, there is no doubt among Muslims that certainly Fatimah, the
daughter of the Prophet, Imam Ali, and their sons: Imam Hasan and Imam
Husayn are members of his household. The only concern is whether other
relatives of the Prophet are included or not, and if so, to what extent.

Sunni Muslims believe that all relatives of the Prophet are included. Of
course, they exclude those who did not embrace Islam, such as Abu Lahab,
one of the uncles of the Prophet and at the same time one of his most
hostile enemies who has been cursed in the Qur’an. Shi’a Muslims believe
that the Ahlul Bayt are those who have appropriate levels of faith and
knowledge that make it possible for them to be mentioned along with the
Qur’an in the tradition of the Thaqalayn and others. Moreover, they
believe that the Prophet himself has clearly defined them.

In what follows, I will mention some hadiths narrated in major Sunni
sources:

(1) Muslim narrates from ‘Ayishah, Umm al-Mu’minin:

The Prophet went out wearing a black woollen cloak, when Hasan the son
of Ali came to him, so the Prophet let Hasan come in with him under the
cloak. Then Husayn came and he too entered. Then Fatimah came. She
entered as well. Then Ali came. He also went under the cloak, such that
the cloak covered the Prophet, Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn. Then the
Prophet recited:

***‘God only desires to keep away impurity from you, O People of the
House! And to purify yo u a (thorough) purifying’*** (33:33) [^5]

(2) Muslim narrates from Sa’d b. Abi Waqqas that he was asked by
Mu’awiyah why he refused to verbally abuse Ali. Sa’d replied:

“I remember three sayings of the Prophet about Ali which caused me not
to say anything bad about him. If I possessed even one of these
qualities it would be better for me than red camels.[^6]

The first was that when the Prophet wanted to go to the war of Tabuk, he
left Ali in Medina. Ali was very sad at not having the good fortune to
join the army and fight for the sake of God. He went to the Prophet,
saying: ‘Do you leave me with the children and women?’ The Prophet
replied: ‘Are you not happy to be to me, as Aaron was to Moses, except
that there will be no prophet after me?’

Second I heard from the Prophet on the day of conquest of Khaybar:
‘Certainly I will give the flag [of Islam] to a man that loves God and
His Messenger and is loved b y God and His Messenger’. We hoped to be
given the flag, but the Prophet said: ‘Call Ali for me!’ Ali came while
suffering from pain in his eyes. The Prophet gave him the flag and at
his hands God granted us victory.

Third when the verse of Mubahalah was revealed the Prophet called Ali,
Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn and said: ‘My Lord! These are my
household’.”[^7]

(3) Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal narrates from Anas b. Malik that when the verse
of tathir (33:33) was revealed, for six months the Prophet used to call
at the house of Ali and Fatimah every morning on his way to the mosque
for the Dawn Prayer and say: “Prayer, O People of the House!”[^8]

There are also traditions about the meaning of Qurb‚ (near ones) which
has been mentioned several times in the Qur’an. For example, according
to the Qur’an, the Prophet did not ask any payment in return for his
teachings from the people. He just wanted the people to love his Qurb‚
for their own benefit.

So who are the Qurb? Zamakhshari, a great Sunni scholar and exegete of
the Qur’an, says that when this verse was revealed the Prophet was asked
who are meant by this verse, and to whom all have to be respectful. The
Prophet replied: “Ali, Fatimah and their two sons”.[^9]

The reason
----------

The Shi’a believe that the reason is a reliable source of knowledge and
in complete harmony with revelation. According to some hadiths, God has
two proofs (hujjah), through which humans can understand His will: the
internal one which is the reason (al-’aql) and the external one, which
are the prophets. Sometimes the reason is called, “the internal prophet”
and the prophets are called “the external reason”.

There is an established rule among Shi’a jurists that whatever judgement
is made by the reason is the same as that made by the religion (shar’)
and vice versa. It is also unanimously accepted that one of the
conditions of moral or legal responsibility is to have a sound reason.
If someone is insane, he is not considered as responsible upon what he
acts.

What is expected of the people in religion also varies according to
their mental and rational capacity. Those who are very clever and
intelligent are expected to be more prepared, to be more pious and
obedient than those who are lay or ignorant.

According to the Qur’an, God requires all human beings to exercise their
rational faculty and to ponder on His signs and communications in the
universe. On many occasions disbelievers are condemned and criticized
because of their failure to think or to act according to rational
requirements.  
 For example, they are condemned because of their blind imitation of
their ancestors, and there are many verses with rhetorical questions,
calling for people to think like:

***“Do not they think?!” (36:68),***

***“Do not they ponder on the Qur’an?!” (4:82; 47:24)*** and

***“In these, there are signs for those who are thoughtful” (13:4;
16:67; 30:28)***

In general, the reason contributes to religious studies in three major
areas: One is to understand the realities of the world, such as the
existence of God, the truth of religion and scientific facts. The second
is to introduce principles of moral values and legal norms, such as the
wrongness of oppression and the rightness of justice. The third is to
set up standards and logical processes of reasoning and inference. All
these three roles of the reason are recognised and, indeed, urged by
Islam.

In contrast, the role of revelation or the Scriptures in religious
studies can be summed up as follows:

• confirmation of the facts that are already known by the reason;

• introducing new subject that are not known by the reason, such as
details of resurrection and detailed accounts of moral and legal
systems;

• Providing sanctions through the religious system of reward and
punishment.

At the end, I should mention that there is nothing irrational in Islam.
Of course, one has to distinguish between certain and decisive rational
judgements, and one’s guessing or personal opinions. If there is a case
in which it seems that the rational judgement is in conflict with
certain religious positions, one has to verify that there must be a
mistake in at least one side: either it was not a real judgement of the
reason or it was not a religious law.

God never misleads people by telling them to do something through the
prophets, and the opposite thing through our God-given reason. There
have always been some judgements attributed to reason and taken as
contradicting religious positions, that after close consideration have
proven to be contrary to decisive rational premises.

Consensus
---------

Traditionally one of the sources of understanding Islam is considered to
be consensus (ijm‚’). According to Shi’a methodology of thought, the
consensus of all people or a group of them, such as the scholars by
itself is not sufficient as a proof (hujjah); As one person may make
mistake, two or three, or thousands or even all of them may do so.

However, whenever there exists an agreement among all Muslims or Muslim
scholars in a way whereby it unveils the Sunnah, it can serve as a
proof, as an instrument to uncover the will of God. For example, when we
find that every Muslim in the time of the Prophet said his prayer in a
certain way we realize that the Prophet had instructed them to do so;
otherwise there would be no factor to unify their action. It is not
possible to imagine that they had all acted blindly and without
instruction or that they all made mistakes and the Prophet did not
correct them.

Thus, for the Shi’a consensus in itself is not a proof. It only works
when it leads to the discovery of Sunnah. Accordingly, if Muslims today
agree on a given subject, while a scholar has doubt about the Islamic
judgement on that subject, he methodologically cannot say that because
everybody says so, I also say the same.

There have been many cases in the history where all human beings
believed in the same way and later they found out that they were wrong,
e.g. the earth being flat. It is only the Qur’an and the Sunnah that are
unquestionably true and immune from any error or mistake.

This approach grants a type of dynamism to Shi’i thought, so that every
generation of scholars and even any single scholar is able and indeed is
required to refer directly to the Qur’an and Sunnah and conduct his own
original ijtih‚d, that is his investigation and independent judgement.
Ijtih‰d has never been banned or closed in the Shi’a world. The Shi’a
believe that the view of no jurist, however high his position, is immune
from scientific questioning or challenge. Of course, as in any other
discipline, every religious scholar needs to consult and examine
carefully the works of his predecessors.

[^1]: Muzaffar, p. 26

[^2]: It has to be noted that the c har ge with belief in alteration is
limited to deletion of s ome alleged verses; otherwise neither Shi’ites
nor Sunnites have ever been char ged with belief in addition to the Qur
‘an. Therefore, one can argue from any verses of the Qur ‘and to refute
the idea of alteration.

[^3]: Sunni Muslims hold that whoever met the Prophet while believing in
him is considered as a companion of the Prophet and can be relied on in
acquir ing knowledge about Islam. Accordingly, members of the household
of the Prophet such as Imam Ali and Fatimah who have always been with
the Prophet and had the closest relation to the Prophet can
unquestionably be relied on.

[^4]: Al-Ta wassul wa al-Wasila h, p. 52, firs t edition.

[^5]: Sahih by Muslim, Vol. 4, p.1883, No.2424 (Kitab Fada’il al-
Sahabah, Bab Fada’il Ahlul Bayt, Sakhr ser ial no. 4450)

[^6]: Red camels were cons idered very valuable in those days.

[^7]: Sahih by Muslim, Vol.4, p.1871, no.2408. (Kitab Fada’il al-
Sahabah, Sakhr serial No. 4420).

[^8]: Musna d by Im am Ahmad b. Hanbal, inter national serial no. 13231.
See also Suna n by al-T irm idhi, inter national serial no. 3130.

[^9]: Al-Kashs haf by Zam akhshari, Comm entary of the verse 42:23,
Vol.4, p. 220.


