Chapter 3: Doctrines
====================

Throughout the history of Islam, Muslims in spite of their differences,
have had great agreement, not only in many principles of Islam, but also
in many of its practices. The Qur’an and the great personality of the
Prophet on the one hand, and the sincere love and devotion of all
Muslims towards them, have unified Muslims and made out of them a real
nation that has its own identity, heritage, aims, objectives and
destiny.

The hostility of the enemies of Islam, who have always been trying to
uproot Islam as a whole, along with challenges of the age, have also
helped to awaken and strengthen the sense of unity and brotherhood among
Muslims. The Qur’anic and prophetic call for unity and brotherhood has
always been echoed by great leading Islamic personalities of different
schools of Islam.

With respect to beliefs, all Muslims share the belief in God and His
unity, in the prophets in general and the mission of the Prophet
Muhammad in particular which is to deliver the final message of God for
human beings, along with the Resurrection, and the just and equal
treatment of everybody on the Day of Judgement. These are the most
fundamental principles of Islam which are agreed upon by all Muslims. An
outside view about the extent of the agreement between Shi’a and Sunni
Muslims is expressed in the following passage:

Since the Iranian Revolution everyone knows that Shi’ites are Muslims,
like the Sunnis respecting the central dogma of the oneness of God, the
same sacred writing (the Koran), the same Prophet Mohammad, the same
belief in the resurrection followed by the last Judgement and the same
fundamental obligations, prayer, fasting, pilgrimage, almsgiving, and
jihad (holy war).

These common points are more important than the differences: there is no
longer any theoretical objection to a Shi’ite performing his prayers
with a Sunni, or vice versa although many difficulties have existed in
the past and in practice still remain. (Richard, p. 5; with
abbreviation)

In what follows, we will proceed by outlining principles of religion or
articles of faith. Some of the characteristic beliefs of the Shi’a will
be examined thereafter.[^1]

Principles of religion
----------------------

### (1) Unity of God

The Islamic faith is formulated by the declaration of two facts, i.e.,
that there is no god (i.e., no one worthy of worship) but God (Allah)
and that Muhammad is His messenger. (La Ilaha Illallah
Muhammadur-Rasululla h). Muslims believe that Allah is one. He has no
partner or children. He is the beginning and he is the end. He is
omnipotent, omniscient and omnipresent. The qur’an says that he is
closer to man than his jugular vein, but he cannot be seen by eyes or
encompassed by human intellect. In a supplication, Imam Ali says:

"Oh God, verily I ask Thee by Thy Name, in the name of Allah, the
All-merciful, the All-compassionate, O the Possessor of Majesty and
Splendour, the Living, the Self-subsistent, the Eternal, there is no God
other than Thee. "

**Divine justice:** Among Divine attributes the Shi’a put a great
emphasis on His justice. Of course, all Muslims believe that God is just
(adil), in that God never commits any injustice towards His servants,
and He never oppresses any one. This fact is clearly expressed by the
Qur’an:

***God is not in the least unjust to the servants. (3:182 & 8:51 &
22:10)***

***Your Lord is not in the least unjust to the servants. (41:46)***

***I am not in the least unjust to the servants. (50:29)***

***Surely God does not do injustice to the weight of an atom. (4:40)***

***Surely God does not do any injustice to men, but men are unjust to
themselves. (10:44)***[^2]

In addition to the importance of Divine justice in itself, the other
reason for the emphasis on this doctrine by the Shi’a, is that the
Ash’arites, a group of Sunni theologians, believe that there is no
objective criteria for morally right or wrong acts. Good is what God
acts or whatever is commanded by God. Therefore, whatever God acts or
commands is good and just by definition.

They believe that if God had asked us to tell lies telling lies would
have become good and if God were to send the pious people to hell that
would be just. Of course, they believe that God never does such acts,
not because they are wrong in themselves, but because in practice He has
said that those acts are wrong. Ash’arites also believe that human
beings do not have free-will and it is God who creates their acts
without them having any role therein. They are only receptacles of
Divine acts.

The Shi’a and some other Sunni theologians, such as the Mu’tazilites,
believe that good and bad, or right and wrong are objective, and that
there are rational criteria for moral judgements. In other words, they
believe in intrinsic goodness and badness. They believe that in reality
there is a difference between, say, justice and oppression and it is not
arbitrary that God has commanded us to be just and not to oppress anyone
even our enemies.

They also believe that human beings are free and responsible for their
acts. Of course, the Mu’tazilites believe in tafwid, i.e. that God has
handed over His authority over human voluntary acts to them and they
have complete control over their acts. But the Shi’a believe that
although determinism (jabr) is wrong and against Divine justice, and
that human beings are free, their freedom and power is limited, and God
has an overall authority upon their acts. This fact is expressed in the
well-known formulation of Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq:

“There is no compulsion (jabr), nor is there absolute delegation of
power (tafwid), but the real position is between the two extremes.”

Due to the ultimate importance of this subject for any value system, the
Shi’a have always stressed on the issue of Divine justice and have
frequently introduced it along with tawhid (Divine unity), prophethood,
Imamate (Divine leadership) and Resurrection as one of the five
Principles of the Faith (Usul al-Madhhab) in contrast to tawhid,
prophethood and resurrection which count as the three Principles of the
Religion (Usul al-Din), which are shared by all Muslims.

This emphasis on the issue of Divine justice has not just had its role
in the theoretical aspect of Shi’ism. Indeed, the Shi’a see the issue of
justice such as a fundamental aspect of Islam that they have always
called for implementation of the principle of justice on a social scale
as well. Shi’a movements that have taken place have always been calling
for justice.

### (2) Prophethood

***God has created mankind wisely and purposefully (51:56)***

He has given man reason and free-will to find his way towards his
perfection and happiness. He has also supplemented the human reason with
Divine revelation. Through His wisdom and justice, He has not left any
people or corner of the world without guidance; He has sent prophets to
all nations to instruct and guide them. (10:47 and 16:36)

The first prophet was Adam and the last was Muhammad, the Seal of
prophets (33:40). The Qur’an mentions twenty- five of the prophets and
states that there were many more (40:78). Through the indications of
hadiths, Muslims believe that there have been 124,000 prophets.

Amongst those mentioned in the Qur’an are Adam, Noah, Abraham, Ishmael,
Isaac, Lot, Jacob, Joseph, Job, Moses, Aaron, Ezekiel, David, Solomon,
Jonah, Zachariah, John the Baptist, Jesus and Muhammad. Among them,
Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus and Muhammad had universal mission and
brought new codes of law. They are called, "Ulu al-’Azm" meaning those
of great determination.

Other than the Qur’an itself, the Qur’an speaks of four Heavenly books:
the Book of Abraham (87:19); the Psalms of David (4:163 and 17:55); the
Torah of Moses (2:87, 3:3 & 4, 6:91 & 154) and the Gospel of Jesus
(5:46).

A Muslim must believe in all the Holy Books (2:4 & 285) and in all the
prophets. (4:152). As we will see later, the Shi’a also believe that all
the prophets were necessarily infallible and sinless prior to and during
their mission.

The Shi’a, like other Muslims, have a great love for the Prophet
Muhammad. They see in the Prophet Muhammad the perfect model of entire
reliance on God, profound knowledge of God, ultimate devotion to God,
sincere obedience to the Divine will, the noblest character, and
compassion and mercy for all mankind.

It was not accidental that he was chosen by God to deliver His final and
most perfect message for humanity. To be able to receive Divine
revelation and be addressed by heaven requires one to possess a very
high calibre, and furthermore to be able to receive the most perfect
revelation requires indeed the highest calibre.

The Personal character and behaviour of the Prophet contributed greatly
to the progress of Islam. He was known to be an honest, trustworthy and
pious person from childhood. During his prophethood, he always lived by
his principles and values. In the times of ease as well as difficulty,
security as well as fear, peace as well as war, victory as well as
defeat, he always manifested humility, justice and confidence.

He was so humble that he never admired himself, he never felt superior
to others and he never lived a life of luxury. Both when he was alone
and powerless as well as when he ruled the Arab peninsula and Muslims
were whole-heartedly following him and taking every drop of his ablution
water, he behaved the same.

He lived very simply and always with the people, especially the poor. He
had no palace or court or guard. When he was sitting with his companions
no one could distinguish him from others by considering his seat or
clothes. It was only his words and spirituality that distinguished him
from others.

He was so just that never ignored the rights of anyone, even his
enemies. He exemplified in his life the Qur’anic command, “O you who
believe! Be upright for God, bearers of witness with justice, and let
not hatred of a people incite you not to act equitably; act equitably,
that is nearer to piety”. (5:8)

Before battles, he always gave instructions to his soldiers not to harm
women, children, old people and those who surrendered themselves, not to
destroy farms and gardens, not to chase those who have escaped from the
war front, and to be kind to their captives. Just before his death, he
announced in the Mosque: “Whoever feels that I am in debt to him or I
have not observed his rights, please come forward and claim his right”.

Muslims cried, they were reminded of all the services that the Prophet
had made for them and the troubles that he had undergone just to guide
them. They knew that he never gave any priority to his own needs and
never preferred his rest and convenience to others. Therefore, they
uttered their statements of deep gratitude and respect to him.

But one man stood up and said: “You owe me something. Before one of the
battles you were arranging the soldiers in a row and your stick hit me.
Now, I want retaliation.” Without any question the Prophet told one of
his close companions to go to his home and bring the same stick and
asked the man to retaliate and hit him back.

But the man said your stick hit the skin of my stomach. Therefore, the
Prophet lifted his shirt so that he could hit the skin, when suddenly
the man kissed the body of the prophet. Perhaps, the whole reason for
doing this was so that he could kiss him out of respect and love.

Imamah: As mentioned earlier, the Shi’a believe in the institution of
Imamah as a continuation of prophethood. In Arabic the term "Imam"
literally means “leader”. An Imam, in general terminology may be good or
bad, and the extent of his leadership may be very broad such as leading
a whole nation, or limited such as leading congregations in a mosque.
However, in the Shi’i faith the Imam in its narrower sense, is the
person who is in charge of all political and religious affairs of the
Islamic nation.

More exactly, the Imam is the person who is appointed by God and
introduced by the Prophet and then by each preceding Imam by explicit
designation (na••) to lead the Muslim community, interpret and protect
the religion and the law (shari ‘ah), and guide the community in all
affairs. The Imam is the Representative of God on earth (khali fat-
Allah) and the successor of the Prophet. He must be sinless and possess
divine knowledge of both the exoteric and the esoteric meaning of the
Qur’an.

The Sunni View: Sunni Muslims use the term Imam as an equivalent to the
term “Caliph” (khali fah). In Arabic the term “khalifah” means
successor. The term has been used as a title for whoever took the power
and ruled the Islamic state after the demise of the Prophet Muhammad.

A Caliph may be elected, or nominated by his predecessor, or selected by
a committee, or may even acquire power through military force. A Caliph
need not be sinless. Neither does he need to be superior to others in
qualities, such as faith or knowledge.

The Twelver Shi’a who constitute the high majority of Shi’a Muslims
believe that the Prophet was succeeded by twelve Imams.[^3] These are:

1. Imam Ali b. Abu Talib[^4] Martyred 40/659

2. Imam Hasan b. Ali Martyred 50/669

3. Imam Husayn b. Ali Martyred 61/680

4. Imam Ali b. Husayn Martyred 95/712

5. Imam Muhammad b. Ali Martyred 114/732.

6. Imam Ja'far b. Muhammad Martyred 148/765

7. Imam Musa b. Ja'far Martyred 183/799

8. Imam Ali b. Musa Martyred 203/817

9. Imam Muhammad b. Ali Martyred 220/835

10. Imam Ali b. Muhammad Martyred 254/868

11. Imam Hasan b. Ali Martyred 260/872

12. Imam al-Mahdi Born 255/868

The belief in a saviour is shared by most (if not all) religions. In
Islam, the idea of a saviour is very deliberately presented in the
doctrine of al-Mahdi (the Guided) who will uprise with Divine blessing
and fill the earth with justice after having been filled with injustice
and oppression. The idea of a saviour or a good end for the world is
indicated in many Qur’anic verses and Islamic hadiths. For example, we
read in the Qur’an:

***We have written in the Psalms following the Reminder: “My honourable
servants shall inherit the earth”. (21:105)***

***Yet we wanted to endow those who were considered inferior on earth,
and make them into leaders and make them [Our] heirs. (28:5)***

The following are only some examples of hadiths on the same idea of the
saviour narrated in both Sunni and Shi’a sources:

1. The Prophet said:

Even if the entire duration of the world's existence has already been
exhausted and only one day is left(before the day of judgment), God will
expand that day to such a length of time, as to accommodate the kingdom
of a person from my household who will be called by my name.[^5]

2. The Prophet also said:

**Al-Mahdi** is one of us, the members of the household (Ahlul-Bayt).
God will prepare for him (his affairs) in one night.[^6]

3. Furthermore, the Prophet said:

**Al-Mahdi** will be of my family, of the descendants of Fatimah.[^7]

4. It is also narrated from Jabir b. Abdillah al-Ansari that he heard
the Messenger of God saying:

A group of my nation will fight for the truth until near the Day of
Judgment when Jesus son of Mary, will descend, and their leader will ask
him to lead the prayer, but Jesus will decline, saying: "No, Verily,
among you God has made leaders for others in order to honour this
nation.[^8]

Thus, al-Mahdi will have a universal mission starting from the Arab
world. His name will be the same as the name of the Prophet Muhammad and
he will be from the progeny of the Lady Fatimah. The Shi’a believe that
he is the son of Imam Hasan al-’Askari. He was born in 255 (A.H). In the
year 260 (A.H.) his occultation started.

He is still alive, but protected by God in the state of occultation till
the preparations will be made for his reappearance. The same is believed
by some Sunni scholars, but some other Sunni scholars believe that he
has not yet been born. Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin in his A’yan al-Shi’ah has
named thirteen examples of those Sunni scholars who have asserted that
al-Mahdi is the son of Imam Hasan and already born, such as Muhammad b.
Yousuf al-Kanji al- Shafi’i in his Al-Bayan fi Akhbar Sahib al-Zaman and
Kifayat al-Talib fi Manaqib Ali b. Abi Talib; Nur al-Din Ali b. Muhammad
al-Maliki in his Al-Fusul al-Muhimmah fi Ma’rifat al-A’immah and Ibn
al-Jawzi in his well-known Tadhkirat al-Khawass.

### (3) Resurrection

The world will come to an end on the Day of the Resurrection (Qiyamah),
the Day of Judgement. All men will be resurrected and presented before
God Who will decide their individual fates according to their beliefs
and deeds in this world. There will be rewards for the good, and
punishments for the bad. (22:6-9 & 1-2; 3:185; 6:62). God will treat
people with justice but the dominant factor in the administration of His
Justice will be His Mercy (6:12).

**Note:**

Although all Muslims believe in the above principles of Islam, there is
a slight difference in their articulation of beliefs and practices.
Shi’a Muslims articulate the above beliefs as principles or roots of the
religion (Usul al-Din) and the acts of worship to follow as practices or
branches of the religion (Furu al-Din). The reason for such an
articulation is that those beliefs are the most fundamental aspect of
the religion and the criteria for being considered a Muslim.

However, the mandatory acts of worship are implications of being
faithful, since genuine faith manifests itself in practices. Sunni
Muslims usually present the declaration of Islam (kalimah) consisting of
bearing witness that there is no god but God (Allah) and that Muhammad
is His Messenger together with four acts of worship, i.e. the daily
prayer, fasting, pilgrimage to Mecca and almsgiving as the Five Pillars
of Faith.

They consider other acts of worship such as enjoining the good and
prohibiting the bad, and struggle as obligatory acts, but not included
amongst the Pillars of Faith.

[^1]: One of the m ain s ources of the following disc ussions on the
princ iples and pr actices of Islam is “An Introduc tion to Is lam” by
Bashir Rahim. For an online version of this article, see
www.al-islam.org/begin/index.html.

[^2]: There are much more verses in the Qur‘an affirming Divine justice.

[^3]: There is a series of hadiths, in which the prophet mentioned that
there would be twelve leaders after him. For example, Bukhari Reports
that the Prophet said: “There will be twelve leaders (amir) after me.”
Then the narrator says that the Prophet said something that he could not
hear. He asked his father, who too was present at the time, to tell him
what the Prophet had said. His father said that the Prophet had said:
“All these twelve leaders will be from the tribe of Quraysh.” Muslim
also reports this tradition, saying that the narrator of this tradition
went with his father to the place where the Prophet was, and the Prophet
said: “This religion will not end until there will have been twelve
successors (khalifah)”. Then the narrator says: “The Prophet said
something I did not understand and I asked my father. He said, the
Prophet said: ‘They are all from Quraysh’.”

[^4]: As we saw earlier, Imam Ali was the Prophet\`s cousin and son-in-
law (the husband of the Lady Fatimah). He was the first man who embraced
Islam.

[^5]: Sunan by al-Tirm idhi, Kitab al-Fitan, Sakhr serial no. 2156 &
2157 and Sunan by Abu Dawud, Kitab al-Mahdi, Sakhr serial no. 3733 &
3734. According to Abu Dawud, the hadith had the ending, “He will fill
out the earth with justice as it will have been full of injustice and
oppression. See also Musnad by Ahmad, Musnad al-‘Asharah al-Mubashs
harinbi al-Jannah, Sakhr serial no. 734 and Suna n by Ibn Maj ah, Kitab
al- Jihad serial no. 2769.

[^6]: Sunan by ibn Majah, Kitab al-Fitan, Sakhr serial no. 4075 and
Musnad by Ahmad, Musnad al-’Asharah al-Mubashshar in bi al- Jannah,
Sakhr serial no. 610.

[^7]: Sunan by Abu Dawud, Kitab al-Mahdi, Sakhr serial no. 3735. See
also Sunan by Ibn Majah, Kitab al-Fitan, Sakhr serial no. 4076.

[^8]: Sahih by Muslim, Kitab al-Iman, Sakhr serial no. 225 and Musnad by
Ahmad, Baqi Musnad al-Mukthirin, Sakhr serial no. 14193 & 14595.


