Chapter 4: Practices
====================

The main mandatory acts of worship accepted by both Sunni and Shi’a
Muslims are:

The Daily Prayers
-----------------

Every Muslim from the time he or she attains puberty performs five daily
prayers (salah). To be able to start the prayer one must first perform
the ritual ablution (wudu) in the prescribed form. Then one stands
facing Mecca and makes an intention to perform the specific prayer of
the time in order to attain proximity to God.

This intention must be kept all the time during the prayer. If someone
at the beginning or later on forgets what he is doing, or prays in order
to show off, or for any other selfish motive, his prayer becomes void.
The actual prayer starts when the person utters: Allah-u Akbar (God is
the Greatest). With this he enters the formal state of prayer in which
he remains until the completion of his prayers.

Each prayer consists of two to four units (rak’ah).[^1] Each unit
consists of:

i. The recitation of the opening chapter of the Qur’an followed by
another chapter such as Tawhid or Qadr;[^2]

ii. bowing down (ruku) and praising and glorifying God in that position;

iii. Performing two prostrations (sajdah) and then praising and
glorifying God.

The prayers are ended by bearing witness that God is One and has no
partners and that Muhammad is His servant and messenger with salutations
upon him and his household (tashahhud) and offering peace to the
Prophet, all the righteous people and all who are engaged in prayers
(taslim).

The daily prayer is the most important form of worship and remembrance
of the Lord. The Qur’an says:  
***Surely prayer keeps (one) away from indecency and evil, and certainly
the remembrance of God is the greatest, and God knows what you do.
(29:45)***

2 . Fasting
-----------

The second act of worship is fasting (sawm) in the month of Ramadan, the
ninth month of the Islamic calendar. In this month every mature Muslim
refrains from eating, drinking and sexual activity from dawn to
sunset.[^3] Like any other acts of worship, fasting must be performed
with pure intention, that is, to be performed solely for the sake of God
and to attain proximity to Him. Along with closeness to God and
achieving His pleasure, there are many other benefits for fasting, such
as strengthening one’s determination, reminding people of God’s
blessings such as the food that they enjoy everyday which they may take
for granted, remembering the hunger and thirst of the Day of Judgement,
helping the rich to understand what the poor experience in order to
awaken their sense of benevolence and sympathy, weakening one’s
appetites and lower desires, and letting rational understanding and
spiritual awareness flourish. In general the Qur’an says:

***O you who believe! Fasting is prescribed for you, as it was
prescribed for those before you, so that you may guard (against evil).
(2:183)***

3 . Pilgrimage to Mecca
-----------------------

Every Muslim who has attained puberty, and is financiall y and
physically capable, must once in his lifetime perform pilgrimage to
Mecca (hajj) in the month of Dhu’l-Hijjah, the twelfth month of the
Islamic calendar. In Mecca is situated the most important Mosque for the
Muslims all over the world called Masjid al-Haram, which is the
sanctuary of the Ka’bah.

All Muslims direct their face and body towards the Ka’bah in their
prayers. The Ka’bah is the cubical construction built by the Prophet
Abraham and his son, Prophet Ishmael, on the foundations of what had
originally been built by the Prophet Adam. Indeed, to a great extent,
pilgrimage to Mecca is a symbolic

Reconstruction of what the Prophet Abraham, the arch monotheist went
through in this very place about four thousand years ago. After a long
journey, when Abraham arrived in Mecca he was asked by God to make
preparation for people’s pilgrimage to Mecca. The Qur’an says:

***Do not associate with Me anything, and purify My house for those who
circle around it and stand to pray and bow and prostrate themselves. And
proclaim among the people the pilgrimage. They will come to you on foot
and on every lean camel from every remote path that they may***
***witness the benefits for them and mention the name of God during the
appointed days over what He has given them. (22:26-28)***

***Most surely the first house appointed for men is the one at Bekka,
blessed and a guidance for the nations. In it are the clear signs, the
standing place of Abraham, and whoever enters it shall be secure, and
pilgrimage to the House is incumbent upon men for the sake of God,
(upon) everyone who is able to undertake the journey to it; and whoever
disbelieves, then surely God is Self- sufficient, above any need of the
worlds. (3:96 &97)***

Pilgrimage to Mecca is full of unforgettable experiences. Perhaps among
them, the most outstanding are selflessness, brotherhood, equality and
simplicity. Every year millions of Muslims from different continents
leave their home, family, business and whatever is dear to them, and set
out on their journey towards Mecca, located in a desert.

Everyone is asked to be present there in the same places at the same
time all wearing the same clothes and performing the same rites. The
rich and the poor, the king and the ordinary man, the elite and the
layman should all stand shoulder to shoulder and wear two pieces of
white cloth. This is something that every one should experience

At least once in his lifetime, and then try to implement it in his day
to day life.

4. Almsgiving
-------------

Giving charity is highly recommended in the Qur’an and Sunnah and the
reward for charitable acts are great. Although everything including
one’s financial possessions belongs to God, the Qur’an presents giving
charity as giving a loan to God:

***Who is the one that lends to God a good lending so that God may give
him double? (57:11)***

In addition to voluntary charities, there are certain types of charity
that are obligatory. For example, one type of almsgiving is zakat, a
wealth tax of a small percentage (usually 2.5%). Paying zakat is not a
gift for the poor but rather is a right for them that must be observed:

***And in their properties is the right of the beggar and the destitute.
(51:19)***

Imam Ali also said:

God the Glorified has fixed the livelihood of the destitute in the
wealth of the rich. Consequently, whenever the destitute remains hungry,
it is because some rich persons have denied him his share.[^4]

Those whose possessions of certain amounts of wheat, barley, dates,
raisins, gold, silver, camels, cows and sheep surpass certain quantities
must pay zakat on a yearly basis to the less fortunate amongst one's
relatives, the orphans, the needy, the wayfarers and etc. Zakat may be
spent for food, shelter, education, health care, orphanages and other
public services.

It is noteworthy that in many verses, paying zakat is mentioned next to
saying one’s prayers (Allah) and as a sign of faith and belief in God.
Paying zakat is an act of worship, so it must be performed for the sake
of God.

Therefore, not only does it help the needy and contribute to the
establishment of social justice and development, but it also purifies
the soul of those who pay from miserliness and greed. The Qur’an says:

***Take alms from their wealth in order to purify and sanctify them.
(9:103)***

**Khums:** Shi’a Muslims also believe in another obligator y tax, called
khums. In Arabic Khums literally means one fifth. It is a 20% tax on the
excess profit that a person annually makes. At the end of one’s
financial year, one pays 20% of all one’s earnings after deduction of
house- hold and commercial expenses. [^5]The obligation to pay  
 Khums has been mentioned in the Qur’an:

***And know that whatever profit you may attain, one fifth of it is
assigned to God and the Messenger, and to the near relatives [of the
Messenger] and the orphans, the destitute, and the wayfarer, if you have
believed in God and that which We sent down to our servant [Muhammad].
(8:41)***

Sunni Muslims usually believe that the verse only refers to what Muslims
earn when they win a war (booty) and consider it to be a type of zakat.

According to Shi’i jurisprudence, half of the khums belongs to the
twelfth Imam, the remaining member of the household of the Prophet and
his successor, and the other

Half to the poor descendants of the Prophet, called “sayyids”. Khums
must be spent under the supervision of a Shi’a religious authority
(marji’ al-taqlid), i.e. the grand jurist (ayatullah) that one follows
in practical issues.

This is to make sure that it is spent in the way that the Imam Mahdi is
pleased with. The portion belonging to the Imam is usually spent on
Islamic seminaries and other educational projects such as publishing
useful books or building Mosques and schools.

5. Struggle for the sake of God
-------------------------------

Every Muslim has to struggle hard and strive for the sake of God in
different ways to make improvements to human life in general and his
individual life in particular. The Qur’an says:

***He has created you upon the Earth and has asked you to develop it.
(11:61)***

To be indifferent to human catastrophes or to be lazy in one’s personal
life is greatly condemned. On the other hand the one who works hard to
earn some money to spend on his family and improve their living
conditions is considered as a hero in the struggle for the sake of God,
a muj‚hid.

A very outstanding and vital case of this struggle (jihad) is to defend
human rights such as liberty, freedom, and Islamic and human values such
as justice, dignity, and a Muslim nation’s integrity. The Qur’an says:

***Permission [to fight] is given to those against whom war is being
wrongfully and offensively waged, and surely God is able to give them
victory. Those who have been expelled from their homes unjustly, only
because they said, “Our Lord is God.” (22:39-40)***

***And why do you not fight for the sake of God and the utterly
oppressed men, women, and children Who are crying out, “O Lord! Rescue
us from this town whose people are oppressors, and raise for us from You
one who will protect, and raise for us from You one who will help.”
(4:75)***

Of course, jihad also includes more personal cases in which one’s
family, property or reputation is endangered, usurped or damaged.
According to Islamic hadiths, the one who is killed while defending his
family or land is considered the same as the soldier who is martyred in
the warfront.

Jihad must continue until the just cause is achieved. The Qur’an says:

***“Fight against aggressors until oppression is stopped.” (2:193)***

Of course, on a larger scale, a real jihad has always existed from the
dawn of creation of mankind, between good and evil, truth and falsehood,
and between the party of God and the party of Satan.

This battle will more or less continue till the End of the Time when the
Earth will be filled with justice and fair distribution of all resources
in the Government of al-MahdÓ.

Jihad whether it be with the pen, the tongue, a weapon or any other
means is an act of worship, and must be performed with pure intention,
that is, only for the sake of God and for just causes. No one is allowed
to fight or struggle for materialistic purposes, for personal glory or
the glory of any tribe, race, nation or any other oppressive cause such
as occupying others’ land to become richer or more powerful.

Indeed, jihad first of all starts within the self of a mujhid (one who
struggles). To make sure that one can win the external battle against
evil, one has to fight first against his own lower desires and lusts,
and must first liberate his own heart from any satanic occupation and
regain the dignity and honour that God the Almighty has given human
beings. The Qur’an says:

***O the soul at peace, return to your Lord, well- pleased (with Him),
well-pleasing (Him). So enter among My true servants and enter into My
Paradise! (89:27-30)***

According to a well-known hadith, once the Prophet Muhammad (peace be
upon him and his family) said to a group of his companions who had won a
battle: “Well- done. Welcome to the people who have completed the minor
jihad (al- jihad al-asghar) and on whom the major jihad (al- jihad
al-akbar) is still incumbent.”

Astonished, the companions who had defeated the enemies and were
prepared to give the dearest thing to them, i.e. their life to defend
Islam asked, “What is the major jihad?” The Prophet Muhammad (peace be
upon him and his family) replied: “The major jihad is to fight against
your own selves [or your souls]”.

Thus, to resist against one’s temptations, and prohibit one’s soul from
wrong, and to purify one’s self is the greatest and the most difficult
jihad.

At the end, let us refer to some of the merits of those who struggle for
the sake of God as explained by God Himself:

***Those who believe, and have left their homes and strive hard with
their wealth and their lives in God's way, are much higher in rank with
God. These are they who are triumphant. Their Lord gives them good
tidings of mercy from Him, and acceptance, and Gardens where enduring
pleasures will be theirs. There they will abide forever. Surely with God
there is a Mighty reward. (9:20-22)***

6 . Enjoining the good and prohibiting the bad
----------------------------------------------

Enjoining the good (al-amr bi al-ma’r˚f) and prohibiting the bad
(al-nahy ‘an al-munkar) are two acts of worship

That every mature Muslim has to perform whenever applicable. No Muslim
can be indifferent to what happens in the world around him. Part of the
social responsibilities of each individual Muslim is to observe human
and religious values, and whenever any of them is deliberately
overlooked or violated, he must advise and direct those responsible
towards performing the good and against committing the bad and sinful
acts. (3:103, 109, 113;7:199; 9:71, 112; 22:41)

[^1]: The morning prayer (fajr) which is performed between dawn and
sunrise consists of two units, the noon (Zuhr) and afternoon prayers
(‘asr) consist of four units, the sunset prayer (maghrib) consists of
three units and the evening (‘is ha’) consists of four units.

[^2]: In three unit and four unit pr ayers the third and four th units
cons ist of rec itation of the opening chapter of the Qur‘an or alter
natively rec itation of a spec ific remem brance (dhikr) called, “al -
tasbihat al-arbi’ah” (Four Glorifications) and then bowing down and
prostrations. In these prayers the affirmation of the oneness of God and
the prophethood of the Prophet Muhammad and salutations upon him and his
household are performed in both the second unit and the last units after
prostrations.

[^3]: Several groups of people are exempted, such as the sick or those
who travel.

[^4]: Nahjal-Balaghah (The Peak of Eloquence)

[^5]: There are other cases mentioned in Shi’a jurisprudence in which
paying khums becomes obligatory. What has been mentioned above is the
most popular one.


