Bibliography
============

• ‘Askari, S.M. (1993), The Role of Holy Imams in the Revival of
Religion, Vols. 1 & 2 (Tehran: Naba’ Organization)

• ‘Askari,mS.M. (1996), Ma’alim al-Madrisatayn (Tehran: al-Majam
‘al-’Ilmii al-Islami, 6th Imprint)

• Abd al-Jabbar (1384 A.H.), Al-Mughni fi al- Tawhi d wa al-’Adl (Cairo:
Dar al-Kutub al- Misriyah)

• Abu Hatam, Ahmad b. Hamdan al-Radi, Al-Zinah fi al-kalimat
al-Islamiyah al-Arabiyah (Egypt: Dar al-Kitab al-Arabi)

• al-Ash’ari, Ali ibn Isma’il Abu al-Hasan, Maqalat al-Islamiyin wa
Ikhtilaf al-Musallin (Beirut: Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-’Arabi)

• al-Fadli, ‘Abd al-Hadi (1992), Tarikh al-Tashri’ al-Islami (Beirut:
Dar al-Nasr)

• al-Fadli, ‘Abd al-Hadi (1997), The Imamiyah Sect: A Study of its
Origins, Beliefs and Laws (Beirut: Al-Ghadeer), Trans. H. Atiyah

• al-Gharifi, ‘Abdullah (1417 A.H./1997), Al- Tashayyu’: Nushu’uhu ñ
Marahiluhu ñ Muqawwimatuhu (Damascus: S.A.Nuri, 6th Imprint with
revisions and additions)

• Al-Hilli, ‘Allamah (1363 A.H.), Anwar al- Malakut fi Sharh al-Yaqut
(Qum: Radi and Bidar)

• Al-Hilli, ‘Allamah (1982), Nahj al-Haqq wa Kashf al-Sidq (Qum: Radi
and Bidar)

• Al-Iji, Abd al-Rahman b. Ahmad (1997), Al-Mawaqif (Beirut: Dar al-Jil)

• Kashif al-Ghita’ (1993), The Origin of Shi’ite Islam and its
Principles (Qum: Ansariyan)

• al-Kulayni, Muhammad (1397 A.H), Us¸ l al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub
al-Islamiyah)

• al-Majlisi, Muhammad B. (1983), Bihar al-Anwar (Beirut: Al-Wafa)

• al-Mufid, Shaykh Muhammad b. M. b. Nu’man (1413 A.H.), Awa’il
al-Maqalat (Qum: Kungereh- e Sheykh-e Mufid, 1413). In this edition the
main text starts on page 33.

• al-Nawbakhti, al-Hasan ibn Musa (1405 A.H), Firaq al-Shi’ah (Beirut)

• al-Qazwini, Sayed Mustafa (2000), Inquiries about Shi’a Islam
(California: The Islamic Educational Centre of Orange County)

• al-Sadr, S.M. (1997), Nash’ah al-Tashayu’wa al- Shi’ah (Beirut:
Al-Ghadeer, 2nd Imprint)

• al-Safi, Lutfullah, Muntakhab al-Athar (Tehran: Maktabah al-Sadr)

• al-Shahrestani, ‘Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Karim (1404 A.H), Al-Milal wa
al-Nihal (Beirut: Dar al- Ma’rifah)

• al-Suyuti, Jalal al-Din ‘Abd al-Rahman (1993), Al-Durr al-Manthur
(Beirut: Dar al-Fikr)

• al-Tusi, Khajeh Nasir al-Din, Talkhis al- Muhassal, “The Treatise on
al-’Ismah”

• al-Wa’ili, Ahmad (1983), Huwiyah al-Tashayu’ (Qum: Dar al-Kitab
al-Islami, 2nd edition)

• al-Wardani, Salih (1999), Aqa’id al-Sunnah wa ‘Aqa’id al-Shi’ah:
al-Taqarub wa al-Taba’ud (Beirut: Al-Ghadeer)

• Chittick, W. C. (ed. and trans.) (1981), A Shi’ite Anthology (Albany,
New York: Sunny Press), Selected by S.M.H. Tabataba’i and Introduced by
S.H. Nasr

• Ezzati, A. (1976), Shi’i Islamic Law and Jurisprudence (Lahore: Ashraf
Press)

• Fakhry, M. (1991) Ethical Theories in Islam Leiden: Tuta Sub Aegide
Pallas

• Ghaffari,S. (1976), Shi’aism or Original Islam (Tehran: Published by
the author, Third edition. First edition was published in 1967)

• Gilsenan, Michael (2000), Recognizing Islam: Religion and Society in
the Modern Middle East (London & New York: I.B. Tauris & Co Ltd. Revised
edition. First published in 1982 by Croon Helm. Reprinted in 1990 & 1993
by I.B. Tauris & Co Ltd).

• Haleem, M.A. (1997) “Early Kalam” in History of Islamic Philosophy
Part 1, edited by Seyyed Hussein Nasr and Oliver Leaman, (London:
Routledge)

• Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarikh Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarjimah Ali (Beirut: Dar al-Fikr)

• Ibn al-Athir (1421 A.H), Al-Nihayah fi Gharib al- Hadith waal-Athar
(Al-Dammam: Dar Ibn al- Jawzi)

• Ibn al-Athir, Muhammad (1415 A.H./1995), Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh
(Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al- ‘Ilmiyah)

• Ibn Hajar, Ahmad Haythami, Al-Sawa'iq al- Muhriqah fi al-Radd ‘ala Ahl
al-Bid’ah (Beirut)

• Ibn Hajar, al-’Asqalani, Al-Isabah fi Tamyiz al- Sahabah (Beirut)

• Ibn Kathir, Isma’il (412 A.H/1992), Al-Bidayah waal-Nihayah (Beirut:
Makatabah al-Ta’aruf,)

• Ibn Khaldun, An Introduction to History (al-Muqaddamah), by Ibn
Khaldoon, English version, London, 1967 Edition.

• Ja’fariyan, R. (1985), Ukdhubat Tahrif al-Qur’an bayn al-Shi’ah wa
al-Sunnah (Tehran: Islamic Propagation Organization).

• Lalani, Arzinia R. (2000), Early Shi’i Thought: The Teachings of Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir (London: I.B. Tauris in association with The Institute
of Ismaili Studies)

• Madelung, Wilfred (2001), The Succession to Muhammad: A Study of the
Early Caliphate (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. First published
1997 and reprinted 1997 & 2001).

• Mughniyah, M.J. (1993), Al-Shi’ah fi al-Mizan (Qum:Al-Sharif al-Radi)

• Muslim, ibn al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri (1375/1956), Sahih Muslim (Beirut:
Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-Islami under supervision of Muhammad Fu’ad al-
Baqi)

• Muzaffar, M.R. (1993), The Faith of Shi’a Islam (Qum: Ansariyan
Publications).

• Nasr, S.H. (1989), Expectation of New Millennium: Shi’ism in History
(New York: State University of New York Press)

• Pavlin, J. (1997) “Sunni Kalam and theological controversies” in
History of Islamic Philosophy Part 1, edited by Seyyed Hussein Nasr and
Oliver Leaman, London: Routledge

• Richard, Yann (1991, English translation first published 1995),
Shi’ite Islam (Oxford, UK & Cambridge, USA: Blackwell Publishers)

• Subhani, Ja’far (2001), Doctrines of Shi’i Islam: A Compendium of
Imami Beliefs and Practices (London: I.B.Tauris), trans. Reza.
Shah-Kazemi

• Subhani, Ja’far, Al-Milal wa al-Nihal, Vol. 6 (Qum: Imam Sadiq Inst.)

• Tabari, Muhammad (1407 A.H), Tarikh al-Umamwa al-Muluk (Beirut: Dar
al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyah)

• Tabataba’i, S.M. H. (1975), Shi’ite Islam (Albany, New York: Sunny
Press), trans. Sayyid H. Nasr.

• Westerland, David & Svanberg, Ingvar (1999), Islam Outside the Arab
World (Richmond: Curzon Press)

**Note:**

References to hadiths from Sahih by Bukhari, Sahih by Muslim, Sunan by
al-Nisa’i, Sunan by Abu Dawud, Sunan by Ibn Majah, Sunan by al-Tirmidhi,
Sunan by al-Darimi, Musnad by Ahmad b.Hanbal are according to al-
‘Alamiyah serial number followed by Sakhr Co. in Mawsu’ah al-Hadith
al-Sharif (Version 1.1, 1991-1996).

For further reading
-------------------

**Shia i Islam: Origins, Faith and Practices**

by Mohammad A. Shomali

(London: Islamic College for Advanced Studies, 2003)

“Muslims are divided into two major groups: the majority is called Sunni
and the second Shi’ite. What are the common features in virtue of which
both groups are said to follow the religion of Islam? What are the
fundamental differences in doctrine and practice between these two
groups? Such questions are answered clearly and intelligently in this
book by a Shi’ite theologian and philosopher. This book will be of
interest to students of Islam and of religious studies generally.” (Dr.
Legenhausen)

**Love in Christianity and Islam: A Contribution to Religious Ethics**

by Mrs. Mahnaz Heydarpoor

(London: New City 2002)

“Her analysis of love in Christianity is scholarly and insightful, but
it will be her exposition of the centrality of love in Islamic theology
and ethics that will be of particular interest to many western readers,
Christians and others.

It is to be hoped that Mahnaz’s initiative will be reciprocated by many
more scholars searching, like her, for grounds for dialogue to further
mutual appreciation and understanding between Islam and Christianity.”
(Dr. Denis Bates)

ISBN: 0 904287 79 3

**Introduction to Hadith**

by ‘Abd al-Hadi al-Fadli

Translated by Mrs. Nazmina Virjee

(London: Islamic College for Advanced Studies, 2002)

This work studies the origins and development of Hadith literature. It
treats the subject of Hadith from different perspectives, such as the
historical beginning of the science, the onset of Hadith literature,
compilation of Hadith works, the terminology and methodology within the
science itself, authenticity and weakness of traditions, and the whole
phenomenon of fabrication.

The same publication also includes a translation of one of the classical
texts on the science of Hadith, Dira yat al-Hadith, by the renowned
tenth-century scholar al- Shahid al-Thani.

ISBN: 1 904063 04 7 (pb)

**Lady Fatima Masuma (A) of Qum**

by Masuma Jaffer

(Qum: Jami’at al-Zahra, 2003)

This book attempts to chroncile her life, from her birth in

173 A.H in Madina, to her death, at the young age of 28, in Qum. It
includes her biography, education and narration of traditions. It also
traces her journey from Madina to Qum.

Also included is the history and description of her shrine and a brief
look at the city of Qum.

ISBN 964-438-455-5


