Introduction
============

All economic schools of thought tirelessly strive to seek a way out of
economic distress in order to form a wealthy, prosperous nation
possessing the highest levels of education, health, and well-being.
However, the pyramid of each school of thought is elaborated upon
certain bases that are different from each other. For instance,
highlighting the Paradox of Thrift, the Keynesian perspective explains
how stagnation derives from inadequate effective demand in the aggregate
good market. Hence, the only appropriate solution to the prospect of
chronic stagnation is to employ a sort of expansionary economic policy
that can keep effective demand high. Other schools of thought may
evaluate this Keynesian solution as a drain of limited resources
diverted to unproductive activities or as a crowding out through which
the private sector loses its importance and weakens. Neoclassical
economics for one, denies the effectiveness of any kind of artificial
policy and its impact on the real economic variables, by rejecting any
kind of money illusion or rigidity in the labor market as well as by
offering the rational expectation model. Instead, it underlines the
importance of the saving rate as the most significant factor to achieve
a higher steady state growth trend. On the other hand, supply side
economists ignore both Keynesian and neoclassical approaches and focus
merely on all factors that support motivation system of the supplier to
increase production, such as the decrease of the tax rate. More
recently, knowledge-based economics puts significant emphasis on human
capital, communication as fundamental to knowledge flows, social
structures, cultural context and other factors to increase the stock of
social capital. In short, since every economic school of thought finds a
way of approaching the problem from a different individual angle, there
are different analyses of the reality of the economy and hence different
solutions and suggestions.

Although each approach reflects a sense of reality and the prescriptions
issued by it can remedy some specific economic problems, the more we can
synthesize these approaches comprehensively, the more they will reflect
reality and the more effective their remedy will appear. To achieve to a
higher standard of effectiveness, there furthermore needs to be a
worldview that connects and gathers together all components such as
ethical, political, cultural and economic subsystems in a coherent
comprehensive system. Besides, it should be capable to synthesize the
different economic perspectives.

I argue that the Islamic worldview as translated briefly in this article
is potentially able to provide a firm consistency between all subsystems
through which we can simultaneously expect an adequate effective demand
in the aggregate good market, high marginal propensity to save, and
strong motive power in the supply side. In addition, it is capable
enough to motivate society to increase the stock of human capital,
social capital, as well as strong infrastructure necessary for
development. Hence, Islamic piety not only is consistent with wealth
creation but also drives society to the highest and loftiest quality of
life possible full of respect and human dignity.

This argument never denies some realized facts concerning Muslim
countries. There is no doubt that the economic performance of Muslim
countries is quite weak. Their economies mostly rely on oil, mining, raw
materials, tourism, agricultural products and from nationals living
abroad who transfer money to relatives living in these countries. Their
residents usually suffer from the lack of a strong welfare state,
weakness of public goods as well as poverty. It seems that their
economic reform programs have already failed or have not yet started.
Although a small minority of these countries - like Indonesia, Malaysia
and Singapore - can be considered as Newly Industrialized Countries
(NICs), the importance of the Muslims’ role in their economies is only
trifle. In my opinion, no society – whether it is the modern, secular
state or the traditional, religious one – embodies Islamic teachings
enough. Therefore, although these miserable situations have been derived
from our religious culture or understandings of our religion, there is
nothing in Islam, in a pure sense, that causes these consequences.
Instead, there are many Islamic teachings that can potentially motivate
us to strengthen our economic performance and actively create wealth.
That is, Islamic teachings change our worldview evolutionally toward a
moral consciousness about humankind, affect our social views, and can
create a more just society, but they are not prescriptions for certain,
specific state actions.

In this article I would like to highlight how Islam might accomplish
such evolutions. To do that, I begin by explaining briefly the Islamic
worldview regarding economic affairs. Presenting my definition of
wealth, I clarify the importance of wealth in an Islamic assessment.
Extracting and elaborating some Islamic economic principles, I show how
this worldview can potentially drive individuals and societies toward
wealth creation. Due to the strong association between Islamic teachings
on the transcendental self and the issue of love as a necessary basis
for the mature society, it can be easily shown that a pious Muslim is
more likely motivated to produce public goods beneficial to the whole
society including himself, than to be a mere and naive profit maximizer
in an egotistic sense. It is expected that in a mature environment only
a sustainable development process will be viable to accomplish - That
is, a development process which keeps natural resources, as well as the
biological food chain and natural cycles, safe and useable for future
generations. Hence, in the last section of this article I shall explain
briefly how an Islamic environment is consistent with only a sustainable
development process.


