The Islamic worldview
=====================

Islam, as I understand it, is a comprehensive religion that concerns
both materialistic and spiritualistic aspects of life. It calls human
beings to that which will give them a new life[^1] ; a life that is good
and pure[^2] . It helps the faithful believers to set their preferences
pattern in such a state that a balance is secured between all real human
needs. It never has human beings leave the world and its affairs for the
Hereafter; on the contrary, Islam considers the current life as a farm
for the Hereafter[^3] and says: “those who were blind in this world,
will be blind in the Hereafter, and yet further and more astray from the
road.”[^4] There is no monasticism in Islam as practiced in a
monastery[^5] , instead its monasticism is a permanent effort to serve
the people selflessly and to create wealth seeking the Lord's
countenance and detaching oneself from worldly desires[^6] .

As a Muslim loves God he loves all creatures and considers them one by
one as a sign of Him and part of His kingdom created for a
transcendental aim. The Qur’an describes the true Muslims as the
following: “Men who celebrate the praises of Allah, standing, sitting,
and lying down on their sides, and contemplate the (wonders of) creation
in the heavens and the earth, (With the thought): Our Lord! Not for
naught Hast Thou created (all) this!” Thus he eagerly endeavors to
approach nature to understand it perfectly and to cooperate with it
righteously in order to direct its power toward excellent goals– not to
harm it to satisfy his desires selfishly. Therefore, the concept of the
direction of nature in the Islamic view does not necessarily match with
what Alex Campbell says[^7] of removing all natural barriers and human
norms and substituting artificial, fabricated equivalents for natural
processes. Instead, it means creating a lovely relationship between
human beings (as vicegerent of God) and nature (as their realm) leading
to companionship and accomplishment. This process of leadership and
conquering should satisfy human needs, supporting human dignity and
sustainable development, which enables individual human beings and
communities to achieve their aspirations and full potential over a
sustained period of time.

Monotheism (Tawhid), the belief in the oneness and the unity of God, is
the pivotal pillar of the Islamic worldview. It might be translated that
we should have only one ultimate goal in our life - becoming God-like by
reflecting all His beautiful names - and clearly it requires
perfectionism. Hence, during his spiritual evolution, man as a
two-dimensional being should make a journey from the basest material,
mud, approaching the most High, God. In other words, God has invited him
to pass through an important reference point, salvation. Thus, we can
imagine that he has two distinct selves in his life: an arrogant,
selfish mud-like self (when the real love is not the dominant factor);
and a God-like, selfless philanthropic self. Clearly, each specific self
requires a certain and separate corresponding rationality. The
rationality corresponding with the mud-self creates a special utility
function fully different from the utility function which comes from the
divine-self. When a household as an economic unit, evolves from
selfishness and being mud-like to salvation and being God-like, the
inferior rationality will not be effective at all and will collapse
instantaneously and

the superior rationality creates a special dynamism more powerful for
economic performance. The driving force of this rationality is still
self-interest, but a quite high-level one rooted in being God-like.
Besides, this rationality is highly exalted, nature friendly, and fully
compatible with sustainable development. On the other hand, due to
self-interest maximization in an immature person who fails to feel love
and has not yet obtained salvation, we may observe alienation, isolation
and hostility.

I would like to refer to one verse of the Quran, which clearly argues
that the individual desires derived from a low-level self-interest lead
to harm and corruption: “Corruption doth appear on land and sea because
of which men's hands have done, that He may make them taste a part of
that which they have done, in order that they may return.” We may deduce
that this corruption is only a part of the consequences of what man has
done as a result of his selfishness, and that there might be many other
bad consequences washed clean by God’s forgiveness. In other words, the
invisible hand in an immature society not only is not able to optimize
social benefits, but also it creates a great deal of harm and corruption
that surpasses our imaginations. However, most of this corruption will
be removed by God’s wisdom. The remaining corruption serves to warn the
people and deter them from being selfish.

Technically speaking, Islamic teachings affect households’ utility
function and consequently on their indifference map[^8] , not the price
mechanism function. Thus, the role of Islamic teachings on consumer’s
behavior formally is very similar to company’s advertising even though
they are very different in content.


