The definition of wealth
========================

Although wealth is a stock concept, it relates more to the flow dynamic
of resources and capabilities while richness relates more to the static
point of absolute value. The simplest definition of wealth might be that
it is any lasting asset or stable capability that is valued by people
and assists them in achieving the ultimate goal of their lives
individually and collectively. Therefore, it includes both tangible
assets like cars and houses as well as intangible capabilities such as
the stock of human capital, social capital or access to essential
services such as health care, public goods, and information technology
infrastructure.

The importance of wealth in an Islamic assessment
-------------------------------------------------

Islam respects wealth and considers it as an invaluable means needed for
maintenance of life. Hence, a considerable part of its teachings
concentrates on this issue including its importance, its distribution,
its consumption, and so on. The key issue in this regard is that wealth
is nothing more than a necessary means to approach our goal, to be
God-like. With this consideration, the wealthier we are, the more
powerfully we can pursue and realize our ultimate goal. This, indeed, is
the real meaning of progressive self-detachment. Wealth, according to
The Qur’an, is a vital element for the society’s existence so that the
lack of sufficient wealth jeopardizes its firmness and its
consistency[^9] . Therefore, the virtue of positive and progressive
self-detachment does not demand being poor at all, instead it requires
casting out from the heart the desire for wealth as an ultimate goal
rather than as a necessary means. In this way, one reaches for a high
level of spirituality, being God’s vicegerent and the object of angels’
prostration. In addition, this virtue is exhibited when wealth is
employed to empower people to progress from a low level of strength,
fitness or co-ordination on a journey that enables them to achieve their
goals and improve their quality of life. Thus, the wealthiest person,
say Solomon, can be called self-detached when he loves the Lord with all
his heart, with all his soul, with all his might. Jalaludin Rumi, one of
the greatest Iranian poets, makes a very nice example in this regard and
says: “Water in the boat is the ruin of the boat, but water under the
boat is its support… The stoppered jar, though in rough water, floated
because of its empty heart. Thus, when the wind of self-detachment is in
anyone, she floats in peace on the waters of this world.”

It is very important to mention that human beings, in accordance with
Shiat doctrine of predestination, are agents with free-will but subject
to some determinism imposed by reality. In other words, humans have
control over their lives and are able to make decisions. These
decisions, however, are always subject to some constraints and under
uncertainty. This is because there are many factors that involve the
implementation of the decisions which may speed up, retard or even stop
them. Therefore, a Muslim should optimize righteously the mathematical
expectation of his target function based on the distribution of
probabilities, even though the result is not clear except in God’s
Omniscience. Thus, this doctrine rejects both extremes, extreme
free-will and extreme determinism, and accepts that there is a variable
degree of choice for each person depending on his

internal and external (genetic and environmental) factors. Being
responsible with our lives and our decisions motivates us to be strong
enough to realize them.

No doubt wealth carries a sort of power which does not deserve to be
neglected. Therefore, all people who wish to become God-like must attend
deeply and strongly to be powerful and creative in order to drive
society toward both justice and growth and to create a living
environment full of hope and dignity seeking the elimination of poverty
from the earth. This approach to wealth is obviously inconsistent with
seeing it as a potential source of corruption, as it is seen in some
closed worldviews. On the contrary, this endowment is a source of a
lofty mission to embrace life and brotherhood and to enrich the lives of
others through our excessive endeavors. Nonetheless, we are responsible
for the process not the result, because the realization of such a divine
mission depends on determinisms over our circumstances, as well as being
indebted to our endeavors. Thus, we can hardly place the blame on the
person who suffers from a lack of wealth. Therefore, in an Islamic
assessment, the state of being wealthy or indigent is considered as a
test[^10] for both parties; it tests the wealthy to share their wealth
with others and drive society toward prosperity, and tests the indigent
to change their situation and move from misery toward happiness
patiently. Furthermore, it is the responsibility of all people to find
the best solution to keep the society free from injustice, tyranny and
corruption, because there is a large tendency toward polarization under
such circumstances.

Knowledge as an excellent example of wealth
-------------------------------------------

Since wealth includes both tangible and intangible assets and
capabilities, Islam attaches importance to a complex portfolio of
different kinds of wealth. In other words, it is more important to have
an optimal combination of material and spiritual assets in the portfolio
of society than to have a very large quantity of wealth but not in
optimal conditions. Hence, Islam carries out a comprehensive scheme to
remove all deprivation that serves as a burden and yoke[^11] . The
priority in its scheme, I argue, is toward the increase of the stock of
human capital and social capital, because the shortage of them can be
counted as the most intolerable aspects of deprivation. The other aspect
of wealth such as physical and monetary capital can do nothing if there
is not enough stock of human and social capital. It encourages people to
strive against the demon of ignorance, such as when The Qur’an swears:
“By the pen and that which they write (therewith)[^12] .” The Qur’an
also reproaches the people for not observing the creation of animals,
heaven, earth, and so on[^13] . It praises the merits of knowledge and
the exaltation of the scholars’ statuses in more than one Verse, for
instance it says: God will exalt those of you who believe, and those who
have knowledge to high ranks[^14] . In addition, there are many hadiths
(traditions) of Holy Prophet of Islam regarding knowledge and
encouraging the Muslims to develop the breadth and the depth of their
knowledge, skills and experience. He says: “Seek knowledge even in (as
far away as) China” or “Seeking knowledge is obligatory upon every
Muslim. Verily, God likes the knowledge seekers[^15] ”. There is the
following maxim in Islamic culture: “seek knowledge from the

cradle to the grave”. In addition, He always seized every opportunity to
improve the level of Muslims’ skills. For instance, He decided to set
some educated slaves free in return for the literacy of ten Muslims per
person. He also sent some Muslims abroad to be skilled in some
industries.

Generally speaking, the establishment of necessary infrastructures and
especially the enhancement of knowledge and science as the basis of
knowledge-based development have been strongly highlighted in Islamic
sources. It emphasizes knowledge and sciences so much that it is argued
that Roger Bacon established his experimental method, considered as a
vital requirement for Western Enlightenment and Renaissance on the basis
of his long studies of Islam and The Qur’an[^16] .


