The capability of the Islamic worldview regarding wealth creation
=================================================================

In parallel with the vision of introducing a wide, deep and progressive
worldview and with the mission of constructing a world of prosperity by
developing its potential in the best way, Islam provides an effective
framework for positive activities. The main elements of this framework
can be derived here as principles important for wealth creation.

1) The balance of Hope and Fear
-------------------------------

To live by the Islamic principles, a Muslim should weigh his
expectations in the balance of hope and fear – hope for God’s mercy due
to His Oft-forgiveness, and fear of God’s wrath due to our sins and a
lack of value. Any imbalance might reduce an activity’s rate of return.
For example, if a person is very hopeful for salvation, she will not
feel a strong motivation to work because she feels that she is already
guaranteed salvation. Likewise, if a person loses her hope she will not
be able to pursue her goal at all. Hence, Islam is a religion of works
and it requires that its followers play an active role in their lives
because: “Every soul is a pledge for its own deeds”. In other words,
although Islamic piety originates from the bottom of the heart, it
should be embodied in the believer’s deeds and behaviors as much as
possible; otherwise it has no fruit and will perish gradually. The Koran
quite often states that “Allah is most merciful”; yet a Muslim, due to
the Shiat doctrine of predestination, must still be mindful of the seeds
planted by his actions. Since work is exalted as the means of pleasing
God, the believer must labor zealously with no assurance of salvation.
Hence, God uses good deeds accompanied with faith in many verses in the
Koran to show that the faith is only a necessary condition for salvation
but it needs good deeds to flourish; so the adherence to both good deeds
and a solid belief in God is the exclusive way to salvation.

This incertitude of salvation, derived from the balance of hope and
fear, provides a strong motivation for Muslims to do their best with
regard to themselves and their society. And since Islam is a
comprehensive religion and relates to economic, political, social and
cultural aspects of his life, the Muslim can pursue all these activities
and feel that his work is pious and in the service of God. Thus, the
Islamic worldview rearranges his utility function in so lofty and
transcendental a manner that all good deeds and services make him happy
and satisfied. In fact, he regards himself as God’s servant by his grace
and honor and it demands that he love people and offer his services to
them. Such an exalted utility function will increase his nation’s wealth
and will accumulate the stock of capital while no corruption will
appear.

2) An optimum portfolio of ownership
------------------------------------

Islam offers a quite elaborate plan of ownership. In this plan, the real
and absolute ownership over the whole universe belongs exclusively to
God. Humankind, as His vicegerent or steward, however, is authorized to
use all this on behalf of Him to carry out the Islamic mission. Thus, in
the light of this teaching a Muslim discovers a vast spiritual vocation
to employ His

Almighty trust to fulfill his mission with pleasure, not to satisfy
those utilities derived from his selfishness.

To realize its complex mission in the context of its vision, Islam
acknowledges different forms of property rights simultaneously and lays
down the principle of multi-faceted ownership. Thus Islam differs
essentially from capitalism which respects unlimited private ownership
as a key economic principle and focuses merely on efficiency and capital
accumulation but does not concern itself at all with the Issue of social
justice and the fatal, widening income gap. Although capitalism
recognizes nationalization and public ownership too, these are
exclusively legitimate in the case of social necessity. Islam also
differs from socialism, which is biased toward public ownership as a
main economic principle and which avoids recognizing private property
rights over the means of production. Even if this school of thought
satisfies the egalitarian distribution of wealth, it fails to satisfy
political or economic freedoms as well as prosperity for a populace,
because of its inefficiency (see: Hayek, 2001).

To benefit from maximum efficiency of economic performance while
satisfying social justice, Islam sets up an optimum portfolio of
different forms of ownership. It respects private property rights for
economic activities as a key element of its multi-faceted principle and
permits nothing to blemish it. This facet of ownership obviously
guarantees motivation at the maximum level. In the meantime, in accord
with Shiat jurisprudence, some natural resources and initial endowments
such as deserts, mines, coasts and even desolate places -in some cases-
belong to the legitimate Islamic government.  By proper reallocation and
redistribution, these properties are employed as an effective lever to
enhance social justice and to eliminate the deprivation of basic
capabilities under the supervision of the Islamic government. Some other
natural resources, especially renewable ones, such as forests,
fisheries, and oceans, belong to public. The government can intervene in
public properties as well as state properties in order to maximize the
level of social benefit.

The question of rent seeking and corruption, as a result of government
interference in redistribution of initial endowments, is a very
appropriate question. The extent of rent seeking, however, depends on
the degree of maturity of the society. In an advanced mature
society—where people adhere to ethical principles enthusiastically and
the legitimate, pious statesmen are dedicated to providing outstanding
service to the society and there exists strong social over-head
institutions such as mass media that critically monitor the functioning
of the government—there is no toehold for rent seeking or corruption at
all. Moreover, this sort of intervention never deviates the price
mechanism, because it is a kind of lump-sum transfer of wealth before
markets can reach a particular Pareto efficient allocation; as a matter
of fact, it solves a market failure problem (See: Arrow, 1951).

3) The value of the practice and work
-------------------------------------

Islam is a religion of practice and it has already been pointed out that
faith, in spite of its power, is fruitless and a dead end without good
deeds and practice. It will lose its motivation power and its liveliness
gradually, if

it remains out of practice. As a matter of fact, Islam supports positive
not negative piety. Islam always warns against superficial concepts and
rituals, against lifeless formalities and non-effective beliefs. In one
representative verse God explains the full meaning of positive piety and
righteousness as follows: “It is not righteousness that you turn your
faces (in prayer) towards East or West; but it is righteousness to
believe in God and the Last day, and the Angels and the Book, and the
Messengers; to spend of your wealth – in spite of your love for it – for
your kin, for orphans, for the needy, for the wayfarer, for those who
ask, and for the ransom of slaves; to be steadfast in prayer and
practice regular charity; to fulfill the contracts which you have made;
and to be firm and patient, in pain and adversity and throughout all
periods of panic. Such are the people of truth, the God – minded”[^17] .
In this verse there is a beautiful and clear description of the
righteous believer. It gives an understandable indication that the
effective faith should be embodied in meritorious services and
behaviors, not in senseless ritual and customs, and that the practice
provides faith with nourishment in return. Hence, being a truly pious
and righteous Muslim requires being a good citizen by supporting
charitable institutions and social organizations solidly and loyally in
all circumstances, as well as being obedient to God and being generous
and kind to people sincerely and with love. In short, righteousness is
not merely an empty declaration but rather it must be founded on strong
faith and constant practice.

4) The dynamism of love
-----------------------

The ongoing challenge amongst Islamic economists is staying focused on
the price mechanism and hence the optimality of the market outcome.
Where there are unlimited wants but scarcity of resources, needless to
say that there should be an institution through which all claims may be
adjusted by either the invisible or the visible hand to maintain a
balance between limited resources and the claims on them. Moreover, this
institution should fit and be in harmony with other components of the
whole system as well as the worldview, the strategy, and goals for which
this system is generated. Otherwise, it sounds like a package of loosely
connected items!

In the ideal laissez-faire capitalist economy, as we know, the price
mechanism is an exclusive efficient filter to allocate scarce resources
to satisfy unlimited wants. Socialism, on the other hand, believes that
the price system alone is too blind to meet socio-economic goals so it
necessarily leads to frustration. Thus, under this school of thought the
slow and heavy public sector undertakes the duty of resource allocation
through central planning, even though this is inefficient. As a moderate
point of view, some Islamic economists such as Chapra (1992) portray the
Islamic economy as an ideal system in which individuals benefit from a
broad array of economic freedoms, including the right to private
ownership and the liberty to trade at freely negotiated terms. At the
same time, it requires individuals “to pass all claims on resources
through the filter mechanism of Islamic values” (p. 335). In other
words, as Rice (1999, 346) illustrates Chapra’s (1992) point of view:
“the Islamic worldview implies that the market system should be
maintained, but that the price mechanism be complemented with a device
that minimizes unnecessary claims on resources. This device is
the*moral*

*filter* . This means that people would pass their potential claims on
resources through the*filter of Islamic values* so that many claims
would be eliminated before being expressed in the marketplace. Resources
would not be allowed to be diverted to the production of luxuries until
the production of necessities was ensured in sufficient quantities
(Siddiqi, 1981). The definition of luxurious or extravagant is related
to the average standards of consumption in a society, the idea being
that large departure from the standards would not be permissible.”

I beg to differ slightly with Chapra’s argument. I think that the filter
that minimizes claims on limited resources is still the price mechanism
and there is no need to employ any complementary devices. Nevertheless,
an ethical system always changes and impacts on the preferences pattern
and consumers’ behavior hence their utility function or revealed
preferences. For instance, a committed (or purposive) Muslim who loves
serving people in order to seek the pleasure of God may be expected not
to express demands for luxurious goods in the marketplace. In other
words, his commitment requires him to shape his target function[^18] in
a way that coordinates with his mission and his ultimate goal.

Accord with this analysis, such a divine fount of revealed preferences
distinguishes a typical Muslim’s behavior from that of a secular person.
For instance, instead of pursuing the inter-temporal preferences of an
ordinary (immature or secular) person, the Muslim’s propensity to save
is quite high so that he reduces his present consumption and invests it
for unborn generations’ consumption. Therefore, the market of such a
society shows a much stronger demand for capital goods than for
consumption goods. Thus, on the one hand, the members of an Islamic
mature society increase their labor supply and employ their whole
endowments to access more efficient technology in production, while on
the other hand, the piety and the Islamic value of thrift drive them not
to increase the demand for consumption goods. Instead, the sense of
social responsibility and the commitment to new generations’ prosperity
motivate them to increase the demand for capital goods and hence an
equilibrium between supply and demand will appear. Therefore, the extra
supply of this market is absorbed in such a way that the society’s
Production Possibility Frontier (PPF) expands, due to the increase of
various kind of capital and to the access to more efficient technology.
In this model, there is no need to worry about the*Paradox of Thrift,*
because the source of this paradox—the inadequateness of effective
demand—is obviously absent here on account of the adequate effective
demand for capital goods. More technically speaking, a society that is
more farsighted and more concerned with developing future wellness
programs, in order to accomplish the divine mission, requires working
harder with a much higher propensity to save.  Based on the turnpike
theorem and the economic literature of growth, the higher rate of
propensity to save a society has, the more accelerating growth trend it
can realize. Therefore, it is strongly expected that an Islamic society
experiences a sharp growth trend coinciding with sustainable development
when it unifies all aspects of life and all functional institutions
following the Islamic worldview.

In addition, the strong love for God and for serving people, which
originates from the mature form of self-interest, reduces the utility of
leisure time for a devoted Muslim, because he should seize every
opportunity serve people as beloved creatures of God. Thus, the motive
power of love drives him to produce more and more and the characteristic
function of Supply Side Economists will be satisfied. Besides, he has
learned many invaluable lessons of the Islamic tradition which teach him
to avoid being idle or less productive, such as:

Continual self-improvement (Imam Ali: He whose two days are equal is a
sure loser.)

No tolerance for idleness (Apostle of Islam: God does not like those who
spend their time for nothing.)

Excellence and quality of work, no tolerance for negligent behavior
(Apostle of Islam: God likes that when someone does anything, it must be
done perfectly well.)

To demonstrate the contribution of Islamic piety, in a positive sense,
to wealth creation and the support of public goods in order to please
Almighty God, rather than to satisfy the inferior desires that come from
the mud-like self, I would like to offer two examples:

1) Both Sunni and Shiat consider Ali Ibn Abi Talib as an aesthetic
detachment from worldly concerns and as a major role model for the
standard of piety and nobility of character. Whereas a simple meal of a
single barley loaf sufficed him when he was working hard in his
plentiful farms and palms in Yanbu, Nakhilah, Wadi Tura 'a, and so on,
many needy people were surviving on his income and enjoying his food
(See: Al-Asqalani III p. 271). He dug many springs and cultivated many
lands, but he endowed them generously in favor of poor people.

2) I consider Professor Muhammad Yunus, the founder of Grameen Bank, as
a good example of positive monasticism. Detaching himself from a
comfortable life as a typical professor, he dedicated and dedicates his
time and his energy to provide the people of the poor class with a
decent life full of human dignity.  His bank and the micro-credit policy
which he adopted have greatly affected the lives of his people in
Bangeladesh and beyond.


