The consistency of Islamic piety with sustainable development
=============================================================

Inviting all people to a progressive mission, The Qur’an depicts two
extremely opposite kind of people and their missions:

The most rigid of opponents: they concentrate their efforts to make
mischief in the land and destroy crops and cattle (thus destroying the
environment), when given an opportunity to rule over a land[^19] ;

The loftiest human beings: they employ their utmost endeavors and donate
themselves entirely to God’s way, which requires serving people seeking
His pleasure.[^20]

Of course, the full Islamic mission, i.e. reflecting all God’s beautiful
names, will never be accomplished[^21] . Therefore, there is no end
point in front of a Muslim to stop. Consequently, he is passionately
committed to exhibit His names throughout his life as much as he can.
Therefore, in the economic domain, he tirelessly attempts to embody His
creative characteristics and gracefully utilizes the widespread
endowments bestowed by God. In this regard The Qur’an says: “He (God)
brought you forth from the earth and has made you husband and develop
it”[^22] . Since the Muslim’s attention has been focused on the loftiest
objective, he endeavors to direct society toward prosperity and create
sufficient wealth in the form of public or private goods vital for a
living and stable society. He never damages the natural resources
corruptly or exploits them extravagantly or wastefully. In contrast,
when he gets involved in exploiting endowments, he invests in them; he
helps them grow, flourish and reach their potential. His involvement in
nature and society brings about activities and improvements, not
environmental destruction.

In general, the ultimate socio-economic goal in the Islamic mission
derived from The Qur’an and other Islamic sources is the high quality of
life coinciding necessarily with social justice, brotherhood, and mutual
interdependence. The best strategy to fulfill this goal is to put
emphasis on building and increasing the stock of human capital and
social capital hence – as Choudhary (2002, 127) argues – the
establishment of the functional capacity for understanding and
implementing systemically unitary practices and concepts in accordance
with the epistemology of divine unity (Tawhid). To achieve this target
and to conquer or remove obstacles such as ignorance, motivelessness,
and alienation, there is a vital need to focus and concentrate on human
resource development in order to build and foster moral consciousness.


