Notes
=====

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] The Qur’an, 8:24: O ye who believe! Give your response to Allah and
His Messenger, when He calleth you to that which will give you life.

[^2] The Qur’an 16:97: Whosoever doeth right, whether male or female,
and is a believer, him verily We shall quicken with good life.

[^3] The apostle of Islam says: “the world is as a farm for Hearafter.”

[^4] The Qur’an 17:72

[^5] Behar-ul Anwar (Arabic)

[^6] Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal (Arabic)

[^7] Alex Campbell: To conquer nature is, in effect, to remove all
natural barriers and human norms and to substitute artificial,
fabricated equivalents for natural processes.

(Quoted by:
http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/a/alexcampbe[^287769]:html)

[^8] An indifference map is a set of indifference curves. An
indifference curve is a collection of bundles of goods that yield the
same utility to a consumer.

[^9] The Qur’an, 4:5: To those weak of understanding Make not over your
property, which Allah hath made a means of support for you.

[^10] For example, see The Qur’an, 6:165: He (God) it is who hath placed
you as viceroys of the earth and hath exalted some of you in rank above
others, that He may try you by (the test of) that which He hath given
you.

[^11] The Qur’an, 7:157: Those who follow the messenger, the Prophet who
can neither read nor write, whom they will find described in the Torah
and the Gospel (which are) with them. He will enjoin on them that which
is right and forbid them that which is wrong. He will make lawful for
them all good things and prohibit for them only the foul; and he will
relieve them of their burden and the fetters that they used to wear.
Then those who believe in him, and honor him and help him, and follow
the light which is sent down with him: they are the successful.

[^12] The Qur’an, 68:1

[^13] The Qur’an, 88:17-20

[^14] The Qur’an, 58:11

[^15] (Related by Ibn ‘Adiyy, Al-Bayhaqi and Al-Tabarani).

[^16] Briffault (1928,200-1 ) says: “it was under their successors at
that Oxford school that Roger Bacon learned Arabic and Arabic science.
Neither Roger Bacon nor his later namesake has any title to be credited
with having introduced the experimental method. Roger Bacon was no more
than one of the apostles of Muslim science and method to Christian
Europe; and he never wearied of declaring that a knowledge of Arabic and
Arabian science was for his contemporaries the only way to true
knowledge. Discussions as to who was the originator of the experimental
method . are part of the colossal misrepresentation of the origins of
European civilization. The experimental method of the Arabs was by
Bacon’s time widespread and eagerly cultivated throughout Europe”. See
also Iqbal (1995,56),

[^17] Koran, 2:177

[^18] Although I believe that target function and utility function are
one and the same, I avoid using utility function in order to show that
the fount (birthplace, source) of target for a committed Muslim and a
secular are not the same.

[^19] The Qur’an, 2:203-4

[^20] The Qur’an, 2:207

[^21]   It is because all God’s names are indefinite (unlimited) and can
not be embodied in limited world.

[^22] The Qur’an, 11:61
