Lesson 9: Allah's Omniscience More knowledge - more benefit?
============================================================

Mighty and powerful bulldozers which are used in building, and which
have various important uses, testify to the knowledge of their designer
and manufacturers. We must agree that the inventor was very well
acquainted with the laws of mechanics the various alloys of metals and
the formula of physics. All that is made by man reflects the
intelligence and knowledge of its maker. The better and more efficient
the product the wider and more complete the knowledge of its maker.

Something beyond compare
------------------------

The grandeur and mystery of creation cannot be compared to a bulldozer
or other man-made artifacts. The infinite details seen in the beings and
objects of the universe indicate the unlimited knowledge of God. Let us
examine the following:

1. Newton said that a study of the components of the ear and the eye
would lead us to understand that the maker of the ear was thoroughly
acquainted with the laws of acoustics, and that the maker of the eye was
thoroughly acquainted with the laws of light and vision. A study of the
heavenly bodies, he said, would lead us to understand the Truth, which
governs the universe.

2. The physiology of the bat is full of amazing things. In order to be
able to find its way in the dark without running into obstacles, the
animal sends out ultrasonic waves in front of itself rather like radar.
If there is an obstacle in the way the sound waves reach it and are
reflected back, and thus the bat can steer clear of the obstacle.

3. Although insects are very small, they are very delicate and wonderful
in their structure. For example, some of them, instead of eyes with one
lens, have compound eyes made up of individual visual units called
ommatids every one of which has three parts: a cornea, a lens and a
retina.

The number of ommatids varies between trisects. Glow-worms have about
2,500, but in others there can be between 10,000 and 28,000. Because
insects cannot rotate their heads, they can be permitted, by these
compound eyes, to see things, which happen, beside them or behind them.

The above examples show that the creator of the world undertook His
creation in His perfect wisdom and infinite knowledge.

Does God know all the things after He has created them? And the answer
is, yes, of course He does. God knows about things, whatever their place
and whenever they happen. He is aware of the shining of the furthest
star in the highest heaven.

The tempestuousness of the foaming blue waves breaking on the furthest
shores of the ocean, of the most mysterious hollows of the most remote
valleys in the folds of the mountains of the rustling of even one leaf
in the gentle breeze. He is aware of the doleful coo of the owl in the
deepest silence of tile forest. He is also aware of the flicker of the
glow-worm among the leaves, of the innumerable fish with their infinite
colors and variety in all the waters of the world. He is aware, of the
birth of the fawn of the honey-colored gazelle, in the depths of the
forest. He is aware, of the falling of the clear, pearly dewdrop from
the petal of the half-opened rosebud, in the recess of the rocks. He
knows the height of the mountains, the covering of the sky, the expanse
of the lands and the seas and the treasures of the mines, the hidden
depths of the caves and of all and everything.

How beautiful is the word of God!

***He knows what is in the land and sea; not a leaf falls, but He knows
it. Not a grain in the earths shadows, Not a thing, fresh or withered,
but it is in a Book Manifest. (ch. 6. V. 59)***

The evidence of God's knowledge
-------------------------------

He who creates and gives existence is aware of His creation and always
attends to it, in the same way, as we are not unaware of the forms we
create in our own imaginations. As long as we wish them to exist, they
remain in our minds, but when we turn our attention away from them, they
cease to exist. If you imagine a person, you are necessarily aware of
all his movements and his resting. His actions are never hidden from
your mind, because this imaginary person is your creation, that is, he
was not in your mind before you thought of him, and you brought him into
you mind by your imagination.

God, who created the world and all of creation, whose existence comes
from Him, oversees it all and is never unaware of it. There is a great
difference between us who imagine various forms in our minds and God,
who created the universe. We ourselves depend on God for our existence,
and our existence comes from Him. However, God is independent of all
things and has given existence to all things. It is for this reason that
He is called the real creator.

The difference between Creator and Maker
----------------------------------------

The maker of the computer is not the creator and did not give it its
existence; his only skill was that he gave a new form to what was
already in existence. He was not aware of the computations and the
information that will be stored in it in the future.

Similarly, other inventors, discoverers and artisans are not informed of
all the minutiae of the movements and resting of what they have made,
because they have not given existence to them, they have not brought
them from non-existence into existence.

The raw materials were already in existence in the world. Only, by
analyzing and constructing, they have changed their form. Take the case
of the airplane, which is made from raw materials in mines, which were
extracted, smelted and forged and made into the finished product.

Clearly, then, the makers did not create what they made; they only
changed the form of the materials. For this reason they are not
permanently aware of their artifacts, and one cannot, therefore,
properly call them creators. If, in some cases they have to be called
creators, they have only been called so figuratively, not literally.

But God, Who has given existence to all things, is always aware and
knowledgeable of their, actions, because He is the real and true
creator. The Holy Qur’an says:

***“Shall He not know who created?” (67:14)***

Now we have understood that we, ourselves and all the creatures of this
world are not separated from the glorious presence of God. Wherever we
are, and to whatever land we travel, in the depths of the oceans, in the
outer reaches of space, in the narrow places of the valleys, we are not
hidden from Him. He sees the smallest of our good or bad deeds, and
rewards and punishes accordingly.

Can someone who knows God and believes in Him fall prey to sin?

Questions
---------

1. What type of things indicates the ultimate knowledge of God?

2. The maker of the car was familiar with the laws of acoustics?

3. What was the maker of the eye familiar with?

4. How does the bat steer clear of the obstacles even though it cannot
see?

5. What are ommatids?

6. How can insects see behind themselves without rotating their heads?

7. Does God know all things after creating those things?

8. Can you give a few examples of some of the things that God knows of?

9. Who gave existence to all things?

10. What does The Holy Qur’an say about God?

11. Are we separated from the Holy Presence of God?

12. Can we ever be hidden from God anywhere?

13. How does God reward and punish people?


