Lesson 10: The Unique in Power and Strength
===========================================

The Wide and Mysterious Universe
--------------------------------

A little reflection on the creation of each of the objects of existence
will reveal to our minds the unique power of the Creator. As examples,
consider the following:

1. The defence system of the body has for a long time attracted the
attention of physiologists. The body's defense system is a complicated
one consisting of the lymph glands, the thymus the spleen, the liver and
the bone marrow. The cells of these parts of the body, despite the
difference in their structure, follow a common aim, viz. defending the
body against foreign elements such as microbes and poisons. In this
task, the white blood cells, found in their greatest concentration in
the lymph glands, play a vital role. When a foreign body enters the
organism the white blood cells, which are about 7 to 30 microns in
diameter rush immediately to the site of the invasion, and, in various
ways, prevent an increase in the danger.

To help these cells the body follows different ways in the fight against
foreign elements, and to combat each foreign substance it manufactures
antibodies. The antibodies made in the body are of different sorts. Some
of them are for the destroying of microbes and their elimination; some
of them neutralize animal, insect and chemical poisons. Some stop the
activity of microbes, and others separate out the poisonous substances
in microbes and other noxious bodies. Yet another kind comes into action
when blood from an incompatible blood group enters the body.

The point is that the body can manufacture suitable antibodies against
all kinds of foreign substances, even those which are as yet unknown to
modern science.

2. The Director of the Leon Observatory on Mount Palomar in Arizona has
said:

“As long as the telescope of this observatory had not been invented, the
range of the visible universe was not more than five hundred light
years, but this telescope has extended this range to one thousand
million light years. As a result, millions of new galaxies have been
found, and some of these are a thousand million light years from us. But
beyond this distance there is a great, dark, fearful expanse in which
nothing can be seen. That is to say that no light comes from it, which
leaves its traces on the photographic plates of the telescope. But,
without doubt, there are hundreds of millions of galaxies, by the force
of whose gravity the universe is held together.

“The whole of this immense visible universe which contains a hundred
thousand million galaxies is nothing but a small and insignificant speck
in a still more immense universe, and I am not sure that we shall not
find beyond that yet another universe.”

Ali ibn Abu Talib the first Imam, said: “We are not able to fathom the
depths of Your Greatness. Only we know that You are Living and
Everlasting that neither slumber nor sleep takes hold of You.

'No sight can reach You, and no eye can see You, but You see the eyes,
and reckon the time-span of everything. The heads and feet of man are in
Your hold.

What is it that we see of Your Creation? What is the Power that causes
us to wonder? What can we describe of Your Ruling? Those parts which are
hidden from us, which our eyes cannot reach, which our minds cannot
comprehend, which are covered by curtains of concealment, are more
magnificent.”

Indeed. The unique Power of Allah has brought everything into existence.
And nothing falls outside the area of His command. The world exists by
the Will of Allah, and it will continue to exist as long as He desires.
The stars, the moon, the sun and the other heavenly bodies move round by
His Power, and the amazing order of the universe is entirely in His
hands. He is able to change it to a new order whenever He wishes. It is
not the case that He created the world and then abandoned it. The
rotation, growth, pulsation, existence and sustenance of everything are
from His Will. Nothing can happen without His willing nor can anything
remain in existence. The One who brings things into existence, Who
sustains them and governs them is Allah.

An Order Superior to the Natural One
------------------------------------

It is true that Allah has laid down a natural order for this universe,
according to which it is possible to anticipate the future but in
certain circumstances, Allah manifests His wide-ranging Power, and by
His Will creates a superior order which can dominate the existing order.
Instances of this superior order can be seen from history and in
everyday life:

In these cases, in fact, the hand of Allah is at work in the universe;
at times He raises those who have fallen, and at other times He causes
those who are elevated to be cast down. It is for this reason that those
who have a strong faith in the powerful God do not become disappointed
in life. In whatever situation they find themselves, in the darkness of
despair, the flame of hope is alight, and they are confident that they
will find deliverance through the help of God.

We have all read or heard the story of Moses and Pharaoh. Pharaoh was
unequalled in cruelty. He killed the sons of the Israelites so that the
promised one of the children of Israel, who, he had heard, would come to
destroy his throne and crown would not come into the worldly life. He
thought that by these contrivances, by persistence and through the
natural order he could counteract the Power of God. But his efforts were
in vain. At last the promised one was born.

The mother of the child was inspired to place him in a box and to cast
him onto the waters of the Nile. The river carried him down to the
palace of Pharaoh and the eyes of Pharaoh’s wife caught sight of the
box. She took it out of the water. When she saw the infant in it, she
asked Pharaoh to take the child as their own son, and Pharaoh agreed.
The powerful hand of God kept the child of whom Pharaoh was so afraid in
his very lap, till he grew up, became strong and brought down the crown
of the Pharaoh.

Similarly, the Power of God caused the vain efforts and devices of the
brothers of Yusuf to come to nothing. Yusuf fell down into the well, but
he was raised to a high position in the land of Egypt.

The unbelievers of Mecca joined hands to do away with the Prophet of
Islam. They began to make trouble for the Muslims, and even applied
economic sanctions against the Prophet and his followers for several
years in the valley of the mountains of Abu Talib. Eventually they
decided to murder the Prophet, thinking that by such subterfuges they
could achieve something. But the Will and Power of God preserved the
Prophet, and He caused Islam to prosper day by day, and brought down the
Quraysh and the disbelievers.

These and other examples lead to the truth that the order of this world
is in the hands of God, and that when it is according to His wish, He
can cause a new order to rule over the normally existing order.

Therefore, our minds and our consciences demand that we humble ourselves
before this Great and Beneficent Power, act in all obedience and avoid
opposing our Creator. The powerful hand of God has moved us through
various stages and has brought us to our present stage of intelligence
and ability. Is it right that we should forget Him?

One who knows God, acknowledging that he has such a Wise and Powerful
helper, will not fear any difficulty The most complex and difficult
problems can be solved by him, and consequently he will try to reach his
aim with unflinching determination arising from his faith in God. He
will not be afraid of any obstacles, for he sees himself in the shade of
a great Power, which will enable him to overcome all difficulties.

Belief in God and His unique power enabled the Prophet to fight large
groups single-handed, to stand firm against difficult circumstances, so
that he could build the structure of tawhid and a program for life. In
this way he was able to establish humanity and virtue.

A man whose heart is overflowing with faith in the Creator of the world,
and is filled with love for the Truth will never feel alone,
disappointed or without hope, and the light of God will always
illuminate the corners of his heart. Obviously, such a man will make
himself ready for a better and more virtuous life with unbounded
enthusiasm.

***Those who have said, “Our Lord is God,” and are steadfast in their
belief need have no fear or be grieved (46:13).***

***They will be the dwellers of Paradise wherein they will live forever
as a reward for what they have done (46:14).***

***To those who have said, “God is our Lord, “ and who have remained
steadfast to their belief, the angels will descend saying, “Do not be
afraid or grieved. Receive the glad news of the Paradise, which was
promised to you (41:30).***

***We are your guardians in this world and in the life to come, where
you will have whatever you call for, (41:31)***

***a hospitable welcome from the All-forgiving and All-merciful God”
(41:32).***

Questions
---------

1. What does the defence system of the body do?

2. Which parts of the body work for the defence of the body?

3. What is the size of the white blood cells?

4. In how many ways do the defenders of the body defend?

5. What do the white blood cells do when a foreign body enters the
organism?

6. Which organs of the body manufacture antibodies?

7. Do the defenders of the body just destroy the enemy or use other
methods also?

8. How much was the range of the universe before modern telescopes?

9. According to the director of Leon observatories how large is the size
of the visible universe?

10. How many galaxies does the visible universe have?

11. According to Imam Ali can anyone comprehend the greatness of Allah?

12. Does Allah according to Imam Ali slumber or sleep?

13. Why can no one comprehend the great power of Allah?

14. Is it possible to predict the future of a creature by the help of
natural laws?

15. Does Allah’s superior order dominate the existing order?

16. Why could pharaoh not destroy Moses?

17. Who frustrated the bad intentions of the brothers of Yusuf?

18. Why could the unbelievers of Mecca not defeat the Prophet of Islam?

19. Which power gives genuine comfort to the hearts of faithful people?

20. Who will never feel alone?


