Lesson 13: The Just God
=======================

From previous lessons we have read and learned that:

1) Creation and its marvellous harmony is a veritable evidence of the
existence of an Omnipotent and Omniscient God.

2) We cannot encompass without finite minds and wisdom the Omnipotence
and Omniscience of God, because what we understand. From the unique
power and knowledge of God in the world of creation is only a small part
of the great and magnificent totality of His creations, each one of
which is evidence for His unlimited Power and infinite Wisdom.

3) Unlike the continual need of all creation, God is the Absolutely
Needless, and He stands in need of nothing.

4) Because God has boundless love, He is continually bestowing His
favours on his servants.

***Allah is He Who made the earth a resting place for you and the heaven
a canopy, and He formed you, then made goodly your form and He provided
you with goodly things; that is Allah, your Lord, blessed then is Allah,
the Lord of the Worlds. (40:64).***

One may ask if 'it is possible for God, Who bestows all these favours on
his servants, to be unjust? We know that injustice stems from ignorance,
weakness arrogance or similar causes, none of which can exist in His
Pure Existence. If we seek to find the cause for injustice, we may find
the following reasons.

1. Fear of failure
------------------

When the director of a factory sees that the establishment of another
factory threatens his profits, and he fears possible bankruptcy, he will
do anything against his rival, unless he is a man of active conscience
and strong faith.

2. Privation of rights
----------------------

Sometimes, when after much struggling someone cannot get what are his
rights from an unjust person, he is led to extremes, and begins to act
with all kinds of injurious acts to bring down that person. The reaction
to being deprived of ones rights becomes a pretext for violence and
crime in some people. When they find themselves powerful after their
position of subjugation, they do what they want, and derive pleasure
from killing and burning weak and helpless people. The groans of these
people are Use music to their ears, but a cause of sadness for us.

3. Ignorance
------------

Laws, which are drawn up by human minds sometimes, cause much oppression
and injustice, because man's knowledge is flint and limited and mixed
with ignorance and misconceptions. So-me of the great injustice against
black people can be attributed to this cause. Some people, convinced of
their own superiority, and thinking that virtue and greatness depend on
the colour of one's skin, ignored the rights of the black people.
However, we know that the criterion for superiority and virtuousness is
knowledge and humanitarianism, and in this matter black and white are
the same.

These and similar results of weakness and ignorance are impossible for
God, because He has unlimited knowledge and Power and is in need of
nothing whose loss could cause Him to be afraid. So He is incapable of
any injustice.

This is a very clear and obvious matter. Those who doubt this have not
considered what we have explained; or else they do not understand what
justice is.

What is Justice?
----------------

Justice is that everybody's rights should be respected that no
distinction should be made between people for any reason. For example,
in a school examination, all those who have a certain mark can move up
to the next grades. Thus, the headmaster cannot make any distinction
among the students and allow some of them to proceed to the next class
while depriving others of this right while their marks are the same.
Because creating such a distinction among students who have the same
right of entry into the higher class constitutes an injustice.

But in a situation where the question of rights does not arise, and only
for the goodness of the act is something given to someone,
discrimination between individuals cannot he counted as injustice. For
instance, if someone wishes to invite some deprived persons to a meal,
and chooses only some of these unfortunates, or makes a distinction
between them in inviting them. His action does not constitute injustice,
because here there are no rights, which are being violated. What is
given to them is only given in Order to help them and out of a sense of
doing good.

The observance of equality anti justice is necessary when all have the
same right, but where no lights exist, there can be no discussion of
equality and justice, and discrimination between two individuals cannot
be called injustice.

Thus those who fined difficulty in understanding the creation of things,
and ask why God has not created all people equal and without
distinction. And why He does not behave towards every one with equal
measure, and imagine that God's Justice has been proved to non-existent
and completely imaginary have not understood the real meaning of
Justice. For the beings of the world have no right to claim of God that
His distinguishing constitutes injustice. If Cod does not create anyone
at all, or if He distinguishes between beings, nobody's rights have been
violated so that we can say that there is injustice.

However, since God is Knowing and Wise, and does nothing without a good
purpose, we can ask what the reason for these distinctions among created
things is. Are they unnecessary in the order of things? These questions
will be answered in the following lessons.

***Do not handle the property of the orphans except with a good reason
until they become mature and strong. Maintain equality in your dealings
by the means of measurement and balance. No soul is responsible for what
is beyond its ability. Be just in your words, even if the party involved
is one of your relatives and keep your promise with God. Thus does your
Lord guide you so that you may take heed? (6:152)***

***Thus, (Muhammad), preach (My revelation) to the people and be
steadfast (in your faith) as you have been commanded. Do not follow
their desires but say, “I believe in the Book, which God has sent down,
and I have been commanded to exercise justice among you. God is our Lord
and your Lord. Each of us will be responsible for his own deeds. Let
there be no disputes among us. God will bring us all together and to Him
we shall all return.” (42:15).***

Questions
---------

1. What is a proof of the existence of God according to item \# 1?

2. Why can we not fully comprehend the power and knowledge of God?

3. Who is always needy and who is not needy at all times and why?

4. What does verse 64 ch. 40 say?

5. Why does injustice take place?

6. Do any of the reasons for injustice mentioned in the text applies to
God and why not?

7. In what way may ignorance become the cause off injustice?

8. In what way may fear become the cause for injustice?

9. How may deprivation become the cause for injustice?

10. How can injustice take place in a school system?

11. Why has the headmaster to treat everyone by the same standard?

12. Why should everyone in school receive different degree of markings?

13. Is there any example to prove that no rights are involved therein?

14. Do we have any difficulty to understand the world and why?

15. What does verse 152 ch. 6 say?

16. What does verse 15 ch. 42 say?

17. What does the phrase, “no soul is responsible for what is beyond its
ability”, prove?

18. Is keeping one’s promise an example of maintaining justice?

19. What does the Phrase, “even if the party involved is one of your
relatives”, prove?

20. What does the phrase, “each of us will be responsible for his own
deeds”, prove?


