Lesson 14: The Vicissitudes in the Life of Man
==============================================

The Reason for Variation in the World of Creation
-------------------------------------------------

Certainly you will have heard of the spacecraft “Apollo”, a perfect
example of the marvellous progress man has made in science and
technology. It took man above the clouds, beyond the atmosphere, and
allowed him to set his feet on the surface of the moon, thus opening the
door to a world hitherto unknown to him.

Looking at the design of this space-craft, we see a huge mass of nuts
and bolts, large and small, and various delicate and complex
instruments; the command module, the main craft, the lunar landing
module, landing and take-off equipment, fuel tanks, telecommunication
and navigational apparatus, power sources, safety devices and sufficient
stores of food, water and other necessities. Each of these parts has its
own role. Obviously, if it were not for these various parts, Apollo
would never have come into existence, and it would not have been able to
overcome the difficulties facing man on his way to the moon.

This example shows us that in a whole whose parts are connected with
each other and in harmony, variety cannot be avoided.

Now let us look at the world of existence, to discover that diversity
here is neither pointless nor without reason. Without doubt, the beauty
and complexity of this world is due to the variety of its parts, and we
cannot call this diversity meaningless or unjust.

In the last lesson we showed that injustice exists where all have the
same right to use something equally, but distinction is made between
some and others. However, the parts of the world had no existence before
they were created, and so they had no pre-existent rights which would
enable us to say that the existence of distinctions between them
constitutes an injustice In fact, the world of creation owes its
existence to variety, and if there had not been any variety there would
not have been any universe, there would have been just one big
uniformity. It was this variety that brought into existence atoms, solar
systems, galaxies, trees, plants and animals.

Turning now towards variety in human life, we see that diversity in man
is not an exception to this general principle of variety. If we look at
diversity in human ability, intelligence and memory and ask why they are
not the same in all humans, we must ask before this why plants and
minerals do not have these superior faculties. Then we can see that
neither of these questions can be properly discussed, because such
questions can only arise when rights are being trampled on. In this
case, neither of these two conditions existed prior to creation that a
distinction between them should be seen as an injustice.

Another point to notice is that God demands from everyone according to
his ability and responsibility, and no one is asked to do more than his
bodily and mental powers enable him. This is justice itself.

For example, if a headmaster gives the examination of the most advanced
class to one of the lower classes this is an injustice. However, if he
gives the easy questions to the lower class and the difficult questions
to the advanced class, then no on can complain that there had been an
injustice. Instead, he would be regarded as just by any meaning of the
word.

Therefore, if all existent things are regarded from the same point of
view, and their responsibilities were all the same, to make a
distinction as regards their creation would be an injustice. But we know
that responsibilities are proportional to the individual's capabilities,
and thus there is no injustice. For example, if a small screw in a
machine has to do the same work as the largest cog, there would be
injustice; but if each part must work according to its design and
possibilities, then there is no injustice.

Moreover, we believe that God is Wise and that He does nothing for no
reason or for no good purpose, and we believe that the world has a
special design so that no speck can come into existence without
reckoning or design, as we explained in detail previously when we showed
how nothing is without its place and its use. If, in some cases,
something appears useless or without a function, it is in fact because
of the limited nature of our minds. Not knowing something does not mean
it does not exist.

We can conclude from this that all the variations in things have some
good purpose, and that they are all perfectly useful and necessary in
the system of the universe, although we may not be able to understand
this by our restricted thinking.

It may be objected that all individuals may have the same
characteristics, talents and abilities, but that because of the needs of
society they are forced to divide their labour among themselves. The
answer to this is that if this were the case, those who seek an easy
life would choose the easier occupations and the difficult.

Questions
---------

1. What is a perfect example of the progress man has made in science and
technology?

2. What makes the world have beauty and complexity?

3. Can we call this diversity meaningless or unjust?

4. What would happen if we had no variety and no universe?

5. Is the diversity in man and expectation to the general principal of
variety?

6. Are memory an intelligence the same in all humans?

7. Does God demand from everyone accordingly?

8. Would there be any injustice if each part of something must work
according to its design?

9. What can we conclude from all the variations in things?

10. Why are individuals forced to divide their labour amongst
themselves?


