Lesson 15: Prophets and Human Guidance
======================================

What is man created for?
------------------------

Did God create man as part of the chain of reproduction, to be a cog m a
machine, and to be counted only as an automaton? Was man created only
for his own enjoyment? Was he created only to amass as much wealth as
possible through any means, direct or devious, so as to satisfies his
material wants? Is there no greater idea behind His creation?

A large number of people regard only man's material aspect and neglect
the other side of the coin, because they have not understood the
profundity of the nature of man, or because they have not correctly
evaluated it. Men of great understanding have ascribed three dimensions
to man:

1. Individual material life.

2. Social life.

3. The world of the spirit and insight.

Those who give importance only to the first dimension, and believe in
absolute freedom for man, even though it be harmful for him, overlook
the profound character of man and they have forgotten the other two
important dimensions. Those who land importance to the first and second
dimensions, but neglect the third only succeed in creating an
environment, which lacks spiritual and moral values.

Arnold Toynbee the great British historian, in a long interview with the
American magazine, 'Life', said that man had submitted himself to
materialism, and that from that point of view we do not lack anything.
However, he said, we have become bankrupt on the spiritual side of
things. However, I think there is still time, he continued, to leave
this incorrect view of things and return to religion.

So, a serious investigator goes further than the first two dimensions,
and looks at and studies man and the aim of creation from all three
dimensions. Because the reality of man is thus, and man cannot be known
in himself in any other way than this. Moreover, the third dimension
gives man the power to evaluate his entrances and exits on the stage of
personal and social life. This is the correct way of living. Man must
reach his perfection by making his way through various dimensions, and
he must find this way, for he is created for this purpose.

The question now arises of whether one's conscience can lead one through
these dimensions. Let us begin to analyse this problem with a view to
finding an answer.

Conscience
----------

Some psychologists deny the existence of conscience. They believe that
what is called conscience is really only the result of early childhood
training On the other hand many scholars, like Rousseau, believe that
there is a power hidden in the depths of man's nature which can
distinguish good from bad. Children who are not under the influence of
an environment, which trains them in a certain way, whose conscience has
not been perverted, can understand good and bad, basically and
instinctively.[^1]

We can agree that a part of good and evil is according to custom; for
example, dress, food and such things, which may be good at one time and
place and bad m, others. But the intelligent and reasonable are governed
by thinking and cannot accept that all goods and evil are like this,
because trust, fulfilment of obligation, help for the poor and the weak,
work for humanity, brotherhood, equality and so on have deep roots in
the nature of man. On the other hand deception, injustice, breaking
agreements, selfishness and the like have always and in all places been
condemned. One cannot, therefore, say that they came to be regarded as
instinctively bad.

One must therefore accept the existence of conscience, but with the
following necessary condition: that conscience, by itself, cannot guide
man completely - it needs training. It must, like minerals in the
grounds, be extracted and refined. Otherwise, it may be perverted under
the influence of a corrupt environment, with the result that these
psychologists cannot recognise it and therefore deny its existence. This
is an indication that man needs infallible prophets.

Human Ideologies
----------------

From early times up to now, man has been putting forward many ideas for
the improvement of society and the individuals who it comprises. But
because man is not completely aware of the secrets of spiritual and
material well-being, and his ignorance is very great, he has never been
able to put forward any ideas which have been able to satisfy the full
requirements of human nature.

Dr. Burrows said some years ago that at Princeton he heard Einstein say
that science tells us what is there, but religion tells us what should
be there, and Victor Hugo said that as much as man progresses, his need
for religion becomes greater.

Another difficulty with such ideologies is that whatever intelligence
tells us, however right it may be, no guarantee can be made that we will
follow its ideas. Many people know through their intelligence and
knowledge that gambling, alcohol, stealing and crime are not good, but
nevertheless they fall victims to such practices.

Today we see that the United Nations, with over 130 members from
countries all over the world, is a weak body whose resolutions generally
remain merely in their minutes and only on paper. This is because
intelligence and knowledge are no guarantee for action.

But the Divine scheme, because it comes from an unlimited source of
knowledge, can have no room for error, and because it issues forth from
the immaculate hearts of the prophets, it has influence on mankind.
Moreover, the reward and punishment for not carrying out His instruction
causes man to implement this scheme. Alone, intelligence and thinking is
not enough; a confirmation must be found through Divine assistance.
These faculties are only, fields for training through the Divine
discipline of the messengers so that man may reach felicity without
being diverted.

Imam Ali (A.S.), in the first sermon m Nahj al-balagha explains the
reason for the sending of messengers thus:

Then Allah sent His messengers and the series of His prophets to them
(mankind) to make them fulfil the pledges of His creation, to recall to
them His bounties, to exhort them by preaching, to unveil before them
the hidden virtues of wisdom and show them the signs of His Omnipotence.

However, supposing that man has a correct ideology, do the dictators and
those who wish to enforce their own ideas allow us to distinguish the
true from the false? Don't they rather try to cover the true face of
ideologies? In this way people, through ignorance of correct beliefs, do
not rise up against oppression and are successfully deceived. However, a
law that comes from God However, a law that comes from God can be made
known to all through the miracles and signs of truth which God gives to
His messengers, and people can understand its truthfulness and believe
in it, and will then be unable to find any excuse for disobedience.

The necessity for the sending of Messengers
-------------------------------------------

a) The personal, social and spiritual perfection of man is one of the
aims of creation.

b) Conscience alone is not enough for the true perfection of man.

c) Human ideologies cannot completely satisfy all the demands of man's
nature, and there is no guarantee for their implementation.

d) Prophets have been sent and their prophet hoods proved through
miracles so that man distinguish the truth and no-one can excuse his
disobedience by saying that he could not find the truth.

Through these four points, we discover that the prophets are necessary
for the perfection of man, and that they were sent to inform man of what
he requires in the way of perfection, so that they may tread the path of
happiness. One cannot imagine that the Wise God could leave man without
instructions, laws and obligations, or that He could leave them in the
hands of tyrants, so diet they might the victims of human and be
prevented from reaching perfection.

Ibn Sina wrote in 'ash-Shifa':

More necessary for the continued existence of man and his essential
perfection than even the growth of eyelashes and eyebrows and the
concavity of the soles of the feet is the sending of prophets by Allah.

Thus, in arriving to the aim of creation and to spiritual and material
perfection, God must have sent some people as messengers, as indeed we
see that he has, so that they might guide people by the radiant torch of
revelation.

A tradition is related by Hisham ibn al-Hakam that:

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq, in answering an atheist who had inquired about the
need for the sending of prophets, said: “When we have shown that there
is a Creator Who fashioned us and Who is above us and all of His
creation, and that this Creator is Wise and Elevated in the sense that
He did not allow His creatures to see or touch Him, so that He might be
together with them, and they might be together with Him, and that He
might argue with them and they might argue with Him, then it becomes
clear that He has emissaries m His creation so that they can speak from
His Presence to His creatures and servants, and they might guide them to
their advantage and benefit and to that in which is their continued
existence and in the absence of which is their extinction. So it has
become evident that there are some who command and prohibit on behalf of
the Wise, the Knowing to His creation, and who speak from His Glorified
Presence, and these are the prophets, and His chosen from among creation
wise and trained through wisdom, and raised in it.

They are apart from man in all their conditions - in spite of sharing
with him in his form and fashioning they are sustained in wisdom by the
Wise, the Knowing. Then the above is evident in every epoch and en in
which the messengers and prophets brought evidence and proofs so that
the earth of Allah might not be deprived of a witness with whom there is
a sign which refers to His Truthfulness and Righteousness.”[^2]

Of course, Divine plans are not concerted on only one level. Rather they
guide us from all direction. Worship, government, justice, economy,
power, individual and social duties and also the general law which
governs individual problems. All of these are the aims of religions and
they enable man to perfect himself in all the three dimensions of his
nature.

Again Divine plans do not restrict themselves to one class of society,
but encompass all levels of society and uphold the rights of all people,
so those who think that religion was invented by the ruling or wealthy
class, and that it was invented in feudal and capitalist societies to
serve the purposes of these societies are clearly wrong, because these
people have not paid proper attention to the foundation of religion.

In addition to this, history bears witness that the upper and wealthy
classes did not participates in the movements led by the prophets, and
Divine religions always opposed the oppression and transgressions of
feudalistic and capitalists.

Leaders, scholars, the simple and the poor, and others, all come to
religion because only by its clear objectives can they satisfy the
demands of their natures and emotions, and they realize that only
religion can guide them to real perfection. This is the only reason why
man turn to religion.

Fortunately, today, educated people are more aware of the value of
religion, and they believe that real peace and perfection can only be
had in the shade of religion and belief in God.

The Necessity for Miracles
--------------------------

After man has realised that he needs the guidance of prophets in order
to reach an all-embracing happiness, and that he can only construct the
glorious edifice of perfection through their instructions, he naturally
feels affection for those teachers who work for his benefit and
sacrifice their sinless souls for his advantage. Thus belief comes to
reach such a degree that people do not spare themselves any hardship in
order to advance the aims of the prophets, and they prefer the demands
of the prophets to the demands of their own souls.

But this deep-rooted and comprehensive influence and importance of the
prophets, and the love and belief of people in them cause some ambitious
persons to take advantage of them, seeking to become influential and
obtain their desires by claiming prophet

So, if someone claims prophet hood and people gather round him, one
cannot believe in him without some investigation. For it is possible
that he falsely proclaims prophet hood, as many people have done up to
the present day and thus collects a following order to find out if
someone is a genuine prophet, this latter must bring some evidence with
him so that people can be sure of him and accept his claim. Thus the
real prophets can be distinguished from the false.

This evidence that distinguishes the true prophets from the false is
known as miracles, and God gave miracles to His prophets and messengers
so that people could be saved from mistakes and the dangers of those who
seek to deceive them, and so that the face of truth may never be hidden
from people. So far we have seen that messengers must bring miracles so
that people can know that they bear a message from God, and that what
they say is true, and so that they may be completely obedient to them
and follow their teachings with faith and conviction.

What are Miracles?
------------------

Miracles (mu'jizah) are what the prophets did according to the Will of
God in order to affirm the prophet hood they claimed, and which others
are unable to copy.

Miracles are only a Proof of Prophethood
----------------------------------------

A group of those who sought excuses for their lack of faith demanded
various things as miracles, not through a desire to have the prophet
hood confirmed, but in order to oppose the prophets. They even asked for
things that were logically impossible.

However, because the prophets brought enough miracles they did not
accede to these demands and told these people that the position of a
prophet is to guide, to bring good tidings and to warn. This is why
miracles are according to the Will of God and in situations where they
are necessary, as is mentioned in the Qur'an with reference to such
people:

***The signs are only with Allah. And lam only a plain Warner.
(29:50)***

***It was not for any Messenger to bring a sign, save by Allah's leave.
(40: 78)***

Questions
---------

1. Is man created for his enjoyment, or to accumulate wealth, or just
for reproduction?

2. What kind of people neglect the more important aspect of life?

3. Who said we must return to religion and why?

4. What are the three dimensions of life?

5. Can working just for one of these dimensions make people happy?

6. What power in man distinguishes in between good and evil?

7. Is conscience due to childhood training?

8. What does Rousseau say about conscienceless?

9. Are all that considered good all the time?

10. Can you name three of the values that due not change?

11. Can the power of conscience identify all that is good and evil?

12. Why do we need infallible prophets?

13. Has man been able to put forward an idea that could satisfy all the
requirements of human nature?

14. According to Einstein what branch of knowledge answers the question
of what is there?

15. What science answers the question of what should be there?

16. What happens to the resolution of the UN?

17. Why is the Divine instruction of greater influence on man?

18. What is the reason for sending prophets according to Imam Ali?

19. What facts prove the truthfulness of prophets?

20. What are the reasons that necessitate the sending of Divine
Messengers?\*

21. What do miracles do?

22. Which four points through that we need Prophets for from God?

23. What kind of comparison has Ibn Sina made about the need for
prophets?

24. What reason has Imam Al-Sadiq has given in support for the need of
prophets?

25. Why are miracles needed?

26. What is a miracle?

[^1]: See Rousseau's Emile, especially Book IV

[^2]: Usul al-Kafi, Kitab al-Hujjah


