Lesson 16: The purity of the Prophets
=====================================

Why the Prophets must be ma'sum (Infallible)
--------------------------------------------

The Merciful and Wise God inspired the prophets, so that through their
leadership and guidance human society might recognise the right way as
opposed to the precipitous way, and might be able to stride up to the
highest peaks of true pride, perfection, and laudable virtues, and stay
on that way.

With the same intention, the Merciful and Wise God also made His
prophets and messengers immune from every kind of sin and error, and, in
one word, made “infallible” (ma'sum) so that they might be able to lead
mankind towards real development in all directions, and towards
obedience and submission to the commands of God without any error or
mistake.

It is obvious that the very same reason, which prompted the need for
prophethood and the sending of prophets also, requires that the prophets
be immaculate and immune from all kinds of sin, impurity error and
fault. Since the aim and purpose of sending prophets is to lead society
towards guidance and instruction. This aim is to be secured through the
infallibility of the prophets and messengers, for it is clear that to do
things which are repulsive or indecent, to sin, and also to be a source
of error and fault is a reason for people to be averse to and diverted
from these things, and thus the aim, which was the guidance and
instruction of society, would be lost.

No people of wisdom would not do anything against their aim, and that
they take regard for what is effectual in attaining and reaching their
aim. For example, someone who wants a number of distinguished
individuals to take part in a celebration in his honour knows that no
one without an invitation can honourably attend. He will never send an
invitation to someone who is averse to him, rather he will try to send
his invitations in such a way that they will all be accepted, and, if he
doesn't do this, his work will not have been prudent and wise, and it
will be regarded as having been unseemly and unbecoming.

The Merciful and Wise God also takes account of what basically
interferes with the guidance and education of society, and does not want
people to depend on and follow the will of capricious and impure men,
and so to end up far from, and be deprived of their true development.
Therefore He has sent immaculate prophets so that the guidance and
instruction of society might be in the best possible way.

The following are further details why the prophets must be infallible.

### 1. The Principle of Instruction.

It is obvious that the purpose of sending prophets was to educate
people, and that in teaching the teacher's behaviour is a more effective
instrument than his speaking and verbal instruction.

The habits and deeds of the teacher can bring about a radical
transformation in man due to people’s tendency to imitate, one of the
indisputable fact in the working of the mind, man gradually adopts the
manner and conduct of his teacher, and becomes of the same colour so
that it is as if he is the clear, limpid surface of a pool which
reflects the image of the sky above him.

Speech alone cannot play the part of instruction, rather it serves
instruction, and this is the idea of the prophetic mission, that
prophets must possess praiseworthy habits and qualities and be untainted
with sin and error so that they can effectively attract the people of
this world towards the sacred aim.

It is clear that one who has soiled his hands with sin, even though in
secret and without anyone being aware so that he himself remains pure in
the eyes of his fellow men, will never have that unwavering strength of
mind to bring about a radical transformation in the area of the human
spirit.

One who taints his lips with wine can never dissuade others from
drinking it, and raise the voice of truth and establish an iron will in
combating this act.

The intense discomfort and disquietude of the prophets, and especially
the noble prophet of Islam, about the sins and indecencies of people is
itself the best witness to the fact that they were disgusted with every
evil and were not involved in sins at all.

The great secret in the progress of the prophets was the consistency in
their words and deeds, and it is this harmony which enabled them to
transform the fundamentals of human thought and lead societies toward
more meaningful cultural values.

### 2. Confidence and Acceptance.

The greater the degree of faith and confidence that people have in a
speaker, the more their agreement with him increases, and vice versa.

For this reason, the prophets, who revealed the Divine commands and
restrained people from sin and immorality, must, according to this be
endowed with the greatest, most admirable qualities, and be free from
every kind of sin and indecency, even error and mistakes, so that
people's confidence and faith in them be greater and they may accept
their guidance and what they say, and so that people may strive more
assiduously in carrying out the plans and practice the reformative
instructions of the prophets, and trust from the depths of their hearts
their leadership. Thus the aim of the prophetic mission, that is to say
the leading of people from darkness to light would be accomplished; the
aim of the prophetic mission would not be obtained under any other
circumstances, and that would be very far from the wisdom of God.

This purity and worthiness of the prophets was so extraordinary that
people became devoted to them to such a degree that their followers felt
great love towards them and gave up their lives in following and obeying
them, without heed for the consequences.

How can a man be completely free from sin and error? The following will
answer this question.

How can a man be ma'sum, (infallible)?
--------------------------------------

### 1. Real Love of God

The holy prophets were deeply devoted to the Merciful Lord, God, and why
should they not have been? They, who with their seeing and hearing and
profound insight knew God better them anyone, who understood His
greatness, glory and majesty to be above all things, who found Him alone
worthy of love, honour and obedience, who had nothing in view but to
please Him, who gave their hearts to none but Him, who did everything
with devotion to Him, and who knew who were they worshipping.

It was for this very reason that the prophets welcomed difficulties and
formidable situations, and also paid attention to God with smiling, open
faces even when they were in the most critical circumstances. And so,
when, in their beloved, true way, they met with difficulties, they
became overflowing with joy.

History has recorded the endeavour of these heavenly, torch-bearing men
of guidance as also the condemnable behaviour of people towards them.
Could steadfastness in these difficulties have had another motivation
apart from love of God and obedience to His commands? Certainly it did
not have other motives.

How can it be imagined that those who are completely engrossed in their
beloved way, and who utter nothing except according to His wish, and in
whose heart, soul, spirit and thoughts not one corner is empty of
remembrance, love and honour of Him, can disobey His commands? Or can
give themselves up to sin? Rather, they followed the path of obedience
to Him and were submitted totally to Him.

Someone asked the noble Prophet of Islam (as) why he applied himself to
worship to such an extent with suffering and hardship since he was
purified and had no sings. His answer was that why should he not be a
grateful and thankful servant of God.[^1]

Amir al-mu'minin, 'Ali (A.S.) made reference to the great qualities of
the Prophet of Islam when he said that the greatness of God had so
deeply overwhelmed prophet Muhammad (S) with the Messengership and
leadership that he was a witness for creation, the bearer of good news,
and a Warner. In his childhood he was better than everyone, in his
maturity more preferred, and his nature was, of all the pure ones, the
purest. His bounty and his generosity were more freely showered down
than that of any other benefactor.[^2]

“He is the leader of the pious, and the eyes of those who are led”[^3].

Thus, the perfect knowledge of the prophets and the deep and true love
which they had for God resulted in their infallibility and absolute
purity, so that, in addition to precluding sin from their will and
thinking, they withheld themselves from sin.

### 2. The Deep and Perfect Insight of the Prophets

Perceptiveness is not the same in everyone. Someone who is ignorant and
illiterate will never think like a doctor does about microbes and the
contamination of the blood vessels by them. A doctor who has spent
years-investigating microbes, has watched their multiplication under a
microscope, and has witnessed the fate of those who were infected by
them can never neglect microbes and their dangers.

Thus, the ignorant person proceeds to drink water contaminated with
microbes and has no worry, whereas the doctor would never be prepared to
drink such water and would never even entertain the idea.

The only motive for refraining from drinking is the knowledge and
information, which this doctor has concerning the bad effects of
microbes. An illiterate and ignorant person would keep himself away from
eating something filthy, for, in this case, he is aware of its impurity
and harmful effects. But a child into whose reach a filthy thing may
fell would probably put it into his mouth.

Some people who attach little importance to incremental harm, although
they fear sudden, unexpected dangers and avoid them. Someone may he
rather lazy about extracting a decayed tooth and may procrastinate about
consulting a dentist, till his other teeth also become affected, and a
great deal more discomfort comes his way. He is now affected by very
serious ailments. However, the very same person, as soon as the pain of
appendicitis appears and there is a possibility of real danger, will
entrust himself to the hands of a surgeon with all haste.

If knowledgeable doctor becomes addicted to alcohol, it can only be
because he is not fully informed of the damage of alcohol to the spirit
and the soul, and because its accumulative harm becomes obscured through
his appetite and his desire to gratify himself.

Ordinary people take a superficial view of evil, and do not take
sufficient note of its physical and spiritual, bodily and psychic
effects.

However, the prophets, who, with the help of a higher power, have
supremacy in their vision and knowledge over the rest of mankind who
have a profound and perfect insight into all the effects of evil, and
who, by a secret witnessing, see even those effects of evil which will
materialize in the next world, will never come under the influence of
their own bodily desires and soil their hands with the contamination of
sin; even the thought of it will never enter their hearts.

The prophets saw the effects of sin in the intermediary and next worlds,
and gave an account of them to people, and many hadith, reports have
been recorded from the great Prophet of Islam on this subject of which
the followings are a few:

“Amir al-mu'minin, 'Ali (A.S.) said, “I and Fatimah (A.S.) went to the
Prophet. We saw that he was weeping excessively. I said, “may God take
my father and mother’s souls in service to protect you from hardships,
why are you weeping?” He said, “The night they took me ton mi'raj, I saw
a group of women from my followers in severe torment. One woman I saw
hung up by her hair, and the brain in her head was boiling from the
intensity of the heat. Another was strung up by her tongue, and they
were pouring caustic water into her throat.

Another was eating the flesh of her body and fire was burning under her
feet. Another one had her hands and feet bound, and the snakes and
scorpions of Hell were crawling over her. Another one, the flesh of her
body was being cut up with flaming scissors. Another one had grown the
face of a dog and fire was entering her from underneath and coming out
of her mouth, and the angels of punishment were striking her with heated
clubs on her head and her body.” Fatimah (A.S.), the daughter of the
Prophet (S), asked, “What had these women done that Allah punished them
in this way?'

“The great Prophet (S) replied, “'The one who was hung up by her hair
had not, in this world, concealed her hair from strangers, and the one
who was strung up by her tongue had tormented her husband, and the one
who was eating flesh of her own body had beautified herself for
strangers, and the one whose hands and feet were bound and over whom
snakes and scorpions crawled had given no importance to wudu and the
purity of her clothes, nor to ghusl, (taking shower) after sexual
impurity and ghusl after menstruation, and had counted her prayers as
nothing, but the one whose flesh was cut by scissors was a woman who had
given herself to the will of unfamiliar and strange men, and the one who
had grown the face of a dog and whom fire entered from underneath and
came out of her mouth had been a singer of falsehood. Then the holy
Prophet said, “Woe to that woman who made her husband angry and how good
it is for the case of that woman whose husband is happy because of
her.”[^4]

Questions
---------

1. What kinds of characteristics does Allah want man to have?

2. Why did Allah bring up the Prophets as infallible people?

3. Why does Allah send immaculate Prophets?

4. What is the purpose of the prophets?

5. What can the habits of teachers do to the students?

6. Can speech alone be more affective or habit and speech together?

7. Can a transgressor be a good teacher?

8. Can a sin be attractive to an infallible person?

9. Can people have more trust in truthful persons, or in a not so
truthful person?

10. What affect did the purity of the character of the prophet produce?

11. What has love of God to do with their infallibility?

12. Why could the prophet endure so much suffering for the cause of God?

13. The presence of what fact in every corner of one’s soul prevents one
from displeasing God?

14. What does sermon 115 of Nahjul Balagha say about the Holy Prophet?

15. Do the ignorant people make more mistakes or the wise and learned
ones?

16. Can people of knowledge, wisdom, and vision be better off against
sins or the illiterate lazy and pleasure seeking ones?

17. What was happening to who the prophet saw in mi'raj by her hair and
why?

18. What was happening to the women strung up by her tongue and why?

19. What was happening to the women whose hand and feet were bound and
why?

20. Was happening to the women whose flesh was being cut and why?

21. What had happened to the lady whose face grew into a dog and why?

[^1]: Nur ath-Thaqalayn,, vol. 3, p. 367.

[^2]: Nahjul Balaghah, Sermon 115.

[^3]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 5, p. 2269-71.

[^4]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar; vol. 18, p. 351.


