Lesson 19: Muhammad, the Radiance that shone forth in the Darkness
==================================================================

The World before Islam
----------------------

The chaotic situation of the world prior to Islam is clearly reflected
in the accurate mirror of history. The outline of decline, oppression,
bloodshed, idol-worship is evident in this mirror.

Before Islam, it was as if mankind was leaning over the edge of the
precipice of ruin and destruction, and there was the fear that at any
moment it could roll down and be annihilated in it.

The Religions and Beliefs of the People
---------------------------------------

### a) In the Arabian Peninsula

The Arabs prior to Islam were committed in their hearts to idols, and
what they saw around themselves with their own eyes they made into
idols. Not only did they lower their heads and prostrate before them,
but they donated everything had, even gifts of agricultural produce, to
their idols[^1].

They believed that apart from the life of this world there was no other
life[^2]. Obviously those who did not see the wretchedness of their
idols whom they had chosen as their gods could not grasp the idea and
truth of the resurrection.

So it was no wonder that they fumed the House, which Hazrat Ibrahim had
built at the command of and in the name of Allah into brightly coloured
quarters for their idols.

As for the origins of idol-worship in the Hijaz, some believe that the
first person to introduce it was 'Amr ibn Luhayy. Alwrites in his
history: “He (ibn Luhayy) journeyed to Syria and saw all of the
inhabitants worshipping idols. When he asked about the virtues of the
idols, they told him, 'They have befriended us, and they bring down rain
for us.' He took a liking to them and asked them to give him an idol.
They gave him &teal and he took him to Mecca.” Ibn Hisham writes that
‘Amr ibn Luhayy brought this idol from Mu'ab (Iraq). In any case, Hubab
was the most famous of the gods in the Ka'bah: he was built in the form
of man, and holy arrows, which the diviners used for casting auguries,
were set in front of him.

The influence of idol-worship grew to the point where idols were built
in the form of animals, plants, men, jinn angels and stars; even stones
were the objects of worship.

**'Lat'** was in Ta'il in the form of a cubic stone, and had a special
field and meadow near Taif which was a holy place, and cutting trees,
hunting and the spilling of blood were not lawful in its vicinity; the
people of Mecca and other places made pilgrimage to it.

**Uzza** was a very powerful god equivalent to the planet Venus and was
situated in Nakhlah east of Mecca, and was worshipped there It was given
much more honour than the other idols. The sanctuary of Uzza took the
form of three trees and human sacrifices were offered to it.

**Manat** was the god of predestination, and its original place of
worship was a black stone at Qudayd (on the road between Mecca and
Medina). It belonged especially to the tribes of Aws and Khazraj[^3].

These gods were female and were like angels.

**Ba'l** was the embodiment of the spirit of wells and underground
waters.

Sometimes a well with clean, invigorating water became wore- in the dry
desert.

A cave, when it had connections with the gods and the underground
powers, was also sanctified. The temple of Ghabghab in Nakhlah (see
above) was in such a place.

**Dhat Anwat,** from which things were hung, was in Nakhlah and in some
years the Meccan made pilgrimage there.

**Dhu sh-Shard** was respected in the form of a heap of black shining
cubic stones.

The spirit of arable lands was the god of good works and sacrifices had
to be made to it. The spirit of barren land was a wicked devil who had
to be avoided.

They had idols made of wood or metal or stones with no definite form
round which they made several turns whenever they went into their
houses, and from which they took permission when they went out on a
journey and then took with themselves.

The town of Harran where Ibrahim had started his campaign against
star-worship, was the centre of the Sabaeans. In this town, stars were
the object of veneration. Belief in the stars and in the connection
between the movements of the stars and earthly destiny was very strong.
Each star was the god of one event. Images of Mars, Jupiter, Venus, etc.
were erected in the temples, and they asked for help from them, and
sometimes sacrificed them.

The thoughts of the Sabeans sometimes fumed to angels and jinn. The
angels were the daughters of god, and were thought to influence events.
They imagined that god had a wife who was one of the jinn[^4].

### b) In Iran

In Iran also many religions were being practised, but the one which most
people followed was Zoroastrians, the official religion.

If we accept that Zoroaster was a true prophet who had a religion based
on tawhid, we must also acknowledge that his true teachings had been
changed by the passage of time. Gradually, they changed their direction
and even their form and identity to the benefit of the ruling classes.

A veil behind which the Magi and the priests to the advantage of
themselves and the ruling classes transformed the foundations and
principles covered its very general and pleasant maxims. Thus it was
that tawhid became polytheism, and the pure sweet and excellent
teachings did not stay: the shell remained, but the nut was thrown out,
and the empty shells were filled with the ancient gods of the first
times of the Aryan tribes.

### c) In Europe

The religious situation in Europe was like it was in Iran. Christianity
had given up its original form, and had become stuck in polytheism and
the dogma of the Trinity.

In France, Britain and Spain, people did not believe in a Unique God.

### d) In India

There were various religions, but idolatry prevailed

Class and Racial Differences
----------------------------

In Iran people were divided into classes, and each class had special
restrictions and privileges. The class connected with the ruling council
had the most privileges. Similarly in Europe and India, society was
divided into classes and the right to possess land, to trade, and the
exemption from taxes was the prerogative of the nobility.

At that time also, every one of the people of the world thought
themselves superior in terms of race over everyone else.

The Situation of Women in Pre-Islamic Society
---------------------------------------------

In Arabia, woman was a commodity, counted in the wealth of the father,
husband or son; and after death she was inherited like the other
possessions and became the property of the descendants

It was a disgrace to have a daughter, and in some tribes the family
buried this shameful thing with their own hands[^5] . In Iran, also, the
form of class society did not bring anything better for women.

In Greece, woman was a creature of perpetual filthiness, a child of
Satan, similar to an animal. In India, throughout her life, she was
under the control of her father, husband or son, and had to address her
husband as god, master and lord, and, like a slave, she had no right to
ownership - after the death of her husband she had no right to take
another husband. The revolting custom of Sati the burning of the widow
alive with the funeral pyre of her husband was also practised at that
time.

In Japan, as well, woman was under the control of her father husband or
son for the whole of her life, and the daughter had no share in
inheritance

In China the father was master of the house and had so much power that
he could sell his wife and children into bondage and slavery, and
sometimes he even had the right to kill them. On top of this, daughters
had no esteem and sometimes they were left in the desert to be the prey
of the wild pigs.

The Romans also considered women to be the incarnation of evil and as
harmful spirits, and kept them like children under their control.

So every human society at that time, wherever it was, was sunken in
darkness, decline and oppression. Throughout the whole of the world, no
glow or gleam of light met the eye, and although the desire for goodness
and virtue still flickered in the depths of the heart of human nature
covered by a dark opaqueness, it had been almost extinguished on the one
hand in the blackness and gloom of humiliations, passions and
oppression, and on the other hand in the prominent features of poverty
and wretchedness. It could not illuminate the path for the seekers after
light, purity and felicity. A darkness like a thick heavy cloud in the
sky had submerged the daily life of all societies of the time in a deep
sleep; and a horrible, powerful obscurity reigned which only the rising
of a radiant sun could disperse.

This darkness was more overpowering in Arabia than in any other place,
as if they had been invaded to the depths of degradation and debasement.

Hear what that best of men 'Ali (a.s.) says about those days:

'...You people of Arabia followed the worst religion; you dwelt amongst
rough stones and poisonous serpents. You drank putrid water and ate
filthy food. You shed the blood of one another and paid no heed to
relationships. Idols are established among you, and sins cling to
you.”[^6]

The Birth of Muhammad, the Prophet of Islam (S)
-----------------------------------------------

Muhammad (S) opened his eyes to the world on the 17th of Rabi' al-awwal
of the 53rd year before the Hijrah (570 AD).

His father, Abdullah was from the family of Hazrat Isma'il, and had died
before he could see his son. His mother was one of the most pious women
of that time.

Muhammad (S) was entrusted to a virtuous woman called Halimah, who
suckled him and nursed him.

One day, Muhammad (S) who had not yet reached the age of four years,
asked Halimah if he could go into the desert with the other
boys...Halimah said: “I bathed Muhammad and anoint his hair with oil. I
put collyrium on his eyes and hung a Yemenite stone on a string and put
it round his neck so that no harm could come to him from the spirits of
the desert. But Muhammad tore the stone from his neck and said, 'Don't
worry about me. My God is taking care of me!'

So we see that from childhood he was the object of God's favour and
grace, and was always guided by Divine friendship and help in works that
were in their right time and place.

Muhammad's behaviour and speech m childhood were such that everyone's
attention was attracted. In his youth, also, he was far from that which
tainted those people in its environment He took no part in their riotous
poetry gatherings. He drank no wine, was an enemy of the idols was
perfect in speech and act. Years before he became a prophet, the people
called him ‘al-Amin’ (the trustworthy one). He had a pure mind and
radiant intellect, and a godly and heavenly character. Every year for
one month he went to the cave of Hirah and was with God in His mysteries
and in prayer. At the end of the month, before returning to his home, he
went to the Ka'bah and made seven or more circumambulatings.

At the age of forty, while busy in worship in the cave of Hirah he was
elevated to the station of Messengership.

For three years the Prophet of Islam (S) received no command to call
people openly to Islam. And during that time only a few people had faith
in Muhammad (S). Among men, the first person who loved and followed him
was Hazrat 'Ali (a.s.), and among women, Khadijah[^7] .

Then after three years he received the command to invite people openly
to Islam, and he called his close family to be his guests; about forty
of these people assemble I together. The food, which the Prophet (S) had
prepared, was no more than enough to satisfy the appetite of one man,
but by the power of God that little food filled everyone, and this was
the cause of much amazement. Abu Lahab without thinking what he was
saying, cried out: “Muhammad is a magician!”

That day the relatives dispersed before the Prophet could speak, so he
called them again the next day. After they had partaken of the food and
hospitality, he spoke: “O Sons of 'Abdul-Muttalib! No youth has brought
to his people better than what I bring to you. I have brought you the
best of this world and of the world of the resurrection. I have been
commanded by Allah to call you to Him. Which of you will extend his help
to me and become my brother and successor?” Apart from 'Ali (a.s.), no
one answered. The Prophet placed his hand on 'Ali's shoulder and said:
“This is my brother and my executor among you. Listen what he says and
obey him!”[^8].

One day the Prophet (S) went up on to Mount Safa and called the people
around him. He said: “If I told you that an enemy was going to fall on
you this morning or this evening, would you trust me?” All together they
replied: “Yes!” He said: “I warn you of a severe torment that is soon to
fall on you.” Out of fear that the speech of Muhammad (S) would take
effect in the hearts of those present, Abu Lahab broke the silence and
said to him: “Did we assemble here just to listen to this nonsense?”

The Prophet of Islam (S) started his call with the slogan of tawhid and
the worship of one God, and established tawhid as the basis of all other
beliefs. He made known to men Allah, who is nearer to man than man
himself; he abolished all forms of idol-worship, revolutionized the
atmosphere of Mecca, and drew people to his religion.

Meanwhile, the Quraysh (the most powerful tribe in Mecca, to which
Muhammad (S) belonged) were be ill at ease with the progress he was
making and tried hard to stop his preaching, even once trying to kill
him; but with the help and protection of Allah and with His care and
intercession all their tortures, persecutions and schemes were without
effect and came to nothing. Day by day the call to Islam, and also the
acceptance by people, spread, even to those who came from outside Mecca.
People rose up with their souls in answer to this Divine invitation.

In the eleventh year of the prophethood some people from Medina
belonging to the Khazraj tribe came to Mecca to perform the ceremonies
of Hajj. The Prophet invited them to Islam and they accepted, with this
promise that when they went back to Medina they would call the people to
Muhammad's religion. They went to Medina and spread around the
invitation of the Prophet (S) “fine next year twelve people from Madina
accepted the faith of the Prophet of Islam (S) at Aqaba and resolved:
not to associate any with Allah, not to steal, not to fornicate, not to
indulge in infanticide, not to bring malicious accusations anyone, not
to disobey the Prophet in anything which he indicated. Then the Prophet
sent a man by the name of Mus'ab along with them to teach the Qur’an and
thus a large group in Medina pledged their faith in the Prophet.

The Prophet's Migration (Hijrah)
--------------------------------

Till the thirteenth year of his mission, the Prophet (S) called the
people in Mecca to Islam, and stood firm when faced with the
persecutions of the Quraysh Eventually he got to know that the Quraysh
had hatched an incredible plot to kill him, so he put Hazrat 'Ali (a.s.)
to sleep in his bed in his place and left Mecca at night; he hid in a
cave, and then migrated from there to Medina.

The Hijrah of the Prophet opened an entirely new chapter in the history
of Islam from which a stimulating and surprising leap forward was made.
For this very reason, the Hijrah of Muhammad (S) became the beginning of
the dating system of the Muslims.

With the presence of the Prophet of Islam (S) in Medina the tribes of
Aws and Khazraj became brothers for life in the shadow of the teachings
of Islam, and a blessed sincerity and cordiality was established between
them.

The example of Muhammad's behaviour, his spiritual and moral
superiority, and the naturalness of his pure religion, caused the people
to come to Islam by the score, and in the end to accept it.

The Prophet of Islam (S) was from the people and with the people, and
did not maintain a distance from them. He shared with them in their
gains and losses. He firmly criticised oppression and aggression, and
refrained from and prevented them. He set forth all the principles,
which were, in the light of Islam, effective for the development of the
position of women, and put an end to the tyranny they had been subjected
to previous to Islam. But he also vehemently fought against their
unchastely and licentiousness for he wanted them to attain their real
development on the basis of the true principles of Islam.

He defended the rights of slaves, and had inroad comprehensive programs
for their freedom. The Prophet of Islam created a society where black
and white, rich and poor, great and small were all-equal and could enjoy
the benefits of being human beings. In such an atmosphere, there could
be no question of 'racial discrimination', for there was a much higher
basis in virtue knowledge, piety, human values and ethical greatness.

Let us look at a clear example of the great teachings of the Prophet
(S):

Juwaybar was a young man, poor and rather ugly. He came to Medina with a
great enthusiasm for Islam, and accepted it. The Prophet gave him a
place in the mosque, and later in 'Saqifah', a garden that was under the
control of the Prophet, and made him its overseer.

One day the Prophet told him: “It is good for a man to take to himself a
woman, and to choose a wife, so that he may keep his chastity and have a
home-life.”

“May God bless you, but I am poor and ugly; in what woman could there be
such a desire that she would take me as her husband? Especially as I am
not from a noble family.”

“Juwaybar, with me coming of Islam all the nobility of the age of
ignorance (before Islam) has been broken down together with all the
standards of greatness and have been melted together. Black and white,
Arab and non-Arab have all come from Adam, and God made Adam from the
earth. “For this reason today there is no black and white, nor even any
results from imperfection or excess in something:

“The dearest person to God is the virtuous person.

“Now go to the house of Ziyad and ask for his daughter, Dhalfa on my
behalf.”

Juwaybar did what the Prophet had told him, but Ziyad who was one of the
nobles of the Ansar tribe, did not accept, and said, “We only give our
daughters to people like ourselves - and the Prophet himself knows that
very well; so go back till I have consulted with him and give him my
apologies myself.”

He fumed to go back, but because of his anger he cried out, “I swear by
Cod, neither the Qur’an nor the Prophet have said that one must give
one's daughter to someone who is of equal status in family and in
wealth!”

Dhulfa heard the voice of Juwaybar and sent someone to her father. He
came to her and she asked him, “What have you said to that young man
that has made him angry?”

“The Prophet sent him to me to take you, my daughter, with my
agreement.”

Juwaybar would not tell a lie; send him back and go yourself to the
Prophet so that he may clarify the matter for you.” Ziyad did what his
daughter had said. He sent Juwaybar back and himself hurried to the
Prophet and said, Juwaybar brought a message from you. I want to remind
you that I am an Ansar and that we do not give our daughters in marriage
except to men of equal status from the same tribe.”

Juwaybar is a believer and a man of faith and a man with faith is the
equal of a woman with faith. Give him your daughter as a wife.”

Ziyad then resumed home and told his daughter what the Prophet had
commanded. The daughter said, “Father! To disobey the Prophet's command
is against the religion. And I am ready of my own accord, so accept
Juwaybar as your son- in-law!”

Ziyad brought Juwaybar in front of the people of his tribe and gave him
in marriage to his daughter on the basis of the command of Islam. He
even gave the dowry to his daughter from his own pocket, and gave them a
house with all necessities that they would live happily.

Truly, this light was dazzling; this source or warmth-giving radiance
lit up a flame in every heart that was a guide to all pure hearts on the
path. And thus it was that the muddled souls of the people were led
forth from the harassment of the gloom and darkness of that time, like
moths who wing their way towards the brilliant flame, and fumed in their
hundreds towards Islam seeking the protection of the illustrious,
illuminating system of the Qur’an.

Questions
---------

1. What do we discover from the beauty in certain objects?

2. What would draw our intention to the designer and the engineer?

3. Is our understanding of these things by our external senses?

4. Why and on what basis do we believe in the existence of the designer
and engineer?

5. How do we come up with two categories of objects of our perception?

6. Which objects fall under the second category?

7. How do we learn that objects 1-6 exist?

8. When, how, and by whom was infrared radiation discovered?

9. When, how, and by whom was ultra-violet radiation discovered?

10. How do we learn about supersonic sounds?

11. How do we learn about our intelligence?

12. Can our imagination be perceived by the four senses?

13. What can we build in our mind?

14. Can our will and our decisions be perceived by any of the four
senses?

15. Can love or hate be perceived by any of the four senses?

16. Can our senses perceive life? How?

17. What do the above scientific examples establish?

18. Why should we not reject the existence of things that the four
senses do not perceive?

19. In what do we learn about the existence of God?

20. What should we say to those who do not except the existence in
things?

21. What is the basic idea written about the sign of God?

[^1]: see VI: 137.

[^2]: see XLV: 24.

[^3]: See lesson 20

[^4]: Taken from “Jihan dar 'Asr Bihat Muhammad Rafsanjani Tehran 1335.

[^5]: See XVI: 59.

[^6]: Nahjul Balaghah, Sermon 26

[^7]: Tarikh at-Tabni vol. 3, p 1159; Sinan ibn Hisham vol. 1, p.
240-245.

[^8]: Tarikh at-Tabari vol. 3, p. 171-1173.


