Lesson 20: Muhammad the Foretold Prophet
========================================

Time of Expectation and Hope
----------------------------

The prophets of ancient times - especially Hazrat Musa and Hazrat Isa
(a.s.), had given their followers news of the advent of Islam, even to
the extent that indications of the special attributes of the Prophet of
Islam appeared in their Holy Scriptures. For this reason, the Jews and
the Christians and the followers of other religions were watching out
for the advent of Islam. They would watch like people who see their ship
with torn sails and broken anchor in danger of sinking in the sea and
therefore direct their gaze at the shore of future safety.[^1] .

Some of the Jews had even found, through much searching, a place between
the hills of ‘Ayr and Uhud which were named in their own books as the
center of Islamic rule, and migrated there, waiting for the advent of
Islam.[^2]

The Qur’an is a testimony to the truth of these facts, that the Torah
and the Injil[^3] had given news of the advent of the prophet of Islam.

***There are those who follow the Messengers, the illiterate Prophet
(not conventionally educated), whose description they find written in
the Torah and the Gospel. [He (the Messengers) enjoins them to do good
and forbids them to do all that is unlawful, makes lawful for them all
that is pure and unlawful all that is filthy, removes their burdens and
the entanglements in which they are involved]. Those who believe in him,
honor and help him, and follow the light, which is sent down to him,
will have everlasting happiness. (7:157)***

***Muhammad is the Messenger of God and those with him are stern to the
disbelievers yet kind among themselves. You can see them bowing and
prostrating before God, seeking His favors and pleasure. Their faces
(foreheads) are marked due to the effect of their frequent prostrations.
That is their description in the Torah and in the Gospel they are
mentioned as the seed which shoots out its stalk then becomes stronger,
harder and stands firm on its stumps, attracting the farmers. Thus, God
has described the believers to enrage the disbelievers. God has promised
forgiveness and a great reward to the righteously striving believers
(48:29).***

This example indicates that the Prophet and his devoted companions
started from nothing, and reached to the summit by self-sacrifice,
dedication and faith. They surprised the world. God has promised
forgiveness and a great reward to those Jews and Christians who become
believers and Muslims and cultivate righteousness.

***And when Isa son of Maryam said: 'Children of Isra'il I am indeed the
Messenger of Allah to you, confirming the Torah that is before me, and
giving good tidings of a Messenger who shall come after me, whose name
shall be Ahmad And when he brought them clear signs, they said: 'This is
a manifest sorcery. (61:6)***

***Those unto whom We have given the Book, and they recognise it as they
recognize their sons, even though there is a party of them who conceal
the truth and that wittingly. (2:146)***

***Those to whom We have given the Book recognise him (Muhammad) as they
recognize their own sons. Those who have lost their own souls they do
not believe. (6:20)***

It comes out clearly from these verses (ayahs) that the previous
prophets informed the people of the coming of Muhammad (S) and of his
characteristics. Clear glad tidings exist in their religious books, so
that when Muhammad (S) appeared together with Islam, no room remained
for any kind of doubt.

If there had been no such news in the Christian and Jewish Holy
Scriptures at the time of Muhammad (S) it would not have been expected
from the radiant thought of someone like Muhammad (S) to stand up and
proclaim. In order to prove his messengership before all the people of
the Book proclaim and say, “My name and my characteristics have appeared
in the Torah and the Injil which are in your possession at this very
moment.” Because the enemies of Muhammad (S) did not give up, and to
annihilate his message, they collected together the copies of the Torah
and Injil to prove that such characteristics were not in these books.

History is a witness that they tried every way that there was in their
opposition to Prophet Muhammad (S) and even rose up to fight him. But
they never managed with this facile and simple ruse to prove that these
characteristics were not mentioned in their holy Scriptures. It is clear
that abundant information concerning the Prophet of Islam existed in the
sacred books.

Some More Historical Evidence
-----------------------------

Before the rise of Islam, two circles or groups of people had grown up
in Medina The first were Jews who had left their original lands in the
hope to witness the advent of the Prophet of Islam (S).

The second were the tribes of Aws and Kharaj, who were the descendants
of Tubba‘ the king of Yemen. Tubba‘ came to Medina and learnt that that
place would be the place of migration of the Prophet and the place where
Islamic Government would take shape. He said to these two tribes to
remain in that place until such time as the Prophet of Islam appeared
and then to support him. [^4]

They stayed there and Gradually increased in numbers and became powerful
to the point that they seized the houses and property of the unconcerned
Jews. They committed aggression and gradually forgot the cause of their
ancestors' staying in that town and became ignorant of why their
ancestors had come there and made their settlement there.

However, the Jews, who were unequal with them in power, continued to
tell each other of the advent of the Prophet of Islam (S) and of safety
from the aggression. The Qur’an says about the Jews:

***And from before they, had been praying for victory over the
unbelievers, (but) when there came to them that they recognised, they
disbelieved in it. (2:89)***

Ibn Hawash (or Ibn'l-llayyaban), a Jewish scholar, left Syria seeking to
meet the Prophet of Islam (S) and came to Medina, but while he was
alive, Muhammad (S) was not yet called to his prophethood. For this
reason, when he was dying, Ibn Hawash said to the Jews: “I left my
extensive, comfortable life in Syria out of love to see Prophet Muhammad
(S) came here, and bread and date were enough for me. Alas! I did not
achieve my wish. But know that he will rise up in Mecca and will migrate
here. In eating he will be content with morsels of bread and dates; he
will be so humble that he will ride on unsaddled mount. His rule will
spread to an amazing extent. He will be afraid of none, and those who
are an obstacle to the way of right and truth will be cast aside...”[^5]

Zayd ibn Umar of Hijaz came in search of the true religion of Ibrahim.
On his way he had crossed from Mecca to Syria and to Mawsul but the more
he searched, the less he found. In the end a Christian scholar said to
him that there remained no trace of the original religion of Ibrahim,
but that in those very days a prophet was to blossom forth in his own
homeland from whose message and sayings he could obtain that original
religion.

Zayd returned towards Mecca, but on the way he was killed. The Prophet
instructed to goodness through his example, saying: “Zayd was someone
who left this world in seeking the way to Allah.”[^6]

Buhayra, a Christian scholar, saw Prophet Muhammad (S) in the latter's
childhood. He recognised him from the signs he had read in the Holy
Scriptures. He said to Abu Talib who was accompanying Muhammad (S), “He
will be a prophet. Look after him, and take him to his country
quickly.”[^7]

Another Christian scholar, Nistur also when he saw Muhammad (S) in the
latter's youth, gave the news that he would become a prophet in a clear
way, “He is the last prophet of time.”

On the basis of these predictions of the holy Books, numerous of people
became Muslims at the very beginning of the rise and appearance of Islam
without any coercion.

The Predisposition of the People of Medina towards Islam
--------------------------------------------------------

When the Prophet received the order from God to invite people to Islam,
and at the time of Hajj which existed in a form before Islam, he
addressed the people and presented Islam to them. During this time he
held a meeting with some people from the tribe of Khazraj whom he asked,
“What tribe are you from?”

“From Khazraj.” They replied.

“Are you ready to sit together for a few moments and talk?” The Prophet
said.

“Yes, we are.” They replied.

“I am calling you to One God.” Said the Holy Prophet.

Then the Prophet read for them some verses from the sweet words of God
and they were so entrapped by the Qur’an that they said to each other
without thinking: “We swear that this is what the Jews were telling us
of. Let not the Jews reach it before us.” Then they all became Muslims,
and when they returned to Medina they commenced the propagation of
Islam. The Prophet also sent Mus'ab ibn ‘umir after them to teach them
the Qur’an and also to call others to Islam.

Mur'ab brought many groups in Medina to Islam; among them the Asid the
heads of the Aws tribe, became Muslims and said to their tribe,
“Muhammad (S) is the very one whose coming the Jews were always
announcing.” And their tribe also became Muslims, and in this way Islam
spread in Medina and became strong. Groups of Muslims from Mecca also
moved there, and, in the end, the Prophet himself went to Medina and
there he set up the Islamic government.

The Attraction of Salman to Islam
---------------------------------

Salman was an Iranian from a peasant family; his mother and father were
Zoroastrians, fire-worshippers Salman whose name was then Ruzbeh, they
loved very much. They taught him the beliefs of their religion, and
entirely prevented him from mixing with others.

One day, Salman went on his father's orders to inspect their fields. On
his way he fell upon a church in which a group of God's slaves were
engaged in prayer. Ruzbeh started to think deeply, and he stayed with
them till dusk approached, meditating. At last he understood that their
way was superior to his fathers' and ancestors’ way.

“Where is the center of this religion?” He asked.

“It is in Syria.” They answered.

His father became anxious because of his late return and sent someone to
look for him. When he returned home, his father asked him where he had
been. He described what had happened, but his father said, “The religion
of your ancestors is much better.”

“With my own thinking,” he replied, “I have seen that their way is
purer.”

His father became even more disturbed and rebuked him. He then locked
him up in the house.

Ruzbeh secretly sent someone to the Christians and informed them that
when merchants came from Syria and had done their work, and when the
time came for their return they should tell him and he would secretly
leave his house and accompany them to Syria.

And thus it was that he went to Syria, and into the presence of one of
the great Christian scholars, and begged him to take him as his servant
and to instruct him on the acquisition of knowledge and servitude to
God. The scholar accepted him.

When the scholar died, Ruzbeh went to some of the other great Christians
of the day, in accordance with his master's instructions. From the last
of these scholars, who lived in the Umuriyah district of Damascus, he
asked guidance to another, but he replied:

“I have no idea of anyone else, but in the very near future a prophet
will arise in the lands of the Arabs who will migrate from his
birthplace to a place covered in date- palms. This land is situated
between two lava belts. Some of the signs of his magnanimity and special
habits are these. He will accept what is given to him out of respect,
but he will not take food and alms given out of compassion and aid.
Among the signs is the mark and seal of prophethood on his skin. If you
can go there, then you should go. “

After the death of that scholar, Ruzbeh asked the caravan leaders who
were setting out for business in Arabia to take him with them to that
place. They accepted, but on their way they betrayed him and sold him in
slavery to a Jew from the Bani Qurayza who put him to labor in the
vicinity of Medina. Ruzbeh recognized the very place he had reached as
one of the signs told to him by the old scholar. So he was happy to
start work in the date-groves of his master, but he was always looking
out for the advent of Prophet Muhammad (S) and searched for him, but,
because he was in difficult circumstances, he could not make many
inquiries.

At last the day of meeting arrived; the Prophet had gone, together with
some of his companions, to a place near Medina and Ruzbeh got to hear of
this.

He said to himself that this was the best time to look for the signs
from this person himself and to compare them with what he had heard from
the Christian scholar. So he took some morsels of food, which he had
with him and gave them to that honored person and said: “This food is
for the special benefit of the needy, and since your companions are
needy, please accept it from me.”

The Prophet gave it to his companions. Ruzbeh looked carefully, but he
saw that the Prophet did not touch the food, and he could not contain
himself with joy, for one of the signs had been found true in him.

With excitement he brought another morsel of food, which he had with him
to the Prophet, presented it to him and said: “This is my present to
you, please accept it from me.” The Prophet gladly accepted it and ate
from it.

Ruzbeh was looking at him and was enthralled. He then walked around the
Prophet of Islam - the blessings and peace of Allah be upon him and his
family - to see the mark on the Prophet's shoulder. The Prophet
understood what he wanted and took off the clothes that were on his back
so that he sees the mark. Ruzbeh saw it and accepted Islam.

He was renamed Salman and the means to free him were collected. He
became close to the group of the companions around the Prophet and with
his insight and deep and wide faith he became in the shortest period of
time, the greatest of the Prophet's disciples.[^8]

All seekers after truth, who were suffering from the dryness and burning
heat of that time like an unquenchable thirst, were looking for the
source of being and the water of life. Since the signs which they had
read or heard of in the holy books were present in the Prophet they gave
their hearts to the ocean and washed their souls in that spring of the
water of life and wisdom. Group after group gave their hearts to the
pure religion of Islam and became followers of Muhammad (S) The Qur’an
says:

***People, group after group, turned to Islam. (110:2)***

But together with these seekers after truth, there were groups of Jews
and Christians and other enemies who did not embrace Islam, through
bigotry or because their businesses or positions were endangered,
although they were aware of the truth of that great, divine person.

They knew where the source of salvation was, but through obstinacy they
clung to their illusions and did not desist from their stubbornness, but
became caught in everlasting perdition and failed to reach contentment.

***And when there came to them that which they recognized, they
disbelieved in it; therefore the curse of Allah is on the unbelievers.
(2:89)***

Two examples:

Safiyah, the daughter of Hayy ibn Akhtab said, “When the Prophet (S)
migrated to Medina and alighted at Qaba', my father and my uncle, Abu
Yassir went to call on him in the half-light of dawn. The sunset came
and they returned, and I went to them with childish joy. But they were
very tired, and, contrary to their custom, they paid no attention to me.
My uncle said to my father:

“Is he the one?”

“By God, I swear he is!”

“Did you recognize him?”

“Yes.”

“Now what do you think of him?”

“By God, I swear that as long as I live I will be his enemy.[^9]”

The following is another example of this hardheartedness. One day the
Holy Prophet said to Ka'b ibn Assad, “Do you not remember the example of
Ibn Hawash (the Jewish scholar who went from Syria to Medina - see
above)? Has it had no effect on you?”

“Yes I do,” replied Ka'b, “and if the censure of the Jews did not
torment me when they say “Ka'b is frightened to be killed”, I would
believe in you. But now I am in the faith of the Jews and I am safe from
their censure, and I shall stay in that religion till I die.”[^10]

The Qur'an tells of the injury caused by this hardheartedness which is
the origin of the destruction of life and contentment, and speaks of
these people thus:

***Vile is the thing they have sold themselves for, disbelieving in that
which Allah sent down, grudging that Allah should send down of His
bounty on whomsoever He will of His servants, and they were laden with
anger upon anger; and for unbelievers awaits a humbling chastisement. (
2:90)***

Questions
---------

1. Who had given the news of the advent of Islam?

2. How anxiously were the people waiting for the advent of Islam?

3. Who were some of the people searching for the place named in their
Holy Book?

4. What does verse 157 ch. 7 say?

5. What does verse 29 ch. 48 say?

6. Did the Prophet and the Muslims establish Islam with suffer or not?

7. What does V 6 ch. 61 say?

8. What does V 146 ch. 2 say?

9. What does V 20 ch. 6 say?

10. What do these verses indicate?

11. What would the enemy do if Prophet Muhammad was not mentioned in the
Bible?

12. Which groups of people settled around Madina and why?

13. Which group forgot the reason of the settling and which group did
not?

14. What does verse 89 ch. 2 say?

15. What did Ibn Hawash say to his people when he was about to die?

16. What did the Christian scholar say to Zaid ibn Umar?

17. What did the Holy Prophet say about Zaid Ibn Umar?

18. What did Buhayra say about Abu Talib?

19. With who did the Prophet have a meeting with during Hajj?

20. Can you answer the Questions of the Holy Prophet 1-3?

21. Who became Muslim because of the preaching of Mus’Ali?

22. Who was Salman and what was his previous religion?

23. Can you mention the experience of Salman before Islam in one
paragraph?

24. Which signs of Prophet Muhammad were mentioned to Salman by the
Christian scholar?

25. When and how Ruzbeh experimented the predictions of the Christian
Scholar?

26. What is considered in the text is the water of life and what did the
people do with it?

27. What does verse 2 ch. 110 say?

28. Were all the people in the early Muslim community sinners?

29. What does verse 89 ch. 2 say?

30. Can you mention the experience of Safiyah?

31. What question did the Prophet from Ka’li Ibn Assad and what was the
reply?

32. What does verse 90 ch. 2 say?

[^1]: See Ibn Hisham’s Life of Muhammad translated by A. Guillaume
(London, 1 955) pp. 90-95

[^2]: See Rawdah Kafi p. 308.

[^3]: See also lessons 17 & 18

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar vol. 15

[^5]: See lbn Hisham pp. 94-95.

[^6]: See Bihar al-Anwar vol. 15 pp. 204.

[^7]: See Ibn Hisham pp. 79-81.

[^8]: See Sirah of Ibn Hisham vol. I, p. 212-214: Tabaqat Ibn S'd vol.
4, p. 54.

[^9]: See Sirah Ibn Hisham vol. 2. p. 518.

[^10]: See Ithbat al-Hudat vol. 1. p. 350


