Lesson 24: The Imamat, Succession to the Prophet (S)
====================================================

Eventually the inevitable occurred and the spirit of the Prophet (S)
flew to its eternal abode. For in the words of the poet Nizami 'he who
has not died and will not die is only God.'

It was clear that with the death of this great man a storm would blow up
over the peaceful ocean of Islam, and that turbulent waters would be
churned up. The ambitious would try to benefit and to get as much as
they could from this turbulence and commotion, to fish in these troubled
waters. On the other hand, we know that the great mass of people believe
anything they see; they have always been thus and have always been fuel
for a fire that anyone may care to kindle. They need constant training
and continual taking care of, and without an educator they cannot reach
their own perfection.

Now we must ask if such a society, in such conditions, needs a leader
who can take the reins of command in the place of the Prophet or not, so
that the result of all the pains the Messenger of Allah took should not
be dissipated. Is there not a need for a knowledgeable, political
authority who is thoroughly acquainted with the Divine laws and who can
guide and lead the people on the right path in the right way?

The Shia holds that the generous Grace and Love of God and His infinite
wisdom demand that after the Prophet the people should not be without a
leader. Such a leader must be sinless and wise, so that his correctness
of speech and action may be a guarantee and a true sign of a superior
main, someone selected by God. He must take the reins of the Muslim
community in his hands and lead and guide them with extensive wisdom and
foresight, without error, and this he must take from the Prophet of
Islam. Because there is no reason for God, Who was considerate of the
people in the time of the Prophet to change His judgement and to
withdraw His loving concern.

How could it be possible that God, Who by His Grace created thousands of
elaborate details for the protection and growth of our bodies, Who
caused the eyebrows to grow so that the salty, bitter, tainted sweat of
the forehead cannot hurt the eyes, and Who made the eyelashes also so
that under their outspread canopy the eyes can be more beautiful and
better protected, how can God, Who created these and many more known and
unknown things, have neglected to appoint a goodly successor to the
Prophet?

Does not the bringing into existence of the best of communities, which
is the aim of Islam need the selection of the best of leaders? Is not
the appointment of a sinless leader, educator and Imam the basis of the
contentment of society? Can Islamic society attain contentment and
happiness without divine supervision and leadership?

So if there is a need for the divine, sinless leader, and Islamic
society wants a divine educator, how can it be said that this matter has
been ignored by Islam and that the people have been left to themselves?

In short, the same philosophy which demands the appointment of the
Prophet also precisely demands that God introduce and appoint a
successor through the Prophet.

The Prophet of Islam (S) said in the latter part of his life: “O People,
I swear before Allah that I have explained what will make you nearer to
heaven (contentment) and what will make you far from the Fire
(error)”.[^1]

With this explanation, how can it be said that the Prophet of Islam did
not appoint his immediate successor?

Is the Qur’an Not Sufficient?
-----------------------------

The great and mighty Qur’an is the fundamental basis for every kind of
Islamic concept. Like a mighty rock, all the fruitful buildings of
Islamic knowledge have been made steady on it. It is the clear spring
from which all the streams of insight flow. The credibility and prestige
of other religious foundations rest on it.

But, on the basis of the proofs we shall give, one cannot be content
with the Qur’an alone to solve the problems of leadership, the
differences which crop up in Islamic society, or the satisfying of the
needs of the Muslim people.

1. Firstly because the Qur’an and its great and abundant contents need
commentary and explanation. Since all the verses are not alike in
clarity and openness, unacquainted and unknowing readers in the first
moments of their journey may become lost and not take the path to their
destination.

So the Prophet himself or those appointed by him who have a spiritual
link with what is beyond the external world, must be a guide in this
valley also, so that they can interpret and explain the ayahs according
to Allah's purpose. For if not, ordinary people will sometimes interpret
incorrectly and will end up far from the thruth.[^2]

It is recounted that a thief was brought into the presence of the
Abassid Caliph Mu’tasim so that he might have the punishment proscribed
in the Qur’an to him. The command of the Qur’an is: “Cut off the hand of
a thief.” But Mu’tasim did not know from where the hand should be cut.
He asked his Sunni ‘ulema One of them said: “ From the wrist.” “From the
elbow,” another said.

Mu’tasim was not satisfied. He was forced to ask Imam Muhammad at-Taqi
the 9th Imam (a.s.) who was present, and he replied: “Four fingers must
be cut off.” “Why?”

“Since Allah has decreed in the Qur’an ***'And that the places of sajdah
are for Allah.’ (72: 18)*** That is the seven places of the body, of
which one is the palm, which in sajdah contact the ground belong to
Allah, they should not be cut off.”[^3]

All those present accepted and were satisfied with his proof.

This kind of interpretation is in fact interpretation of the Qur'an by
the Qur’an, and is peculiar to the descendants of the prophetic mission,
and no-one, to whatever degree he may be a master of interpretation, is
able to succeed in perfectly understanding interpretation in this way
unless he has taken the habit from the Household of the Prophet and has
taken them as his model.

2. Another proof is that what we have said Concerning the need for
correct interpretation of the Qur’an concerns only one side of the
Qur’an the exotic meaning and the commands of the Qur’an But in the
shelter of these exotic words anti meanings, a deeper and wider aim, a
spiritual profundity is concealed, especially in the sections on
knowledge, beliefs and the virtues.

The respected Prophet (S) said: The Qur’an has a beautiful outer meaning
and a profound inner meaning.”[^4]

He also said: “The Qur'an has profundity, and the profundity of that is
deep too, up to seven inner meanings.”[^5]

Truly, all the Qur’an has, according to the words of the great
exegetists, a hermeneutics and an inner meaning, and to arrive at them
by thought and research alone is not possible. It is not explicable to
all through words, for the ability to perceive and practice this is not
given to all men. Only those near to God, the pure, those free from
corruption, can comprehend this, and use it for the solution of the
differences and incidents between men, and learn it, and then, by virtue
of the immunity from error and mistake that they have from God, teach it
to others.

These ones near to God, the slaves immune from error are the Prophet (S)
and the Household of the Prophet (a.s.) about whom the Qur’an said:

***Household of the Prophet; Allah desires only to put away from you
abomination and to cleanse you out.” (33: 33)***

There is also a hadith that only the Prophet and his Household, who are
the original ones to be addressed by the Qur'an, can perceive all the
truths of the Book.[^6]

That is to say the Prophet who was addressed by Jibra'il and his
Household, since they are the family of the Prophet, are more acquainted
with the meaning of the Qur'an.

It is because of this connection (the Qur’an and the Household) that the
Prophet said to the people in the last days of his life: “I leave two
things in your trust, the Book of Allah and my descendants; if you
attach yourselves to these two you will never go astray.”[^7]

3. The Qur’an needs a sinless, enforcing guarantor. Since the Qur'an is
a fundamental law, a kind of constitution, it needs an enforcing
guarantor and a power to implement it. But only he who like the Prophet
(S) is free from error and who understands and knows the Qur'an with
competence can be the guarantor of its commands and laws.

These special qualities are to be found in the beings of the Imams
(a.s.), and the best witness to this is the few years of the leadership
of Ali (a.s.), who, despite the difficulties which beset his holding of
the rein of government, carried out to the end the great and resplendent
laws of Islam each and every one.

As a postscript, the summary and fundamental of this lesson can be found
in a discussion which students following the sixth Imam, Ja'far as-Sadiq
(a.s.), had with one of the Sunni school in the presence of the Imam.

A man from Damascus was given a meeting with Imam Sadiq (a.s.) and said
that he had come for a discussion with one of his students.

The Imam said, “Introduce him to Hisham.” Hisham was the youngest of his
students.

“O Boy,” said the man from Damascus, “ask me concerning the Imamate of
this man (Imam Sadiq (a.s.)).”

Hisham was angered by his lack of manners and shuddered But he concealed
his temper and began.

“Is your Creator more kind and loving towards His slaves or the slaves
themselves?”

“The Creator.”

“What has the loving Creator done for his slaves?”

“He has appointed a clear guidance and proof, to protect them from
differences and disunity, and to establish friendship an unity among
them He has made clear to them their religious duties.”

“Who is that guide?”

“The Prophet.”

“Who is it after the death of the Prophet?”

“The Book of Allah and the Sunnah of the Prophet of Allah

“Can the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of the Prophet prevent us from
differences today?”

“Yes.”

“So why do you and I who are both Muslims have a dispute or in other
words, why have you come here from Damascus a result of this
difference?”

The man from Damascus was silent and said no more.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said to him: “Why don't you speak up

“What shall I say?” he replied. “If I say we have no difference then I
lie. And just as I said the Book of Allah and the Sunnah the Prophet
should take away The difference between us, so this also is untrue
because, in many instances, the Book of Allah and the Sunnah do not have
a clear and obvious meaning that could dispel our differences.”

So the man from Damascus said that he wanted to ask the very same
question from Hisham. The Imam agreed.

“O Hisham. Who is the more loving towards people? God, or the people
themselves?”

“God.”

“Did he send them someone to protect the unit of Muslims and to take
over their control, to explain to them truth and falsity?”

“Are you talking about the time of the Prophet, or about now?”

“In the time of the Prophet, it was him; no, tell me about now.”

“Today it is this man who is seated here and to whom people come from
every corner of the land, and who gives us news of the heaven and the
earth; and this knowledge was bequeathed to him from his father and so
on back to the Prophet.”

“How can I verify and accept this statement for myself?”

“Go now and ask him anything you like.”

“That's right, there is no other excuse; only I must ask.”

Then Imam Sadiq (a.s.) told him about his journey and of the things that
happened to him on his way, which only the man could know of. When he
had explained so that no doubt remained for him, the man declared his
belief in the Imam.[^8]

Questions
---------

1. What does the poet Mizami say?

2. According to the text a storm would blow upon what and what would
happen?

3. Who would try to fish in the troubled waters?

4. Who has always been fuelled for a fire?

5. Who needs training and an educator?

6. What needed to be preserved and how?

7. What do the grace and love of God demand?

8. What kind of a leader did Muslims need after the Holy Prophet
(according to Shia Muslims)

9. What would this leader do for the Muslims?

10. Did God reduce his attention to Muslims after the Holy Prophet?

11. How has God arranged means for protection of the Human Body?

12. What means has God arranged for protections of Human eyes?

13. What is the social aim of Islam and what kind of community does it
intend to establish?

14. What kind of leader would such a society require?

15. Would God, who has arranged marvellous means for the protection of
the Human Body, would not arrange for a leader to educate and lead an
Islamic community?

16. Is the philosophy of prophet hood different from that for his
successorship?

17. What does the Hadith of Usool-e-Kafi vol. 2. p. 74 say?

18. What is like a mighty rock in Islam?

19. Why does the Holy Qur’an require commentaries?

20. Who could be the best authority to inerpret the Holy Qur’an?

21. Who did not know how to cut the hands of the thief and what did he
do?

22. What does verse 18 chapter 72 say?

23. What was the basis of Imam Muhammad Taqis decision?

24. What kind of interpretation is the kind Imam Muhammad Taqi applied?

25. Can Qur’an be interpreted by personal opinions?

26. What has the Holy Prophet said about such interpretations?

27. What does Usuul Kafi vol. 2, p. 599 say?

28. Who can better understand the Holy Qur’an?

29. What does Verse 33 Ch. 33 say?

30. What does Tafsir Mira’t Al-Anwar page 16 say?

31. What does Al-Ghadir vol. 1, p. 55 say?

32. What kind of qualifications does a executive authorities of laws of
Qur’an must have?

33. What does the few years of the administration prove?

34. What was the topic of discussion between Hisham and the man from
Damascus?

35. Can you answer Hishams Questions 1-6?

36. What did the man from Damascus say after the sixth question?

37. Can you answer the questions of the man from Damascus 1-5?

38. What did Imam As-Sadiq tell the man about his journey?

[^1]: Usul Kafi vol. 2, p. 74

[^2]: The great Prophet of Islam (S) said that everyone who interprets
the Qur’an according to his own opinions will have the place in which he
sits at the Resurrection made the site of the gathering together of
fire. (Tafsir as vol. I, p. 21)

[^3]: Nur ath-Thaqalayn vol. 5, p. 439.

[^4]: Usul Kafi, vol. 2 p. 599.

[^5]: Tafsir Safi, vol. 1, p. 39.

[^6]: Tafsir Mir’at al-Anwar, p. 16.

[^7]: Ibn Haubab Musnad Beirut, vol. 3, p. 17. al-Ghadir, vol. 1, p. 55
Ghayat al-Maryam p. 212.

[^8]: Usul Kafi, vol. I, p. 171-173.


