Lesson 3: Design in the Universe
================================

In this universe, from the smallest atom to the largest celestial body,
in everything we see, we are reminded of its perfect orderliness and
exact regulation so much so that the great scientists have been provoked
to amazement.

Cecil Boyce Hamann, Professor of Biology at Asbury College says that
whenever he places a drop of water under a microscope or observes the
farthest star through a telescope. He is filled with great wonder.

There is so much orderliness in nature that it is possible to explain by
means of immutable laws the course any phenomenon will take before it
occurs.

For this reason (i.e. that the patterns and laws which govern nature are
immutable and fixed), scientists endeavour to discover these laws. For
if they did not hold every kind of effort in this field would be
fruitless?[^1]

The earth, on which we live, with respect to its size, its distance from
the sun the speed of its orbital movement, etc., is so arranged that it
is able to act as the support for life. Because, if in the conditions of
its existence the smallest change was to take place, losses of
unacceptable dimensions would occur.

The atmosphere, most of whose constituent elements are life gases, is
sufficiently viscous that it can, like a shield or armour protect the
earth from the deadly attack of 200 million meteors a day which approach
the earth with a speed of 50 kms. Per second.

The responsibility for regulating the temperature of the earth's surface
within limits which maintain life also belongs to the atmosphere, and if
it did not exist, inhabited land would, like the dry deserts, become
incapable of life.

But why are we taking the long way round in explaining these things?

Nearer than anything are ourselves. The mysteries of man's existence are
without number so much so that the world's scientists, after years of
much study have not yet been able to fathom all the wonders of it.

After many years of study Dr. Alexis Carel wrote a book called
“L'homune, cet inconnue” (Man, the Unknown). He wrote confessing that
biology and other sciences were still unable to discover the facts about
the working of the human body, and that many problems remained to be
unravelled.

Now let us examine some of the marvels of our own existence.

The Cells of the Body
---------------------

The body of man is like a building. It is composed of small building
blocks called cells, a living entity each of which is a living entity.

Each cell, therefore, is alive, and its nourishment, digestion,
absorption elimination and reproduction, for example, are as in other
organisms, and are perfectly carried out.

In the structure of the cells most metals, such as iron, copper,
calcium, also other elements such as oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen and
sulphursare used.

The number of these cells in the body of man is about 10 16 which is
equivalent to ten thousand, million, million.

Each one of these living cells works in perfect co-operation with the
next, and all of them follow the same aim. They are very quick to
suffer, having little toleration, and nourishment must be correctly
supplied for their needs.

The blood, with the help of the heart, performs this duty very well. The
structure of the heart is of well-designed and perfect dimensions, so
that it can supply blood to the whole body through the agency of the
blood vessels and the capillaries.

The blood, after it has delivered nourishment to the cells, absorbs
poisonous substances, which have accumulated there, and returns to the
heart with a dull colour. The heart delivers this to the lungs, a
filtering apparatus for the blood, whereupon it is re-supplied to the
whole body with a bright colour and greater freshness.

While passing through the kidneys, other parts of these poisonous
matters are removed, so that no kind of disturbance arises in the
general working of the body.

Do we not see in the precise combination and quantity of the metals and
elements from which the cell is formed as well as in the amazing
structure of the heart and its way of working which is claiming the
attention of the thinkers of today, a plan of perfect and superior
design?

And if we see in the human body a mysterious whole and at the same time
a design, are we exaggerating?

Without doubt no.

And in this same way we must confess that the world of existence is firm
on the foundation of perfect orderliness, and undoubtedly every
orderliness and design is the creation and accomplishment of a wise and
powerful maker.

This subject will be investigated completely in further chapters.

The Main Points:

• From the smallest atom to the gigantic bodies in space all work by
very strict laws and orderliness.

• Human body is an amazingly sophisticated creature and every part
therein work in a marvellous orderliness.

• These amazing orderliness and super structures are huge evidence of
the Existence of a Super intelligence, the Lord and the Creator of the
universe.

Questions
---------

1. If there were a single change in the Earth’s orbit, what would
happen?

2. How strong is the “shield” or “armour” of the Earth?

3. To who does the responsibility of controlling the temperature on the
surface of the Earth belong?

4. What would happen if the Earth did not have an atmosphere?

5. What is it that acts as the building blocks in human body?

6. What is the approximate number of cells in a man’s body?

7. What does blood give to the cells?

8. What does blood do to poisonous substances?

9. What does the heart do to the blood?

10. What do we are reminded of by the existence of order in nature?

11. Do different parts of human body, work independently or
coordinately?

12. What would have happened if blood would not take poisons from the
cells?

13. What is the function of the kidney in human body?

14. How much knowledge and intelligent do you think would be needed to
make a cell in human body?

15. Do you agree with this statement: “every design is the creation and
accomplishment of a wise and powerful maker?”

16. What other proofs can you present for the existence of God?

[^1]: The Evidence of God in an Expanding Universe Ed J.C. Monsma, New
York 1958


