Lesson 4: The Designer of the Universe
======================================

The Computer
------------

Today, most people manage to do their most difficult work easily with
the help of machines. One of the most amazing of these machines is the
computer, about whose various capabilities most people have heard. For
example, one variety of computers can, in a few minutes, accurately
supply a doctor with medical records, which have been stored in it, and
is capable of diagnosing illnesses. It investigates details of every
condition reported in the past year or even ten years ago, and makes
recommendations for the cure and therapy of disease.

This computer can, when necessary, recommend a suitable medicine to the
hospital pharmacy, and inform the nurse, so that she can give the
medicine to the patient. Some important factories also use computers for
the control and adjustment of their machines.

Is it possible that an accident or chance brought the computer into
existence, or is its astounding design rather a proof of the
intelligence and genius of its maker?

Undoubtedly anyone faced with such a machine would agree that he is
aware of the greatness of the intelligence and thinking of its maker.

The Automatic Kitchen
---------------------

“Orbis” is the name of an apparatus, which can prepare excellent food
for more than one thousand people in one hour.

In many present-day countries transport cafes and roadside restaurants
make use of this apparatus; it is capable of doing the work of twenty
trained cooks.

When you park your car in front of the restaurant, you press the button
on a loudspeaker beside you, and immediately a voice asks you what you
want. You give an order for various kinds of food, and exactly eight
minutes later a special waiter brings your food.

### How Does the Automatic Kitchen Work?

When the customer presses the button, a light switches on inside
“Orbis”, and as the customer gives his order for food (e.g. a sandwich),
someone sitting in front of the apparatus depresses special switches.
The machine starts to work. In this way, first bread is cut by means of
an automatic knife, and at the same moment a piece of meat is sent to
the cooker, which grills it in exactly four minutes. Then it is
transferred onto the bread and the other parts of the sandwich are also
placed on the bread. At this point the warm sandwich is put into a
plastic bag and is ready.

Is the automatic and well-designed “Orbis” without a maker or a
designer, and did it come into existence as the result of an accident or
chance? Or is it not rather the product of the ideas of a scientist who
invented it using precise calculations?

Undoubtedly, this design and order, which you notice in the above
examples, is the result of the thinking of its engineer and inventor.
That is to say that if there had been no inventor, and if they had not
been constructed on the basis of very exact calculations and
measurements, these machines would never have come into existence.

The same argument demonstrates a general proof and its undoubted truth,
that design and orderliness must take their origin in a source of
knowledge and power. Chance cannot be the origin of marvels having
design and orderliness, because, as to everything belongs a particular
effect (e.g. cold water is an unlikely cause for being scalded), it is
incorrect to suppose that design and reckoning should come from chance
or mere accident.

It therefore follows that the wonderful design and orderliness which is
observed in the brain, the nerves, the digestive system, the heart, the
eyes, the ears and thousands of other examples constitutes complete
evidence and a living proof. They prove that the world of creation has a
wise and powerful designer and creator. Whatever attracts our attention
among the secrets of the way creation is arranged, permits us to become
more aware of the greatness of its creator. Can we say that the human
brain and the wonders of the body are less significant than the
computer?

Of course, you will acknowledge that all these things are proofs of the
greatness and vastness of the knowledge and power of the Creator of the
world - its designer. In addition to this, the understanding and
intelligence, which is seen in man is clear evidence of the
manifestation of something knowledgeable and intelligent which produced
him. It is not possible for someone who has no understanding and
intelligence to give to his constructions and creations such
understanding and intelligence.

The Holy Qur’an points to this undoubted truth and shining reality in
many verses, such as the following:

***“God is He Who raised up the heavens without pillars you can see, He
subjected the sun and the moon each one running to a term stated; He
directs the affair; He distinguishes the signs; haply you will have
faith in the encounter with your Lord.” (S.13; V. 2)***

The existence of proper order with calculated design in creatures is
evidence of the existence of their planers and the designers.

Questions
---------

1. Are computers in an orderly manner?

2. Will computers work properly without receiving instructions?

3. Did computers come into existence by themselves?

4. Are the designers of computers intelligent or insane people?

5. Can every human being make computers or only those who know a lot
about them?

6. Is the automatic kitchen a man-made device or grows like plants?

7. Did this device exist two hundred years ago?

8. Why did it not exist three hundred years ago?

9. Is making a computer easier or to make a human heart?

10. Is making an automatic computer easier or to make one of the major
organs of human body?

11. Why are not people able to make human hearts?

12. What means are needed to make a computer?

13. Can the computer materials become computers without intelligent
design?

14. Does designing computers require greater intelligence or building a
human brain?

Whose existence do the design and order in nature prove?

Can you find an example of phenomena that would never follow designs and
plans?


