Lesson 5: Unveiling the Secrets of Nature
=========================================

The amazing progress of man's knowledge is progressively uncovering the
unknown and destroying misconceptions in physiology and the experimental
sciences.

For example, it was once thought that some of the organs of the body
were of no use. But modern science, after much analysis and research,
has demonstrated specific uses for each of them, and in the future, when
research tools have been further developed; more important functions
will surely be discovered. We shall mention some examples to show what
we mean.

1. The thymus is a small gland located in the mediastinum in front of
the windpipe and behind the ribs. The specific function of the thymus
had been unclear, and previous scientists had thought it to be a
superfluous organ. But today it is known that the thymus plays an
important role in resistance and defence against foreign substances that
attack the body. The thymus gland produces lymphocytes and its
fundamental use is in the making of anti-bodies that defend and protect
the body against viruses and foreign protein.

Some scientists believe that this gland has an important influence on
sexual function and the growth of the body after puberty. Its removal
results in atrophy of the sexual organs and delayed puberty.

2. The pineal gland, or epiphysis is more complex than the thymus and it
is situated in the brain. In the past some physiologists had attributed
no use to it, but nowadays it is believed that tints gland is operative
in controlling sexual activity and in preventing premature puberty. It
also has other functions, which, if stopped, cause death.[^1]

3. Previously, physicians had thought that the tonsils were without
function, and in the event of swelling of the tonsils would advise their
extraction, and would excise them. However, today, specialists
understand their importance, and do not recommend their removal except
in exceptional circumstances.

The tonsils produce white blood cells whose function is to defend the
body against microbes. They perform the same function for the body as
does quarantine for diseases coming into a country. They act as a strong
barrier at the entrance to the respiratory passages, cleaning the
inspired air against infection and destroying microbes. When the air is
more polluted, or when microbes are more active, the tonsils work
harder, and as a result they swell up. Removal of the tonsils is
inadvisable because it results in an increased activity of microbes in
the throat and lets them enter the glottis, the windpipe and the lungs,
and causes illnesses such as bronchitis.

The skin lining the nose and the glottis becomes thinner than normal and
causes dryness in the nose and throat (atrophy of the mucous membranes)
What is more, at the time of various throat infections, the tonsils
swell up and, like warning lamps, inform doctors of these illnesses. So,
if they are not there the diseases will not be diagnosed, and this may
result in further complications such as angina.

4. After much research, a group of scientists came to the conclusion
that the appendix has an important role to play in the fight against
cancer and its removal, when unnecessary, can be a cause of this fatal
illness. It has been explained in the Journal of the American Medical
Association that removal of the appendix in those who are in danger of
getting cancer has an important effect and may itself cause cancer.

The study of the examples mentioned above, together with hundreds of
others, shows that when we do not find any use or advantage for
something, we should not come to the conclusion that it really has no
use or advantage. Rather, we should wait until its secrets and functions
are revealed in the light of science.

For, although man has made much progress, he is still at the first
stages, and has not yet read even one line from the great Book of
Nature.

Einstein said in his book The Philosophy of Relativity that what we have
read from the Book of Nature has taught us many things, but we know that
we are far from finding the complete solution and understanding of her
secrets.

Williams James also remarked that the difference between our knowledge
and our ignorance is like the difference between a drop and the ocean.

Therefore, do not those materialists who, because of incomplete
knowledge of the secrets and properties of a thing, think to be without
use or function make a serious mistake? Whereas if they were to be more
careful, they would realize that there is a world of difference between
not knowing a thing and its non-existence, and that it is not correct to
assume that because a man does not find a thing therefore it does not
exist.

It is obvious that man's not knowing the details of one or two things
from the infinity of existents should not be an obstacle to him on
comprehending the, Wise Creator of the universe through the secrets of
the world of creation and its wonderful harmony.

There is no doubt that the study of even one of the parts of creation,
or even just a fragment of that part, is sufficient to lead man to the
Knowing Designer and Builder of the universe. If one picks up a book,
which is written in a fully rational and logical manner, but one, does
not understand some things because of one's lack of knowledge, what
should be one's judgement on the book? Should one ignore all the useful
matters there in which are derived from the writer's creative thinking
and broad vision? Surely it is not so.

In the words of the poet:[^2]

*The world is as eye, cheek, mole and brow,*  
*for everything in its place is good.*

Ignorance of something is not evidence of its absence from the realm of
existence.

Questions
---------

1. Which gland in human body produces antibodies?

2. Is it true that some parts in human body are of no use?

3. What are some of the functions of the pineal gland?

4. What kind of hormones does pineal gland produce?

5. What are some of the functions of the tonsils in the human body?

6. Is it advisable to remove the tonsils?

7. Do the Tonsils produce white or red blood cells?

8. What is the major function of appendix in human body?

9. Is it advisable to remove the appendix?

10. Did William James or Einstein say, “ We are far from knowing the
secrets of Nature”?

11. Did Einstein or William James say, “our ignorance of the world is an
ocean and our knowledge of the world is like one drop?

12. What has the Journal of American medical Association has said about
removing the Appendix?

13. How much of nature one would need to study to learn about its
designer?

14. Does not knowing means that the unknown does not exist?

15. What has destroyed some of the misconceptions about the secrets of
the world?

16. Can you point out the weakness of the argument in the text?

17. If you did find out any weakness can you compensate?

[^1]: The pineal gland acts by secreting a hormone called
Glomerulotrophin that circulates in the blood and causes another hormone
called aldosterone. These are to be secreted from the surface of the
adrenal gland. This latter controls the concentration of sodium and
potassium in the blood. This is of importance because an imbalance in
these concentrations and the stopping of the secretion of aldosterone
results in death in less than one week.

[^2]: Gulshan-i Raz, Shabistari


