Lesson 7: The Creatures Eternal need for Allah
==============================================

Examine the following examples, and then you will realize the extent to
which the creatures of this world show the presence of a Creator.

1. How do those who construct airplanes act together to produce a plane?
These specialized engineers assemble the metal sections in a specific
manner according to exact equations so that the plane may fly, carrying
passengers and cargo. Of course, the work of the construction engineers
is the assembly with their own hands of the basic materials according to
their plans, in such a way that when their work is finished their
activity ends. As for the metal sections, the engines, the lights, the
seats, etc., which are made by the engineers, these do not depend upon
them once their work is finished.

2. If we want to build a house and we are in possession of all the raw
materials, is that sufficient? Surely, we need a builder and his workmen
not in order to produce the raw materials but so as to put them together
according to their craft. It is clear that we do not need the workmen
for producing the materials used in the building, but that we need them
only in so far as the use of these materials is concerned in this way a
house can be built from these materials.

3. A person who has never seen the Eiffel Tower can nevertheless
construct it in his imagination in no time at all, merely from having
heard about it. He can even construct it higher than it is, and imagine
people climbing it.

The existence of the Tower in the imagination is, as suggested in the
previous two examples, the work of the one who has imagined it. The
basic materials of the plan and the house were not produced by their
constructors, but all the materials for the imagined Tower were made by
the one who imagined it, not obtained from some place or another. That
is why their size is not dependent on the quantity of raw material
available, and it can be made larger according to the wish of the one
who imagines it. We can see that imaginary forms derive their existence
from ourselves. They remain in our minds as long as we want them to, and
when we forget about them they become nothing again, and have no further
existence in our imagination.

From this last example we can conclude that anything whose existence
depends on the existence of something else cannot be independent, and at
every moment has need of the other.

Now we can understand the condition of the created things of this world,
which have come into existence from nothing and are the creation of God.
Are these, at every moment, in need of their creator? Some people may
think that the created things of this world, after their creation, do
not stand in need of their creator for their continued existence.
However this is a completely erroneous concept. Because the things in
the world are the effects and creations of God and are identical with
the imagined forms, which we ourselves can construct in imaginations, in
that at every moment they need the One who created them in order to
continue existing.

The better to understand this, imagine in your mind a human figure,
speaking, walking and working according to his will. Does this figure
have any independence? Clearly his existence is due to you, for if you
cease to want him to exist, he will be annihilated and returned to
nothingness.

This is the condition of the entire universe of creation, which is
completely from God, created by Him, and in no way independent. It is
always in need of God. Also, if God ceased to will its existence, it
would return to nothingness.

Allah has said in the Holy Qur’an:

***“O men, you are the ones that have need of Allah, He is the All
sufficient. The All laudable. If He will, He can put you away and bring
a new creation.” (S. 35: V.15-16)***

This is a subject to which Islam directs the attention of its followers.
For example, it is instructed that in prayer (salat) when one rises one
should say *bi hawli'l-lahi wa quwwatihi aqumu wa aq'ud* - “With the
power of Allah I do stand up and sit down.'

In truth, if we realize that we have no independence from God, and that
it is only He Who has created us thinking and willing creatures to
strive in the way of happiness, and that it is only He Whose
all-embracing Love encompasses us. Therefore we prostrate before Him and
say *subhana rabbi al-a'la wa bi hamdah* – Glory be to my Supreme Lord
and Praise be to Him.”

Questions
---------

1. Is an airplane independent of its manufacturer?

2. What will happen if the manufacturer abandons the airplane?

3. Will it cease to exist due to abandonment?

4. How would one make such a finely built device to cease existing?

5. What is the difference between a real and a make belief object?

6. When a make belief object cease to exist?

7. What is the similarity between a make belief object and things that
the Creator has made?

8. Why do the creatures need the creator all the time?

9. What is the proof to show that creatures do not need the creator?

10. What is the proof to show that creatures do need the creator all the
time?

11. According to the verse of the holy Qur’an who is self-sufficient and
who is not so?

12. According the above verse whom has the power to replace one nation
by another?


