Lesson 8:  Allah the Self-sufficient
====================================

A Testable and Irrefutable Law
------------------------------

The world we see with our eyes is a material world composed of atoms.
Every object has a special place and special properties, which vary from
situation to situation and according to their orientation. Distance
plays a role in the actions of these properties and the nearer the cause
is to the effect the stronger the effect is; the further away it is, the
weaker the effect, until a distance is reached where the cause has no
action at all. To elucidate this point consider the following.

1. The power of a magnet is not the same at all distances: the nearer
the metal is to the magnet, the stronger the power of attraction. If a
nail is placed at a distance of two centimeters from a magnet, the
attraction will be stronger than if it is placed at a distance of ten
centimetres.

2. The heat of the sun on the surface of the planet Venus is not the
same as it is on the surface of the Earth. Since Venus is nearer the sun
it receives more heat and is therefore hotter than the Earth.

3. The light of a lamp may reach a hundred meters but within this
distance the intensity is not uniform. The nearer to the lamp we are the
greater the intensity of its light.

4. The voice of a public speaker may reach fifty meters but like the
light it is not uniform within this distance. The nearer to him we are
the louder his voice, the further away we are, the more difficult it is
to hear.

5. If a leader wishes to exert his influence without using agents or
modern methods of communication, he cannot succeed, because his own
efforts have an effect in a certain place and cannot influence those who
are far from him. On the other hand, by using modern methods he can
exert his influence on all people. Of course, this depends not only on
his own activity, but also on the power of his supporters and, in the
same way, his power varies in relation to the distance he is from his
supporters.

These examples show that all things, which are situated in a certain
place, do not have an equal effect at all distances, the nearer we are
to the centre of something, the greater its effect will be and vice
versa.

Does God Have a Centre?
-----------------------

Some people may possibly think that like the sun and other material
things God has a place, and that He has a seat from which He exerts His
influence over His Creation. However, this is not the case, because His
influence on creation, which is His work, is the same in every place,
from the depths of the oceans to the furthest parts of the universe.
There is no place to which His influence does not reach in sufficiency.

This influence is not such as has a centre, such that the further we go
from it the weaker it becomes, until we reach a point where there is no
trace of His influence and chaos reigns. For if God had a place like
other material things, His influence would vary throughout the universe.
Therefore we can deduce from this that the creator of this world has no
location and no centre. Indeed, God is the creator of “place” and it is
impossible that the creator should be dependent on what He has created.

God cannot be compared with an inventor, because, as we explained
previously, an inventor is not a creator. His only genius is that he
understands the properties of things and is successful in bringing
together certain elements to make something, which, in some cases, he is
himself in need of. But God, Who is the creator of all creation, is not
in need of what He has created.

Is God visible?
---------------

Now, since we have seen that God has no place, it is clear that he has
no body either. Because a body needs a place, and there can be no body
which has no place. Since God has no body, He cannot be seen, because
our eyes can see only bodies.

God does not need the creatures
-------------------------------

Since God is the creator of nourishment and other necessities of life of
all existents, we must agree that He needs none of these things.

God therefore, is the entire Truth Who does not need the creatures.
Unlike human beings, He does not need shelter nourishment, and the other
necessities of life. Rather all people and things are in need of Him.
You may ask: “If God has no body, occupies no space and cannot be seen
then what is He and how can we say that He exists?”

To understand this, take the following example. Electricity is neither
solid, nor liquid, nor gas. These negations do not deny the existence of
electricity. And it could never be true to say that because electricity
is none of these things, therefore it does not exist. We have to admit
that electricity is a fact, which cannot be describable by any of the
afore-mentioned conditions.

God who is Self-sufficient and has neither body, nor place, nor can He
be seen, nor He needs any of the creatures is perfect and free of these
imperfections. The unlimited Being, God is the source of all existence,
Perfect and Self-sufficient.

These properties distinguish His Being from other beings, and in God we
must believe. Intelligence and human nature acknowledge the existence of
God. Wise and honest person does not deny His Existence. Comparing this
with the belief that God is on a level with man, having a body, children
and other such attributes and appendages, shows the supremacy of Islamic
thinking.

In fact, many materialists reject God because the true God (i.e. Allah
as He is understood through Islam) has not been made known to them, and
what they have considered is not the real God.

The greatness of the universe is a clear evidence of the existence of
the Self-sufficient creator.

One who would need something, anything could never guard and control
this huge creature, the whole universe.

***“Allah, God is Self-sufficient and Almighty.” Ch. 112:2.***

Questions
---------

1. Can the force of a piece of magnate be the same on a piece of iron
from one and four inches apart?

2. Can the intensity of heat remain the same passing through space and
objects?

3. Can the intensity of light passing through space and objects remain
the same?

4. Can the intensity of sound passing through space and objects remain
the same?

5. Does a ruler close to his subjects and centre have greater control or
one far away from them?

6. Does God have a centre to control His creatures?

7. Can space stop the power of its creator?

8. Can any obstacle like that in Question one through seven become a
problem for the Creator?

9. Can the eyes see the creator?

10. Does the creator need any body or anything?

11. What the phenomenon that is neither solid, nor liquid and nor gas is
called?

12. In what way the Islamic guidance leads to the real creator?


