Foreword
========

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

The concept of morality has existed since the creation of mankind. In
the old days, there was a clear distinction between ‘good’ morals and
‘bad’ morals although people did not always follow the former. During
modern times, the distinction between good and bad has become blurred
and morality has been significantly diluted. As a result, there is a
danger that immorality will prevail over morality throughout the world.

There is no excuse for a Muslim to get caught in this quagmire. There is
clear guidance from God through Holy Qur’an and the Prophets and
Ma’soomeen. Prophet Muhammad himself said, *“I have been sent as a
Prophet for the purpose of perfecting the morals.”* One of the best ways
of understanding morality is by studying practical examples from the
lives of Prophets and Ma’soomeen.

A few books have been written on moral stories emanating from the
Islamic world, one of them being ‘Pearls of Wisdom’, published by the
Islamic Education Board of World Federation in March 1993. Bearing in
mind the importance of the subject of Akhlaaqiyat, IEB-WF is publishing
‘Anecdotes for Reflection’ in 5 parts. The source of this publication is
the book ‘Yaksad Mawzu’ wa 500 Dastan’ by Sayyid Ali Akber Sadaaqat. The
translation from Farsi to English was carried out by Shaykh Shahnawaz
Mahdavi. IEB – WF would like to thank Sayyid Ali Akber Sadaaqat and
Shaykh Shahnawaz Mahdavi for their efforts and we pray to Allah s.w.t.
to reward them amply.

May Allah s.w.t. accept this work as a further attempt by IEB – WF to
propagate Islam.

Islamic Education Board  
*The World Federation of K S I Muslim Communities*  
*Sha’baan 1424*  
*October 2003*


