9. Enjoining The Good And Forbidding The Evil
=============================================

**Allah, the Wise, has said:**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُنْتُم خَيْرَ اُمَّهٍ اُخْرِجَت للنَّاسِ تَآمُرُونَ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَ
تَنْهَونَ عَنِ الْمُنكَر
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(You are the best group that has been brought forth for mankind: you
enjoin goodness and you forbid the evil.)***[^1]

Imam Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ تَرَكَ اِنْكاَرَ الْمُنْكَرِ بِقَلْبِهِ وَ يَدِهِ وَ لِساَنِهِ
فَهُوَ مَيِّتٌ بَيْنَ الْاَحْياَء
  </p>
</blockquote>

*One, who refrains from prohibiting the evil by means of his heart, hand
and tongue, is (like) a dead amongst the living.*[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

Anyone who seeks to enjoin the good and forbid the evil must himself be
aware of what is lawful and unlawful, and should not act contrary to
what he preaches.

His aim should be to guide the people. He should talk nicely and be
aware of the difference in the level of understanding of the people. If
he is opposed, he should exhibit patience and if supported and favoured,
he should thank God.

1) Bishr Haafi
--------------

Once, Imam Kadhim (a.s.) was passing by the house of *Bishr Haafi*, when
he heard the sound of dance and music coming from inside.

At that very moment a slave-girl came out of the house to throw some
garbage.

“Is the owner of this house a free person or a slave?” the Imam (a.s.)
asked her.

The slave-girl replied, “He is a free man.”

Hearing this, the Imam (a.s.) remarked, “You speak the truth, for had he
been a slave, he would have feared his Master.”

When the slave-girl came back inside the house, Bishr, who had been
consuming wine, asked her what took her so long. As soon as the
slave-girl related what had happened, Bishr immediately got up and ran
bare-footed after the Imam (a.s.). Once he had caught up with the Imam,
he expressed shame and repentance over his acts, sought forgiveness and
amended his wrongful ways.[^3]

2) Mulla Hasan Yazdi, the Forbidder of Evil
-------------------------------------------

During the reign of *Fath Ali Shah Qajaar,* there lived in Yazd a
scholar, by the name of *Mulla Hasan Yazdi*[^4] who was held in high
esteem by the people. The governor of the city of Yazd used to oppress
the people and treat them with great cruelty. Mulla Hasan advised him to
stop his evil deeds. When he refused to mend his ways, Mulla complained
to Fath Ali Shah, but this too proved unproductive.

Since Mulla was particularly assiduous with respect to the issue of
enjoining the good and forbidding the evil, he assembled the people of
Yazd who, upon his orders, collectively threw the governor out of the
city.

When Fath Ali Shah was informed of this incident, he was immensely upset
and ordered Mulla Hasan Yazdi to be brought before him in Tehran.

As soon as Mulla came, Fath Ali Shah asked him about the incident in
Yazd.

Mulla replied, “Your governor in Yazd was a tyrant and I wanted to
relieve the people of his evils by throwing him out of Yazd.”

The answer so enraged the Shah that he ordered Mulla’s legs to be tied.

Ameen-uddaulah said to the Shah, “He is not at fault. It was without his
permission that the people threw out the governor.”

In spite of his feet being fettered, Mulla Hasan spoke out:

“Why do we need to lie? I had the governor thrown out of Yazd because of
his oppression.”

Eventually, due to the intervention of Ameen-uddaulah, Mulla Hasan’s
legs were untied.

That night, Shah witnessed the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) in his dream and
observed that two of his toes were tied.

“Why are your toes tied?” he asked the Holy Prophet.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) replied, “It is you who has tied them.”

Shah pointed out that he had never shown such disrespect.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) explained, “But was it not you who had ordered
Mulla Hasan Yazdi’s feet to be tied?”

Shah woke up from his sleep greatly alarmed. He ordered Mulla Hasan to
be given resplendent clothes and to be returned to his city with great
honour and respect. Mulla Hasan refused to accept the clothes and
returned to Yazd. Later, he travelled to Kerbala and remained there for
the rest of his life.[^5]

3) God’s Command to Destroy City
--------------------------------

God ordered two angels to destroy a city. On reaching there, the angels
noticed one of the inhabitants beseeching and supplicating to God. One
of the angels said to the other:

“Don’t you see this person supplicating?”

“Yes I do, but God’s order has to be executed,” replied the other one.

“Wait. Let me ask God as to what should be done.”

Praying to God, the first angel inquired: “In this city there is a
person, who entreats and beseeches you. Do we still impose
thechastisement upon the city?”

The answer came from God:

“Execute the commandment which has been given to you, for that person
has never been perturbed and distressed for My sake, nor did he show
anger over the evil deeds committed by the other people.”[^6]

4) Yunus Ibn Abd al-Rahmaan
---------------------------

When Imam Kadhim (a.s.) departed from the world, his representatives had
huge sums of wealth in their possession. As a result of their greed some
of them began to deny the Imam’s death and thereby laid the foundation
of a sect known as *Waaqifiyyah.* Ziyaad Qandi possessed seventy
thousand gold coins while Ali Ibn Abi Hamzah had thirty thousand.

Meanwhile, Yunus Ibn A'bd al-Rahmaan invited the people towards the
Imamate of Imam Ridha (peace be upon him) and regarded the *Waaqifiyah*
sect as false and erroneous. When Ziyaad Qandi and Ali Ibn Abi Hamzah
realised what Yunus was doing, they sent him a message asking:

“Why do you invite the people towards Imam Ridha (a.s.)? If your
objective is to acquire riches, we will make you rich.”

They pledged to give him ten thousand gold coins if he kept quiet and
refrained from inviting the people towards the Imam (a.s.).

Yunus Ibn A'bd al-Rahmaan[^7] replied to them by quoting a narration
from Imam Baqir (a.s.) and Imam Sadiq (a.s.), which says:

*‘When innovations manifest themselves amongst the people, it is
imperative for the elders and leaders to manifest what they know (so
that people refrain from evil) and if they fail to do so, God shall take
away from them, the light of faith.’* Under no circumstances shall I
abandon jihad in the path of religion and the affairs of God.”

After receiving this forthright and explicit reply from Yunus, Ziyaad
Qandi and Ali Ibn Abi Hamzah became his enemies.[^8]

5) The Caliph on the Rooftop!
-----------------------------

One night, the second Caliph was surveying the streets to ascertain the
general state of affairs in the city. In the course of his inspection,
he happened to pass by a house from which he heard suspicious noises. He
climbed over the wall of the house and looked inside. A man and a woman
were sitting together, with a jar of wine placed before them.

Addressing them harshly he said, “You commit sins in solitude in the
belief that God shall not make manifest your secret?”

The person turned to the Caliph and said, “Do not be so hasty, for if I
have committed one sin, you have committed three. Firstly, God has said
in the Qur'an*: and do not spy*[^9]*.* You have been doing just that.
Secondly, He has said in the Qur'an: *and go into the houses by their
doors*[^10]*.* You have entered from over the wall. Thirdly, He has
said: *So when you enter houses, greet your people with a
salutation*[^11]*.* You have not done so.”

The Caliph asked, “If I were to pardon you, do you resolve to amend your
ways?”

“By God! I shall never repeat this act again,” the man replied.

The Caliph said, “Now you can be at ease, for I have pardoned you.”[^12]

[^1]: Holy Qur'an, ch. Aale I’mraan (3), vs. 110.

[^2]: Jaame’ al-Sa’adaat, vol. 2, pg. 235.

[^3]: Darsi Az Akhlaaq, pg. 128; Minhaaj al-Karaamah (of A'llamah
Hilli).

[^4]: Author of Muheej Al-Ahzaan.

[^5]: Hikaayat-ha-e-Shanidani, vol. 3, pg. 146; Qisas al-U’lema, pg.
101. 

[^6]: Jaame’ al-Sa’adaat, vol. 2, pg. 231.

[^7]: Imam Ridha (peace be upon him) had said:  Yunus Ibn A'bd
al-Rahmaan, in his time, is as Salman Farsi was, in his own.

[^8]: Muntahal Aa’maal, vol. 2, pg. 253.

[^9]: Holy Qur'an, ch. Al-Hujaraat (49), vs. 12  (وَ لاَ تَجَسَّسُوا)

[^10]: Ibid, ch. Al-Baqarah (2), vs. 189  (وَ آْتُوا الْبُيُوتَ مِن
اَبواَبِهَا)

[^11]: Ibid, ch. Al-Nur (24), vs. 61  (إِذاَ دَخَلتُم بُيُوتاً
فَسَلِّمُوا)

[^12]: Pand-e-Taareekh, vol. 5, pg. 29; Al-Ghadeer, vol. 6, pg. 121.


