10. Fairness
============

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُونُوا قَوَّامِينَ لِله شُهَداَءَ بِالْقِسطِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*(Be upright for Allah, bearers of witness with justice.)*[^1]

Imam Ali (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ يُنْصِفُ مِنْ نَفْسِهِ لَمْ يَزِدهُ اللهُ إلاَّ عِزًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*(One, who exhibits fairness on his part, Allah shall increase him in
glory.)*[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

A person’s faith does not become perfect until he observes fairness with
respect to himself and others. In exchange, God shall increase his
honour and glory.

Man, by nature, prefers his own self and loves everything that is
associated with him. He also possesses a dislike for everything bad and
evil. Thus, if he helps someone in need, he would be commended by one
and all. Similarly, (justice demands that) if he does not desire
anything bad and evil for himself, he should not desire it for the
others too.

This also holds true when mediating between two warring parties; never
should he side unfairly with one, against the other, even if the outcome
results in his own detriment.

1) An Advice from the Holy Prophet
----------------------------------

An Arab approached the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) when he was about to embark
upon a military expedition.

Seizing the reins of the Prophet’scamel, he said, “O’ Prophet of Allah!
Inform me of a deed that would earn me Paradise.”

“Conduct yourself with people in the same manner as you would want them
to behave towards you and refrain from doing to them what you would not
want them to do to you,” advised the Prophet (s.a.w.) and then added,
“Let go of the reins (for I have to go for jihad).”[^3]

2) The Equity of Imam Ali
-------------------------

*Shu’bi* narrates:

Like the other youths, I entered the vast open ground of Kufah, where I
witnessed Amirul Mu'mineen (a.s.) standing beside two containers which
were filled with gold and silver coins. He had a small whip in his hand.
A huge crowd had gathered around him and he kept them back by means of
his whip, to prevent them from hampering the distribution of the money.

The Imam (a.s.) began distributing the money amongst the people until
nothing remained for himself and he returned home empty-handed.

I returned home and said to my father, “I witnessed a very strange act
today but I fail to comprehend if this person’s action was good or bad
because he never retained anything for himself!”

My father inquired, “Who was the person?”

“Amirul Mu'mineen (a.s.),” I replied and then went on to narrate what
had transpired earlier. Upon hearing Ali’s (a.s.) fairness in
distributing the money, my father began to weep and said to me, “My son,
you have witnessed the most excellent person from amongst the
people.”[^4]

3) A’di Ibn Haatim
------------------

A’di, the son of the well-known Haatim Taai, was one of the sincere and
loyal companions of Amirul Mu'mineen (a.s.). From the year 10 A.H. when
he accepted Islam, A’di had always remained in the service of the Imam
(a.s.), and had fought alongside him in the battles of Jamal, Siffeen
and Nahrawaan. In the battle of Jamal he sustained an injury to one of
his eyes as a result of which he lost his vision.

Once he came to Mua'wiyah for some purpose. Mua’wiyah asked him why he
had not brought his sons with him.

“They were killed while fighting alongside Amirul Mu'mineen (a.s.),” he
replied.

“Ali has not been just to you, for he sent your sons to be killed while
he has kept his own sons alive!” said Mua’wiyah.

A’di retorted, “(On the contrary) I have not done justice to Ali for he
has been killed, whereas I am still alive. O’ Mua'wiyah! Our rage
towards you still smoulders in our hearts. Do know that (the pain of)
having our throats slit or the agony of death is easier for us to bear
than hearing bad comments about Ali (a.s.).”[^5]

4) The Fairness of Abu Dharr
----------------------------

On the way towards the battle of Tabuk[^6], Abu Dharr fell behind the
army because he was mounted on a slow animal. When the others realized
this, they notified the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), who said:

“If he possesses goodness in him, God shall make him reach you.”

Meanwhile, Abu Dharr, disappointed with his animal, dismounted and
proceeded on foot. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) found a convenient place
and had decided to pitch the tents, when one of the Muslims shouted that
there was someone in the distance approaching them.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) prayed:

*O’ Lord! May it be Abu Dharr!*

The others informed him that it was indeed Abu Dharr. The Prophet
supplicated:

*May Allah forgive Abu Dharr! He travels alone, shall die alone and
shall be resurrected alone.* He then asked the people to provide Abu
Dharr with some water, as he appeared to be thirsty.

But when Abu Dharr arrived in his presence, the Prophet (s.a.w.)
observed that he had a container of water in his possession, and so
asked him, “Abu Dharr! You had water with you and yet you remained
thirsty?”

“Yes! O’ Prophet of Allah! May my parents be sacrificed for you! On the
way, I was overcome by thirst. I reached a place where there was some
water. Tasting it, I found it to be cold and delicious and so said to
myself: (It is not fair) if I drink this water before the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.),” replied Abu Dharr.

Hearing this, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “O’ Abu Dharr! May Allah
forgive your sins! You shall lead your life in solitude, die as a
stranger, away from home, and enter Paradise alone.”[^7]

[^1]: Holy Qur'an, ch. Al-Maidah (5), vs. 8.

[^2]: Jaame' al-Sa'adaat, vol. 1, pg. 368.

[^3]: Al-Kafi, vol. 2, Chapter of Fairness, tr. 10.

[^4]: Al-Ghaaraat, vol. 1, pg. 55; Dastaanhai Az Zindagi Ali, pg. 7.

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: Located three hundred miles north of Medinah.

[^7]: Paighambar Wa Yaaraan, vol. 1, pg. 49; Al-Isaabah, vol. 4, pg. 65


