1. Morals
=========

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّکّ لَعَلىَ خُلُقٍ عَظِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*(And certainly, you stand on sublime morality.)*[^1]

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بُعِثتُ لِأُتَمِّمَ مَکاَرِمَ الْاَخلاَقِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

I have been sent (as a Prophet) to perfect the morals.[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

For man, good morals bring grace and elegance in this world, and relief
and happiness in the hereafter. They elevate a person’s status in
proximity to God and aid him in the perfection of his religion. All the
Prophets, *auliya*, and the chosen ones of God possessed exemplary
morals and every believer ought to adorn himself with such morals, in
order that his Scales of deeds become weightier on the Day of Judgement.
The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) has said: *The Haatim of our time is one, who
possesses good morals. Bad morals cause a person to suffer the squeezing
of the grave and the (punishment of) hell (in the hereafter), and a lack
of friends in this world.*

Man should not be measured according to his knowledge, wealth or
position, but rather, according to his commendable attributes, which
make him acceptable in the eyes of God and distinguished and praised in
the eyes of people.[^3]

1) The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and Noa’imaan
------------------------------------------

Noa’imaan Ibn A’mr Ansaari was one of the early companions of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) and had a jovial and jocose nature. It has been
reported that a tribal Bedouin once arrived in Madinah and, resting his
camel behind the mosque, entered inside to be in the presence of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.).

Some of the Prophet’s companions incited Noa’imaan by saying, “ If you
kill this camel, we could distribute its meat amongst ourselves, and the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) would have to pay its price to the owner.”

Following their advice, Noa’imaan killed the animal. When the owner came
out of the mosque and discovered his dead camel, he was furious and
decided to bring the matter to the attention of the Holy Prophet.
Noa’imaan, in the meantime, had taken flight.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) came out of the mosque, saw the dead camel and
inquired, “Who is responsible for this act?”

Those around him accused Noa’imaan so the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.)
despatched someone to bring Noa’imaan before him. Word spread around
that Noa’imaan was hiding in the house of Dhubaa’h Bint Zubair,[^4]
which was near the mosque. He had climbed into a pit and covered himself
with fresh grass. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) was told about Noa’imaan’s
hideout and he and his companions set out towards Dhubaa’h’s house. Once
there, the envoy revealed Noa’imaan’s hideaway to the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.), who ordered him to uncover the pit. When it was done,
Noa’imaan emerged, his cheeks and forehead covered with fresh grass. On
seeing him, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) asked:

“O’ Noa’imaan! What is this that you have done?”

He replied, “O’ Prophet of Allah! By Allah! Those people who have led
you to my hiding-place,were the same ones who persuaded me to kill the
camel.”

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) smiled and brushed away the grass from
Noa’imaan’s cheeks and forehead with his holy hands. He then paid the
price of the camel to the Bedouin[^5] on Noa’imaan’s behalf.

2) Khuzaimah and the Roman Emperor
----------------------------------

Khuzaimah Abrash, the Arabian king, never embarked upon any task without
first conferring with the Roman Emperor who was one of his closest
friends. Once, with the intention of seeking the Emperor’s opinion
regarding his children’s fortune, he sent a letter to him with his
herald. In the letter, he wrote:

“I feel I should set aside great riches for each of my sons and
daughters in order that they do not fall into bad times after me. What
is your opinion in this affair?”

The Roman Emperor replied: “Wealth is a sweetener - unfaithful and
impermanent! The best service for your children would be to embellish
them with good morals and laudable attributes, which will lead to
permanent leadership in the world and forgiveness (of sins) in the
hereafter*.*”[^6]11

3) The Conduct of Imam Sajjad
-----------------------------

Once, a relative of Imam Sajjad (a.s.) approached the Imam (a.s.) and
began to revile and insult him. The Imam (a.s.) did not utter a word in
reply but, after the man had left the gathering, he turned to the people
around him and said:

“You heard what this man said. Now I want you to accompany me andhear
what I have to say in response to his abuses and insults.”

The companions complied, “We shall surely accompany you; in fact we had
hoped that youwould reply to him at that very moment.”

The Imam (a.s.) set off towards the person’s house and was heard
reciting the following Qur’anic verse:

*And who restrain (their) anger, and forgive (the faults of) men; for
God loves those who d*o *good (to others)*.[^7]

The narrator says: “ When we heard the recitation of this verse, we
realized that the Imam (a.s.) intended to exhibit goodness towards the
person who had just insulted him.”

When he reached the person’s house, the Imam (a.s.) called out to him
and announced his arrival.

On seeing the Imam, the person immediately assumed that he had come to
respond to his abuses.

However, as soon as the Imam (a.s.) saw the man, he said, “O’ Brother!
You came to me and uttered things which were appalling and unpleasant.
If what you have attributed to meis true, I seek forgiveness for myself
from God, but if it is not so, then I pray that God forgives you.”

The man was shocked to hear these words and repented. He kissed Imam
Sajjad (a.s.) between the eyes and apologised, saying:

“My insults and abuse were unfounded and cannot be attributed to your
character. In fact, those insults befit me more than you.”[^8]13

4) Imam 'Ali and the Discourteous Trader
----------------------------------------

Imam Ali (a.s.), during his Calphate, would often undertake tours to
survey the markets and advise and guide the traders there.

One day, while passing through the date market, he noticed that a small
girl was weeping. Imam asked her the reason for her tears at which she
explained:

“My master had given me a dirham to purchase some dates. I purchased
them from this trader here, but when I returned home, my master did not
approve of them. Now I wish to return them but the trader refuses to
take them back.”

Imam 'Ali (a.s.), turned to the trader and said to him, “This child is a
slave-girl and has no authority of her own. Take back the dates and
return her money to her.”

The trader stepped forward and, in full view of the other traders and
onlookers, struck the Imam (a.s.) on the chest in an attempt to shove
him away from the front of his shop.

The people who were witnessing the incident, rushed forward and said to
the man:

“What do you think you are doing? This is Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.)!”

The trader’s face went pale as he stood flabbergasted. He immediately
took the dates from the girl and handed back the money to her.

Then, turning to the Imam (a.s.), he implored, “O’ Amirul Mu'mineen! Be
pleased with me and forgive me.”

The Imam replied, “I shall only be pleased with you when you change your
behaviour for the better and pay close attention to morals and
courtesy.”[^9]

5) Maalik Ashtar
----------------

Once, Maalik Ashtar was passing through the market of Kufah looking very
indigent. He was dressed in coarse canvas apparel and had placed canvas
on his head instead of a turban. One of the traders was sitting in his
shop when his eyes fell upon Maalik. He looked at him with contempt and
scornfully hurled a lump of earth towards him.

Maalik disregarded him and proceeded on his way. However, a person who
had recognized Malik and had witnessed the incident, reprimanded the
trader:

“Shame on you! Do you know who you have just humiliated?”

“No,” replied the trader.

“He was Maalik Ashtar, the companion of 'Ali (a.s.).”

A shiver ran through the body of the trader at the thought of the evil
deed he had committed. He immediately set off after Maalik in order to
offer his apologies. He noticed that Maalik had entered a mosque where
he was engaged in prayers and decided to wait for him. As soon as Maalik
had finished praying, the trader fell at his feet and began kissing
them. Maalik raised him and asked him what he was doing.

“ I am apologizing for the sin I have committed,” answered the trader.

Maalik explained, “There is no sin upon you. By God, I came to the
mosque especially to seek forgiveness for you.”[^10]

[^1]: Holy Qur’an, ch. Al-Qalam, vs. 4.

[^2]: Jaame’ al-Sa’adaat, vol. 1, pg. 23

[^3]: Tadhkirah al-Haqaiq, pg. 57.

[^4]: She was the cousin of the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his
progeny) and the wife of Miqdad Ibn al-Aswad

[^5]: Lataaif al-Tawaaif, pg. 26

[^6]: Namunah-e-Ma’arif, vol. 1, pg. 64; Jawaame’ al-Hikaayaat, pg. 270.

[^7]: Holy Qur'an, ch. Aale I’mraan (3), vs. 134.

[^8]: Muntahal Aa’maal, vol. 2, pg. 4.

[^9]: Daastaan-ha Wa Pand-ha, vol. 1, pg. 46; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 9,
pg. 519.

[^10]: Muntahal Aa’maal, vol. 1, pg. 212; Majmua’h Warraam Ibn Abi
Farraas.


