4. Perseverance
===============

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاسْتَقِمْ كَماَ اُمِرْتَ وَ مَنْ تاَبَ مَعَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*(Then stand you fast (O’ Our Apostle Muhammad) (on the right path) as
you are commanded, (by your Lord) as also he who has turned (to Allah)
with you.)*[^1]*40*

*Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنِ ابْتُلِيَ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِيْنَ بِبَلاَءٍ فَصَبَرَ عَلَيْهِ كاَنَ
لَهُ مِثْلُ اَجْرِ اَلْفِ شَهِيْدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*(Every Mu’min, who happens to be afflicted with a misfortune and (then)
exhibits patience in the face of it, shall be granted rewards equivalent
to that of a thousand martyrs.)*[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

Endurance and perseverance can reduce the severity of misfortunes and
calamities.

A person who possesses faith does not exhibit impatience when faced with
trials, lest his faith should suffer.

It has been said: *A Mu’min is more resolute than a mountain*. This is
because he is steadfast against the enemies and displays fortitude in
the face of misfortune, to the extent that no grief ever finds a way
into the heart of a perfect Mu’min.

Life, with its many troubles, will not present a problem for those with
a firm resolve. It is only those who lack sincerity in their
perseverance who tend to break down at the slightest of calamities.
After all, if the religion of God has reached us today, it is due to the
perseverance of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and the patience of Imam Ali
(a.s.).

1) The Family of Yasir
----------------------

In the initial period of Islam, a small and oppressed family of four
embraced the religion. Each of them displayed an incredible degree of
perseverance in facing up to the ruthless tortures of the polytheists.
These four persons were Yasir, his wife Sumaiyyah and their two children
A’mmar and A'bdullah.

Yasir stood steadfast in his religion, suffering the abuses of the
enemies, till he eventually died. His wife Sumaiyyah, in spite of her
advanced age, resolutely bore the tortures of the enemies till
eventually Abu Jahl inflicted her final injury. Sumaiyyah therefore
attained martyrdom as a result of a blow to her abdomen.

Abu Jahl, in addition to physically torturing Sumaiyyah, also tortured
her psychologically at a time when she was old and frail. He used to
taunt her saying:

“You have brought faith upon Muhammad not because of God, but because
you are enamoured with Muhammad and captivated by his good looks.”

Yasir’s son, A'bdullah, was also subjected to great tortures but he too
remained steadfast. The other son, A'mmar, would be taken to the
scorching desert, stripped under the hot sun and have an iron
coat-of-mail placed over his half-burnt body. He would then be forced to
lie on the heated sand, the particles of which were like tiny
smouldering pieces of iron from the blacksmith’s furnace. As a result,
the chains of the coat-of-mail would penetrate into A’mmar’s body and he
would be told,“Reject Muhammad (s.a.w.) and worshipLat and U’zza,”but
A'mmar never succumbed to their torture.

The burning metal left such traces imprinted upon his body that when the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) saw him, A’mmar appeared to resemble someone who
was afflicted with leprosy. The disease-like marks upon the face, arms
and body of A’mmar gave him the appearance of a leper.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) used to say to this family:

“O’ Family of Yasir! Be patient and remain steadfast, for undoubtedly
Paradise is your abode*.*”[^3]

2) You are not Inferior to an Ant
---------------------------------

Amir Taimur Gurgaan, was someone who was so firm and unfaltering in
every predicament, that he did not cower from any misfortune. When the
reason for this was sought from him, he said:

“Once, having fled from my enemies and seeking refuge in the ruins of a
worn down and dilapidated building, I was reflecting over my future when
my eyes suddenly fell upon a small and weak ant, carrying a grain bigger
than itself, endeavouring to climb to the top of a wall.

“Looking carefully and counting accurately, I found that the grain had
dropped from its clutches sixty seven times before the ant finally
managed to make it to the top of the wall with it. The spectacle of this
effort on the part of the ant infused within me strength of such great
magnitude that I am never able to forget it.

“I said to myself: *O’ Taimur! You are by no means inferior to an ant.
Arise and get back to work*.I got up and gathered my resolve till I
eventually came to acquire the courage that I now possess.”[^4]

3) Hadhrat Nuh (a.s.)
---------------------

Hadhrat Nuh (a.s.) lived a very long and difficult life which resulted
from his spending a lot of time among stout idol worshippers, attempting
to rid them of their false beliefs. However, in spite of this, he
persevered and exhibited steadfastness, withstanding their tortures and
troubles.

At times, the people would beat him up to such an extent that for three
whole days he would be in a state of unconsciousness while blood
continued to ooze out of his ears. They would pick him up and throw him
in a house but upon regaining consciousness, he would pray:

*“O’ Lord! Guide my people for they comprehend not!”*

For approximately nine hundred and fifty years, he invited people
towards God, but the people only increased in their rebellion and
obstinacy. They would bring their children towards Nuh (a.s.), point him
out to them and say:

“O’ Children! If you happen to remain alive after us, beware that you do
not follow this insane person!”

Then, they would say to him,“O’ Nuh! If you do not stop your speeches,
you shall be stoned to death. These people who follow you, are base and
ignoble ones, who have listened to your talks and accepted your
invitation without the slightest of reflection and deliberation.”

When Nuh (a.s.) spoke to them, they would insert their fingers into
their ears and pull their clothes over their heads so that they would
neither hear his words nor see his face. The situation reached such an
unbearable point that Nuh (a.s.) saw no alternative but to seek God’s
help and so he supplicated:

*“O’ Allah! I am overpowered. Assist me and grant me relief from
them.”*[^5]

4) Sakkaki
----------

Siraj al-Deen Sakkaki was an Islamic scholar and a native of *Kharazm*.

Sakkaki was a blacksmith by profession. Once, having constructed a tiny
and delicate iron chest with great effort and trouble, he decided to
present it to the king of the time. The king and his ministers
appreciated the delicate piece of work but while Sakkaki stood by
awaiting his reward, a scholar entered the courtroom, whereupon
everybody honoured him and sat before him in veneration and respect.
Sakkaki was very impressed and askedwho he was. He was informed that he
was one of the scholars of that period.

Sakkaki lamented the nature of his own profession and decided to seek
knowledge instead. He was thirty years of age when he approached a
school and expressed his desire to gain knowledge. The teacher of the
school said to him:

“At your age, I doubt if you can make any progress. Go away and do not
waste your timeunnecessarily*.*”

But after a great deal of insistence, Sakkaki procured the permission to
engage himself in seeking knowledge. His memory was very weak. Once, his
teacher asked him to memorize the following religious ruling: *The skin
of a dog becomes pure by means of tanning;* but the next day, when he
had to recite it before his teacher, he said:

“The dog said: The skin of the teacher becomes pure by means of
tanning.”

Hearing this, the students as well as the teacher burst out laughing and
ridiculed him.

Ten years of effort did not yield any result for Sakkaki, who became sad
and despondent. He turned towards the mountains but as he wandered, he
reached a place where drops of water were falling from a height onto a
large slab of stone. The persistent falling of water had carved a hole
in the stone.

Sakkaki studied the stone for some time and then said to himself:

“Surely your heart is not as hard as this rock. If you persevere, you
shall finally succeed.” Having resolved on this, he returned to his
school and from the age of 40, began his studies with even greater
diligence, vigour and patience. Sakkaki finally reached a stage whereby,
in the field of Arabic grammar and literature, the scholars of his
period looked upon him with wonder and awe.

He wrote the book Miftaah al-U’loom, which comprises twelve sciences of
Arabic literature and is regarded as one of the greatest and most
distinguished works on the subject.[^6]

[^1]: Holy Qur’an, ch. Hud (11), vs. 112.

[^2]: Jaame’ al-Sa’adaat, vol. 3, pg. 404.

[^3]: Hikaayat-ha-e-Shanidani, vol. 5, pg. 25; Tafsir al-Manaar, vol. 2,
pg. 367.

[^4]: Namunah-e-Ma'arif, vol. 1, pg. 174; Akhlaaq-e-Ijtimaae’e, pg. 41.

[^5]: Taareekh-e-Anbiya, pg. 48-52.

[^6]: Dastaan-ha-e-Maa, vol. 3, pg. 45.


