Threats of physical violence to secure the bayya for Yazeed
===========================================================

In*'Abu Hanifa ki Siyasi Zindagee page 51' al Misra page 115 Volume 2*
it is cited the way that Abdullah bin Umro bin Aas gave bayya to Yazeed:

"When Ibn Sa'eed approached his door with firewood, and said 'Give bayya
to Yazeed otherwise I shall set your home alight', Abdullah then joined
the majority by giving bayya to Yazeed".

Yes, burning people's homes was a favourite threat from the khalifa to
get people to see things their way. It didn't work to get the Bayya when
Abu Bakr and Umar burned Ali (as) and Fatima (as)'s house, but it worked
here and got the desired result. I wonder how the Nasibis live with
their religion?

Please see our article "Burning the house of Fatima [sa]"

Mu'awiya's use of threats to secure Yazeed's khilafat We read in al
Bidaya Volume 7 page 79 Dhikr events of 54 Hijri "5 people rejected the
bayya to Yazeed.

**Abdur Rahman bin Abu Bakr**

**Abullah bin Umar**

**Abdullah bin Zubayr**

**Abdullah bin Abbas**

**Husayn bin 'Ali**

Mu'awiya then personally went to Medina, summoned all five and
threatened them."

We read in*Tareekh Kamil Volume 3 page 455 Dhikr bayya Yazeed:*

"Five people rejected the bayya of Yazeed. Mu'awiya approached Ayesha
and said, 'If these individuals don't give bayya to Yazeed then I will
kill them'. Ayesha replied 'I have also heard news that that you are
threatening the Khalifah's sons, in connection with the bayya to
Yazeed".

We read in*Tareekh Tabari Volume 7 page 177 Events of 56 Hijri:*

"Abdur Rahman bin Abu Bakr refrained from giving bayya to Yazeed.
Mu'awiya called him and said 'You have the audacity to raise your hands
and feet against me? By Allah I am thinking of having you killed'. Abdur
Rahman said 'By killing me, then your punishment shall be that Allah
(swt) shall curse you in this world and throw you in Hell in the next"

We read in Nuzul al Abrar page 89 Dhikr bayya Yazeed:

"When Mu'awiya made plans to make Yazeed the khalifah he consulted the
people of Syria. He then made his way to Medina and Makka, to raise this
matter they voiced their opposition. Mu'awiya then intimidated and
threatened them".

Just look at the way that Mu'awiya secured the Khilafat that Abu
Sulaiman and Azam Tariq deem to be lawful. He threatened to kill the
sons of the rightly guided khalifahs. If Yazeed were really worthy of
Khilafat then the situation would not have reached a stage where
Mu'awiya was issuing threats to kill people to secure bayya!

Mu'awiya's withdrawal of stipends to Banu Hashim for their rejection of
YazeedWe read in*al Imama wa al Siyasa Volume 1 page 173 Dhikr Bayya* as
follows:

"Mu'awiya sent stipends to the people of Medina he increased their
amounts, with regards to Banu Hashim stipends were withdrawn as they had
rejected the bayya of Yazeed"

We read in*Tareekh Kamil Volume 3 page 256* :

"When Mu'awiya made preparations to return to Syria, Ibn Abbas
complained 'You have perpetuated injustice against us'. Mu'awiya replied
'Your chief Husayn bin 'Ali has not given bayya".

This was the legitimate bayya; Mu'awiya was willing to apply economic
sanctions as a bargaining chip for Yazeed's bayya! It was like the
United Nations. When Sunni Muslims contemplate their khalifas they
should know that their games were no different to those of America and
Britain in the UN - acting holier-than-though, while slaughtering and
getting away with it through legal loopholes. The problem with the Sunni
khalifas is their sincerity. Neither is America sincere, nor was the
khilafat sincere. This makes their protagonists pathetic.

Mu'awiya adopted evil methods to secure the bayya to Yazeed We read
in*Tafseer Ruh al Ma'ani page 73 Surah Muhammad Part 29* :

"If people analyse history, they shall realise how people were forced to
give bayya to Yazeed, and that Mu'awiya adopted every wicked method to
secure bayya".

Mu'awiya used every means at his disposal to secure bayya for his Nasibi
son: bribery, threats, intimidation and killing. Despite this we have
Nasibi such as Abu Sulaiman and Azam Tariq deeming his bayya to be
legitimate simply because he got it. This is no dissimilar to what goes
on at the United Nations. The Sunni khilafat is one big legal loophole
whereby the worst men are revered as saints. It is part of the Nasibi
religion...one big sickening legal loophole. The integrity, the honesty,
the TRUTH is with Shia Islam and the 12 Shia Imams.

Imam Husayn (as) refused to play ball with the American President of his
time, the Sunni khalifa Yazeed, appointed like George Bush was through a
legal loophole and through his father's influence. Nawasibis condemn
Hussain (as). Real Muslims applaud him. The mentality of the Nasibis is
that of southern redneckers in America - "What MY President (Khalifa)
does is ALWAYS right. God bless America (Sunni Islam).

How can WE be wrong? George Bush (Yazeed) is our leader. He's as good as
his father George Bush Snr. (Mu'awiya)." And just like George Bush Jr,
Yazeed was the vile (but stupid) son of a cunning father. And just like
Bush, he has the media (Nasibi scholars such as the Ansar site) feeding
the masses his lies. Only difference is Mu'awiya and Yazeed, father and
son, were several times worse even than the Bushes in the White House.

Abu Sulaiman al Nasibi's claim that there was an ijma in Yazeed's
khilafat is an absolute lie Advocate of Mu'awiya Ibn Hajr al Makki
in*Thatheer al Janaan page 109 Dhikr Khalasa Jang Jamal* states:

"The Sahaba were just, but on some occasions they would make such
mistakes that were not becoming of the Sahaba. Such mistakes can be
highlighted. For example Mu'awiya's appointing his son as Khalifah was a
mistake, his love for his son clouded his eyes. This love in effect made

Mu'awiya blind, and his making Yazeed the khalifah was a mistake, may
Allah (swt) forgive him."

This is a polite way to say nepotism.

According to Ibn Hajr al Makki, Mu'awiya was blinded by his love for his
son Yazeed. Nasibis such as Abu Sulaiman and Azam Tariq are just as
blind when they sing the praises of Yazeed and deem his khilafat to be
legitimate.

The acknowledgement that this appointment was a mistake destroys the
Nasibi notion that Yazeed's khilafat had ijma and was hence lawful. Had
there been ijma then there would have been no grounds to conclude that a
mistake had taken place. Mu'awiya through his blind love of his fasiq /
fajir son sought to secure his Khilafat via the State machinery of
terrorism and bribery.

Another defender of Mu'awiya, Allamah Abdul Hai states in*Mahmuwa Naqwi
Volume 2 page 94* states:

At the time of the bayya to Yazeed, Hadhrath Husayn and other Sahaba did
not give bayya. Those who did give bayya were forced to do so; it was
known that Yazeed was a fasiq and faajir.

This is further proof that people were pressured to give bayya, thus
meaning that Abu Sulaiman's glowing curriculum vitae for Yazeed, namely
that his khilafat had ijma, is a clear lie.

In*Fatawa Azeezi page 227 al Muhaddith Shah Abdul Aziz* states as
follows:

"People in Makka, Medina and Kufa were unhappy at filthy Yazeed being
made heir apparent, and Imam Husayn, Abdullah bin Umar, Abdullah bin
Abbas, Abdullah bin Zubayr and other Sahaba did not give bayya".

Medina was the capital and heart of Islam where the family of the Holy
Prophet (saws) and remaining companions lived. When the people of Madina
rejected the khilafat of Yazeed then to all extent and purposes Nasibi
Abu Sulaiman's claim that Yazeed's khilafat was legitimate on account of
ijma is an absolute lie. It doesn't get more clear-cut than this.
In*Shaheed Karbala page 11 Part 19* the Hanafi scholar Mufti Muhammad
Shaafi writes:

"Yazeed's personal lifestyle was such that many in the vast Ummah did
not deem him to be the khalifah. The people (Sahaba) opposed this
planning, many opposed it till their last breath, and the situation got
to a point where residents of Medina, Kufa and Kerbala were massacred."

This author has also through his pen discredited the claim that Yazeed
had attained ijma of the people.

We read in*Takmeel al Iman page 178 by Shah Abdul Haq Dehlavi* :

"How could Yazeed be the Ameer when Imam Husayn was present? How was it
a duty to obtain ijma (in this circumstance) when the Sahaba and their
children were present at that time and when they had already voiced
their opposition to this order? They were aware that he was an enemy of
Allah (swt), would drink, did not offer Salat, committed Zina
(adultery), he could not even refrain from copulating with his Mahram
relatives (incest - having sex with sisters, daughters etc)."

This further destroys Nasibi Abu Sulaiman's false claim that ijma
constitutes legitimacy. Shah Abdul Haqq also wrote in Ba Shabaath
basnaath page 36 as follows:

"The reality is Yazeed was born in 25 or 26 Hijri, and just like his
father public disdain was no barr on him attaining power". i.e. father
and son displayed a trait peculiarly common to many notorious families,
who want power at any cost, even human life.

Maulana Akbar Shah Abadi in*Tareekh Islam Volume 2 page 56* stated:

"Mu'awiya's securing bayya for his son during his lifetime was a major
mistake, this mistake was on account of his blind love for his son".

We have faithfully relied on Sunni sources to prove that the claims of
any Muhaddith that ijma was secured for Yazeed is an absolute lie.

Mu'awiya's securing support for Yazeed via his political rally in Makka
We have already given some examples with regards to Mu'awiya's
intimidation tactics to gain support for his son. At this point it would
be fitting to take apart this romantic notion that Ansar.Org's Abu
Sulaiman had portrayed in his article on Mu'awiya:

Mu'awiyah was eager for people's agreement to give allegiance to his son
Yazeed. He resolved to take allegiance to Yazeed as a crown prince. So
he consulted the grandest companions, the masters of the people and the
district's governors. They all accepted. Delegations from the districts
came with acceptance to give allegiance to Yazeed. Ha...ha...ha. What a
bunch of lies for our readers to laugh at: What's this 'grandest
companions'? We have proved that Mu'awiya killed or bribed them all!
This is called whitewashing history...something very common in Sunni
Islam. Sometimes the Nawasibis even rewrite history. Yes, it's the Santa
Claus fairytales again in a different guise.

That Pinocchio factor in Sunni Islam, like you have in today's world
leaders...they just lie. Abu Sulaiman must have a very rich plastic
surgeon. What, how many nose jobs is it now? We would like to cite an
example of this wonderful 'consultation' process that Mu'awiya adopted,
and leave it to our readers to think whether this bayya was really as
popular as Abu Sulaiman would have us believe. We read in*Tareekh Kami*
l, Dhikr events of 56 Hijri*Volume 3 pages 257* :

"In his efforts to secure bayya for Yazeed, whilst in Makka Mu'awiya
summoned the key members from the families of Abu Bakr, Umar, Banu
Hashim and Ibn Zubayr to be brought to him. He then said to them all 'I
am about to make a speech and should any one of you interrupt me, this
shall be the last thing that he shall say, his head shall be removed
with this sword'. He then called an officer and said that he should
position two soldiers next to each of these chiefs, 'should they oppose
what I say then strike off their heads'.

The chieftains were then brought before the podium accompanied by the
guards. Mu'awiya began to speak, he praised the chieftains and then said
that these individuals 'have expressed their pleasure at the bayya given
to Yazeed and have also given bayya', with that the speech was brought
to an end. When these Chieftains left and the people asked them about
the situation, they said 'we have not given bayya to Yazeed'. When they
were

asked why they had not spoken up, they replied, 'we were under the
threat of death'.

Nasibi ideology justifies such methods of despotic government. For them,
obedience to the leader, be that man lawful or not, is mandatory. We the
Shia do not regard as true Khalifas men who broke the sacred rules by
which leadership is bestowed. This is a cardinal difference between Shia
and Sunni. The Sunnis believe that a man who fixes the elections and
becomes leader must be obeyed, or even one who like Mu'awiya murdered to
do so. There is no other explanation other than this is as might is
right, they believe, and all that counts is that man's holding the
leadership and the army. The Shia believe that the leader must be
bestowed with leadership in an honest and halal fashion.

We believe that one who is unlawfully appointed is not the lawful
leader. The unlawful leader has no right to demand our obeisance.
Unbiased men and women can decide on who is right, Shia or Sunni. It is
as obvious as the difference between day and night. It is in this
context that the case of Yazeed becomes an embarrassment for Sunnis. For
their khalifa Yazeed denied that Muhammad (saws) was even a prophet, in
al Tabari stating that the Qur'an was a fabrication. In the first year
of his rule Yazeed slayed al-Husayn (as), in the second year of his rule
he put the people of Madina to the sword, and in the third year of his
rule he burned the Ka'aba.

All three actions are in the Sunna of Shia and Sunni acts which condemn
a man to hellfire. Yet by Sunni orthodoxy Yazeed must be obeyed, and
those of the khalifa's army who refused to slay Husayn (as), slay the
people of Madina, or burn the Ka'aba, were transgressors! Conscience
does not exist in Sunni Islam when it comes to the relationship of
client/citizen to leader. The notion of individual accountability for
one's actions is dummed down when it comes to obeying the leader.

This strange and morally unacceptable position comes from the fact that
men like Mu'awiya and Yazeed had scholars in their pockets, on their
payroll, bribed like the men named above, to spin doctor Hadith that
were falsely attributed to Muhammad (saws). Sahih Bukhari notes Abu
Hurayra being caught lying about the Hadith he would fabricate, yet the
same Sahih Bukhari, each word of which is Gospel and the truth for
Sunnis, takes most of its Hadith from the same Abu Hurayra.

Summary of these references
---------------------------

We have only selected a few highlights depicting the wonderful methods
that Mu'awiya had adopted to secure his son's position as Khilfat'ul
Muslimeen. He employed the following tactics:

**Bribery, financial indictments and political positions**

**Economic sanctions**

**Physical intimidation**

**Threats of violence**

**State sponsored executions and state terrorism**

**Poison administered by his secret police**

It is ironic that the great Nasibi debater Abu Sulaiman in his pathetic
defence of Mu'awiya (that we have refuted) made the comment:

Mu'awiyah did not force people to give allegiance to his son Yazeed

Perhaps we are being a little nave, but can we not construe his methods
of sanctions, intimidation, violence and murder to secure this bayya as
evidence of coercion on his part? Or does this Nasibi have a different
definition of the word 'force' to the rest of the human race?

We appeal to those with brain cells, is this the way that ijma is
attained? Can we really extol the legitimacy of a Khalifah who comes to
power under the shadow of such methods? Is this how you sell the Islamic
concept of khilafat to non-Muslims?


