Was Yazeed's khilafat rightful?
===============================

Abu Sulaiman al Nasibi in his article on Mu'awiya had tirelessly sought
to canvass for his Imam Yazeed's right to rule by stating:

Ansar.org states:Many Companions gave him the allegiance as well.
Al-Hafedh Abdulghani Al-Maqdisay says: "His (Yazeed's) caliphate is
rightful, sixty of the companions of the prophet peace be upon him gave
him the allegiance. IbnUmar was one of them."*[Qayd Al-Shareed min
Akhbar Yazeed, by Ibn Khaldoun, p.70]*

The concept of ijma is null and void since Allah (swt)'s opposition to
the bayya to Yazeed can be proven from the Qur'an Here we shall rely
upon the following sources of Ahl'ul Sunnah and their commentaries of
Surah Baqarah verse 124 (Yusuf 'Ali transliteration):

"And remember that Abraham was tried by his Lord with certain commands,
which he fulfilled: He said: "I will make thee an Imam to the Nations."
He pleaded: "And also (Imams) from my offspring!" He answered: "But My
Promise is not within the reach of evil-doers."

We will rely on the following classical Sunni tafseer's to understand
how the leading Sunni Ulema interpreted this verse.

*Tafseer Khazana volume 1 page 89*

*Ma'am al Tazeel Volume 1 page 89*

*Fathul Qadeer Volume 1 page 140*

*Faseer Mudharik al Tazeel Volume 1 page 84*

*Tafseer Durre Manthur Volume 1 page 118*

*Tafseer Jama al Mubeen Volume 1 page 118*

*Tafseer Gharab al Qu'an Volume 1 page 439*

*Tafseer Ibn Katheer Volume 1 page 167*

*Ahkam al Quir'an Volume 1 page 69*

*Tafseer al Kabeer Volume 1 page 494*

Let us first of all see what Allah (swt) says in Surah Baqarah verses
124:

In Tafseer Khazana volume 1 page 89 we read as follows:

"Allah (swt) said to Ibrahim (as) that we have made the condition of
Imamate to be the same as that of Prophethood, that he who amongst your
descendants is Dhaalim cannot attain it".

The verse clearly guarantees Imamate to be administered, but NOT to
those that are unjust. The Ahl'ul Sunnah Ulema in their tafseers have
defined Dhalimoon (pronoun of the noun Dhaalim) as kufr and fisq
(transgression). Both of these traits were inherent in Abu Sulaiman's
Imam Yazeed ibn Mu'awiya.

The opinions of Ahl'ul Sunnah on the kufr and fisq of Yazeed As evidence
we are relying on the following texts of Ahl'ul Sunnah:

*Al Bidayah wa al Nihaya Volume 8 pages 232,224 and 248*

*Siyar A'lam Al-Nubala" Volume 4 pages 37-38*

*Al Sawaiqh al Muhroqa page 131*

*Thatheer al Janaan page 115*

*Sharh Fiqh Akbar page 73*

*Fatawa Azeezi pafe 80 Dhikr Yazeed*

*Nuzool al Abrar page 97 Dhikr Yazeed*

*Ya Nabi al Mawaddath Volume 2 page 325 Part 60*

*Al Nasaa al Kaafiya page 120*

*Tareekh Ibn Khaldun Volume 1 page 179*

*Sharh Aqaid Nasfee page 113 Dhikr Yazeed*

*Tareekh Kamil Volume 3 pages, 152, 153 and 156 and 450 events of 52
Hijri*

*Al Imama wa al Siayasa page 165*

*Iqd al Fareed Voume 2 page 258 Dhikr Yazeed*

*Tareekh Abu al Fala Volume 1 page 186 Dkihr al Khabar Mu'awiya*

*Al Akbar al Taweel page 268 Dhikr Yazeed*

*Tareekh Tabari Volume 7 page 146*

*Rasail page 129 by Abu Bakr Jauzi*

*Maqathil Husayn page 172 Ch 9*

*Tadkhira Khawwas page 164*

*Shazath al Dhabab Volume 1 page 69 events of 61 Hijri*

*Tareekh al Khulafa page 204 Dhikr Mu'awiya*

*Al Khabar al Awal page 61 Dhikr Hukumith Ibn Ziyad*

*Tareekh Khamees oage 300 Dhikr Yazeed*

*Hayaath al Haywaan Volume 2 page 196*

*Tareekh Islam Volume 2 page 356 events of 63 Hijri*

*Ahsan aur Meezan Volume 5 page 284*

*Tafseer Mazhari Volume 5 page 61 Surah Ibraheem part 13*

*Murudjh al Dhahab Volume 3 page 78 Dhikr Yazeed*

*Taufa Ithna Ashari page 6 Chapter 1*

*Muttalib al Saul Volume 2 page 26 Dhikr Husayn*

*Nur al Absar page 139 Dhikr Husayn*

*Sharh Muqassid Volume 2 page 309 Part 6*

*Al Tabaqat al Akbar Volume 5 page 96*

*Mustadrak al Hakim Volume 3 page 522*

*Tareekh Ibn Asakir page 275*

*Al Isaba page 181*

*Meezan al Itidal Volume 4 page 440*

*Wafa al Wafa Volume 1 page 127*

*Tahdheeb al Itidal Volume 11 page 361*

*Tabthaseer wa al Sharaf page 265 Dhikr Yazeed*

*Mujum al buldan Volume 2 page 253 Dkikr Harra*

*Fathul Bari Volume 13 page 70 Dhikr Yazeed*

*Irshad al Sari Volume 10 pages 171 and 199 Bab ul Fitan*

*Sirush Shahadathayn page 26 Dhikr Shahadath Imam Hasan*

*Minhajj al Sunnah page 239 Dhikr Yazeed*

*Takmeel al Iman page 178*

*Shaheed Karbala pages 11-12 by Mufti Muhammad Shaafi*

*Sharh Muwatta Imam Malik Volume 5 page 435 by Shaykh Muhammad Zakaria*

*Tareekh Milat page 55 Part 3 by Qadhi Zaynul Abideen*

*Tarrekh Islam Volume 2 page 56 by Akbar Najeeb Abadhi*

*Bahar Shariat Volume 1 page 76*

*Hidayaath al Shi'a Volume 1 page 95 by Allamah Rasheed Ahmad Gangohi*

*Isthaklah ai Yazeed page 312 by Maulanan Lal Shah Bukhari*

*Fitna Kharijee Volume 1 page 267 by Qadhi Madhar Husayn*

*Mukthubaath Shaykhul Islam Volume 1 page 267 by Maulana Husayn Hamdani*

*Sharh Shifa Volume 1 page 694 by Mulla 'Ali Qari al Hanafi*

*Siraaj Muneer Sharh Jama Sagheer Volume 3 page 382*

*Hujutul Balagha page 507*

*Qasim al Ulum page 221*

*Nabraas ala Sharh Aqaid page 553*

*Ahsaaf al Ghaneen page 210*

*Yazeed bin Mu'awiya page 30 by Ibn Taymeeya*

*Muktobaath page 203 by Qadhi Thanaullah Panee Pathee*

*Al Shabeeya page 60 by Barelvi*

*Al Mafooz page 114 Barelvi*

*Ahsaan alwa page 52 by Barelvi*

*Ahkam Shariat Volume 2 page 88 Barelvi*

*Fatawi Volume 5 page 51 by AA Thanvi*

*Fatawa Rasheediya Volume 1 page 7*

*Skahyk al Islam bu Muhammad Qaim Nanothi Voluime 1 page 258*

*Imam Pak aur Yazeed paleeth by M Shaafi page 33*

*Tabat Ibn Sa'd page 283 Dhikr Ma'aqil bin Sanan*

*Mirqaat Sharh mishkaat Volume 1 page 120*

*Umdah Qari fo Sharh Bukhari Volume 11 page 334*

*Fatawa Azeezi Volume 1 page 21*

*Izalath al Ghaneen Volume 1 page 368 by Maulana Haydher 'Ali*

*Muttalib al Saul page 26*

*Nur al Absar page 139*

*Neel al Authar Volume 7 page 181 Dhikr Jihad*

*Tahdheeb Abu Shakur Shaami page 15*

*Al Samra page 317 by ibn Shareef Shaami*

*Mujmua al Zadhaar page 241*

*Khilafat Mu'awiya aur Yazeed page 378 Dhikr Yazeed*

*Muruj al Nubuwat Volume 1 page 126*

*Ahkam al Qur'an Volume 3 page 119*

*Tareekh Ibn Asakir Volume 5 page 107*

*Tafseer Ruh al Ma'ani page 72 Surah Muhammad*

*Siraj Muneera Sharh Jama al Sagheera Volume 2 page 80 Letter Alif*

*Shadharat al Dhahab page 69, Volume 1*

*Wafa al-Wafa Volume 1 page 217*

Ibn Kathir's comments on Yazeed
-------------------------------

Ibn Kathir is the Wahabi's biggest historian and a student of Ibn
Taymiyya himself. As far as Wahabis are concerned, his words are written
in gold. Yet Ibn Kathir himself writes in al Bidayah:

"Traditions inform us that Yazeed loved worldly vices, would drink,
listen to music, kept the company of boys with no facial hair [civil
expression for paedophilia with boys, a form of homosexuality], played
drums, kept dogs [civil expression for bestiality], not a day would go
by when he was not in a drunken state".

Listen up you Nasibi scholars! This is what the second highest ranking
Wahabi scholar in history says, so why do you come out with this
nonsense about Yazeed? Can the religion of truth confusion?

Ibn Atheer's comments on Yazeed
-------------------------------

In*Tareekh al Kamil Volume 3 page 450* Ibn Atheer narrates from Munzir
bin Zabeer:

"Verily Yazeed rewarded me with 100,000 dirhams but this cannot stop me
from highlighting his state, By Allah he is a drunkard"

Allamah Dhahabi's naration and verdict on Yazeed
------------------------------------------------

Yazeed's drinking despite Azam Tariq's denials is such an established
fact that even Dhahabi, relied on as an authority by Abu Sulaiman,
testifies to this fact.

In "Siyar A'lam Al-Nubala" Volume 4 pages 37-38, Dhahabi narrates:

"Ziyad Hurshee narrates 'Yazeed gave me alcohol to drink, I had never
drunk alcohol like that before and I enquired where he had obtained its
ingredients'. Yazeed replied 'it is made of sweet pomegranate, honey
from Isfahan, sugar from Hawaz and grapes from BurdahYazeed indulged in
alcohol and would participate in actions that opposed the dictates set
by Allah (swt)".

In*"Shadharat al Dhahab" page 69, Volume 1* , Ibn al-'Imad al-Hanbali
cites these comments of Dhahabi:

"Mu'awiya's son Yazeed was an enemy of 'Ali, a Nasibi, a man of evil
nature, and a drunkard".

Ibn Jauzi's comments on Yazeed 'the drunkard'Ibn Jauzi in Wafa al-Wafa:

"Yazeed appointed his cousin Uthman bin Muhammad bin Abu Sufyan as
Governor of Madina. He sent a delegation to visit Yazeed who bore gifts
so that they might take the oath of allegiance to him. Upon their return
they said 'We have returned having visited a man who has no religion, he
drinks, plays instruments, keeps the company of singers and dogs [civil
word for bestiality], we declare that we have broken our allegiance to
him. Abdullah bin Abi Umro bin Hafs Mukhzumee commented 'Yazeed gave me
gifts. But the reality is this man is an enemy of Allah (swt) and a
drunkard. I shall separate myself from him in the same way that I remove
my turban [from my head]."

Ibn Hajr's comments on Yazeed
-----------------------------

In his book written against the Shi'a, Sawaiqh al Muhriqa, Ibn Hajr sets
out the traditional Sunni position on Yazeed:

"There is difference between Ahl'ul Sunnah over whether Mu'awiya's heir
apparent Yazeed was a kaafir. One group have deemed Yazeed to be a
kaafir, another has stated he was a Muslim but a fasiq (transgressor), a
fajir (one that commits debauchery) and a drunkard. There is consensus
over his fisq (transgression). One party of Ulema have stated that you
can curse him by name, this includes individuals such as Ibn Jauzi and
Ahmad. One group made up of individuals such as Ibn Jauzi deem Yazeed a
kaafir, others say

he was not a kaafir but rather this is a matter that has caused a
difference of opinion.

The majority of**Ahl'ul Sunnah** all agree that he was a fasiq
(transgressor), a fajir (one that commits debauchery) and a drunkard.
Waqidi had recorded a narration 'Verily we opposed Yazeed fearing Allah
(swt) would reign stones down on us, Yazeed considered nikah (marriage)
with mothers and sisters to be permissible and drank alcohol".

In Thatheer al Janaan, Ibn Hajr al Makki had stated:

"Rasulullah (s) witnessed a dream in which thirty individuals were
jumping on his pulpit like monkeys. This pained Rasulullah (s) so much
that until his death no one ever witnessed him smiling. The thirty
include the family of Marwan and Yazeed, Yazeed was the worst of them
and the greatest Fasiq, and there is a group amongst the [Sunni] imams
that have issued fatwas deeming Yazeed to be a Fasiq and a kaafir.
Rasulullah (s) said that the Deen would be destroyed at the hands of the
youth from Quraysh. This refers to Banu Marwan, Yazeed bin Mu'awiya and
others. Yazeed ranks amongst the most debased dhaalims and fasiqs of all
time".

Ibn Hajr al Makki like Abu Sulaiman and Azam Tariq was a major adherent
of Mu'awiya, and in fact wrote a book in honour of Mu'awiya. Yet even he
deemed Yazeed to be a fasiq. The Ulema of Ahl'ul Sunnah are united that
Yazeed was a fasiq. Nasibis such as Abu Sulaiman and Azam Tariq of
course beg to differ as they support anyone who hates Ahlulbayt, even if
that person uses his penis to penetrate the anuses of young boys and
dogs, and the vaginas of his sisters and mother. Nasibis portray the
most debased sinners as saints. The Santa Claus fairytale is taken to
new heights of lying with Yazeed. Yes, I said he had sex with his mother
also, for we read in Tareekh al Islam:

"Dhahabi narrates that when Abdullah bin Kuzai returned from Damascus he
stated that Yazeed performs zina with his mother, sister and daughters.
We had better start a movement to oppose Yazeed otherwise stones may
reign down on us".

This is one reason why Ibn Hajar al Makki (above) calls Yazeed one of
the most debased men in history.

A Sahaba's testimony that Yazeed was an incestuous drunkard In Isaba we
read:

"The Sahaba Maqil stated that 'Yazeed drank alcohol, committed zina with
his mahram relatives, infact he performed every type of bad action"

al Muhaddith Shah Abdul Aziz's comments on Yazeed In Sirush
Shahadhathayn, Shah Abdul Aziz states:

"Imam Husayn did not give bayya to Yazeed because he was a drunkard, a
fasiq and Dhaalim".

Ibn Taymeeya's condemnation of unjust Yazeed Ibn Taymeeya in*Minhajj* :

"Yazeed had the sword and hence he had the power to deal with anyone
that opposed him. He had the power to reward his subjects with the
contents of the treasury, and could also withhold their rights. He had
the power to punish criminals; it is in this context that we can
understand that he was the khalifah and king. Issues such as Yazeed's
piety or lack of it, or his honesty

or lack of it, is another matter. In all of his actions Yazeed was not
just, there is no dispute amongst the people of Islam on this matter".

Ibn Taymeeya here acknowledges that none of Yazeed's actions were just,
and then this automatically means some of his actions also fall within
the category of fisq. For a Nasibi such as Ibn Taymeeya to acknowledge
such a fact is a major coup, it seems that Azam Tariq and Abu Sualiman's
al Nasibi aqeedah is worse than Ibn Taymeeya for these Mullah's are
seeking to portray Yazeed in a pious just manner that even Ibn Taymiyya
does not! Tell me this you 21st century Nasibis. This is damming for
you. The grand sheikh of the Nasibis, Ibn Taymiyya himself, says that
Yazeed's evil character and actions are indisputable and unanimously
accepted by all scholars. So why have YOU taken it upon yourselves to
glorify Yazeed as a Santa Claus and saint? After all, you say Ibn
Taymiyya's opinion overrides that of any scholar. This proves that
Nasibi'ism /Wahabi'ism is no religion for it has no order or logic in
it. It is a confused cult. It feeds on the deep resentment and hatred
within the hearts of men. It is a vicious, irrational cult that is
pathetically humiliated when asked to debate in the open arena. Ibn
Taymiyya's own fatwa on Yazeed damns Nasibi'ism/Wahabism, which he is
the leading scholar of. Just recite this fatwa to**ANY Nasibi** and you
will stop him dead in his tracks.

Yazeed's rule was dogged by alcoholism and transgression We read
in*Muruj al Dhahab* :

"Due to his hatred of Allah (swt) Yazeed openly drank alcohol. In his
deeds he followed the Seerah of Pharoah, but Pharoah was more just to
his own subjects."

Ibn Khaldun states:

"Yazeed's time of governance can be seen as fisq and debauchery, and the
blame is on Mu'awiya who should have controlled him".

We read in Tareekh Kamil:

"The narrator states 'By Allah, Yazeed drinks alcohol and abandons
Salat"

We read in Tareekh Abul Fida:

"Yazeed played the tambourine, drank alcohol and raised bears [civil
expression for bestiality]".

Hayaath al Haywaan states:

"Yazeed would hunt with cheetas, play chess and drink alcohol".

People opposed Yazeed due to his atrocious deeds We read in Tareekh
Khamees:

"The people of Medina broke the bayya to Yazeed on account of his bad
acts, he used to drink alcohol"

Qadi Thanaullah's comments on Yazeed's kufr poetry We read in Tafseer
Mazhari:

"Yazeed deemed drinking alcohol to be Halaal, and he recited these
couplets 'if the Deen of Ahmad deems alcohol to be haraam Any narrations
by Yazeed are to be rejected In Ahsan aur Meezan:

"Yazeed was a fasiq, faajir, we cannot rely on his narrations"

Yazeed was such a fasiq that not a single hadith of his can be accepted,
when this is the case then his khilafat cannot be accepted either. Shah
Abdul

Haqq Dehlavis comments on impure Yazeed the drunkard In*Takmeel al Iman
page 97* Shah Abdul Haqq Dehlavi gives Yazeed a number of titles such as
impure, fasiq and drunkard.


