The stance of Imam Hussain [as]
===============================

**Was this only a political dispute? Azam Tariq al Nasibi stated:**

Kr-hcy.com states:**IT WAS ONLY A POLITICAL DIFFERENCE WITH YAZID AND
HAZRAT HUSAYN WANTED TO RECTIFY THE SITUATION. IT WAS NEVER A
CONFRONTATION BETWEEN ISLAM AND KUFR AS NONE OF THE CONTESTANTS EVEN
ONCE CALLED EACH OTHER AS KAFIR (INFIDEL).**

Reply One
---------

What this Nasibi has failed to recognise is the fact that opposition to
Ahl'ul bayt (as) is inexorably linked to the Deen; it cannot simply be
watered down to a political dispute. In this connection we shall cite a
narration of a Sunni scholar Allamah Shibli:

"'Ali [r] said to Mu'awiya 'Guard yourself from hating me since
Rasulullah (s) said that on the Day of Judgement those that hate me
shall be turned away from the Pond of Kauthar and be thrown in the
fire".

This one example serves as proof that Mu'awiya's hatred / opposition to
Imam 'Ali (as) can never be defined as a political dispute. Had it just
been a political matter, Hadhrath 'Ali (as) would not have threatened
Mu'awiya his enemy with Hell Fire. This example serves as proof that
even the political enemies / opponents of 'Ahl'ul bayt (as) shall burn
in Hell.

Reply Two
---------

Imam of Ahl'ul Sunnah al Hafidh Jalaladun Suyuti records this tradition
in Khasais al Kubra, on the authority of Sahaba Uns bin Harith: "I heard
Rasulullah (s) say 'Verily my son [Husayn] will be killed in a land
called Kerbala, whoever amongst you is alive at that time must go and
help him".

Khasais al Kubra Volume 2 page 125 (Maktaba Nurree Rizvi Publishers,
Pakistan If this was only a political dispute, then why did Rasulullah
(s) deem it incumbent on the Sahaba to help his grandson Husayn (as),
who he called his son? Politics is something without compulsion, for in
Islam it is part of religion, for Islam is a system of life. And there
is no ordinance in Islam that compels a person to follow a certain
political persuasion UNLTIL that person submits to Islam. But here
Rasulullah (s) commands the companions to side with Imam Husayn (as),
making it a duty on them to side with Husayn (as). Hence it can only be
deemed to be a religious ordinance for THOSE WHO BELIEVE and have
embraced Islam. The difference between Husayn (as) and Yazeed was thus,
incontrovertibly, a religious one, for the Holy Prophet (saws) made it a
duty for the Muslims who follow his religion to side with Husayn (as).
This logic is undeniable and crystal-clear.

Was this a battle of truth against falsehood?
---------------------------------------------

**Azam Tariq Nasibi stated:**

Kr-hcy.com states: "**THE BATTLE OF KARBALA IN 61 A.H. WAS NOT A BATTLE
BETWEEN TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD OR ISLAM AND KUFR AS IS ALLEGED BY THE
SHIAS".**

This is an attempt by the champions of the 21st century Nasibi movement
to deny how all Muslims, Shia and Sunni alike, view the Battle of
Karbala. To most Muslims, Shia and Sunni alike, Husayn (as) embodied
faith and the

true religion, while Yazeed embodied kufr and the devil. After all, did
not Husayn (as)'s grandfather tell the Muslims to side with Husayn (as).
Thus most Muslims see in Karbala the ultimate battle between the forces
of good and those of evil.

The Nasibis would instead have us see it another way, simply as the
embodiment of good happens also to be the Third Shia Imam, and this
adulation for him by the Sunni world is intolerable to the Nasibi cult.
Ansar.Org's favourite Nasibi son Afriki also sought to discredit the
martyrdom of Imam Husayn (as) - by mocking the notion of most Muslims
that this was a battle between truth and falsehood. In his article on
'Who killed Imam Husayn?' he stated:

Ansar.org states: However, it is regrettable that despite the huge
amount of attention the subject of Karbala enjoys, the event is
persistently portrayed as two-sided. It is always depicted as Husayn
against Yazid, Right rising up against Wrong, the Quest for Justice
against the Forces of Oppression.

### Reply One

###

We have proven that Yazeed opposed the concept of revelation and denied
the Prophethood. To raise one's voice against such an enemy of God is
certainly proof that Imam Husayn (as) was on the party of truth and was
seeking to counter Yazeed's falsehood. Shah Abdul Aziz Dehlavi, a
staunch Wahabi, in*Taufa Ithna Ashari, Chapter 1 page 6* stated clearly
that: "Imam Husayn was aware of the falsehood of Yazeed the Paleeth
(impure)"

If opposition to such a transgressor is not Jihad then what is? How can
these same Nasibi define the Banu Umayyad campaigns of conquests,
pillaging / looting etc, to satiate Muslim greed and maintain a life of
luxury as Jihad? If Jihad is defined as fighting the kuffar then Yazeed
and his ancestors were kaafir, his father may have sought to cloak his
hypocrisy but Yazeed openly declared his kaafir beliefs, and al Istiab
also gives clear proof over the hypocrisy of Abu Sufyan.

When people opposed Yazeed in Madina, amongst them were the largest
concentration of still living Sahaba, and the vast bulk were
slaughtered. Amongst those who were martyred by the side of Husayn (as)
in actual battle were also Muhammad (saws)'s sahaba, while at the actual
battle not one sahaba was found on the side of Yazeed's army.

Were their actions [as Sahaba] false? Against Yazeed ranged the majority
of the surviving sahaba - were all misguided waging war against a man
who did not even know the Holy Prophet (saws), was a man who used his
penis to penetrate men/ dogs/bears/sisters/daughters/mother? Yazeed
expected the Bayya while he openly expressed that Muhammad (saws) was a
fraud. Yazeed and the clique of sahaba like Abdullah bin Omar (son of
the second khalifa) that supported him were scum of the worst kind.

### Reply Two

###

Ibn Kathir in al Bidaya wa al Nihaya Volume 8 page 231 narrates this
hadith on the authority if Abu Ubaydah: "My Ummah shall be ruled with
justice, until the first individual that shall destroy it, he shall from
the Banu Ummaya, his name will be Yazeed". In a short time span of three
years this Khalifah of Azam Tariq shed the blood of the family of the
Prophet, the

residents of Medina and catapulted the Kaaba. Rasulullah (s) pinpointed
the man that would destroy the Deen BY NAME. When this is the case then
opposition to him can automatically be defined as opposition to
falsehood. Why do the Nasibis support a man cursed BY NAME by the Holy
Prophet (saws) himself.

### Reply Three

###

Even advocate of Mu'awiya Ibn Khaldun in Mudaqqimah Volume 2 page 304
states:

"Husayn was on the right path, he attained martyrdom for which he shall
be rewarded". Another Mu'awiya supporter, the Grand Sheikh of Wahabis
Ibn Taymiyya states:

"The Ahl'ul Sunnah believes that Husayn was a martyr and he attained an
exalted rank on account of this martyrdom. Those that killed him are
worthy of God's condemnation and curse".

In this connection Allamah Shibli also makes an important observation:
"Husayn did not oppose giving bayya to Yazeed because he wanted to
become the Khalifa - his opposition was to elevate the kalima of Tauheed
and Deen of Hanafeeya, in this regards he was following the footsteps of
his father".

*Zaynab page 157*

When Imam Husayn, according the Ahl'ul Sunnah Sect, died a martyr then
his difference with Yazeed cannot be condensed down to a political
dispute. These Nasibi need to understand that you can only die a martyr
if you are defending the Deen - and Ibn Taymeeya said the Ahl'ul Sunnah
hold the opinion that Imam Husayn (as) was a martyr. Can we not
therefore conclude that the aqeedah of Ahl'ul Sunnah is that Imam Husayn
(as) the martyr was slain upholding the Deen and his killer Yazeed was
following falsehood? This is self-implicit if one accepts, as Ahl al
Sunna do, that Husayn (as) achieved the rank of martyrdom.

### Reply Four

###

Ibn Asakir records (in*Mishbaath ba Sunnath page 219* ) a hadith on the
authority of Hadhrath Ayesha: "Oh Allah never shower your blessings on
the cursed killer Yazeed. He will rebel against my beloved Husayn and
martyr him"

Does this not act as conclusive proof that the battle of Kerbala was a
battle between truth and falsehood? Rasulullah (s) deemed Imam Husayn
(as) a martyr and cursed Yazeed, his killer who rebelled against Imam
Husayn (as). Verily a martyr dies on the path of truth whilst a baghi
(rebel) dies on the path of falsehood. Need we say any more on this
topic?

Does the Sahaba's failure to support Imam Husayn (as) prove that this
was not a battle between truth and falsehood? This filthy Nasibi then
states:

Kr-hcy.com states:**IT IS EVIDENT FROM THE FACT THAT SEVERAL HUNDREDS OF
SAHABA WERE ALIVE AT THAT TIME BUT ALL OF THEM KEPT ALOOF FROM THIS
EVENT TO SAVE UMMAH FROM ENTANGLEMENT AND BLOODSHED. HAD IT BEEN AN
ENCOUNTER BETWEEN GOOD AND EVIL, THE SAHABAH WHO THROUGHOUT THEIR LIVES
HAD NOT SHIRKED JIHAD WOULD**

**HAVE DEFINITELY THROWN ALL THEIR WEIGHT BEHIND HADHRAT HUSAYN.**

Reply One
---------

Azam Tariq seems to suggest that the Sahaba would not be so shameless as
to ignore Jihad. These Nasibi claim to be the defenders of the Sahaba,
let us leave them aside for a moment and focus on Mu'awiya and the Banu
Ummaya clan. Did they not shirk their duties to defend Uthman at the
time of his murder? The entire Banu Umayya, including Mu'awiya stood
back and allowed their relative Khalifah be slaughtered. Poor old Uthman
was left on his own with no support, no son, brother in law or relative
sought to protect his dear relative.

Is this how the passive Gandhi ethics of Uthman were met? If these
Nasibi claim that they were merely following the words of noble Uthman
who stated no one whether that be his clan, the people of Medina or
Mu'awiya's army support him, then his desire is false since it is even
incumbent on a seventy year old man to protect his life. Failure to do
so constitutes suicide that contravenes the Shari'a.

Reply Two
---------

If the Sahaba could not shirk the responsibility of Jihad then we should
point out that poor old Uthman was cornered in his home for forty days
before his end and the Sahaba did not have the decency to fight and
protect their imam even though this oppression occurred in the city in
which they resided. When they shirked 'jihad' in their own hometown then
what likelihood was there to expect these same 'lions' to defend Imam
Husayn (as) who had been cornered two thousand miles away by Yazeed in
the remote plains of Kerbala?

Can these Nasibi produce any evidence that their Imam Yazeed had made a
declaration via radio / television / papers that he was intending to
fight Imam Husayn (as) on a specific date at a specific venue - and that
despite this, the Sahaba shirked their responsibilities?

Reply Three
-----------

Rather than protect poor Uthman history testifies that many played a key
role in his downfall and killing. Ayesha for example had issued takfeer
against Uthman. Why did the Sahaba not raise their objections and seek
to head off these libellous claims? Why is this Nasibi trying to use the
Sahaba's inaction with regards to supporting Imam Husayn (as) as proof -
when the same Sahaba were involved in killing Uthman? On Azam Tariq's
assessment can we therefore deem their action against Uthman to be
correct?

When the Sahaba had participated in the killing of Uthman, who as they
claim was the Khilafah over the Muslims, and this did not bother them in
the slightest, then how can Azam Tariq ask us why the Sahaba remained
silent and failed to side with Imam Husayn (as)? It's those Santas
again - the Nasibis keep hiding behind them while we lift their red
Santa kaftans and expose their uncircumcised privates.

Reply Four
----------

If this Nasibi claims that the Sahaba's inaction serves as evidence that
no Jihad had taken place then we should point out that in Medina a group
of the companions openly advocated their opposition to Yazeed and
demonstrated this opposition by removing their shoes from their feet.
Then the people of Medina rebelled and fought the army of Yazeed. Tell
us, can we describe the Sahaba's rebellion in Medina and fighting
Yazeed, as Jihad on their part and a battle between truth and falsehood?
Were the people of Medina not on the path of truth? Or were all those
who narrated this event of Harra including great Nasibis such as Ibn
Kathir Dimishqi misguided by Ibn Saba in this regard?

Reply Five: The Santas are cowards
----------------------------------

If Azam Tariq claims that the Sahaba never shirked Jihad then what can
we say of the fact that the Sahaba in the Battle Uhud fled for their
lives leaving Rasulullah (s) exposed to the enemy forces - does Surah
Aal-e-Imran not expose their Jihad phobia in this regards?

Reply Six
---------

Did the Sahaba and Tabieen not leave Umm'ul Momineen Ayesha during the
battle of Jamal? She was left on her camel, undefended. What happened to
the honourable Sahaba on this occasion. Did they not shirk their Jihad
duties here?

Imam Husayn (as) fought Yazeed's army in hand-to-hand combat as he was
brave, as were the sahaba who joined him. Most of the other sahaba only
fought Yazeed when Yazeed attacked them in Madina i.e. they were set
upon. This is because none had the courage of a Shia Imam, who took on
the might of the world' most powerful empire rather than abandon his
principles. Meanwhile, the Santas were running scared.

Was Imam Husayn (as) returning so as to give bayya to Yazeed? Tareekh
Kamil Volume 4 page 48 Imam Husayn

*Al Bidayah Volume 8 page 175*

*Tareekh Tabari page 314*

*Tadkhira Khawwas page 141*

We read in*al Bidaya that Uqbah bin Subhan* narrates:

"I accompanied Husayn from Makka until the time that he was killed. I
heard all of his speeches and at no point did he state 'Take me to
Yazeed so that I can give him bayya" The comments of an actual Sunni
scholar, Allamah Shibli in his book Zeyneb page 156 are also worthy of
note:

"Husayn said 'I am from the Ahl'ul bayt of the Prophet. Yazeed is not
worthy of receiving my bayya'"

Kr-hcy.com states**: WHEN HAZART HUSAYN WAS STILL ON HIS WAY TO KUFA HE
RECEIVED NEWS THAT HIS COUSIN, MUSLIM BIN AQEEL, WHO WAS SENT EARLIER BY
HIM TO KUFA TO ASCERTAIN THE CONDITIONS THERE, HAD BEEN MURDERED ON
RECEIVING NEWS OF THE DEATH OF MUSLIM BIN AQEEL, HAZRAT HUSAYN LOST
CONFIDENCE IN THE PEOPLE OF KUFA AND DECIDED TO RETURN BUT THE RELATIVES
OF MUSLIM BIN AQEEL UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF SABAI ELEMENTS INSISTED ON
AVENGING THE MURDER OF MUSLIM BIN AQEEL AND HENCE**

**HAZRAT HUSAYN DECIDED TO RESUME HIS ONWARD JOURNEY TO KUFA.**

Reply
-----

If the brothers of Muslim wanted to avenge his death - then what is the
big deal here? The desire to avenge the blood of an innocent is not a
reprehensible act. The Qur'an prescribes an eye for an eye and a tooth
for a tooth. Yazeed was responsible for the killing of an innocent here,
and the state being controlled by Yazeed had committed the atrocity, so
the innocent's brothers decided to follow God's Word and carry out the
penalty against the soldiers of Yazeed who had committed this action as
the state would do nothing having committed the atrocity.

The family of Rasulullah (s) were the rightful heirs of Hadhrath Muslim
(as) - if his brothers took action to fulfil a desire to avenge their
brothers unlawful murder at the hands of a demonic khalifa, then what is
the objection? It was no reason why Imam Husayn (as) should have halted
his journey. If the family of Rasulullah (s) had discussions amongst
themselves and continued on the journey then how exactly does this
absolve the transgression of Yazeed? If Imam Husayn (as) was intending
to return to Medina, a view for which there is no historical or textual
basis, then what basis did Yazeed then have to kill Imam Husayn (as)?

We the Shi'a believe that Yazeed, in order to strengthen his reign,
blocked Imam Husayn (as)'s march to Kufa at a place called Karbala. This
is testified to in all historical sources e.g. whole chapters in Tabari
and the chapters in all the other historical works that chronicle 60-61
AH. They also chronicle the fact that Yazeed's army then killed Husayn
(as) in a pitched battle.

This sin is worse than kufr. Husayn (as) was the last voice of open
dissension in the Ummah, and dictators like Yazeed deal with those that
speak out against their unjust ways by using their armed forces to
liquidate them. The choices that were put before Imam Husayn (as) were
to either accept the reign of Yazeed or die. If Imam Husayn (as) really
was returning to give bayya to Yazeed then there would have been no need
for this battle. The objective of bayya could have been carried out
through via an intermediary, and indeed Yazeed's commanders at the
Battle of Karbala said to Husayn (as) that he would be free to go if he
gave the bayya to Yazeed.

In fact it is manifestly clear that Yazeed wanted one thing and one
thing only from Imam Husayn (as) - his bayat. Husayn (as)'s refusal to
give this bayya was the trigger that enabled Yazeed to justify killing
Imam Husayn (as) to the Muslims. But other Muslims objected and said, as
most do to this day, that Husayn (as) could not have given bayya to
Yazeed as the latter was unlawfully appointed khalifa in breach of
treaty, and further Yazeed's character would have destroyed Islam had
the very grandson of the Prophet (saws) sanctioned such a demon as
Khalifah.

It is like voting for a homosexual into power - if he is elected it
means that homosexuality is not condoned by the people. This is the
state in many western countries today. Had the greatest and most learned
Muslim of the age, indeed the closest male blood of the Prophet (saws)
given the bayat, it would mean that dog/sister/bear/mother daughter
penetration was acceptable

in Islamic society. Given how fragile 60/61 AH was - Islam was still a
very new religion - Islam itself as a religion with laws for society
would have been destroyed.

This is why Husayn (as) is called the Saviour of his grandfather's
religion. Yazeed's ulterior motive was on top of extracting the bayat,
and thereby completing his agenda to decimate Islam as a religion in
society, to avenge the slaying of his family by Muhammad (saws) and Ali
(as) by exacting tribal blood revenge - this is obvious from his words
when the head of Husayn (as) was brought before him, in which Yazeed
claims that the Revelation to Muhammad (saws) was a power game of the
Hashim tribe, and one in which his own tribe of Umayyad had been the
losers which was now avenged by killing Muhammad (saws)'s grandson who
was also Ali (as)'s son.

Was Imam Husayn (as)'s alleged return from Karbala without fighting
proof that this was not a battle between truth and falsehood? Another
Nasibi, lieutenant of Azam Tariq, Hafidh Salah'udeen in his book
'Khilafat ai Mu'awiya aur Yazeed' echoed these comments in his book page
23 "If the battle of Kerbala was a fight between truth and falsehood,
then he [Husayn (as)] would not have made plans to return to Medina.
Haqq (truth) is linked to rules of martyrdom, falsehood is not linked to
anything"

Reply One
---------

Can this Nasibi cite us any proof that Imam Husayn set a date and venue
to fight Yazeed? Yet again the Nasibis adopt a tactic of using words
that give the impression that they are supported by historical facts.
The reader might think that this premise of the Nasibis is based on some
kind of textual source. There is none - it is just a fairytale of this
Nasibi that Husayn (as) intended to return to Madina rather than do
battle. Not one book, page, sentence, word, letter or dot in any book
exists that says this was his intention or that he made plans to return
to Madina. This is what Nasibis do every day in their speeches. They
just**LIE** to people.

I am angry at being**LIED** to like this. The most disturbing thing is
that this man Azam Tariq and his deputies have hundreds of thousands of
followers in places like Pakistan who believe every word of his. See how
the Nasibis just lie. Here the Nasibi makes up a whole story that Husayn
(as) was returning to Madina - as if he is an expert on history with
academic references. This story has, literally, just been made up by him
in this sentence.

However we shall refute this fairytale that has come out of this
Nasibi's deranged mind (Is this Nasibi on hallucinogenic drugs?) - we
are now having to refute the verbal diarrhoea that comes out of a
deluded mind: this is the level of argument the Nasibis have. If the
Imam (as) had set a date, and then not fought, then we would have to
accept that Imam Husayn (as) abandoned Jihad.

We the Shi'a believe that Imam Husayn (as) declared that he was the true
representative of Rasulullah (s) and hence he rejected the authority /
obedience to Yazeed. Yazeed's army, by cornering and killing Imam Husayn
(as), proves Yazeed's actions were false and Imam Husayn (as) was on the
path of truth. Had Imam Husayn (as) returned from Karbala that

would not in any way prove that Yazeed was on the right path, his
returning without fighting in no way means that Yazeed was right! What
on Earth was that reply from the Nasibis about in the first place? It
still does nothing to exonerate Yazeed. What this nasibi said is called
verbal diarrhoea.

It's malformed crap without any shape or substance that just comes out
and you can't control it. This is what Nasibis talk - crap with a
kaftan, a turban and an Arabic accent to pass off as something more
substantial. It is tragic that this turbaned crap is out there preaching
to Muslims and taking them astray.

Reply Two
---------

The Sahaba in Usamah's army returned without fighting We read in Sharh
Muwaqqaf Volume 1 page 746 Dhiky Ikhthilaaf Al-e-Islam Rasullulah (s)
said that whoever does not participate in the army of Usamah, Allah's
lanath be on such a person. N.B. This is not the Usamah bin Ladin of
today but the Usamah bin Zaid who was a companion of the Holy Prophet
(saws).

The Shaykhain were also present in this army. A battle that Rasulullah
(s) prepares and sends out is definitely a battle of truth, so why did
Abu Bakr and Umar leave the battle and return without fighting? This
Nasibi clearly believes that martyrdom is dependant on Jihad, then how
will these two individuals be forgiven for failing to participate in
Jihad whilst Rasulullah (s) was on his deathbed? If these Nasibi are
going to claim that the Shaykhain's return without fighting does not
prove that their Kaafir opponents were on the right path, Imam Husayn
(as)'s**ALLEGED** (in this Nasibi's dream) returning to Medina does not
prove the correctness of Yazeed's Fasiq Government.

Reply Three
-----------

Riyadh al Nadira states that Abu Bakr returned without delivering the
verses of Baraath to the kuffar. The deliverance of these verses was
definitely delivering truth against falsehood, and Abu Bakr's return
without delivering these verses in no way means that the kuffar were
right.

Reply Four
----------

Rasulullah (s) returned from Tabuk without fighting

We read*in al Bidayah Volume 5 pages 14* , that Rasulullah (s) prepared
a huge army to counter the kaafir threat at Tabuk, but he returned
without fighting. This expedition was definitely a battle between truth
and falsehood, and in the same way that Rasulullah (s) returned without
fighting does not mean that the kaafir Byzantines were in the right,
Imam Husayn (as)'s ALLEGED returning to Medina (in the Nasibi's dream)
in no way means that Yazeed was in the right.

Reply Five
----------

Rasulullah (s) returned from Makka without performing Hajj

The books of Ahl'ul Sunnah are replete with the fact that Rasulullah (s)
left from Medina to go to Makka and perform Hajj with the Sahaba. The
Kuffar and Makka prevented him from doing so and he returned without

carrying through this objective. Hajj is a duty, so how were all the
Muslims forgiven for failing to carry out Hajj that year?


