Yazeed's killing of Imam Hussain [as]
=====================================

Azam Tariq Nasibi stated:

Kr-hcy.com states:**"IT WOULD BE SEEN THERE FROM THAT YAZID HAD NO HANDS
IN THE MURDER OF HAZRAT HUSAYN. MOST OF THE HISTORICAL ACCOUNTS ARE
WRITTEN BY SHIAS AND AS SUCH HEAP ALL SORTS OF RUBBISH ON YAZID OUT OF
SHEER CONTEMPT AND HATRED AND DEPICT HIM IN ALARMING COLOUR WHICH IS FAR
FROM TRUTH AND REALITY. STILL SOME OF THE IGNORANT MUSLIMS ACCUSE HIM
UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF SHIAS. THE FACT IS THAT WHEN THE NEWS OF HAZRAT
HUSAYN'S MARTYRDOM REACHED YAZID, HE AND HIS FAMILY WEPT. YAZID EVEN
SAID: "CURSE OF ALLAH BE ON UBAIDULLAH BIN ZIAD. BY ALLAH! IF HE HAD
BEEN A RELATIVE OF HAZRAT HUSAYN HE WOULD HAVE NEVER KILLED HIM. I WOULD
HAVE ACCEPTED THE SUBMISSION OF IRAQIS WITHOUT THE KILLING OF HAZRAT
HUSAYN."**

Here we shall cite the following reputable texts of Ahl'ul Sunnah, that
confirm that Yazeed killed Imam Husayn (as):

*Maqathil Husayn al Khuwarzmee Volume 2 page 80 Chapter 9*

*Ya Nabi al Mawadath page 223 Chapter 91*

*Tareekh al Yaqoobi Volume 2 page 299 Dhikr Yazeed*

*Mtallib al Saul Volume 2 page 26*

*Nur al Absar page 139*

*Al Bidayah wa al Nihaya page 219 Dhikr 63 Hijri*

*Tareekh Kamil Volume 4 page 69*

*Tareekh Tabari page 408 Dhikr Ibn Ziyad*

*Akhbar al Tiwal page 384*

*Tadkira Khawwas page 159*

*Hayaath al Haywaan Volume 1 page 88*

*Tareekh Khamees Volume 2 page 301*

*Sawaiqh al Muhriqa page 134*

*Sharh Fiqh Akbar page 73*

*Taufa Ithna Ashari page 6 Volume 1*

*Izalath Ayn page 368*

*Ash Shiaath al Lamaath Volume 4 page 623 Bab Manaqib Quraysh*

*Shazarath al Dhahab Volume 1 page 69 Dhikr 61 Hijri*

*Murujh al DhahabVolume 3 page 71 Dhikr Yazeed*

*Tafseer Mazhari Volume 5 page 21 Part 13 Surah Ibrahim*

*Aqaid al Islam pahe 232 ny Maulana Abdul Haqq Haqani*

*Imam Pak aur Yazeed Palaeeth page 88*

*Aqaid Nafsee page 113*

*Sharh Muqassad Volume 2 page 309*

*Nuzul al Ibrar page 97*

*Irfan Shariath Volume 2 page 21*

*Fatawi Maulana Abdul Hai page 79*

*Shaheed ai Kerbala pages 11-12 by Mufti Muhammad Shaafi*

*Irshad al Sari (Sharh Bukhari) Volume 10 page 1717 Bab ul Fitan*

*Durre Maarif Volume 4 page 295 Dikr Zeyneb binte 'Ali*

*Sharh al Muneer Sharh al Sagheer Volume 1 page 80*

We read in Irfan*ai Shariath* :

"Yazeed tore away a piece of Rasulullah's heart, starving him for three
days and then killing him, together with his companions and then he
ordered horses to trample his body after his martyrdom, his body was
ripped to shreds. Hi head was then placed on a spear, this was a head
that Rasulullah (s) would kiss. The head was exhibited at various
places, people of the household were arrested and brought before the
wicked Yazeed, cursed is he who does not deem such acts as atrocious".

Are all these men, together with the authorities cited at the start
including the Grand Sheikh of the Wahabis Ibn Taymiyya, and his
successor Ibn Kathir, all SHIAS or influenced by**SHIAS** ??

It's like saying the Pope is Jewish.

I mean what can you say to a man who lies like Azam Tariq (and he is the
HEAD of the Wahabis in Pakistan, and they all speak these exported Saudi
lies].

Interviewer: Mr. Tariq [interruption]

Azam Tariq: No, my name is Mr. Abdul

Interviewer: Mr. Abdul....[interruption]

Azam Tariq: No, my name is Mr. Saleem

Interviewer: Mr. Saleem...[interruption]

Azam Tariq: No, my name is Mr. Mustafa

.....and on it goes.

There must be a medical syndrome for this behaviour....oh yes, it's
called pathological liar [also known as Nasibi Syndrome]. Maybe your
local Sheikh has symptoms of it.

Yazeed ordered his Governor Waleed kill Imam Hussain [as] We read in
Maqathil Husayn:

"Yazeed wrote a letter to Waleed the Governor of Medina, in which he
stated 'Force Husayn to give bayya. Should he refuse then strike off his
head and return it to me.'

Yazeed wrote to Ibn Ziyad telling him to kill Imam Hussain [as]
---------------------------------------------------------------

We read in Mutaalib al Saul that:

"Ibn Ziyad wrote to Husayn 'I have received information that you have
arrived in Kerbala, and Yazeed has told me not to kill you, provided you
accept his authority and mine.'"

Ibn Ziyad's own admission that he killed Imam Husayn on the orders of
Yazeed We read in al Bidayah:

"When Yazeed wrote to Ibn Ziyad ordering him to fight Ibn Zubayr in
Makka, he said 'I can't obey this fasiq. I killed the grandson of
Rasulullah (s) upon his orders, I'm not now going to assault the Kaaba'.

Interesting also to note the fact that Azam Tariq says that Yazeed
blamed Ibn Ziyad (his governor in Kufa at the time of the Battle of
Karbala) for the killing of Husayn (as). Yet we see here the fact that
Ibn Ziyad twp years AFTER Karbala is still in a position of authority in
Yazeed's government and army.

Had Yazeed sincerely wept for Husayn (as) (he did not and Azam Tariq is
quoting the story out of context - see imminently later) then he would
have dismissed and executed Ibn Ziyad for genocide. Indeed Yazeed kept
Ibn Ziyad in a position of authority in Yazeed's government, and indeed
Ibn Ziyad outlived Yazeed, till Shia rebels killed him during the
insurrection of Al Mukhtar to avenge the blood of Imam Husayn (as).

Testimony of Ibn Abbas that Yazeed killed Imam Hussain [as]
-----------------------------------------------------------

We read in*Tareekh Kamil* :

Ibn Abbas replied to a letter of Yazeed stating 'You killed Husayn ibn
'Ali as well as the youth from Banu Abdul Muttalib, who were beacons of
guidance."

The testimony of Abdullah Ibn Umar that Yazeed killed Imam Hussain [as]
We read in Maqathil al Husayn:

Ibn Umar wrote to Yazeed, 'Hasn't your heart gone black yet? You
murdered the family of the Prophet?'

The Nasibis want to drag the Muslims to hell to face the charge of
taking to their heart the man who hurt Muhammad (saws)'s soul more than
any other.

Mu'awiya The Second's testimony that his father Yazeed killed Imam
Hussain [as] We read in Hayaath al Haywaan:

"When Yazeed was succeeded to the throne by his son Mu'awiya he said in
his first sermon 'We are definite about Yazeed's wrongdoing, he killed
the family of the Prophet, deemed alcohol halal, and brought pain to the
Ka'aba."

This was the testimony of the succeeding khalifa, and Yazeed's own son,
Mu'awiya The Second.

Yazeed's own admission that he killed the family of the Prophet (s) We
read in Sharh Fiqh Akbar:

"Following the murder of Husayn, Yazeed said 'I avenged the killing of
my kaafir relatives in Badr through killing the family of the Prophet".
The testimony of Shah Abdul Aziz that Yazeed killed Imam Hussain[as]We
read in Taufa "Upon the orders of Yazeed the disgraceful people from
Syria and Iraq killed Imam Husayn".

The testimony of Shah Abdul Haqq that Yazeed killed Imam Hussain [as] We
read in Ashiath al Lamaath:

"It is unusual that some say Yazeed did not kill Husayn when he
instructed Ibn Ziyad to carry out the killing".

Yazeed's pride at killing Imam Hussain [as]
-------------------------------------------

We read in al Bidayah Volume 8 page 204:

"Ibn Asakir, writing on Yazeed, states then when Husayn's head was
brought before Yazeed, he recited the couplets of Ibn Zubayri the kaafir
'I wish my ancestors of Badr were hear to see the severed head of the
rebellious tribe [The Prophet (saws's tribe of Hashim]."

Did Yazeed express sadness at the death of Imam Hussain [as]?
-------------------------------------------------------------

Nasibi Azam Tariq's lies continue as follows:

Kr-hcy.com states**: THE FACT IS THAT WHEN THE NEWS OF HAZRAT HUSAYN'S
MARTYRDOM REACHED YAZID, HE AND HIS FAMILY WEPT. YAZID EVEN SAID: "CURSE
OF ALLAH BE ON UBAIDULLAH BIN ZIAD. BY ALLAH! IF HE HAD BEEN A RELATIVE
OF HAZRAT HUSAYN HE WOULD HAVE NEVER KILLED HIM. I WOULD HAVE ACCEPTED
THE SUBMISSION OF IRAQIS WITHOUT THE KILLING OF HAZRAT HUSAYN." THEN HE
ACCORDED A VERY GRACIOUS HOSPITALITY TO THE REMAINING FAMILY MEMBERS OF
HAZRAT HUSAYN AND ARRANGED THEIR RETURN JOURNEY TO MADINAH WITH GREAT
HONOUR AND RESPECT.**

### Reply One

###

We can establish from the texts of Ahl'ul Sunnah that not only was
Yazeed content with the death of Imam Husayn (as) he recited a couplet
that he had avenged the deaths of his kaafir ancestors, by the killing
of Imam Husayn (as) - can this poetry be deemed to be a couplet of
regret? Reply TwoTariq's reference that we presume is a crude
translation of the text in al Bidaya wa al Nihaya, we suggest that he
cite all that Ibn Katheer had written in that section so that the truth
can be made known to all.

We are quoting from*al Bidaya wa al Nihaya Volume 8 page 235* :

"When Ibn Ziyad killed Husayn and his companions and sent their heads to
Yazeed, he [Yazeed] became happy at the death of Husayn which is why the
position of Ibn Ziyad was elevated, but this happiness was only short
lived".

This text confirms that Yazeed was pleased that Imam Husayn (as) had
been killed and the rank of his killer Ibn Ziyad had automatically
increased in Yazeed's estimation. The happiness being short-lived means
that rebellions arose to avenge Husayn (as)'s martyrdom that threatened
to destroy Yazeed's khilafat - Madina, Makka and Iraq all rose up
against him, which is why he sent his army in to burn the Ka'aba and
sack Madina. Nasibis are not horrified, you see, by these actions by
their khalifa. This is as they have no sense of anything being sacred
save the remembrance of the Santas. They even reproach other Sunnis for
saying peace to the Prophet (saws).

The next portion is the part that Nasibis such as Azam Tariq and Bilal
Philips are most fond of citing (they tactically forget the above
paragraph). We are quoting from*al Bidayah wa al Nihaya Volume 8 page
235* :

"the situation reached a point of embarrassment for Yazeed and he said
'Curse be upon Ibn Murjan [Ibn Ziyad] he pained Husayn, made him
desperate. Husayn had asked to be allowed to roam freely wherever to see
me, or go to the frontier - but Ibn Ziyad rejected this. He [Ibn Ziyad]
killed him and has now due to this Muslim shall bear enmity towards me,
now every person, good and bad shall bear hatred in their hearts towards
me, people shall be shocked at my killing Husayn. I have nothing to do
with Murjan's son? May Allah (swt) destroy him and reap destruction upon
him'."

Carefully analyse the final comments of Yazeed in this regard:

"now every person, good and bad shall bear hatred in their hearts
towards me, people shall be shocked at my killing Husayn."

These words clearly prove that the killing of Imam Husayn (as) was upon
the orders of Yazeed, and t his act of cursing Ibn Ziyad was in effect a
tactical method to cover up his own culpability. These were crocodile
tears shed to display false grief as the Ummah now wanted revenge and
were blaming Yazeed. Indeed, the Islamic heartlands of Makka, Madina and
Kufa were now in open armed rebellion and Yazeed had lost control there.

Ibn Katheer further commented as follows:

"Verily Yazeed cursed Ibn Ziyad for his actions and spoke ill of him,
since the truth had dawned on him, that when the matter came out what
would happen to him? But, neither did Yazeed punish Ibn Ziyad for his
filthy act, nor did he say anything to him after, neither did he tell
people to learn from this lesson, via retelling and condemning the
episode".

*al Bidaya wa al Nihaya Volume 8 page 204*

If the argument is Yazeed didn't physically kill Imam Husayn (as) then
these Nasibi should know that Pharaoh is deemed the killer of the
Israelites even though he only issued the order for boys to be executed
though he didn't use the sword himself. Irshad al Sari Volume 10 page
171 Bab ul Fitan states clearly that Yazeed was happy at killing Imam
Husayn (as) and his disrespect of the family of Rasulullah (s) is a
proven fact.

Let us see the comments of the President of Shari'a Majid 'Ali in Bhar
Shariath:

'Those who in this day and age state 'who are we to comment on Yazeed
and Husayn and that they were both Princes' are cursed, Hell bound
individuals.'

Yazeed's treatment of the Ahl'ul bayt [as]
------------------------------------------

Yazeed's army looted the camps of the women of Rasulullah (s)'s
household and made them captives We read in al Bidayah Volume 8 page
188:

Following the killing of Husayn the tents were set on fire and women and
their possession were distributed and scarves were removed from the
heads of the women.

Habeeb as Sayyar Volume 2 page 33 also confirms that the tents belonging
to the Ahl'ul bayt (as) were set alight.

Iqd al Fareed Volume 2 page 254 states that the women of the household
were then imprisoned.

Did Yazeed treat the women from Ahl'ul bayt (as) with respect and treat
them as guests? Azam Tariq could have us believe that:

**Kr-hcy.com states: THEN HE ACCORDED A VERY GRACIOUS HOSPITALITY TO THE
REMAINING FAMILY MEMBERS OF HAZRAT HUSAYN AND ARRANGED THEIR RETURN
JOURNEY TO MADINAH WITH GREAT HONOUR AND RESPECT.**

**HAD YAZID GOT ANY INVOLVEMENT IN THE MURDER OF HADHRAT HUSAYN THE
REMANANTS OF HIS FAMILY WOULD HAVE NEVER STAYED WITH YAZID AS HIS GUESTS
FOR SEVERAL DAYS IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE INCIDENT OF KARBALA. HOW CAN ONE
STAY AND DINE WITH THE MURDERERS OF ONE'S BLOOD RELATIONS? ALL THE VILE
PROPAGANDA AGAINST YAZID IS A LATTER INNOVATION OF THE SHIAS.**

Reply One
---------

What hospitality! Perhaps we are not up to date with Nasibi etiquettes,
but would the reasonable man deem the act of parading of women in ropes
before Yazeed, without scarves to be an act of honour and respect. These
women did not happily visit Yazeed whilst on holiday, Yazeed's army had
slaughtered their men folk and they had entered the court as prisoners
not guests. Even inside the court Yazeed showed his hospitality by
rowing with Sayyida Zeyneb and argued with her. Is this how guests are
respected when they visit friends?

See how this nasibi, the biggest one in Pakistan, Azam Tariq, twists
basic facts to make it seem like a tea party. He calls prisoners of war
'guests of the khalifa' on the basis of thei having been in his palace.
Yes, roped, chained and in the dungeon! The rest about meals with the
khalifa is all lies...there is no basis for it in any textual source. In
fact these sources all testify to the fact that Yazeed had their hijab
torn off them.

Reply Two
---------

The women appeared before Yazeed without purdah and yet 'dear hospitable
Yazeed' the prima Donna Santa Claus failed to address this issue. Is
this how honour and respected was afforded to the grand daughters of
Rasulullah (s)? Ibn Katheer states in al Bidaya Volume 8 page 204 as
follows:

"If he [Yazeed] was embarrassed [by the killing of Imam Husayn] then why
did he not arrange for the women's purdah when they appeared without any
covering? Some supporters of Yazeed state that he respected the women
[treated them well] when the reality is, in regards to his treatment of
the women of Husayn's household, efforts were made to make Yazeed aware
that the grand daughters of Rasulullah (s) were without Purdah, whilst
his own Servant women were in Purdah [i.e. he humiliated them further]".

Was Yazeed related to Imam Hussain[as] via marriage?The Nasibi liar says:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Kr-hcy.com states:**THIS IS HIGHLY MISLEADING AS IT MAY BE MENTIONED
HERE THE CLOSE AFFINITY OF YAZID WITH THE FAMILY OF HADHRAT ALI. IN 53 H
WHEN YAZID AS AMIR-UL-HUJJAJ WENT TO MAKKAH AND AFTER HAJ REACHED
MADINAH, AT THAT OCCASION HE WAS MARRIED TO SAYYEDA UMM HUHAMMAD, THE
DAUGHTER OF ABDULLAH BIN JAFFAR YAHYAR WHO WAS THE SON-IN-LAW OF HADHRAT
ALI AND BROTHER-IN-LAW OF HASAN AND HUSAYN.**

Our challenge is to this Nasibi to substantiate this claim. Produce us
an authentic text, with a complete chain proving this alleged marriage.
Also, did Yazeed or any members of the Ahl'ul bayt (as) mention that
they were related to Yazeed via marriage? Can Azam Tariq produce even a
single source wherein Yazeed had stated that he was the brother in law
of Imam Husayn (as)? What is astonishing is the way in which Azam Tariq
just makes up historical facts with no textual basis. And he spurts them
out with such confidence. This man, who is clearly a pathological liar,
is the leader of the Wahabis in Pakistan...it is shocking.

Hadith referring to Yazeed
--------------------------

*Abu Hurraira sought protection from the events of 56 Hijri Al Bidayah
wa al Nihaya Volume 8 page 114*

*Fathul Bari Volume 13 page 10 Kitab al Fitan*

*Tareekh al Islam (Dhahabi) Volume 2 page 339 Dhikr Abu Hurraira*

*Al Isaba Volume 4 page 200 Dhikr Abu Hurraira*

*Al Bidaya wa al Nihaya Volume 6 page 228*

Abu Hurraira would walk through the markets and 'O Allah don't accept
the events of 56

Hijri and I don't see this boy's reign'

In Fathul Bari Ibn Hajr states that:

"Abu Hurraira was referring to the youth of Quraysh"

*Abu Said al Khudri's condemnation of 60 Hijri Tafseer Ibn Katheer
Volume 3 page 128, Surah Maryam verse 59*

*Mujmu al Zadaad Volume 6 page 231*

*Musnad Ibn Hanbal Volume 3 page 38*

*Fathul Qadeer Volume 3 page 329*

*Al Bidayah wa al Nihaya Volume 8 page 230*

Ibn Kathir states:

"The Sahaba Abu Said al Khudri narrates that he heard Rasulullah (s) say
after 60 Hijri undeserving people shall ignore prayers and enter the
deepest part of Hell".

This hadith is also a condemnation of Yazeed since he became the Leader
immediately after 60 Hijri. (Page 219)

Rasulullah (s) said Yazeed will destroy my religion
---------------------------------------------------

We read in al Bidayah Volume 8 page 231 Dhikr Yazeed:

Justice shall rule my Ummah until the first individual who shall destroy
my Deen, from the Banu Ummayaa his name shall be Yazeed. Yes, imam of
the Nasibis Yazeed is accused of destroying the Deen by the Holy Prophet
(saws) himself. I say we destroy the Deen of the Nasibis. Their Deen is
different to that of other Muslims, Shia or Sunni.


