Analysing hadith blessing Yazeed
================================

Has Yazeed been guaranteed Paradise?
------------------------------------

Here it comes, more from Azam Tariq (may Allah's curse be upon him):

**Kr-hcy.com states: YAZID WAS THE COMMANDER OF MUSLIM FORCES WHO
MARCHED TO CAESAR'S CITY. THIS EXPEDITION WAS SENT DURING THE REIGN OF
HAZRAT MUAWIYAH AND IN THIS TASK FORCE WERE INCLUDED ELDERLY AND
ILLUSTRIOUS SAHABA LIKE HAZRAT ABU AYYUB ANSARI WHOSE FUNERAL PRAYER WAS
LED BY YAZID ACCORDING TO THE WILL OF HAZRAT AYYUB ANSARI HIMSELF. THIS
EXPEDITION TOOK PLACE IN 51 H IN WHICH HAZRAT HUSAYN FOUGHT UNDER THE
LEADERSHIP OF YAZID. THIS WAS THE PIONEERING MUSLIM FORCE WHICH LANDED
IN CAESAR'S CITY AND ACCORDING TO A HADITH NARRATED BY ABDULLAH BIN UMAR
WHICH HAS BEEN RECORDED BY BUKHARI, RASUL-ALLAH SAID:**

**"THE ARMY WHICH WILL FIRST EMBARK ON THE EXPEDITION OF CONTANTINOPLE
WILL BLESSED." (***BUKHARI*** ).**

**YAZID WAS THE COMMANDER OF MUSLIM FORCES ON THIS EXPEDITION WHO WAGED
JIHAD IN CAESAR'S CITY AND AS SUCH HE FALLS WITHIN THE PARAMETER OF
ABOVE HADITH OF THE PROPHET (SAW). IN VIEW OF THIS IT IS NOT BECOMING ON
ANY MUSLIM TO CAST ASPERIONS ON YAZID AS THE ENTIRE ARMY WHICH TOOK PART
IN THIS COMPAIGN HAS BEEN BLESSED BY ALLAH IN THE CONTEXT OF ABOVE
HADITH.**

Reply One
---------

Let us analyse the complete tradition from*Sahih al Bukhari* , Book
of*Jihad Volume 4, Book 52, and Number 175* :

Narrated Khalid bin Madan:

That 'Umair bin Al-Aswad Al-Anasi told him that he went to 'Ubada bin
As-Samit while he was staying in his house at the seashore of Hims with
(his wife) Um Haram. 'Umair said. Um Haram informed us that she heard
the Prophet saying, "Paradise is granted to the first batch of my
followers who will undertake a naval expedition."

Um Haram added, I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Will I be amongst them?' He
replied, 'You are amongst them.' The Prophet then said, 'the first army
amongst' my followers who will invade Caesar's City will be forgiven
their sins.' I asked, 'Will I be one of them, O Allah's Apostle?' He
replied in the negative."

These filthy Nasibi have only one hadith that they claim absolves their
Imam of any wrongdoing, namely his participation in the army that
conquered Caesar's City has assured him of Paradise. We all have to die
one day and answer our Creator we have cited scores of Sunni sources
that highlight Yazeed's deeds, his love of incest, homosexuality,
drinking, singing, kufr aqeedah and his killing of Imam Husayn (as). Are
we really going to just accept this single hadith in al Bukhari to
neutralise all of Yazeed's deeds? We appeal to justice and shall cite
the following replies:

Reply One: Imam of Ahl'ul Sunnah Muhammad bin Yahya deemed Bukhari an
innovator and amongst Murijee Fathul Baree Volume 13 page 490

*Tabaqat Shaafeeya Volume 2 pages 12-13*

*Tareekh Baghdad Volume 2 page 32*

"Imam Yahya deemed Muhammad bin Ismail Bukhari an innovator and a
Murijee"

Reply Two: Bukhari did not trust the narrations of Imam Jafer Sadiq
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Bukhari's Nasibi leanings are evident from this reference, and he
steered clear of narrating tradition from the Imams from Ahl'ul bayt
(as). This is clear from the fact that he didn't narrate from Imam
Ja'far As-Sadiq (as), nor from his son Imam Musa Al-Kathem (as), nor
from his son Imam Ali Ar-Reda (as), nor from his son Imam Muhammad
Aj-Jawad (as), nor from his grandson Imam Hasan Al Askari (as) who was a
contemporary of Bukhari. Why didn't Bukhari narrate from his own
contemporary Imam of Ahl'ul Bayt (as)?

He narrated only two ahadith from the master of the youth of paradise,
Imam Husayn Bin Ali (as). He only narrated six hadith from his son Imam
Ali Bin Al Husayn Zaynul Abideen (as). He only narrated seventy-nine
hadith from the City of Knowledge Imam Ali Bin Abi Talib (as)!

He also didn't narrate from Al-Hasan Al Muthana son of Imam Hasan (as).
He didn't narrate from Zayd Bin Ali, nor from his son Yahya Bin Zayd,
nor from Muhammad Bin Abdullah Bin Hasan Bin Hasan, nor from his brother
Ibrahim, nor from Husayn bin Ali bin Hasan bin Hasan, nor from Yahya Bin
Abdullah Bin Hasan, nor from Idris bin Abdullah, nor from Muhammad Bin
Ja'far, nor from Ibrahim Bin Isma'eel bin Ibrahim bin Hasan bin Hasan,
nor from his brother Qasem, nor from Muhammad bin Muhammad bin zayd bin
Ali, nor from Ali bin Ja'far Al Aridi, etc.

Reply Three
-----------

The Sunni Ulema have deemed this narration as worthless Fathul Bari
Volume 6 page 120, Kitab Jihad

*Umdahthul Qari Volume 6 page 648*

*Irshad Sari Volume 5 page 140 Kitab Jihad*

*Siraaj al Muneer Sharh Jami al Sagheer Volume 2 page 80*

The above leading Sunni scholars have rejected this hadith that Nasibi
Azam Tariq cited to defend his Imam.

Reply Four: All the narrators of this tradition are Syrian
----------------------------------------------------------

Ibn Hajr Asqalani and al Aini in their analysis of this hadith commented
that its narrators are all Syrians that constitutes sufficient grounds
to reject it, since any hadith devoid of narrators from Makka, Medina
makes that hadith worthless. Bukhari narrated this from Ishaq bin Yazeed
who narrated the tradition from Bukhari's own teacher Abu Abdu'Rahman
bin Yahya bin Hamza, who was the Qadhi of Damascus, this was the heart
of the Yazeedi / Nasibi homeland.

Reply Five: the narrators of this hadith are enemies of Ahl'ul bayt (as)
------------------------------------------------------------------------

If we consult*Sahih al Bukhari Volume 1 page 409 Kitab Jihad Rasheedeya
Publishers Delhi 1377 Hijri* and the commentary by Shaykh ul Hadith
Ahmad 'Ali Shahranpuri we read:

"The tradition relating to Caesar's City was narrated by Sawaar binte
Yazeed he was an enemy of Commander of the Faithful 'Ali". If this
doesn't convince these Nasibi then we shall cite Tadheeb al Tadheeb
Volume 2 page 33, Dhikr Sawaar binte Yazeed:

Sawar binte Yazeed bin Ziyad was an irreligious man, his grandfather
sided with Mu'awiya in Sifeen, and he was killed in this battle. When he
referred to 'Ali, he would say 'I do not deem a person that killed my
grandfather to be my friend'.

These so called defenders of Ahl'ul Sunnah are trying to get us to
accept a hadith narrated by this Nasibi!

Reply Six
---------

The people of Syria in the eyes of the Qur'an, Hadith, the Sahaba and
Ahl'ul Sunnah Ulema We read in*Sunan al Kabir Volume 8 page 174*

Do not say that the people of Syria committed kufr; rather say they
committed Fisq (transgression).

### Tareekh al Damishq

###

"Umar bin Ubayd was asked when we read this verse 'Those that rule
against the orders of Allah are Fasiq, does this refer to the people of
Syria' he replied 'yes'.

This proves that the people of Syria were fasiq and we shall now cite
from Tareekh Damishq proof that the Syrians did not deserve to be deemed
Imams of Shari'a that could narrate traditions When Umar would be
angered with someone he would expel that person to Syria Abu Hurayra
narrated, in Syria there is a Devil that calls out loudly in a manner
that leads people astray [This voice was raised in 60 Hijri with the
bayya to Yazeed].

Amr bin Aas stated the people of Syria are different from all others;
they disobey Allah (swt).

Sheeba urged that people refrain from taking hadith from a Syrian.

Abdur Rahman bin Hadi was asked 'which people's hadith are most
reliable? He replied the people of Hejaz, the people of Basra then the
people of Kufa. He was then asked 'What of the people of Syria?' He
replied by opening his hand, 'when it comes to the people of Syria they
narrate traditions with open hands".

The people of Syria find it hard to listen to hadith praising 'Ali.

Here it's proven that the Syrians of the time were a population
comprised of criminals and men who would naturally be on the payroll of
the khalifa Yazeed as Damascus was his capital and powerbase where he
lived and he centred his army. The people of Syria were the worst of
people they were die-hard lovers of Mu'awiya that rebelled against the
lawful Imam 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (as).

This was the hub of the Banu Ummaya Kingdom where the cursing of Imam
'Ali (as) went on for some ninety years - people had a hatred of Imam

'Ali in their hearts and the Salaf Ulema deemed these people to be
careless / untrustworthy narrators of hadith. Despite this, we have this
contemporary Nasibi trying to get people to accept a sole hadith whose
narrators are all Syrians, one who happens to be an open Nasibi.

Reply Seven
-----------

Bukhari is the ONLY person to have recorded the word 'maghfoor' -
Paradise We read in*al Bidaya wa al Nihaya Volume 8 page 222* :

In the hadith that makes reference to Caesar's City, Imam Bukhari is the
sole individual to have recorded the words maghfoor; all the other books
do not record this word.

We appeal to these Nasibi advocates, why did all the other hadith
narrators remove this word. Either every one of these is dishonest or
Bukhari added it in to fit in with his support for Yazeed.

We all know that the Sunni scholars say the Sahih of Bukhari is their
most authentic work of Hadith. Yet, despite this, ALL the countless
Sunni scholars, just some of whom we have quoted and all who would have
been well-versed in Sahih Bukhari, have nevertheless condemned Yazeed
and many said he will burn in hellfire. Thus they have placed the sheer
number of other authentic chains above the testimony of Bukhari. Thus
though this Hadith exists in Bukhari it is not accepted by Sunni
scholars.

In itself this is a contradiction in the Sunni religion as many of the
same scholars say Bukhari is 100% authentic! Perhaps now the reader can
understand how many Hadith in Bukhari that portray the sahaba as Santas
are coined. They were cooked up by men of the payroll of the likes of
Yazeed and Muawiya, and were passed down to enter Bukhari a couple of
generations later - old wives tales.

Reply Eight
-----------

The teachers of Khalid bin Madani were all Nasibi We read in*Tadheeb al
Tadheeb Volume 3 page 119 Dhikr Khalid* :

Khalid was from third generation of Ulema from Syria, he had three
teachers, Mu'awiya bin Abu Sufyan, Suhar bin Yazeed and Hareez bin
Uthman. All three of his teachers were Nasibi enemies of Ahl'ul bayt
(as). What reliance can we have on a hadith nararted by a scholar whose
source of knowledge came from three KingPins of Salafi Aqeedah?

Reply Nine
----------

Is this the only tradition that 'Umair bin Al-Aswad Al-Anasi narrated
during his life? We read in*Fathul Bari Volume 6 page 102 Bab Maqeel Fi
Qaathil al Rum*

"Other than the hadith relating to Caesar's City this narartor 'Umair
bin Al-Aswad Al-Anasi has narrated no other hadith. There is a
distinction between [him and] 'Umair and Amr bin al Aswa since 'Umair
was a Syrian".

This Nasibi Shaykh al Hadith is a very unusual creature whose only
reason for existence was to award the killer of the Ahl'ul bayt (as)
with Paradise in a fabricated Hadith made up on the payroll of the
Umayyads to protect Yazeed's reputation amongst the Ummah they ruled
over i.e. shut up

and stop condemning him because the Holy Prophet (saws) said such and
such about him, which he just didn't.

Reply Ten
---------

Umair bin Al-Aswad Al-Anasi only taught one person We read in Ahl'ul
Sunnah authority work*Muqaddimah Ibn Saleh page 23* :

"The illiteracy of a narrator is established when we learn that in
principles of Shari'a he had only two students"

Umair had only one student Khalid bin Madain and he was himself a
Nasibi.

Reply Eleven
------------

: 'Umair bin Al-Aswad Al-Anasi's teacher was a non-Mahram woman If we
analyse the chain in Sahih al Bukhari it is as follows:

### Khalid bin Madan - 'Umair bin Al-Aswad Al-Anasi -Um Haram.

###

We ask people to think over this matter logically. How is it that this
'Umair bin Al-Aswad Al-Anasi was unable to find a teacher for his entire
life, then ventures into the home of a friend whose wife (a non mahram
woman to Umair), as luck might have it happens to be an expert of
hadith. After this fortunate and unlikely occurrence his entire research
scholarship leads him to learn just one hadith from her, a hadith that
guarantees Paradise for a man who (with the exception of Nasibi) the
entire Muslim world sends curses on - the killer of Imam Husayn (as),
Yazeed ibn Mu'awiya (LA).

Reply Eleven
------------

**The only narrator of this hadith is a woman:**

This is a crucial point. Why would Rasulullah (s) choose to locate
non-mahram women to convey this hadith to? Is this the type of hadith
that he (s) would not wish to convey to a wider audience, particularly
to men participating in Jihad? Is this not a hadith that would boost
morale / encourage soldiers to fight? Why keep it top secret, to the
point that only one person knows of the rewards for participating in
this expedition is a woman, who clearly will be unable to communicate
this to an audience in a manner that 'esteemed' figures such as Abu
Hurraira could do.

Additionally why convey to this woman? Why convey this to a woman, who
was his (s) non-mahram that meant that she would have had to observe
strict purdah in his presence? After all Rasulullah (s) had nine wives,
could he not have conveyed this hadith to any of them? Why convey this
to a woman that was not his (s) wife, relative or sister in law? And why
did her husband not take this hadith and declare it to the masses in the
battlefield? Surely this would have instilled true fighting spirit
amongst masses, if they knew that they were to attain Paradise. Rather
than do this, why did Um Haram choose to only convey this to her student
'Umair bin Al-Aswad Al-Anasi?

Worthy of note, when we read this hadith in sources other than Sahih
al-Bukhari wherein Um Haram has narrated the tradition to her nephew Uns
bin Malik there is no mention of maghfoor [Paradise], yet when she
narrates it to a non mahram Umair she remembers that the participants
are blessed with Heaven! Why did she forget to convey the words
'Paradise' to her

nephew but then chose to entertain a non-mahram in her home and convey
the hadith with this word to him? Smells very fishy.

Reply Twelve
------------

Yazeed was not amongst the people that led the expedition Umdah thul
Qari page 649 Kitab Jihad

*Al Isaba Volume 2 page 54 Dkikr Sufyan bin Auf*

*Al Fathowaath page 161*

We read in Umdah:

"Mu'awiyah sent the army under the Leadership of Sufyan bin Auf they
reached upto Constantinople. Those present in this army were Ibn Abbas,
Ibn Zubayr and Abu Ayub Ansari. Abu Ayub died when they reached Egypt,
the elderly Sahaba were with Sufyan they were not with Yazeed, since
Yazeed was not of the rank to be in their midst".

When Yazeed was not even in this first naval expedition then the claims
of this Nasibi are Batil. Azam Tariq's whole premise is thus flawed -
Yazeed was part of this massive campaign but was not even in this key
first expedition that took Constantinople. So where was he at the time?

Reply Thirteen
--------------

At the time that Constantinople was attacked Yazeed was at home drunk

Azam Tariq Nasibi sought to bless his Khalifah Yazeed by stating:

Kr-hcy.com states**: YAZID WAS THE COMMANDER OF MUSLIM FORCES ON THIS
EXPEDITION WHO WAGED JIHAD IN CAESAR'S CITY AND AS SUCH HE FALLS WITHIN
THE PARAMETER OF ABOVE HADITH OF THE PROPHET (SAW).**

Not only is this hadith a lie but also so is the claim that Yazeed led
this campaign and as evidence for this we have relied on the following
authentic texts of Ahl'ul Sunnah:

*Tareekh Kamil Volume 3 page 231 Events of 49 Hijri*

*Tareekh Ibn Khaldoon Volume 3 page 15*

*Tareekh Yaqoobi page 217*

*Murujh al Dhahab Volume 3 page 33*

*Shaheed ai Kerbala page 184*

*Mu'awiya aur isthikhlaaf ai Yazeed page 343*

*Imam Pak aur Yazeed Paleeth page 138*

We read in*Tareekh Kamil*

"In 49 Hijri, Mu'awiya made preparations to take the towns and cities of
Rome under Sufyan bin Auf. He sent out the army and ordered his son
Yazeed to join him but Yazeed was lax in this regard - Mu'awiya
therefore became silent on the matter. The army successfully conquered
Rome and upon receipt of this news Yazeed recited a couplet".

We read in Muruj al Dhahab:

"Mu'awiya received information on the progress of the army and conveyed
this news to Yazeed who said, "In this case I shall convene a function
in home, joined by my fellow drunkards". Azam Tariq's Nasibi Khalifah
was not even present when the army took Rome, an army that according to
him had been blessed with paradise.

By citing the non attendance of Yazeed from Sunni sources we are seeking
to demonstrate to actual run of the mill Sunnis that these fake Sunnis
are extolling a fasiq / alcoholic / fornicator /
mother/sister/daughter/dog/bear/man/young boy orifice penetrator- and as
part of their efforts have even deemed it fit to cite a fabricated
tradition to the Sunni majority.

Like Yazeed, Mu'awiya also conquered lands and what a surprise we even
find a tradition stating that the participant of the first naval
expedition shall be blessed with Paradise (Mu'awiya led this
expedition). We reject these absurd claims since salvation is dependant
on being momin and those that sought it fit to rebel against the Ahl'ul
bayt (as), harm their reign, curse them and kill them are devoid of Iman
and cannot benefit from salvation. If a Dhaalim and Fasiq shall not
enter Hell then why will Shaythaan - since Shaythaan never committed an
act of Shirk?

It is implausible that the Holy Prophet (saws) who did not even promise
Paradise to those who fought in the first battles of Badr and Uhud would
promise it to a massive army fighting a war years after his departure
from this world, led by the first khalifas the Sunni world itself say
were 'not rightly guided'. What about the campaigns led by the so-called
'rightly guided' khalifas? As we have proven part of the reason these
khalifas were 'not rightly guided' (a polite expression for them) is
their cooking up of Hadith.

Reply Fourteen
--------------

Texts purporting Yazeed to have been present in this 'Paradise-bound
army' are lies.

We appeal to our Sunni brothers: are these advocates of Yazeed not the
same people that have relied on the texts of irreligious alleged
scholars? These Nasibi claim that Shi'a writers are in effect seditious
Iranian Ibn Saba elements of Jewish origin. We challenge these followers
of Yazeed to prove to us from the Qur'an and Sahih hadith that Yazeed
was present in the army that according to Umm Haram had been blessed
with Paradise - and these people's claims shall be proven false.

The fact is we curse all these commentators who claim that Yazeed was
praiseworthy / deserving of Paradise - and for that aim they rely on a
hadith that had been recorded by an Iranian - called Ismail Bukhari - so
let's ignore him as he may be an Ibn Saba Magian. In fact it is the
Nasibis who practice a form of Islam pioneered by men like Mu'awiya and
that perpetrates fabricated Umayyad Hadith to this day, and upon which
they base their 'Deen' (Cult).

Since Mu'awiya and Yazeed both never accepted Islam in their hearts
(proved in this article and the one on Mu'awiya) it is quite reasonable
to say the Nasibis represent the Jahiliyya element in Islam - their cult
is that which is influenced by the pagan Meccans like Abu Sofyan and
Mu'awiya and the hardness of their hearts to this day to Muhammad (saws)
and his family is indicative of that hatred - for their cult was founded
by our dear Prophet (saws)'s worst enemies. That's why when the Fatwa
from the Shia came on Salman Rushdie's head, the scholars of Saudi
Arabia were quiet they didn't feel for the Holy Prophet (saws) like
Shias and Sunnis do.

In the words of mainstream Sunnis the silence from the Sunni world was
deafening. So next time, be you Shia or Sunni, and you hear the Nasibis
stop you saying Salam to the Prophet (saws) and calling it bid'a - just
pause - that Nasibi voice is the voice 1,400 years later of the Prophet
(saws)'s enemies. It's the voice of Abu Jahl, Abu Lahab, Abu Sofyan,
Mu'awiya and Yazeed. It's the voice of Shaitan. That's why something in
you makes you react against it, or something in you will make you turn
away from it if they've already snared you...Insha Allah. We challenge
Azam Tariq Nasibi to: Present us this hadith from an Arab scholar who
recorded in his book that the first army to enter Rome shall be in
Paradise, and then:

Produce an authentic Arab source with a Sahih Isnad confirming the
presence of Yazeed in that army.

How can one even entertain the notion that Yazeed will attain Paradise?
A man that killed the descendents of the Prophet (saws) kills Ahl'ul
bayt (as) and also allows the occurrence of gang rapes of the Sahaba's
daughters in Medina. If Yazeed can enter Paradise then by the same token
then so can the killers of Hadhrath Uthman. They did a lot less harm
than Yazeed did.

Reply Fifteen
-------------

Sunni Ulema have stated that Yazeed was not deserving of Paradise

As proof we shall rely on the following authentic Sunni texts:

*Fathul Bari Volume 6 page 102, Kitab Jihad*

*Umdah'thul Qari fi Sharh Bukhari Volume 6 page 649 Bab ba Qeel fi
Qaathil al Rum*

*Mu'awiya aur Isthakhlaf ai Yazeed page 391*

*Imam Pak aur Yazeed Paleeth page138*

*Shaeed ai Kerbala aur Yazeed page 184*

*Siraaj al Muneer Volume 1 page 80, the letter 'Alif'*

We read in*Umdah* :

"Yazeed's character is well known. If people cite the fact that this
hadith points to the conquerors of Rome attaining Paradise - it is not
incumbent to incorporate Yazeed here (in this group). It does not
guarantee Paradise for all combatants, since there is no dispute amongst
the people of knowledge, that Rasulullah's order was placed on a
condition - the only participants that can rely on the promise of
Paradise are those worthy of attaining it. Those that participated and
then subsequently apostatised will not be counted as those deserving of
Salvation".

We read in*Fathul Bari* :

"Some state that the hadith relating to the city of Caesar constitutes a
merit of Yazeed, but Ibn Atheer and al Muneer have stated that even if
Yazeed was one of those in that army being referred to in the Caesar
tradition, it does not prevent Yazeed from being excluded from this
group, since there is no dispute amongst the people of knowledge, that
the only participants that can rely on the promise of Paradise are those
worthy of attaining it. Those that participated and then subsequently
apostatised will not be counted amongst these people".

We could say the same thing about the Day of Hudaibiya using this same
logic of Sunni scholarship - many of the companions there apostatised
AFTER the Treaty. Thus Allah's words giving peace to those who swore

allegiance to the Prophet (saws) under the tree at Hudaibiya only apply
to those who did not later apostasies and were thus worthy of this merit
and did not betray its beatific sense, which many did when they denied
Ali (as) the khilafat. The same applies according to these scholars when
dealing with the combatants in the battle for Constantinople.

We read in*Irshad Sari* by*Shahabadeen Taftazani* :

"People have cited the Caesar hadith so as to prove that Yazeed is in
Heaven and our reply to such a claim is Even if Yazeed was amongst the
combatants there is no reason why he cannot be removed from this group
since there is no dispute amongst the people of knowledge, that the only
participants that can rely on the promise of Paradise are those worthy
of attaining it. Those that participated and then subsequently
apostatised will not be counted amongst these people. May Allah's curse
(la'nat) be upon Yazeed and such disgraceful people" After citing the
comments of Ibn al Muneer [see above], Shahabadeen Taftazani states
that: ".according to Sa'dadeen Taftazani some Ulema have deemed it
permissible to curse Yazeed by name - since by ordering the execution of
Husayn he committed Kufr. His ordering the killing of Husayn, being
happy at his death and his paining the Ahl'ul bayt are proven facts".

In*Siraj al Muneer* ,*Allamah Shaykh 'Ali bin Ahmad Azeezi* after citing
the tradition from al Bukhari states:

"Having been satisfied at the killing of Husayn, the Ulema of Ahl'ul
Sunnah have deemed it permissible to curse Yazeed, since he ordered his
killing and was happy at his death. Imam Taftazani and Ibn Hajr Asqalani
in Sharh Mubeeya commented that a scholar of the rank of Imam Ibn Hanbal
issued takfeer against Yazeed".

We appeal to those with just minds:

**Ibn Hajr Asqalani**

**Allamah Taftazani**

**Aini**

**Ali bin Ahmad Azeezi**

**Ibn Atheer**

**Ibn Muneer**

The above six personalities are all reputed classical Sunni Ulema that
rejected the notion that Yazeed was blessed with Paradise. Taftazani
openly cursed Yazeed and these comments serve as a slap in the face of
Maulana Azam Tariq. We would like to say to these Nasibi attempts, 'you
have failed to prove that Yazeed attained Paradise. Your attempts are
futile, and the hadith that you worship fails to mention your dear
Khalifah by name. You stand in opposition to 99% of Sunni scholars. NO
scholar till this age, and it is a corrupt age, said what you say about
Yazeed. ' In this context it is worth noting that in regard to the
rising of Sofyan and Raja and the final age, the Holy Prophet (saws)
said, as we all know, that the scholars would be liars. Dear brothers,
Sunni and Shia.

The lying by the Ansar group, the Saudi scholars, the Pakistani Wahabis,
and the Nasibis in general, and that we have exposed....the sheer
blatant pathological compulsive lying that we have shown you ...is the
biggest proof to date that the scholars of the Muslims lie. This is a
sign of the last

age. Till this age NO scholar of any persuasion extolled Yazeed. Today,
the Nasibis are doing this. This lying is so blatant that it appals. It
is exactly as our Prophet (saws) said of this age. The scholars would be
the liars and the worst of people in the Ummah.

This doesn't mean all scholars. It means Nasibi scholars. Protect
yourself from them, for the Prophet (saws) wept for they would take
Muslims to Hellfire with them. Despite his citing the hadith that
allegedly purports to Yazeed being in Paradise, Nasibi Azam Tariq has
failed in his efforts to get Muslims to sign up to the 'We love Yazeed
Fan Club'. For these Nasibi, Paradise is so cheap that Yazeed, killer of
Imam Husayn (as), raper of the companions' wives in Madina, burner of
the Ka'aba, can enter it. If Yazeed's massacre of the Ahl'ul bayt (as)
is no barr on his entering Paradise then by the same token:

**The killers of Uthman should also enter Paradise.**

The Rafidi, whose affiliation is with Ahl'ul bayt (as), who distance
themselves from their enemies should also be deemed as momin, and there
should be no barr on the amount of tabarra they do, since like Yazeed
they will also be in Heaven.

It is indeed unusual that in the eyes of these Nasibi the Shi'a who
condemn those Sahaba that harmed, fought and cursed the Ahl'ul bayt are
kaafirs as they curse the Sahaba, whilst a fasiiq, fajir, incestuous,
paedophile, homosexual drunkard who attacks Medina, slaughters the
Sahaba, upholds the rape of their daughters, in Kerbala corners, starves
and massacres the family of the Prophet (s) including the Leader of the
People of Paradise is a momin.

These pathetic Nasibi should know that murder is a big sin, whilst
cursing is a lesser sin - your Imams Mu'awiya and Yazeed cursed and
killed the family of the Prophet and cursed them and yet you exalt them
as pious Muslims. You say the murderer of the Chief of the Youths of
Paradise will be in Paradise also. Yes, Husayn (as) is by the accounts
of all Muslims, Shia and Sunni, leader of the Heavenly Youth (and since
we are all youths in Paradise according to the Qur'an this means he is
the leader with his brother (who also held this title from the Prophet
(saws) of the believers who make it to Heaven). Why don't you wake up
and smell what you shovel.

The Devil has taken hold of your scholars' minds. How can the murdered
and the murdered both be in Paradise. They can both be in Hell. They
cannot both be in Heaven. Still less a Heaven where the murdered is the
Leader of its Youth.


