Dedications
===========

**Dedications**

This book is dedicated primarily to the seekers of Truth, to the Youth
of Islam, and to the New Muslims who have adopted the Straight Path to
ensure their salvation.

The translation of this book is dedicated to my late mother who
salvaged the Manuscript from the closet and had it published in the Urdu
language.

Syed Haider H. Shamsi, M.D.
Acknowledgments

I must thank my wife Dr. Adiba K. Shamsi for her total support in my
efforts to translate this book. She cheerfully put up with my late hours
at the home computer after her long and strenuous day at work, She read
the translated manuscript for errors of typography and syntax, so that
the readers of this book may enjoy it without the annoying
interruptions.

I also thank Br. Nasir Shamsi for carefully screening the contents of
the translation for their accuracy and authenticity. His scholarly
knowledge of the religious literature has been fully utilized in the
preparation of the English book.

Br. Aunali Khalfan gave me valuable technical advice and suggestions
for the layout and the final shape of this book. I thank him for his
time and assistance. Syed Haider H. Shamsi, M.D.

**About the Author**

Syed Muhammad Hussain Shamsi was born on December 24, 1878 at Narowal,
District Sialkot, British India. He lost his father at an early age.
Even at a young and tender age, he started to work to help his mother
and younger sibs. He left home for the tiny State of Jammu for
education, about thirty miles north of Narowal. He was a brilliant
student of the oriental languages, English and Biblical Studies. He
scored the second highest position in Biblical Studies in the Panjab
University examination for the entire region.

He had a passion for the healing sciences, but the mundane need for
survival took its priority. After matriculation, destiny took him to the
newly opened territory of Kenya. He enrolled to work for the British
Railways in Kenya. Here he found himself to be one of the few educated
people. He saw a unique opportunity to serve a nascent Muslim Community
in a strange new land. He led the ritual prayers for them, attended to
their funerals, weddings and answered their questions on Islamic Fiqh
related to their daily lives.

He led and participated in several interfaith debates and dialogues
about Islam. All this essentially stimulated him to remain up-to-date in
Islamic and other non- Islamic literature. In so doing, he built up a
large personal library of reference books which people borrowed to read
on their own.

He was committed to education, propagation and the defence of his
faith. Towards this end, he started evening and week end schools for the
young and the adults, and initially used his own premises for most
activities.

As the community enlarged, he participated actively to build the first
mosque in Nairobi, and to employ an alim (a Muslim minister and a
jurist) to carry out the daily religious practices. However he continued
his services at a personal level throughout his life.

He died in Mayo Hospital, Lahore on October 18, 1962 attended by his
youngest son who was a medical student at that time. His passion came to
fruition. He saw his son in the Medical School and in his service by his
bed side.

He was buried besides his father in their family cemetary at Narowal,
Pakistan.


A Humble Request from the Reader
Dear Brother/Sister in Islam,

Please pray for my parents and grand parents, as well as for my husband
Syed Muhammad Hussain Shamsi, the author of this book and his parents,
and recite the Sum Fateha for their eternal benefit. May Allah protect
you from evil and bless you with health and prosperity in this world,
and make available means for your salvation in the hereafter. May
Muhammad wa Ale Muhammad shower you with peace and tranquility in this
world and the next, Amin. Sayyeda Begum Mumtaz Manzil, Narowal,
Pakistan


**Author's Foreword**

It was generally felt that whereas there is a lot of written material
available on the lives of the Prophets, the beginners, especially the
young students are unable to benefit from these voluminous works. This
problem became more obvious when I was teaching at Sunday School on
Islam to young children of the Nairobi Muslim Community. Although no one
is expected to know all the generally quoted number of the prophets of
one hundred and twenty four thousand, the children were unfamiliar with
even the names of those mentioned in the Qur'an. To fill this gap, it
was therefore felt that a brief narrative be compiled about these
prophets. This is how this booklet came to be compiled.

The beginning of the book has an abbreviated Table of Genealogy of the
Prophets, starting with Adam and concluding with Muhammed. This should
provide an historical perspective to these greart personalities.

The narratives are purposely kept brief to facilitate memorization and
retention. It is hoped that this book will fulfil the need that was
being felt.

With Sincere Wishes Syed Muhammed Hussain Shamsi Nairobi, Kenya
November 15, 1956

**Translator's Foreword**

The present booklet on biographical sketches of the Prophets of Islam
mentioned in the Qur'an is one of the three books compiled by my late
father, when he was teaching Muslim youth at a Sunday School in Nairobi.
Initially this consisted of notes and hand outs to the students. Later
these materials were organized in the form of books. For many years
after his death, these manuscripts remained unpublished. While spending
her last days in Pakistan,

my late mother took the initiative to have the first of these
manusripts published in Urdu language. She wished that the years of
research and experience invested in these books should not go waste and
the young and new Muslims should continue to benefit from his writings.
Unfortunately, she did not live long enough to see the publication of
the remaining manuscripts. All copies of the first print in Urdu have
been distributed by now, and reprinting of the book is being planned for
the continuation of this noble mission.

I most dearly cherish the memories of being associated by my father in
the preparation of these teaching materials. I was then a teenager and
enjoyed these assignments. I felt happy to carry out the research
projects. It is a long time since my youth that I was again given an
assignment to teach Muslim youth at a Sunday School in Englewood, New
Jersey.

This has also gone on for several years now. I felt that the need for
educational materials for young children is no different now than it was
about half a century ago. This prompted me to embark on translating my
father's works from Urdu to the English language.

I have tried to adhere to the style and the spirit of my father's
original works. He tried to keep his narratives of all Prophets before
Prophet Muhammad within the confines of information provided in the
Qur'an. Occasionally he added information from the authentic Islamic
traditions. His intention was to avoid confusion arising from
controversial traditions, and to make the narratives brief enough for
the children to memorize them. He did not quote the exact ayas of the
Qur'an just to maintain the continuity of the text. He preferred to give
references of the relevant Suras at the end of each narrative. In doing
so, he intended to assist the curious reader towards personal research
from the Qur'an.

Islam aims to bring out the best of the human being within an
individual by strengthening the personality. The Qur'an is the guide for
achieving this goal. It must be understood that the Qur'an as a book is
neither an encyclopedia nor a compendium of any singular subject.
However, the Qur'anic references cover enormous topics with precision
and depth. Every one can get sufficient guidance and benefit from its
contents according to his/her intelligence or search.

References to the prophets are made at various occasions as
necessitated in illustrating a particular character or during the
derivation of a lesson or moral conclusion. Qur'an is the only Holy
Scripture that uses this unique methodology to teach man about his past
and provide guidance for his present and his future.

All prophets were sent by the Creator to guide mankind. Some of them
were charged with greater responsibility than the others, and were given
the Cannonic code of conduct to be handed down to the people for their
guidance. Consequently the references and narrative description of these
prophets occurs with greater frequency in various Suras. Some prophets
are named while others are only mentioned with a reference to an event,
or when a lesson or message is intended.

Middle Eastern nations share a common ancestary and they trace their
genealogy to the same patriarches. Two mainstream peoples have been
identified in history. One of these people are the Israilites, the
children of Prophet Ya'qub (a son of Prophet Ishaq), while the other are
the Arabs, the children of Prophet Ismail, the elder brother of Prophet
Ishaq.

While addressing the Arabs, the Qur'an makes frequent references to
Bani Israil, the Jews. The Message of the Qur'an is however universal.
Allah has sent prophets to all people wherever they dwell on Earth, and
hence the Last Testament of Allah i.e. the Qur'an, brought by The Last
Prophet, is intended for all mankind wherever they may dwell on Earth.

The Message of The Last Prophet is the same as that of The First
Prophet, and for the entire humankind created by The One and The Only
God. It is for this reason that the author of this book found it
necessary to provide greater details on the life of the Last Prophet. He
was more proximal to our time. The Qur'an proclaimed him to be the Seal
of Prophecy. Which means there will be no prophet after him. He lends
authenticity to all previous Holy Scriptures and completes the Divine
Message for the human race. Allah has called him
"Rahmatun-lil-aalameen", the Blessing for the Universe.

I have been fortunate to collaborate my efforts with brother Nasir
Shamsi in reading, reviewing and editing the English content of the
language and the text. I also sought the help of several youth to read
the text and comment on the flow and readability of the narratives. At
the suggestions received from most readers, the salutations after the
names of prophets, that are traditional in Urdu (Persian and Arabic)
language were dropped to ensure easy and uninterrupted reading.

I sincerely hope that this book will find its place in every home with
children and be read and memorized as intended by the author. This book
will also provide a stimulus to young people to carry out research on
their own, frequently referring to the Qur'an and improving their lives
through proper understanding of the Divine Message.


Syed Haider H. Shamsi
Demarest, New Jersey, USA (1994)
Editor's Comments

The genesis of this book lies in the author's abiding interest in the
comparative study of the Monotheistic Faiths Judaism, Christianity and
Islam. Having majored in the Biblical Studies, with distention, he
continued to benefit from the wisdom (Hikma) of the Revealed Word
through regular study of the Qur'an. A few years ago, Br. Haider Shamsi
and myself were teaching the young students in the Sunday School in
Englewood, NJ. I was to teach about the Prophets mentioned in the Qur'an
and there was no English book available on the subject.

When Br. Haider Shamsi told me that his late father had written a book
on the Prophets in Urdu language, I knew that we will have its
translation available some day. Br. Haider is man of his word. By the
Grace of Allah, he has translated the book in English. I sincerely hope
this will meet the need of the young as well as the New Muslims in
particular, and students of religion in general.

This excellent work will also help the readers to recognize the
essential link and commonality of belief in the Oneness of God, the
Prophesy and the Day of Judgement among the followers of the three
Monotheistic Faiths. May they learn to live in peace, and endeavour to
make this world a better and safer place for their children.

Nasir Shamsi
Jackson, NJ
Sunday, February 6, 1994
Prophet Adam The Creation of Adam

The most widely held belief about the origin of Adam has been that
Allah created him from non-existence by His Will using the earth
materials. This did not involve the biological processes of evolution or
reproduction. Allah created Man and Woman from clay in the form and
shape, the way they are today. Any belief or controversy to the contrary
is only a speculation.

Different peoples in the world have stories concerning the origin of
Man, which point towards the spontaneous arrival of the patriarch with
his family. The Hindu believe that man's original parents were Mahadev
and Parwati and that they looked like human beings, but were the image
of Parinishwar (God Himself). The Jews and the Christians also believe
that God created Adam in His own image.

Most people believe that God has no physical form, then how could He
create Man in His own image! This riddle was solved by the last Prophet
of Islam when he said "Allah had created Adam with His quality, not His
form. " Allah can be recognised by His qualities alone. So the saying of
the Prophet makes it clear that the image of Allah refers to His
qualities.

The Prophet further said "Adopt the qualities of Allah." This becomes
clear from the Qur'an where Allah says that He created Adam on this
earth as His representative. A representative follows orders. Only one
who can execute the orders properly can be a true representative or
vicegerent, otherwise there would be effors. Thus, according to the
Prophet, assuming the responsibilities of a worthy representative
requires the acqisition of the conduct of the master. This, then is what
is meant by "God created Man in His image."

**Adam, the Caliph of Allah**

When Allah desired to create Adam He addressed the angels and said that
He was going to create Man and appoint him as His representative on
earth. As soon as the creation was accomplished and He had bestowed Adam
with His spirit, He told them to bow down in obedience to Adam. The
angels who considered themselves to be superior to Adam on account of
their closeness to the Creator Himself, were surprised at this
instruction to bow down in obedience to a creature that was molded from
earth materials. They said to Allah, "You are appointing a being as your
vicegerent who would bring unrest and blood shed on earth, whereas we,
who have been immersed in your worship were more deserving to receive
this honor.

Allah said to them that what was known to Him could not be in their
knowledge, and that Adam was specifically suited for the position He had
designed for the earth. He offered them a chance to compete in an open
contest of knowledge and wisdom with Adam. The angels failed in the
contest and Adam emerged superior to them in knowledge and wisdom. All
of them except Iblis (Satan) obeyed Allah's commandment and bowed down
in obedience to Adam.

**Eblis & Adam**

It is said that before the creation of Adam, the earth was inhabited by
Jinn, a creation from the elements of fire. They were mutually
disruptive and indulged in senseless bloodshed. The angels had referered
to their mischief. Iblis was also a Jinn. He was knowledgeable about
matters of the earth. By virtue of his devotion and service to Allah, he
had secured a high position in the Celectial existence. Iblis had
started living with the angels. When Allah ordered all of them to
prostrate before Adam, he refused. When asked why he had refused the
divine ordinance, he said that he was superior to Adam on several
counts. Firstly, his creation came from finer elements.

Secondly, he had been in proximity to the Creator in direct servitude.
He had vast work experience on the earth where the novice Adam was being
sent as a representative. He contended that this was his coveted
position and should have been given to him instead to an undeserving
novice. Allah rebuked and down graded Iblis for his disobedience and
told him to immediately remove himself from His divine presence and his
eternal abode will be reserved in hell inferno.

Iblis said that Man was a poor choice for such an important position.
He said that he would take every opprtunity to haul all mankind with him
to hell. He would like to be granted eternal opportunity to test and
tempt this representative and prove that Man may not be such a worthy
khalifa.

Allah said that only He commands eternity, but He will give him his
desired opportunity to the Time known only to Himself. He said that His
obedient servents will remain steadfast in all his' tough tests and
temptations throughout Time, and prove that He created a wise and
knowledgeable khalifa on earth. Allah warned Adam about the evil designs
of Iblis against him and his progeny throughout Time. But He also
assured that those that remain firm in their faith on Truth shall be
victorious and will return to Him on the Day of Judgement for a Life of
Contentment in close proximity to the Creator.

**The Garden of Eden**

Allah brought Adam to the Garden of Eden and gave him education towards
carrying out the intended functions of Khalifa on Earth. Allah created
Eve from the substance of Adam as his partner in life and gave them
total freedom to enjoy the benevolence of the Provider and Sustainer of
Life with prohibition only for a particular tree. The two were not even
to go near the tree let alone to taste of its fruit.

Iblis saw his opportunity to tempt Adam and Eve and invoke their
curiosity to get closer to the prohibited tree and taste its fruit. No
sooner they had done what had been prohibited by the Lord, the Innocense
of the Garden of Eden changed to the reality of Life. They heard the
voice of their Lord calling. He reminded them of the prohibition He had
invoked, which they had clearly transgressed. He reminded them of the
open enemosity of Iblis towards them. They were to leave the Garden of
Eden and make their abode on the Earth till the end of a period of Time
known only to Him.

The Almighty said," There you will procreate of your kind in numbers
and will colonise the land provided, and eat and drink from that you
will procure from the bounties of your Lord. This is where you will
spend your lives, and die, and be raised on the Day of Judgement on your
conduct on the Earth. Beware of the damaging evil counsel of Iblis who
will continue to attempt rift between bretheren, disrupt your lives,
cause death and destruction on Earth through those who will listen to
him.

" Both Adam and Eve felt sorry for what they had done, and begged for
their forgiveness. Allah reminded them of their role in Life and said
that they will return to Him once again to enjoy His bounties in
paradise upon their successfully completing the mission on the earth.
Thus Adam descended to the earth as a representative of Allah.

**The Life and Progeny of Adam**

In the beginning, Adam had two sons from Eve named Habeel (Abel) and
Qabeel (Cane) followed by Sheeth and others. It is said that Adam lived
for almost 930 years.

References : al Qur'an: Surah Baqrah, Maidah, Aaraf, Hajj, Bani Israel,
Kahaf, Taha, Sabaa, Yaseen, Jinn and Hajrat.

**The Story of Habeel and Qabeel**

It is said that from their first harvest, the two sons of Adam, Habeel
and Qabeel, each offered a sacrifice to Allah. The offering of Habeel
was accepted for his being " the first among the muttaqeen (the God
fearing). " A fire descended from the heaven and consumed the offering
of Habeel. The offering of Qabeel was spared. He thought that his
offering was rejected. This made him jealous of Habeel and he murdered
him.

Qabeel felt deep remourse over this act and carried the dead body of
his brother over his shoulder, not knowing what to do with it. Then he
saw a crow burying a dead crow in the ground. Qabeel followed suit and
buried his brother's dead body by digging a hole in the ground.

This was the first criminal act on Earth and it was caused by jealousy.
Jealousy is the root cause of many sins, including the murder of fellow
human beings. It therefore behoves mankind to avoid this terrible
emotion which leads to a lot of sins.

References : al Qur'an: Sura Maidah.


