Prophet Sheeth
==============

**Prophet Sheeth**

Adam remained sad after the death of his son Habeel. He had witnessed
death for the first time, and was heartbroken at a crime of this
magnitude at the hands of his own son against a brother. He was very
withdrawn and wept at his predicament. Allah gave him the gift of
another son whom he named Sheeth. He succeeded him as a prophet and as a
representative of Allah on Earth. He had several children and was the
ancestor of the prophets mentioned in the Scriptures. He is known as
Seth in Torah.

**Prophet Idris**

ldris was bom in the seventh generation from Adam and was the great
grand father of Nuh (Noah). He was a great prophet form Allah and was
the recipient of numerous revelations from Allah. He is the originator
of the art of writing, astrology, astronomy, mathematics, sewing,
weights and measures, and many useful instruments and implitnents.

It is known that despite his knowledge and piety, the people of his
time ignored his teachings and the Lord brought His punishment towards
them in the form of a prolonged drought. When they repented, ldris
prayed for their forgiveness and the Lord sent down rain to quench the
land and swell the rivers for trade and prosperity.

Idris often observed fasting and spent so much of his time in prayers
that even the angels in the heavens wondered over his worship. It is
said that he was taken away alive by Allah and is kept in occultation by
His Will. ldris left a large progeny on Earth from whom Allah chose
great leaders and prophets. He is known as Enoch in Torah.

References : al Qur'an: Sura Matiam and Anmbiya'.

**Prophet Nuh**

Nuh (Noah) was bom to Lamak in the tenth generation of Adam. He was a
grand son of ldris. He preached oneness of Allah but the people turned
to idolatory. They laughed at Nuh and ridiculed his preaching. They
tortured him and his family. Their hearts had hardened and they had shut
their ears to his words. Yet he remained patient and continued
preaching.

When he got tired about the obstinacy and hostility of his people
towards him, his family and towards his teachings, he complained to
Allah about them. Allah told Nuh that they had transgressed His limits
and would meet His punishment which would serve as a lesson for
generations to come. He told Nuh that he would send an enormous flood
that will engulf and destroy all nonbelievers and their dwellings along
with their false gods.

**The Deluge**

Allah instructed Nuh to build a large boat and bring on board all
believers and a pair of each species of animals before He unleashed His
floods. Nuh carried out the instructions of Allah, and started building
an enormous ark. Since there were no sea or gulf but only a meager
river, people laughed at him for constructing a boat of such large
dimensions. Upon completion of his task, Nuh invited people to come on
board, but they ridiculed him. The family of the prophet, three of his
four sons and a handfull of true believers along with a pair of each
species of animals boarded the ark.

No sooner Nuh entered the ark, thunderous rain started to pour from the
heavens and springs burst from the bottom of the Earth. As the waters
rose higher and higher, people climbed up the tallest trees and headed
towards high grounds. The waters began to engulf these refuges too. Some
people repented and wanted to board the ark, but alas it was too late.
The ark had been sealed to protect against the down-pour and the
turbulence of the roaring waters. The floods spread far and wide,
covering the entire terrain, destroyed all except those who had believed
in the prophet, and heeding his warning, had boarded with him.

It is said that the flooding lasted one hundred and fifty days. When
the waters receded, the ark came to rest over Mount Ararat. The
occupants of the ark came out and thanked the Lord for their miraculous
survival. They then spread out to inhabit the Earth again with the
blessings of their Lord.

Nuh is known as Noah in Torah. He lived for nine hundred and fifty
years and left a large progeny after him. His eldest surviving son
Yaffath (Japheth) went north west towards Europe and settled there. His
descendents are known as the Japhetic race. His middle son Sam (Shem)
remained with his father in the Middle East. His descendents are known
as the Semetic race.

The youngest son Ham went south west and settled in northern Africa.
His descendents are called the Hemetic race. References: al Qur'an: Ale
Imran, Anam, Aaraf, Yunus, @ud, Ibrahim, Bani Israel, Anmbiya@,Momenoon,
Furqan, Shu'ra', Ankaboot, Zatiyat, Najam, Qamar, Hadeed, Tahreem, Haqah
and Nuh.

**Prophet Hud**

Prophet Hud was bom to Shaleh in the fifth generation from Nuh. He was
appointed as the messenger from Allah to the people known as Aa'd. These
people were a tall and sturdy race. They had abandoned the worship of
Allah in favor of idols hewed from stone. Hud preached them the true
path for salvation and reminded them of the benevolences that their
Creator had bestowed them without their asking. But they refused to pay
attention.

Hud warned them of the punishment Allah could unleash over them for
their disobedience. They arrogantly rejected his warnings. They thought
that no such punishment could ever come over them. They had forgotten
the story of the terrible deluge that had come over the people of Nuh
for their rejecting of the teachings of their prophet. At first they had
to endure a total drought for three years. When Hud tried to ask for
their subjugation, they taunted him: "Go ahead and do whatever you
could, because we consider you only a fool."

When Allah saw those people 'paid no heed to His signs, a terrible
storin overtook them for an overwhelming duration of eight days. There
was an utter darkness, and debris flew in all directions. The whole
nation of these arrogant people perished, and Hud and only a small group
of believers were saved by the Grace and benevolence of Allah.

He is known as A'eeber or A'aber in Torah. References: al Qur'an: Sura:
Aaraf, ]Lud, Ibrahim, Furqan, Shu'ra'. Ankaboot, Ha-Meem Sajdah, Ahqaf,
Zatiyat, Najan, Qamar, Alhaqah and Fajar.

**Prophet Saleh**

Saleh was bom in the ninth generation from Nuh. He was appointed
prophet for the Thamud people who inhabited the moutanous territory
between Hejaz and Palestine. They built their homes by hewing the rocky
faces of cliffs. They lived long lives and worshiped gods made from
stone.

They refused to listen to the wisdom of Saleh and challenged him to
show them any sign to prove that an invisible God existed. They demanded
a miracle at their annual festival. They told Saleh: "You pray to your
God and we will pray to ours. Let us see whose prayer is accepted, yours
or ours. That will decide the matter between us.

They came in drones from around the land and gathered around their
decorated stone gods and brought offerings for fulfilments of their
prayers. Clearly the stone gods were unable to respond to their prayers.
They then turned to Saleh and one of them asked him to pray to his God
and to bring out a pregnant camel from the large boulder that was lying
on the ground, and if this she-camel had an off-spring bom in front of
their eyes, they would accept Saleh's God as theirs as well. Saleh
prayed to The Almighty Allah and sure enough a pregnant she-camel rose
out of the large boulder and gave birth to a calf as they watched. They
were clearly struck with wonder on this miracle.

In accordance with Allah's Command, Saleh told the people that they
must share their drink with the camel. It was agreed that the people
would use the water from the village well on all days of the week except
one day which was reserved for the camel and her baby. But they were a
disobedient people.

They refused the animals to drink or graze freely in the territory as
agreed, and forced Saleh to assume their full responsibility. Saleh told
them that the camel and her baby were there because they had asked for
the miracle, and they must take care of the animals. They threatened to
kill the two animals. He then reminded them of the benevolence of Allah
that only He could bestow over His creation without asking for it,
namely water, rain, fertility of the land where crops grow, the stone
cliffs where they built their homes, and the clean air that they
breathed. They must refrain from their threatened acts otherwise they
would bring down a disaster over themselves.

One day the people carried out their threat and slew both the mother
and her baby camel. This invited Allah's immediate wrath. Allah
instructed Saleh to leave the territory along with his family and a
small group of true believers before His wrath would strike that
insolent people. No sooner the pious group of believers had crossed over
the last of the cliffs, than a tremendous earth quake -shook the land
with a blinding lightning and an ear shattering thunder. The entire
people in that territory perished along with their false gods.

References : al Qur'an: Sura Araf, ]Lud, Ibrahim, Hajar, Furqan,
Shu'ra' Nahl, Ankabooi, Ha-Meem Sajdah, Zariyat, Qamar, al-Haqah, Fajar,
Shams.

**Prophet Ibrahim**

**The Birth of Ibrahim**

Ibrahim was bom in the fifth generation from Hud, and during the reign
of a tyrant known as Namrood (Nimrod). Namrood, a powerful king, made
his subjects bow to him as a god. One night he dreamt that a star rose
from the horizon and its brilliance eclipsed the moon and the sun. He
woke up wondering about the interpretation of his dream. He summoned the
astrologers and fortune tellers to come up with the most acceptable
explanation of his dream.

They conferred with one another and told him: 'A person will be bom in
your kingdom who will wreck your power and destroy your influence.' He
asked if that person had actually been bom or would be bom in the near
future. They told him that he was not yet bom. Upon hearing that,
Namrood ordered a ban on all marriages, separating men from women and
ordered the killing of all new boms.

Allah is All Powerful and All Knowing. His intentions come to be
whenever He deems them to be. The mother of Ibrahim successfully
concealed her pregnancy. She went out of the city limits and gave birth
to her child in a cave. She stayed in that cave with her child until the
senseless slaughter of the new boms had come to an end and the king's
own fear of his destruction had abated. By this time Ibrahim had grown
up to be a tall and handsome lad. They returned to their ancestral home
in the city of Ur.

**His Intelligence, Cognition, and Rejection of Idolatory:**

In those days people believed in the celestial bodies as their deities.
One night, Ibrahim also selected the brightest of all the stars for his
observation. By the morning its light faded and it disappeared. He
thought that the most brilliant of the stars could not be the creator as
it faded away in the brightness of another celetial body. Similarly he
noted that the moon changed phases, and was but a shadow in front of the
brightness of the sun. He concluded that the moon could not be the
creator either. He pondered if the sun were the ultimate god, as he had
also noted people bowing in subjugation to the sun.

But the sun was out only for the duration of the day, and gave way to
the stars and the moon at night. He reflected upon this phenomenon and
concluded that the one who put these celestial bodies in their
respective places has the supreme power over them and must be the God
Almighty, even though He were not visible or physically tangible. He was
pleased with this conclusion and enthusiastically began to tell people
how wrong they all had been to ignore the obvious power behind their
daily lives, the Supreme power of Allah. He invited them to give up
their false gods and return to the truth.

Some laughed at his idea, some ignored him as he was only a youth "with
little knowledge of life," while others were offended and admonished him
for his lack of respect for their gods.

They invited him to come to the annual festival and see for himself how
they had decorated their gods along with fabulous offerings brought over
from far and wide. Ibrahim excused himself and did not go to the
festival. As the towns people had all gone to the fair grounds to
indulge in their festivities, Ibrahim went to their temple, broke all
their idols and left his axe hanging on the shoulder of the biggest of
them all in the center of the temple.

Next day when people went to the temple and saw what had happened to
their gods, they knew that Ibrahim had done it, since he had made no
secret of his dislike of those idols. The village chief asked Ibrahim if
he knew who had broken their idols. Ibrahim, pointing towards the big
idol said, "Why don't you ask him?" The cheif said, "How could a stone
idol do such a deed?" There upon Ibrahim said, "If the stone idol was
incapable of doing it, or protect itself and the other idols, how could
it be a god, the provider and the protectors " They obviously had no
answer to the logic of Ibrahim. However, they were not prepared to
follow his path. They wanted him punished for being disrespectful to
their gods. They sent a deputation to Namrood, their god-king for a
judgement against Ibrahim.

Ibrahim was summoned to the court of Namrood to answer his charges and
face the punishment.

When all the people had gathered in the court, Namrood arrived. All
subjects bowed down to the ground for their total submission except for
Ibrahim who remained upright and did not bow to the king-god. When asked
why he refused to bow to him, Ibrahim replied that he submitted only to
his God, The Creator, The Sustainer. This was an open insult to the king
who commanded an absolute power over his subjects and claimed himself to
be a god. By his act, Ibrahim had provoked the king's wrath. However,
surprised at the courage of Ibrahim, the king decided to question him.

**Debate in the Court of Namrood on the existence of Allah**

The king asked Ibrahim to explain to the entire audience who his god
was. Ibrahim said that his God was one who gave life and who took it
away. The king said that he did that every day!

Ibrahim said that his God brought forth the sun from the east. He asked
the king that if he had the power, could he cause the sun to rise from
the west! Clearly the king was unable to carry out such a feat.

The king then turned around and asked Ibrahim why he had broken all the
idols in the temple. He gave the same reply to the king as he had given
to the chief of the village before. The king said to Ibrahim that he
knew that the idols did not talk and yet he kept on referring to the
biggest of them to answer the question that actually pertained to him.
Ibrahim said that since the king and all his subjects knew that idols
did not talk why then they worshiped them as gods.

As there were no answers to the logic of Ibrahim the king ordered his
courtiers to dig a large pit, light a wood fire and throw Ibrahim in it
alive, to make an example so that nobody would again disobey or ridicule
their god-king.

**The Miraculous escape of Ibrahim from the fire**

The pit was dug and a large fire was lit in it. When it was roaring
with flames and the heat could be felt from a distance, Ibrahim was
thrown in it. Ibrahim prayed to the true God, Allah, for His mercy in
that hour of trial. By the Grace of Allah neither the fire nor the heat
touched Ibrahim. He walked around as if in a garden and left the pit
totally unharmed. This indeed was a miracle that convinced some of the
onlookers who bowed to the true God and accepted the true religion of
Allah and gave up idolatory.

Ibrahim left his ancestoral city of Ur and migrated north to Haran
where he stayed for a short period of time. Then he moved west to Kin'an
(Canan in Torah), along with his wife Sarah and nephew Lut (Lot in
Torah). After a while, Lut was appointed messenger by Allah to the
people of Sidom and Gomorrah who lived north of Kin'an.

**The Progeny of Ibrahim**

Before finally settling in Kin'an, Ibrahim visited Egypt where the king
gave him a maiden (according to some, his daughter) in marriage. Her
name was Hajirah (Hager in Torah). Allah gave Ismail as the first bom
child to Ibrahim through his second wife Hajirah at a old age of eighty
six years. Sarah was infertile and became jealous of Hajirah. Under
instructions from Allah, Ibrahim took his son Ismail and his wife
Hajirah from Kin'an and brought them down south in the land of Arabia
where they were left to live for rest of their lives. Ismail grew up to
be a handsome and tall young man who had many children and is popularly
known as the patriarch of the Arabs.

Back in Kin'an, after a few years, Sarah who had grown old, and given
up hope of ever bearing a child of her own, also conceived and bore a
son to Ibrahim named Ishaq. It is worth noting here that Ibrahim had
then turned ninety nine years of age. Ishaq was a great prophet of Allah
in the land of Kin'an. He remained settled in Kin'an and had several
prominent prophets amongst his progeny.

After the death of his wife Sarah, Ibrahim took another wife named
Qutura from whom had many sons and daughters. These children of Ibrahim
settled and populated the lands of Madain, Midyan and Saba.

**The Trial of Ibrahim by Allah**

One night Ibrahim saw in his dream that he had sacrificed his son
Ismail to please Allah. He wondered over this dream and pondered over
its meaning. He saw the same dream on three consecutive nights. He
called his son Ismail and told him about his dreams. The son asked his
father to do exactly what he had seen in his dreams, if that was the
wish of the Creator Almighty, and that he would find him patient.
Ibrahim tied his son just as he would tie a sacrificial lamb, and placed
the knife on the throat of his son to carry out the sacrifice.

The Sustainer of life and of all mankind sent the archangel Jibril
(Gabrial) with salutations from Allah and told the father and the son
that their belief in Allah and their resolve to give their most valued
possession in life in His way had pleased Him greatly. Allah had sent a
lamb to be sacrificed in place of Ismail.

Ibrahim thanked the Lord for the acceptance of his service and returned
home with humility and gratitude towards Allah. This act of Ibrahim has
been perpetuated by Allah for ever, and is celebrated by Muslims all
over the world every year when they sacrifice a lamb. This event is
known as Eid-al-Adha.

**The Construction of Kalba and Hajj**

Ibrahim and his son Ismail built the Ka'ba and inserted the Black Stone
in one of the comers of the building in accordance with the Will of
Allah. The ritual of Hajj was initiated at that time and has continued
to this day.

**Solution to the question of Death and Resurrection**

Once Ibrahim asked Allah how would He bring them to life again when the
living had died and perished. Allah asked Ibrahim if he had doubts over
that question. He said he had no doubt about the absolute powers of his
Lord but he wanted to satisfy his curiosity over the mechanism of
resurrection. Allah instructed Ibrahim: 'gather four birds, let them
become familiar with you, then sacrifice them, mix their meat and
scatter it on four hills across from one another. Then call the birds by
their names, and they will come to you.' Ibrahim did as instructed, and
verily the same happened as predicted by the Supreme One, Allah. Thus
Ibrahim solved the riddle of resurrection of the dead on the Day of
Judgement. Allah will call His creation as He Wills, and they will all
rise from their graves.

**The Ritual of Circumcision**

When Ibrahim turned ninety nine years of age, Allah ordained that he
himself, his male progeny, and all believers be circumcised. The divine
order was obeyed. It might be noted here that Ishaq was bom to Ibrahim
at that old age and after the ritual of circumcision. This ritual is
practiced by the Muslims and the Jews, the followers of Ibrahim, and all
those who recognize the hygienic advantages of circumcision.

**The Death of Ibrahim**

This great prophet and a friend of Allah, also known as the patriarch
of all subsequent prophets, died at the age of one hundred and seventy
five years.

**Major Lessons from the Life of Ibrahi**

1. Do not remain ignorant about religion,nor be stubborn about the old
ways of our forefathers. Seek the truth. Accept it when discovered.

2. Do not associate any thing or any one with The Creator. Nothing can
share with Him the glory of His Oneness.

3. Submit to Allah in total submission to enjoy His bounty and
benevolence.

4. When it is difficult to practice your faith in safety and in peace,
move to another place, for His territory is vast and His bounty
limitless.

5. Whenever occasions arise requiring sacrifice to preserve or protect
Faith, do not hesitate, for all we have, came from Him. We are
independent owners of nothing in this world.

References : al Qur'an: Sura Baqra, ale Imran, Nisa', An'am, Taubah,
Lud, Yusuf, Ibrahim, Hajar, Nahl, Mariyam, Anmbiyaa, Hajj, Shu'raa,
Ankaboot, Sa fat, Jinn, Zakhraf, Hadeed, Mumtahna, Zariyat, Najam,
Taha.


