Prophet Musa
============

**The Birth and Early Life of Musa**

The children of Israil came to Egypt during the days of Yusuf and
flourished with wealth and large progenies. Their growth in wealth and
power became a threat to the rulers of Egypt. The adviser of the
pharaohs devised several ways to reduce this threat. This brought great
hardship to the children of Israil.

Around the time of the birth of Musa there were rumors that a great
messiah will be bom t ' hat year amongst these people and that he will
challenge the might of the Pharaoh and liberate the children of Israil.
The Pharaoh ordered all male babies bom to these people to be killed so
that the messiah may never challenge his power. This was extremely
painful for the parents of many ill-fated infants that were slain as a
result of this cruel decree.

Allah has His Divine Wisdom and no body can avert what He has planned
or designed. Musa was bom in the house of Imran, in the clan of Lavi
(one of the twelve clans of Banu Israil). Fearful of the destiny of her
child at the hands of the rulers of the time, his mother laid him in a
basket and set on the waters of the mighty Nile. The basket drifted
towards the gardens surrounding the palace of the Phraoh. The maids in
attendance to queen retrieved the basket and saw a beautiful baby in it.
The queen who had no child of her own developed immediate love for the
baby.She adopted him as her son. He was named Musa, which, in the old
Egyptian language meant "pulled out of water."

Allah has His own ways of protecting and providing for His chosen
servants. The hungry baby needed to be fed but he did not accept any of
the fostered mothers brought in. The sister of Musa had followed the
basket to the palace. She offered to bring one of the new mothers whose
baby had recently been slain.

She did not reveal her or her mother's association with the baby. The
queen agreed, as she had no other choice. When the mother of Musa was
presented in the palace as one who had been deprived of her baby, Musa
responded immediately to the nursing. The queen hired her to nurse the
baby in the palace and at her own home as needed. The infant prophet, a
servant of Allah was thus returned to his own mother and household for
care and nurture.

**Musa as a teenager in the palace of Pharaoh**

The Pharaoh saw the intellectual brilliance in this youth and appointed
his top astrologers, magicians, scribes and priests to educate Musa in
all aspects of the royal faculties. He must have intended to appoint
Musa as his special advisor, or high priest, or even his successor.
However, this could also be the Will of Allah to have Musa gain all the
secrets of the Pharaoh that made him so powerful.

**Musa in the service of Sholayb**

Musa was naturally inclined to help his people. One day, while trying
to free an Israilite in a scuffle with an Egyptian, Musa killed the
Egyptian with one blow. This incidence reached the elite circle of the
ruling class who branded Musa as a friend of the wretched Israilites
whom the Egyptians hated from the core of their hearts. They passed a
unanimous resolution to have a public trial of Musa to get him killed
for his deed against an Egyptian. A noble person in the clan of the
Pharaoh (called Momine Ale-Fir'on in Qur'an) informed Musa of the plot
and he helped him escape into the desert.

The desert journey was arduous. Musa reached the city of Midyan. He
came to rest at a well where several shepherds were busy watering their
herds. He saw that there were two young and beautiful women waiting for
their turn to serve their herd. The men took their turns assertively
while the ladies waited patiently. Musa could not remain passive at the
sight. He offered to help the young women by pulling the water from the
well. They told him that their father was old and since he was unable to
do this work, they had no choice but to come out to serve their herd.
Sometimes it could be quite late in the evening when they returned to
their home.

Musa helped them water their herd expeditiously, and they returned home
early. Their father enquired on their unusual early return. They told
him of the incidence at the well. Sho'ayb recognized the deed to be that
of a man of Allah and sent one of his daughters to bring him home. Musa
had nowhere else to go, so he accompanied the lady to her home. Sho'ayb
asked Musa the details of his travel. The story of Musa fascinated all
in the audience.

Sho'ayb offered Musa to stay with him, and married one of his daughters
to him. He lived in the clan for about ten years and led an extemely
simple life in contrast to the comforts of the royal Egyptian palace. He
tended the sheep and goats of the family and spent time in the solitude
of the desert. Here he contemplated and reflected on his past and
present experiences. He had discusssions with his father-in-law, Sho'ayb
which enriched him spiritually. He reflected over the plight of his
people in Egypt and made a firm resolve to free them from the servitude
of the Egyptians.


**The Prophethood of Musa and his return to Egypt**

After living ten years in Midyan, Musa left for Egypt, accompanied by
his family. On their way, one night, they pitched their tents near Mount
Sinai. It was cold and they needed fire for warmth. He saw what looked
like a fire higher up on the mountain. Musa told the family to stay in
the tents while he would go up the mountain to bring the fire for their
comfort. When he arrived at the site, instead of fire, he noticed a
brilliant light emanating from a bush.

Musa approached the bush cautiously when he heard a voice calling him
to take off his shoes as he was in the presence of his Creator, and that
he was standing on the santified terraine. It was here that Allah
bestowed upon Musa the gifts of miracles to be used while confronting
the mighty Pharaoh. He was given a brilliant light in his hand
(Yadebaiza), and a staff with miraculous powers. Allah told him that He
would give him other great signs to help accomplish His mission. Musa
was then instructed to proceed to Egypt immediately.

Musa said that he was afraid of getting arrested on a previous murder
charge, and also because he could not speak fluently due to his
stuttering. He prayed to Allah to grant him fluency of speech, and have
his brother Harun help him and be a deputy to him in all his tasks
ahead. Allah granted Musa his requests and told him that he could take
his brother along with him, and told him to be gentle in his language
and be patient in all his dealings.

Musa was overwhelmed at the experience. The brilliant light emanating
from the bush disappeared. For his own satisfaction, Musa varified the
miracles of Yade-baiza and conversion of his staff into a serpent. He
knew that it was not a dream, and he indeed was in the presence of The
Divine One.

Musa came down from the mountain, narrated his experience to his wife,
who acnowledged him to be the prophet of Allah and gave him the
reassurance and comfort he needed. They made their way to Egypt, and to
the house of Imran, his father. He took Harun aside and told him of his
appointment as a prophet and his vicergeant. Harun was pleased and
assured to help his brother in'the task that lay ahead.

**The confrontation with the Pharaoh**

Musa and Harun arrived in the court of the Pharaoh and told him that
his claim of godhood was false, for there is but one God who created the
king and the subject. He controls all that is in this world and beyond.
The only reason for his return to Egypt was to obtain the release of his
people from their bondage in Egypt.

The Pharaoh was not pleased with the dialogue, and said that Musa was a
fugitive of their law and was to be hanged for the crime of killing an
Egyptian. Musa said that the final justice was in the hands of Allah and
that the Pharaoh himself was commiting the worst crime in defying his
own Creator by forcing his false godhood over his subjects.

Musa produced the miracle of Yadebaiza, and showed how, with the Will
of Allah, his hand could produce blinding brilliance. The Pharaoh
laughed and said that was nothing but an act of magic. To impress Musa,
his magicians threw strings on the floor which turned into snakes. Musa
threw his staff to the floor. It became a serpent and devoured all the
wriggling snakes.

Whereas the magic of the Pharaoh was beaten, he declined to acknowledge
the superiority of Allah over him. As he defiantly refused to allow Bani
Israil to leave Egypt, Musa had to unleash the punishment of Allah over
him and his people. These punishments came in the form of unseasonal
floods that demolished their dwellings, swarms of locust that destroyed
the crop, pestilence of lice that made life miserable, toads that
croaked and sprang everywhere, and the turning of all driking water into
blood.

Each time the Pharaoh was subjected to humiliation, his defiance became
pervasive. Finally, when the first bom sons of all Egyptians started to
die from no apparent cause, including the beloved son of the Pharaoh, he
finally gave up his defiance and most reluctantly agreed Bani Israil to
leave Egypt.


**The Exodus of Bani Israil from Egypt**

Musa issued specific instructions for his people to collect all their
belongings and leave their homes before sun rise, to gather outside the
city periphery. The remains of Yusuf had already been collected in a
coffin box, which was hauled out of the city, with caution and respect.
As the people had little time to cook their normal food early in the
morning, they could only eat the bread baked from rapidly kneaded
dough.

Musa led his people out of the city and headed straight for the shores
of Red Sea. When the day dawned and the Egyptians saw their city to be
devoid of the work force they reported this to the Pharaoh. He could not
believe that Musa could achieve this mobilisation so fast. His defiance
resurged into a mad rage. He mounted his fastest chariot and, in the
company of his swiftest horsemen, chased Musa and his people, and caught
up with them at the Red Sea.

**Miracles of Musa during Exodus**

Musa and his people were sandwitched between the army of the Pharaoh
and the Red Sea. The Pharaoh laughed at the situation, and said that the
God of Musa was not a very clever strategist, and clearly they were at
his mercy. He orderd them to return or be killed on the spot. The faith
of Bani Israil wavered, and they started to blame Musa for their plight.
Musa prayed for help from Allah and hit the waters of Red Sea which
created a dry passage between two walls of water. He ordered his people
to quickly cross over to the other side.

When they were half way down the path, the Pharaoh descended down the
same path, in hot pursuit of the fugitives. However, man's designs are
no match to that of Allah. As soon as the last of the fugitives had
crossed over to the other side, the waters returned to fill the gap, and
drowned the defiant Pharaoh, his army, his swift chariot and all their
fast horses. Musa prayed to Allah and thanked Him for His Divine
Assistance to him and his people.

**Arrival at Mount Sinai**

Musa led the large caravan through the hot desert of Sinai and arrived
at the foot hills of Mount Sinai. The caravan was extremely short of
water. They started to moan and blame Musa for having dragged them from
the comfort of their homes into the desert with no water or shelter.
Having been exposed to the style of idol worship under Egyptian
subjugation for generations, they irked to make idols for worship in the
old fasion. Musa scolded them on their absurd desire. He prayed to Allah
for help and hit a nearby rock with his staff. A spring of sparkling
water gushed out from it. They all drank from the spring and washed
themselves and their clothing with the plentiful water.

Musa told his people that he was going up the mountain for a few days
and Harun would act as his deputy in his absence. They should consider
Harun to be their overlord just as he himself was to them, and that they
should be obedient to him just as they were to Musa himself. Having
given them these instructions, he left for the heights of Mount Sinai.

**Revelation of Torah to Musa**

Musa returned to the spot where he had first received his miracles from
Allah. He took off his shoes as before and went down into subjugation to
The Creator and The Sustainer of the universe. He prayed to Allah for
His guidance. He was given the Ten Commandments at this session. Before
leaving, he begged Allah to be revealed to him.

Allah told him that it would not be possible for him to set his eye on
His Divine Radiance. He would shower just a little of this over the
mighty mountain so that he may derive his satisfaction. No sooner the
communication had ended than a blinding pure white radiance struck the
mighty mountain and instantaneously turned it into ashes. Musa lost
consciousness from the roar that accompanied the lightening. When he
recovered, he went down in total submission and asked forgiveness of
Allah. Having thus received the Torah for his people, Musa came down
from the mountain and headed for the camp.

**Samry and the Golden Bull**

In the absence of Musa from the camp, the Israilites defied Harun.
Misguided by Samry, a pagan, they collected their golden jewelery and
quickly wrought a golden colt from it, as they had done for the temples
of the Pharaoh for years. They said that the God of Musa was no where to
be seen, and Musa had abandoned them in the wilderness. They started
worshipping the Samry's colt, danced around it in sinful pursuits, and
indulged in immoral acts.

When Musa arrived at the camp, he was infuriated to see his people in
clear defiance of his specific orders. He was very angry with his
brother for letting them indulge in blatent kufr. Harun told him that
they would not listen to him. Musa admonished Samry and broke and burnt
his golden colt. As a punishment, the sinning people were ordained to
kill one another for atonement of sin.

**Banu Israil demand to see God of Musa**

After the commotion settled, the elders in the camp insisted upon
meeting with God. Musa told them that no one could see Allah but they
were adament. So Musa took seventy selected elders to Mount Sinai. They
were not even close to the mountain when a thundering lightening struck
in their path. The entire groupof insolent people fell to their knees.

Musa begged Allah for their forgiveness, and brought them back to the
camp. Here they stayed for many days and Musa and his brother Harun
educated the people on the Oneness of Allah, and taught them the method
of worship as prescribed in the Torah. They sanctified one tent and
dedicated it for worship only. They kept this congregational tent with
them for worship until they came back to the land of Kin'an where they
built the first permanent Bait-ul-Muqaddas (the Holy House).

**The Gift of Mann-o-Salwa**

The caravan had exhausted their food supply in the desert and started
grumbling. They again blamed Musa for all their difficulties. In his
prayers, Musa begged Allah for their relief. Allah sent the gift of
Mann-o-Salwa (the heavenly meals consisting of meat and sweets) to feed
them. They were happy for a short time but started grumbling about the
monotonous diet. Now they wanted the traditional diet of lentils
garnished with garlic etc. Musa admonished them for their thanklessness.
By this time they had reached Palestine, on the border of Kin'an, where
they erected their tents in the desert.

**The Promised Land**

Kin'an was the land that Allah had promised Musa at the end of their
jouney, the land of their forefathers. They could see the land from
their high perch in the desert. Musa sent Yusha' bin Nun to gather
information. It was here that Maryam, the sister of Musa passed away.
Yusha' bin Nun came back and reported that the valley was very fertile
with fruit groves and vineyards. The people were very tall and strong.
Banu Israil refused to go down to claim the territory and face a strong
people in combat.

Musa became very disheartened at the defiance and insolence of the
people and prayed to Allah for guidance. Allah ordered Musa to take them
back to the desert where they would roam in wretchedness for forty years
and they would never see the promised land. Hearing this, they agreed to
go down to the valley. However Musa advised them to refrain from doing
so since Allah had already decreed their renewed toils in the desert.
They would not listen, and a large group from amongst them went up the
hills.

They were attacked by the inhabitants of the valley and many of them
were killed in their attempt to gain control of the valley. They had no
recourse but to return to the dersert and aimlessly roam there. Musa
took his people and travelled south. When he arrived at Mount Hoor,
Harun, his brother passed away. Musa continued to lead his people for
the duration of this suffering. Yusha' bin Nun assisted Musa in the
tasks that were previously carried out by Harun.

**Fort,jr Years in the Desert**

Musa continued the journeys in the desert for forty years as ordained.
During this time many of the older folks, who had originated in Egypt,
died, and a new generation of Banu Israil was raised who believed in
Allah and followed orders inscribed in the Torah. They were now eager to
carry out the biddings of Allah and ' seek their destiny in the land of
Kin'an, the land of their forefathers.

**Return to the Promised Land**

Musa led them north once again and camped on the opposite banks of
River Jordan. He showed them the promised land which their parents had
rejected forty years earlier. He told them that he would not be
accompanying them beyond the banks of the river. He left them in the
camp in the care of Yusha' bir,- Nun and went up the hill for his
prayers.

**The Death of Musa**

Musa went up the mountain but never came back. He died there, and
nobody found him or his grave. Musa is known as,Moses in the Torah.
References : His story has been told in several forms and contexts in al
Qur'an. The relevant Suras are as follows: Baqarah, Alelmran, Nisaa'.
Maidah, Anam'Anjaal, Yunus, @ud, Raad, Ibrahim, Nahl, Bani Israil,
Kahaf, Maryam, Taha, Anmbiya'. Momin, Furqan, Shu'ra' ' Qasas,
A'nkaboot, Sajdah, Ahzab, Sa Yfat, Haa meem Sajdah, Dukhan, Mujadelah,
Jathiyah, Zariyat, Qamar, Tahreem, Ha'qah, Muzammil, Nazat, Fajar.

**Prophet Harun**

Harun was the elder brother of Musa. He was son of Imran. He was
appointed by Allah to help his brother Musa in the arduous task of
freeing and molding the unruly children of Israil into a nation. He was
responsible for carrying out of the rituals of worship as assigned by
Musa. His descendants still carry out these rituals in the temples of
Bani Israil. He acted as the vicegerent of Musa and accompanied his
brother through the desert journeys till he died atop Mount Hoor.

References : He is known as Aaron in Torah and is referred to in al
Qur'an along with Musa.

**Prophet Yusha' bin Nun**

Yusha' bin Nun carried out the first assignment of Musa on their first
arrival at the Promised land. After the death of Harun he accompanied
Musa in the desert for forty years and carried out all the assignments
that were previously carried out by Harun. When they returned to the
banks of Jordan River after their wretched journeys in the desert, Musa
appointed him his deputy and went up the mountain for the last time.

He never came back. It was Yusha' bin Nun who led Bani Israil into the
city of Yareho (Jericho) and arranged the settlement of the twelve
tribes of Bani Israil in the land of Kin'an. It was his responsibility
to personally see the burial of the remains of Prophet Yusuf amongst his
forefathers in accordance with his will. He died when all the task of
settling the Israilites was accomplished according to the Will of
Allah.

Yusha' bin Nun is known as Jashua in the Torah.

References : His name is not mentioned in al Qur'an but is referred to
along with the narratives of Musa in Sura Maidah, Kahaf, Waqeah.

**Prophet Samuel**

After gaining hold of the new territory, Banu Israil were governed by
the clergy in accordance with the laws laid down by Musa in the Torah.
After a while they started to dream about a kingdom of their own, just
as other people around them had. Allah appointed Samuel prophet to Banu
Israil. Samuel was a descendant from Ephraim (a son of Yusuf). The
people made Taalut (Saul in Torah) their king. However, Taalut was
unable to govern the people well, and was not obedient to Samuel. Allah
took the kingdom away from Taalut and gave it to Da'ud (David).

References : Samuel is not named in al Qur'an, but a refemce is made in
Sura Baqarah without his name.

**Prophet Da'ud**

Da'ud (David) was a ninth generation descendant of Yahudah (one of the
twelve sons of Ya'qub, known as Judah in Torah). Banu Israil were in war
with the Eimaliques, and no one was able to subdue their gigantic king
called Jalut (Goliath). Da'ud was still a young lad when he used his
sling to kill giant king Jalut (Goliath). He was appointed prophet and
king by Allah while Samuel was still alive.

The boundaries of his kingdom expanded during his rule, and he spread
the religion of Allah to other territories. He laid the foundations of
Bait-ul Muqaddas (the Holy Mosque) Allah gave him the Book Zubur (Psalms
in the Torah), that has poetical rhyme and prophetic wisdom in its
words. He lived long and ruled his people wisely and in accordance with
the laws of Torah. References: al Qur'an: Sura Baqarah, Nisaa', Maidah,
An'am, Bani Israil, Anmbiya', Nahl, Saba', Jinn.

**Prophet Sulayman**

Sulayman was one of the sons of Da'ud. Allah appointed him prophet and
king after his father and gave him immense wisdom and power over all
creation, including the jinns. The stories of his justice are alive to
this day. His kingdom expanded as far east as Euphrates river, as far
west as Egypt, and as far south as Yamen (known as the kingdem of Saba,
or Sheba in the Torah).

The queen of Saba, named Bilqis, was so overwhelmed by the power and
wisdom of Sulayman that she gave up her kingdom to become his wife and
lived with him and by his side. He completed the construction of
Bait-ul-Muqaddas whose foundations were laid by his father. Sulayman is
known as King Solomon in the Torah.

References : al Qur'an may be seen in Sura Baqarah, Nisaa', Anam,
Anmbiya'. Nahl, Saba, Jinn.


