Chapter 1 : Introduction
========================

This article revolves around certain presuppositions, themes, and
theories related to a selected number of Western writings on Islamic
resurgence in the modern Arab world. In this regard, I purport to
examine the following claims:

(1) Islamic resurgence is a widespread traditional, cultural, and
political phenomenon in modern Islam;

(2) some Western (and even Muslim) studies of Islamic resurgence have
only touched the surface, and, therefore, their methodological
orientation has been inadequate;

(3) as a facet of modern Islam, Islamic resurgence has reinterpreted
the Islamic tradition in a creative and unique way; and (4) although the
major leaders of the Islamic movement have placed philosophy outside the
pale of Islam, one is tempted to study Islamic resurgence as a
philosophical expression of modern and contemporary Muslim societies.
[^1]

In order to show the theoretical inadequacy of the writings on Islamic
revivalism, I would like to discuss four major recent studies: (1)
Emmanuel Sivan, Radical Islam: Medieval Theology and Modern Politics;
[^2](2) William M. Watt, Islamic Fundamentalism and Modernity; [^3] (3)
Leonard Binder, Islamic Liberalism: A Critique of Development
Ideologies, [^4] and (4) Ronald Nettler, Past Trials and Present
Tribulations. [^5]

**Notes:**

[^1]. Sayyid Qutb criticizes philosophy in general, and argues that it
lacks inspiration and a sense of praxis: "We must make it clear,
however, that we do not desire to seek the truths of the Islamic concept
merely for the sake of academic knowledge. We have no desire to add
still another book to the shelves of Islamic libraries under the heading
of \`Islamic philosophy'." Sayyid Qutb, The Islamic Concept and its
Characteristics, tr. Mohammed M. Siddiqui (Indianapolis: American Trust
Publications, 1991), p. 5.

[^2]. (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1990).

[^3]. (London and New York: Routledge,1988).

[^4]. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988).

[^5]. (New York: Pergamon Press, 1987).


