Chapter 2 : First Study
=======================

In Radical Islam, Sivan proposes following two notions: First, to
better understand the thinking of modern Islamic resurgence, especially
that of the Egyptian Sayyid Qutb, [^6] one has to study the influence
both of Ibn Taymiyyah of the 14th century and the Pakistani Abu
al-\`Ala' Mawdudi of the 20th century on Qutb's language and thought.
Second, Islamic revival is basically defensive and anti-modern. In
addition, the modernity/jahiliyyah polarity (read as modernity/tradition
polarity) provides the most adequate approach to study the dynamics of
modern Islam. [^7]

Sivan's takes a political-theological approach to discuss the history
of Arab societies in the past three decades. In other words, his
objective is to analyze the connection between "political Islam" and
society in selected Arab countries, especially Egypt, Lebanon, Syria and
Jordan. To my mind, the book is highly reductionist and selective and
does not adequately portray the historical dynamics between religious
institutions, ideas, and personalities, on the one hand, and Arab
society, on the other. Sivan uses a multitude of terms to refer to the
phenomenon of Islamism, such as radical Islam (p. 1); Islamic revival
(p. 3); Islamic militancy (p. 11), and fundamentalism (p. 67).

Sivan asserts in the first chapter, "The Mood: Doom and Gloom," that
Muslim "fundamentalists" are a pessimistic group of people because they
abhor current social and political realities. This aversion to reality
has translated itself into a radical political movement which aims at
restructuring the status quo.

Thus Sivan reduces Islamism to mere politics: "Islamic revival-while
activist and militant-is thus essentially defensive; a sort of holding
operation against modernity. And though it has no doubt a sharp
political edge, it is primarily a cultural phenomenon. Its very strength
proceeds from this alliance of political and cultural protest." [^8]

As is common in a lot of Western writings on Islam, the term modernity
is used often. Sivan contends that Western modernity, [^9] in its
economic and intellectual dimensions, presents a special challenge to
Muslims: "Western investment means the integration of the Islamic world
into the system of the multinationals, which is totally alien to Muslim
concepts of interests, insurance, taxation, and so on."

[^10] Then he reaches the following major conclusion without providing
enough historical evidence and introduction: "Islam thus comes out badly
bruised from the encounter with modernity."

[^11]

To my mind, the author fails to provide an adequate historical analysis
that takes into account the problematic nature of colonization in the
Muslim world and its different manifestations, military, economic,
cultural, political, religious, and conceptual. [^12] Sivan does not
consider colonization to be problematic at all; rather, he considers the
Muslim rejection of modernity to be the crux of the matter: "The picture
that emerges is not one which scholars studying Islamic society would
tend to refute. Modernity has indeed made important gains, especially in
recent decades. Islam, although more resilient than other traditional
cultures, has seen its position greatly eroded." [^13]

**Notes:**

[^6]. See the author's recent article on Sayyid Qutb, Ibrahim M.
Abu-Rabi\`, "Discourse, Power, and Ideology in Modern Islamic
Revivalism," The Muslim World, Vol. LXXXI (3-4), July-October 1991, pp.
283-298.

[^7]. Many scholars follow this approach in the course of their
investigation of Islamic resurgence. See the following: Issa Boullata,
Trends and Issues in Modern Arab Thought (Albany: State University of
New York Press, 1990); Gilles Kepel, The Revenge of God: The Resurgence
of Islam, Christianity and Judaism in the Modern World (Cambridge:
Polity Press, 1994), and Abdallah Labdaoui, Les nouveaus intellectuals
arabes (Paris: L'Harmattan,1993).

[^8]. Sivan, p. 3.

[^9]. On modernity, consult the following: Marshall Berman, All That
Solid Melts Into Air: The Experience of Modernity (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1982), and Anthony Giddens, The Consequences of Modernity
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1990).

[^10]. Sivan, p.10.

[^11]. Ibid., p.14.

[^12]. Khurshid Ahmad, a contemporary Islamic thinker, insists that
colonialism has been the most single important factor in the
metamorphosis of modern Muslim societies. See Ibrahim M. Abu-Rabi\`,
ed., Islamic Resurgence: Challenges, Directions and Future Perspectives,
a Round Table with Khurshid Ahmad (Tampa: The World and Islam Studies
Enterprise, 1994), especially chapter three.

[^13]. Sivan, p.15.


