Chapter 3 : Second Study
========================

The second study is William M. Watt's Islamic Fundamentalism and
Modernity. [^14] In this book, Watt argues that the traditional Islamic
world­view is incompatible with the conditions and demands of Western
modernity. He contends that the modern Muslim mind is still determined
by the epistemological rules of the early phase of Islam-what Muhammad
Arkoun might call the Classical Islamic phase. [^15]

Watt offers only a quasi-theoretical reading of the subject of Islam
and modernity. Although modernity is one of his key analytic concepts,
he does not define it clearly, nor does he adequately portray the
dynamics of Western hegemony over the Muslim world and their current
consequences.

The author further maintains that the traditional Islamic outlook,
which was formed in the early phase of Islam against the background of
the Qur'an, hadith and consensus, is based on the following premises:
(1) the unchangingness of the world, (2) the finality and superiority of
Islam, and (3) the idealization of Muhammad as the perfect model that
Muslims must follow.

In reconstructing the epistemological foundations of this outlook, Watt
argues quite explicitly that there is no place in Muslim thinking for
development, social and economic progress and advancement. He justifies
the above view by saying that, "apart from the particular dangers
inherent in the idealization of early Islam, there is a general danger,
namely, that the community becomes so obsessed with recreating something
past that it fails to see and deal with the real challenges and problems
of the present." [^16]

It is clear that Watt treats the complex and rich history of Islamic
epistemology in a monolithic fashion. He is far less successful in his
attempt at the reconstruction of the Islamic theory of knowledge than,
let us say, both Fazlur Rahman [^17] and Muhammad Arkoun, to whom he
refers very often.

In treating \`religious revivalism,' Watt argues that Islamic
resurgence has resulted from the \`ulama's desire to enhance their power
and social prestige. [^18] This thesis, to my mind, misrepresents the
formation and growth of the modern Islamic movements, which should be
understood, to a large extent, as a reaction to the Western colonization
of the Muslim world. Although he declares that one of the great evils of
the present day is "the unscrupulous exploitation of the Third World by
Western multinational corporations," [^19] he does not show how this
exploitation has affected the formation of the whole process of Islamic
resurgence.

Watt's effort to present a true picture of the conflict between Islam
and modernity is highlighted by his failure to grasp the complex
composition of Islamic epistemology and its successive transformations
through the system of the Shari'ah. He argues, for instance, that the
traditional Islamic image "is making it difficult for Muslims to adjust
adequately to life at the end of the twentieth century." [^20] Isn't the
role of theology in any religious system to constantly adapt its main
presuppo­sitions to the exigencies of the changing world?

In conclusion, Watt fails to integrate the historical reality of
Western exploitation of the Muslim world into -coherent system of
analysis. At times, his analysis takes a highly descriptive form which
lacks a dynamic reflection on the process of modern history.
Furthermore, as indicated above, Watt's approach incorporates in it the
notion of the superiority of the Western culture over the Islamic one.
It is time that Third World thinkers take a critical stand towards the
legacy of the West, Westerni­zation, and modernization in the Muslim
world.


**Notes:**

[^14]. William Montgomery Watt, Islamic Fundamentalism and Modernity
(London and New York: Routledge,1988).

[^15]. Mohammed Arkoun, Essais sur la pensee islamique (Paris:
Maisonneuve & Larose, 1984), especially chapter eight.

[^16]. Watt, p. 22.

[^17]. See Fazlur Rahman, Islam and Modernity: Transformation of an
Intellectual Tradition (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982), and
Akbar Ahmed, Postmodernism and Islam (London: Routledge Press, 1992).

[^18]. Watt, p. 43.

[^19]. Ibid., p.102.

[^20]. Ibid., p. 71.


