Chapter 4 : Third Study
=======================

Leonard Binder's Islamic Liberalism: A Critique of Development
Ideologies is the most sophisticated Western study of the relationship
between Islam and society in the modern Arab world to appear in the
United States recently. Binder maintains that liberalism is not only
rational, universal, and politically feasible, but it is the only
alternative to the political and moral predicament of the Third World,
especially the Muslim world.

Binder claims that his main goal behind writing a book on "Islamic
liberalism" is to help Muslim intellectuals produce "a liberal Islamic
discursive formation which poses a challenge to the existing
scripturalist and fundamentalist alternatives." Modern Muslim
theologians and thinkers are aware of the Straussian distinction between
political philosophy and political theology.

According to Leo Strauss, [^21] political theology is made up of those
teachings that are based on divine revelation, whereas political
philosophy is limited to what is accessible to the unassisted human
mind. Western political philosophy rejects any divine intervention in
the historical and political process.

Political philosophy, as advanced by Binder, is based on the notion
that the best context for political action is that of a democracy.
Therefore, according to this view, the main assumptions, trends, and
manifestations of political philosophy are sustained by a democracy.

Binder contends that liberalism, as a political philosophy and Western
ideological formation, is viable in the contemporary Muslim world,
especially in the Middle East. He points out that "political liberalism
can exist only where and when its social and intellectual prerequisites
exist ... These preconditions already exist in the Middle East." [^22]
Political liberalism rests on the fundamental assumption of the
state-religion separation. Although the latter has been a de facto
reality in many Middle East societies, Muslim theorists of contemporary
state and politics have not appropriated it yet.

It is clear that Binder does not question the inherent notions of
superiority underlying modernization theories. He argues that
modernization theory is only "an academic transfer of the dominant, and
ideologically significant paradigm employed in research on the American
political system."

Classical as well as contemporary American moderniÂ­zation theorists
have only recently begun to take into account the importance of Islam as
a cultural system and an ideological social phenomenon. For a long
while, the only factors considered were education, urbanization, media
exposure, and economic productivity.

As a result, modernization theorists, including Binder, have failed to
present an adequate formulation of the relationship between Islam and
society in the post-colonial phase. In one sense, Binder "atomizes" [^23]
Islam to such an extent where he holds the comfortable notion that
"Islam in its various forms, and categories, and applications, is only a
part of Middle East culture, and by itself accounts for little." Such an
inaccurate statement makes one doubt the coherence and vitality of a
\`liberal project' in an Islamic context.

One of Binder's implicit assumptions is that Western liberalism has
been a major cause behind the transition of the modern Arab world from
"the closed society" to "the open society." Binder contends along the
same lines of the famous "open society" theoretician, Karl Popper, [^24]
that the main characteristics of "closed society" are defined by its
organic ties, tribal and collectivist mentality, lack of individuality,
and religious rigidity.

The open (liberal) society, on the other hand, is marked by
individuality, freedom of expression, rationalism, social mobility, and
a critical appraisal of social reality. In other words, according to
Binder, liberalism has assisted modern Arab society in maintaining a
degree of tolerance and openness to outside influences. Furthermore, the
transition from the "closed society" to the open one signals a total
breakdown of tribalism and religious rigidity.

Then, to Binder's mind, any reaction against liberalism in the modern
Arab World, either in the form of "Islamic fundamentalism" or
anti-Western nationalism, is, in fact, a reaction against socio-economic
progress, and the scientific culture of the Western civilization. One
can, therefore, theorize that Binder's political project for the Muslim
Middle East is superimposed from the outside since it fails to express
the aspirations of Muslims as people.

**Notes:**

[^21]. See Leo Strauss, What is Political Philosophy? (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1988).

[^22]. Leonard Binder, Islamic Liberalism: A Critique of Development
Ideologies (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988), p.102.

[^23]. In one of his major studies on modern Islam, Hamilton Gibb argues
that the Arab-Islamic mind is atomistic. Consult, Hamilton Gibb, Modern
Trends in Islam (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1947), especially
chapter one.

[^24]. Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies, two volumes
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1962).


