Chapter 5 : Fourth Study
========================

Our fourth book is authored by the Canadian scholar Ronald Nettler. In
Past Trials and Present Tribulations, [^25]Nettler's objective is to
portray the Islamic doctrinal dimension of Muslim-Jewish relations. He
argues that Muslims have developed a sophisticated and rich doctrine of
hatred towards Jews (including modern-day Israelis) since the foundation
of the Islamic state during the Prophet's time in 622.

Undoubtedly, Nettler's assumptions are bounded by an interest, context,
and subjectivity. It seems to me that his objective in essence is to
justify the hegemonic and colonialist nature of the state of Israel.
Since his context is that of Israeli scholarship, which is antagonistic
to both Arabism and Islam, his personal interest would be to show that
the real problem is not between Christendom/Europe and Judaism, but
between Islam and Judaism.


Nettler does not draw any analytical distinction between Judaism,
Zionism, and Israel. [^26] He considers Zionism to be the product of
Judaism and Israel the culmination of both. Understood in this light, if
Muslims oppose the Israeli occupation of Palestine, they, then, oppose
both Zionism and Judaism.

It is the contention of many specialists on Jewish history that Zionism
and the Jewish Holocaust have to be understood against the
socioÂ­economic, political, and nationalist-chauvinistic European
background of the 19th and early 20th centuries. [^27] The European
persecution of Jews did not only culminate in the Holocaust but in the
creation of Israel too. The writer is oblivious to this significant
historical phenomenon, and, instead, considers the West to be the true
liberator of the Jews when it supported the creation of the state of
Israel.

It is clear that Nettler cannot see the anomalous consequences that the
creation of Israel has brought upon Palestinian society, its total
disintegration, and the dispersal of its people. What he discusses,
instead, is the alleged "darker side of Jewish life under Islam, which
redefined the erstwhile conception of Islamic \`toleration' as having
been more problematic than could before have been imagined." [^28] With
no historical evidence in hand, the writer rushes to prove the "evil
Muslim treatment of the Jews." [^29]

Nettler aims at proving his thesis of "Muslim animosity to Jews" by
treating some of the works of the leading Egyptian Muslim thinker,
Sayyid Qutb (d. 1966). He uncritically accepts Wilfred Cantwell Smith's
argument that "the modern period of Islamic history... begins with
decadence within, intrusion and menace without;

and the worldly glory that reputedly went with obedience to God's law
only a distant memory of happier days."3o He argues, in an absolute
manner, that the West has nothing to do, directly or indirectly, with
the "decline" of Islam in the modern world. Yet, Modern Islam, in the
writer's view, suffers from a fundamental malaise. The only justifiable
explanation, then, has to be sought within the Islamic religion.

Nettler proposes that the leaders of modern Islamic resurgence, and in
particular Sayyid Qutb, propogated an "emotional hatred which [is]
uniquely modern as part of Muslim thinking on the Jews." [^31] To him,
this supposed Muslim hatred is a metaphysical a priori; it is fixed,
absolute, and unchanging, and beyond the rules of history. Nettler does
not treat Qutb's ideas in their totality as a comprehensive dynamic.
Instead, he singles out one dimension of his thought: his stand on
Zionism and the State of Israel. [^32]

To better understand Qutb's ideas, one has to relate them to the
influence of foreign powers on the leading Egyptian intelligentsia of
the 1930s, 40s, and 50s. Early in his professional career as a man of
letters in the late thirties, Qutb wrote a number of articles on
colonialism and Westernization. He linked these two phenomena to the
British attempt to create a state for the Jews in Palestine.

Nettler does not refer to these significant phases in the history of
the Middle East: colonialism and the creation of Israel. He treats the
Qutbian "doctrine of hatred towards the Jews" in an absolute political,
and historical vacuum.

Qutb's philosophy, which is succinctly summarized in his main works,
Social Justice in Islam, [^33]and Islam and the Battle between Islam and
Capitalism, [^34]placed him at the center of Egyptian intellectual life
during that period. He was never a neutral interpreter of events, but an
involved theologian, philosopher, and social thinker. His social
commitments equalled his political and theological concerns.

It was quite natural for him, therefore, to respond, analytically at
least, to one of the main dangers that the Muslim world was facing:
Western colonization and its culmination in the creation of the state of
Israel. [^35] Qutb's theoretical formulations were very much shaped by
those practical concerns.

**Notes:**

[^25]. Ronald L. Nettler, Past Trials and Present Tribulations: A Muslim
Fundamentalist's View o f the Jews (Published for the Vidal Sasoon
International Center for the Study of Anti-Semitism, New York: The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem by Pergamon Press, 1987).

[^26]. One of the best books on the subject is Benjamin Bei-Hallahmi,
Original Sins: Reflections on the History of Zionism and Israel (New
York: Olive Branch Press, 1993), especially chapter four.

[^27]. In this regard see the following. Marc H. Ellis, Ending
Auschwitz: The Future of Jewish and Christian Life (Louisville:
Westminister/John Knox Press, 1994); Marc H. Ellis, Toward a Jewish
Theology of Liberation (Markynoll: Orbis Books, 1988); Marc H. Ellis,
Beyond Innocence and Redemption: Confronting the Holocaust and Israeli
Power (New York: Harper and Row, 1990), and Isma'il Raji al-Faruqi,
Islam and the Problem of Israel (Islamic Council of Europe, 1990).

[^28]. Nettler, p. ix.

[^29]. Many Israeli writers nowadays are propagating this theme. In this
regard see the following major article of the Israeli scholar, Hanna
Rahman, "The Conflict Between the Prophet and the Opposition in Madina,"
Der Islam, Vol. 62 (2),1985, pp. 260-297.

[^30]. See. W. C. Smith, Islam in Modern History (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1962? p.16.

[^31]. Nettler, p. 51.

[^32]. For a comprehensive analysis of Sayyid Qutb's ideas on
imperialism and Israel, consult the author's study: The Intellectual
Origins of Islamic Resurgence in the Modern Arab World, to be published
by State University of New York Press.

[^33]. See Sayyid Qutb, al-'Adalah al-ijtima iyyah fi al-Islam (Cairo,
1948). English Translation by J. Hardy, Social Justice in Islam
(Washington, D. C,1952).

[^34]. Sayyid Qutb, al-Ma'rakah bayn al-Islam wa al-ra'smaliyyah (Cairo,
1952).

[^35]. For an elaboration on this theme see John L. Esposito, The
Islamic Threat: Myth or Reality? (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1992).


