Chapter 6 : Europe and the Study of Islamism
============================================

It is important at this juncture to stress that a number of well­
researched studies, done mainly in Europe, treat the subject of Islamism
in its cultural and theological, and not only political, dimensions. One
study is that of Olivie Carre's, Mystique et politique: lector
revolutionnaire du Coran par Sayyid Qutb, frere musulmane radical, [^36]
which is an indispensable contribution to our understanding of the
Qur'anic principles and contents of, what has been termed, the Qutbian
discourse (the thought-structure of Sayyid Qutb).

Carre, who bases his study on a thorough analysis of the principal
themes of Sayyid Qutb's major exegesis, Fi zilal al-Qur'an, [^37] adopts
a comparative method of analysis. He, for instance, keeps referring to
the major exegesis by the Syrian Rashid Rida, [^38] Tafsir al-manar, and
its impact, in terms of method and terminology, on Qutbian tafsir.

The main difference between Rida's tafsir and Qutb's Zilal is that Rida
presented a traditional Qur'anic commentary which was in line with
traditional Islamic exegesis, whereas Qutb, who came from a secular
background of learning, did not follow in the footsteps of traditional
exegesis. This is the case mainly because Qutb was more effective than
Rida in relating the Qur'anic reality [al-haqiqah al ­qur'aniyyah] [^39]
to the modern exigencies of life.

Qutb's main goal, as Carre shows throughout his study, is to free the
Qur'anic text from the obscurantism and scholasticism of the \`ulama'
who emphasize the doctrinal at the expense of the social, and the
ethical at the expense of the political. Qutb's interpretation is based
primarily on (1) philological understanding; (2) the primary social and
political context of the verses (circumstances of the revelation); (3)
and the present meaning that can be derived from the above. As sums, his
theoretical reflections gain a new significance; far from restricting
himself to philology and past meaning, he is concerned about the
relevance of the Qur'anic text to the present.

Carre explains correctly that Qutb's method rests on a number of
interdependent principles: theology, philosophy, sociology, politics,
and hermeneutics. Experience also plays a significant part in his
methodological construct. Therefore, the expressions Qutb relates should
be understood as part of a whole stream of consciousness emanating from
the historical experience of a religious figure in a highly diversified
intellectual context.

Hence Qutb's formula of Qur'anic knowledge is understanding through
experience and reflection. We witness the intersection of the personal
and the epistemological from his early work, and thus we can not easily
escape the methodological problematic as construed by Qutb. He was not
objective; neither was he subjective. He was pragmatic and idealistic at
the same time. His justification was marred by speculative idealism and
social pragmatism.

We are here concerned with the theological, social, cultural, and
ideological formulations of Sayyid Qutb as they appear in the Zilal. We
believe that these formulations are culmination of his mature
intellectual effort that began before his joining the Muslim Brotherhood
in 1952. Therefore, Qutb's pre-Zilal ideas bear a direct relevance to
what we are trying to study in the Zilal. That is to say, Qutb's oeuvre
has to be considered in its totality before any sound judgement on the
value of this work could be made.

What we have in mind are two significant goals: (1) to study Qutb's
Qur'anic weltanschauung; i.e., the ontology of his thought, and (2) to
discuss his basic concepts in relation to the larger issues and problems
that have preoccupied modern Arabic/Islamic thought, such as, revival,
westernization, tradition, the role of the intelligentsia, sacred and
profane theories of knowledge, and the place of religion in general in
the modern world.

Carre proceeds in his discussion to argue that, "The author, Sayyid
Qutb, does not interest us himself. But some elements of his life are
uniquely utilized in order to comprehend certain fragments of discourse
that make up the Zi1al." [^40] The Zilal has furnished the theoretical
framework of thinking and behaviour for Islamic movements, not only in
Egypt, but throughout the Arab World, and in some other Muslim countries
as well. In many passages in the Zilal, Qutb owes to the thought of two
major Indian Muslim thinkers, Nadwi and Mawdudi.

Carre attempts to lay down the principal themes of Zilal: (1) questions
of Qutbian method and discourse; (2) the normative foundations of
Islamic society; (3) the political form of ideal Islamic state; (4)
questions of peace and war; (5) Jahiliyyah vs. Islam; (6) the People of
the Book, especially Jews and Christians; (7) proper Islamic economic
system and social structure; (8) family structure and role of women in
society. Thus one can see that the themes of the Zilal revolve around
doctrinal, philosophical, and social issues and questions.

[^36]. Olivie Carre, Mystique et politique: lectur revolutionnaire du
Coran par Sayyid Qutb, frere musulman radical (Paris: Editions du
Cherf,1984).

[^37]. Sayyid Qutb, Fi zilal al-Qur'an ('In the Shade of the Qur'an')
(Beirut, 1974).

[^38]. Rida was born in what is called today Lebanon. He died in 1937 in
Egypt after becoming one of the most influential disciples of Shaykh
Muhammad \`Abduh (d. 1905). See Albert Hourani's excellent analysis of
part of Rida's life: Albert Hourani, Islam in European Thought (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1991). A recent important book is: Emad
Eldin Shahin, Through Muslim Eyes: M. Rashid Rida and the West (Herndon:
The International Institute of Islamic Thought, 1993), especially
chapter one.

**Notes:**

[^39]. On the elaboration of this term, see Martin Lings, What is
Sufism? (London, Islamic Texts Society, 1993), and his Symbol and
Archetype: A Study of the Meaning of Existence (London: Quinta
Essentia,1991).

[^40]. Carre, p.19.


