Chapter 7 : Modern Islamic Discourse: Themes and Arguments
==========================================================

Based on the above theoretical consideration, I would like to
investigate, albeit briefly, the main themes and arguments of the modern
Islamic discourse, especially that of resurgence. The following are some
of the underlying presuppositions and claims of this method: (1) First,
since the emergence of Islam, the interpretation provided by various
scholars of this religious phenomenon has given rise to different
discourses.

Furthermore, within the Arabic language, the words used and the
meanings of the words used differ from one discourse to another. (2)
Second, these discourses have been conditioned by the concepts, mental
formations, economic conditions, and political attitudes of their
particular historical situation.

Therefore, in rendering a judgement on somebody's work, one has to pose
questions about the historical conditions in which that discourse was
produced. (3) Third, one has to study the different Islamic discourses
of modern Islam in relation to the West. (4) The West as a conceptual
category should be historically and philosophically defined. (5) This
comprehensive method proposed should elaborate on the possible
connection between ideology and discourse. [^41]

What is, therefore, the relationship between modern Islam and the West?
Somebody may object to this formulation: how can we equate a theological
construct with a purely political or geographic construct? The initial
stage of this inquiry, however, is a matter of definition. What is the
West? What is Islam?

What is the West? In dealing with the modern West, we are to discuss
five salient movements: (1) Renaissance, (2) Reformation, (3)
Industrialization, (4) Enlightenment , and (5) post-Enlightenment. I
want to stress here that these movements are in essence philosophical
movements. The philosophical underpinnings of the Renaissance were:
rationalism, humanism, secularization. The Reformation led to the
resurgence of individuality and the annihilation of the communal
Christian spirit.

What is Islam? It is impossible, of course, to give a precise
linguistic meaning to the term Islam. For analytical purposes, one could
talk of this universal religious phenomenon in the following terms: (1)
Islam as metaphysics; (2) Islam as civilization (it means different
things to different people); (3) Islam as the "other."

I would venture to argue that the history of the modern Muslim people
has been highly intertwined with that of the West. And, therefore,
modern Islam cannot be understood except in relation to the modern West
and all the movements that constituted this modern West, be they
philosophical, cultural, economic, political, and military.

We can delineate three moments or phases in the interaction between
modern Islam and the West: (1) the first is the military conquest of
Muslim lands by Western powers. Muslims were weak militarily and
politically. Their only response was to seek refuge in Islam as the
source of their strength.

(2) The second phase witnesses the translation of European hegemony
into a cultural and religious system. This phase is distinguished by the
building of Western educational, cultural, and legal institutions that
begin to replace the traditional Islamic ones. This is the phase of
westernization. The third phase is that of post-colonialism, one
distinguishing feature of which is the rise of both nationalism and
religious revivalism.

What are the main premises of "resurgent Islam?" The following are some
basic characteristics.

(1) Islamic resurgence has emphasized the role of reason in Muslim
legal theory, and called for a renaissance of Islam in the modern world
on the basis of a reactivation of ijtihad in the religious and legal
sciences. The Muslims can achieve the ideals of Islam as a religion, as
a Shari'ah and as a state, by opening the door of ijtihad. Furthermore,
the neglect of ijtihad led some Muslims to become ignorant of Islam, and
others to be attached to westernization and atheism.

(2) Second, Islamic revivalism has called for the reconstruction of the
notion of authority, of the Islamic nation, which is a gradual
"reconstitution of the Muslim Ummah," and the building of a
comprehensive system of Islamic law, government, education, and ethics
in the modern world. The reconstitution of the Ummah in the modern world
was possible, if there were "a return" to the original sources of
Islam.

(3) Third, it has called for the reconstruction of the sources of
knowledge. The Qur'an and the Sunnah were the only sources recognized.
The moral, doctrinal, and linguistic superiority of the "grand
ancestors" or the Companions of the Prophet furnished the sole criterion
according to which new ethical and social rules would be judged.
Therefore, Islamic theory of life is characterized by simplicity and
doctrinal unity. Many came to define religious reform as a triple
unification of doctrine, law, and ethics.

The Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt was founded in 1928 by Hasan al-Â­Banna
[^42] Al-Banna, who was greatly influenced by Rida, acted as a caliph in
exile, as the supreme mujtahid in the community, as a political and
spiritual leader and the interpreter par excellence of the rules of the
Shari'ah.

From its inception, the Ikhwan movement aimed at finding "Islamic
solutions" to the problems of education, economic organization, and
social justice in society. It advocated an Islamic nation without
separation of religion and state. Next, it proposed an Islamic
educational system whose goal was to create the "Muslim individual, the
Muslim house, the Muslim nation, and the Muslim government." Third, it
created an economic infrastructure based on Islamic principles to solve
social injustice.

In the midst of this heritage weighty with consequences, the mission of
the Ikhwan was (1) to free the Islamic fatherland from all foreign
domination, and (2) to help a free Islamic state arise in the Islamic
fatherland. Al-Banna considered it the duty of each Muslim to help build
such a state, "for as long as this state does not emerge, the Muslims in
their totality are committing sin." In addition, they should work to
reform the education system, wage war against poverty, ignorance,
disease, and crime, and create an exemplary society which would deserve
to be associated with the Islamic sacred law.

In conclusion, the above discussion has raised a number of questions
that still await an answer. One way of passing sound judgement on the
nature, growth, and current dispensation of Islamic resurgence is to
study the theological and cultural underpinning of this phenomenon in
addition to its political impact.

**Notes:**

[^41]. An extensive analysis of these notions is to be found in: Ibrahim
M. Abu-Rabi\`, "Reflections on the Islamic Renaissance in the Modern
Arab World: Some Methodological Questions," Islamic Culture, Vol. LXIII
(3), July 1989, pp. 42-59, and his "Secularization, Islam and the Future
of the Arab World: A Derivative Discourse," Peuples Mediterraneens,
Issue Number 60 (July-September 1992), pp.177741.

[^42]. On Hasan al-Banna see, Ishak Musal al-Hussaini, The Moslem
Brethren: The Greatest of Modern Islamic Movements (Beirut: Khayat's
College Book Cooperative, 1956); Charles Wendell, Five Tracts of Hasan
al-Banna (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978); Sa id Hawwa,
al-Madkhal ila Da'wat al-Ikhwan al-Muslimin (Amman, 1979); Ibrahim
Ghanim, al-Fikr al-siyasi li al-Imam Hasan al-Banna (Cairo, 1992), and
Rifa't al-Said, ,Hasan al-Banna: kayfa wa limadha? (Cairo, 1984).


