Intellectual Status
===================

Intellectually, Shi'ites had a privileged status in that period.
Moreover, their doctrines of religion were established by Imam Sādiq
(A.S) and Imam Baqir (A.S) and also Hadiths were saved in forms of Usūl
and Jawāmi'1 while validation criteria of Hadiths and their refinement
were gained from Imams (A.S). Sheikhs, pupils and companions2 were
trained to resolve crises and also support Shi'ite's reputation in
beliefs and jurisprudence against different groups and sects, especially
those who had Caliphs' support.

Guarding Islam and the concept of revelation and protecting it from
misleaders and crises are among the duties of Imams (A.S). Some
significant features of this period were 'Askariyain's (A.S)
illuminations and true policy-makings against society's intellectual
deviances such as the Waqifites, the Mufawwidah, dualists (*thanawiyah*
) and zealots ( *ghulāt* ). 3

Answering to jurisprudential questions and thought problems as well as
keeping Shi'ites away from engaging in useless debates and unnecessary
conflicts were among remarkable characteristics of that period.

Once, in answering one of the Shi'ites' question about whether the
Qur'ān is created [by God], Imam Hādī (A.S) wrote: “In the Name of
Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful; May God keeps us from being
affected by this tribulation for then He has bestowed us the greatest
bounty and the rest is all distractions ahead of us. In our opinion,
arguing about the Qur'ān (that if it has been created or it has been
eternal) is a (reprehensible) innovation whose questioner and questioned
are involved; because the questioner is looking for what he does not
deserve it and the one who is questioned runs himself into trouble for
an unimportant matter which is out of his competence.

The creator is no one but Allah and all others are creatures except Him,
so the Qur'ān is His words. Then, do not name it otherwise, for then you
will be among the those who go astray. May Allah hold you and us up as
exemplars of His word that states:

***'The pious who fear their Lord in secret, and who are apprehensive of
the Hour. (21:49)*** .'”4

Of the other key measures 'Askarīyān (A.S) took in that period was to
provide intellectual preparation for Shi'ites for entering “the age of
occultation”; among whose procedures were their hadiths about
approaching occultation and their good news about the birth of Allah's
authority (the promised Mahdi).5

Other activities consisted of referring the Shi'ites to Imam's deputies6
and validating some of jurisprudential books and hadith references 7 and
finally reducing their direct contacts with Shi'ites, until even in
Samarra, they would answer Shi'ites' problems and issues by letter or
their deputies and doing so, they prepared the Shi'ites to adapt
themselves to conditions of the age of occultation and also indirect
contact with Imam (A.S). 8

As we will see later, this was the policy that the Twelfth Imam (A.S)
himself later on adopted during the age of “minor occultation” and
gradually prepared Shi'ites for the “greater occultation”.

References
----------

[^1]: Muhammad b. Ma'ruf Hilalī said: “I went Hirah to Ja'far b. Sadiq
[Imam Sadiq] (A.S.). I could not reach him because of the many people
around him, until the fourth day he saw me and took me beside himself.
He went on pilgrimage to Imam Ali's shrine after people went away, while
I was his companion and heard what he stated. (Dr. Gorji, Tārīkh Fiqh wa
Fuqahā', p. 115, quoted from Rijāl Najāshi). Hasan b. 'Ali b. Ziyād and
Sha' told Ibn 'Īsa: “I saw 900 Sheikhs in this mosque (Kūfah Mosque),
all of whom would say: 'Haddathani Ja'far b. Muhammad [Imam Ja'far
Sadiq]'”.

Hafiz Abu al-'Abbās b. Uqdah Hamidānī Kūfī (died 333 A.H) has written a
book about the names of whom had quoted from Imam Sādiq (A.S) and has
introduced 4000 persons.

During the time of Imam Baqir and Imam Sadiq, (A.S), hadithes spread so
much among Shī'ites that had never spread before in any period or
religion. (ref. Fadli, 'Abdul Hādī, pp. 203 & 204) This period is called
the period of spreading knowledge of 'Aal-e Muhammad (A.S). (Ibid., p.
95

[^2]: To know the number and the names of 'Askarīyān's (A.S) pupils and
companions ref. Tārīkh al-Tashrī' al-Islāmī.

Sheikh Tūsī counts the number of Imam Hādī's (A.S) pupils in different
fields as 185; among whom are distinguished people such as: Fadl b.
Shādhān, Husayn b. Sa'id Ahwazi, Ayub b. Nuh, Abu 'Ali Hasan b. Rāshid,
Hasan b. 'Ali Nāsir Kabīr, 'Abdul 'Azīm Hasani, 'Utmān b. Sa'id Ahwazi,
some of whom have definitive works and publications in different fields
of Islamic sciences. (Al-Rijāl, Sheikh Tūsī, pp. 409 - 429) and also
ref. Hayāt al-Imām al-Hādī, pp. 170 - [^230]:

Some researchers have counted the number of Imam 'Askarī's (A.S) pupils
and transmitters of his Hadiths up to 213; ref. Hayāt al-Imām
al-'Askarī, pp. 345 - [^413]:

The author of A'yān al-Shī'ah also says: “Different sciences and
knowledge acquired from Imam 'Askarī (A.S) have filled papers of books.”
A'yān al-Shī'ah, Vol. 1, p. [^40]:

[^3]: Hayāt al-Imām al-'Askarī, pp. 287-295.

[^4]: Tawhīd, p. 224.

[^5]: Hayāt al-Imām al-'Askarī, p.316.

[^6]: Ibid. p.324.

[^7]: Ibid. p.325.

[^8]: Ibid. p.324.
