Political Situation
===================

1. Transferring 'Askarīyān (A.S) from Medina to Samarra and strict Control Over Them
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In that period, the policy of the 'Abbasid Caliph Mutawakkil was the
same as Ma'mūn's against Imam Ridā (A.S) and Imam Jawād (A.S) and that
was to draw Imam Hādī (A.S) nearer to the court and limit him to the
periphery of government to be able to control Imam totally and to know
about all his movements and to isolate him from the Shi'ites. The same
policy was followed with respect to Imam 'Askarī (A.S); therefore,
similar to his father, he was kept under control in Samarra and had to
call the Caliph's palace every Monday and Thursday.1

The reason for calling Imam Hādī (A.S) to Samarra was the reports that
Mutawakkil had received about Imam's activities in Medina and people's
attention and interest about him.2 They brought Imam from Medina to
Samarra forcibly 3 and kept him under strict control and attacked his
house at midnight and inspected it on the slightest pretext, such as
that Imam had hidden money and weaponry. 4

After Imam Hādī (A.S) passed away, Imam 'Askarī (A.S) became the next
Imam at the age of 22 and until his martyrdom at the age of 28, he was
under control of the Caliph's agents in Samarra.

2. ‘Askariyān’s different methods of political oppositions
----------------------------------------------------------

'Askariyān's political oppositions, similar to their intellectual
oppositions, had different approaches and aspects; from the policy
of*taqīyah* to allowing some Shi'ites to assume positions in the
government (in order to help the poor and the opressed),5 preservation
of the Shi'ites6 , fulfilling their needs7 , approving and supporting
some opposing groups8 and most of all, developing and reinforcing the
secret network of deputies; a network which was founded at the time of
Imam Sādiq (A.S) and in 'Askarīyān's period came to develop at a faster
pace.

More about this network and the factors of its development in that
period, its importance, features and historical course will be discussed
in detail in the next section; and are mentioned here just to introduce
the matter. We will have a brief look at the policy of taqīyah as the
key to understand Imamate history.

With respect to taqīyah, it should be briefly stated that it is a
complex form of opposition. Taqīyah is not doing nothing, but it is
doing everything needed in secret; and in all its kinds, it is a kind of
holy struggle and defense. We read in hadiths, “Taqīyah is a part of my
faith and my fathers', and no one is faithful unless he practices
taqīyah [if needed]”;9 “Nine tenth of the religion is in taqīyah, and no
one follows the religion unless he practices taqīyah”;10 “The faithful
should be like descendants of Imam Ali. The faithful should be a [holy]
struggler, but you are recommended to perform the practice of taqīyah
under an illegitimate government and to fight full-frontally under a
legitimate one.”11

Taqīyah has been the reason for Shi'a's survival against all
illegitimate rulers and arrogant powers. The history of Imams' taqīyah
is the key to

understand the history of Shi'a, and without it, Imams' movement will
not be analyzable while it will also be considered as non-systematic,
non-strategic, weak and cowardly. Inevitably, we have to cose this issue
with three hadiths from Imam 'Ali (A.S), Imam Hādī (A.S) and Imam
'Askarī (A.S) about the importance of taqīyah.

Referring to the what happened after the demise of the Prophet Muhammad,
Imam Ali (A.S) states: “…I sat aside and thought whether I have to fight
without hands or I must be patient with the blind unknowingness. This
unknowingness which kills the old, ages the child and grinds the
faithful down in pain till he meets his Lord. I found patience with this
all better and wiser. So I tolerated with wet eyes and aching throat;
while I was watching my heritage being robbed.”12 And that is the very
Imam 'Ali's taqīyah. He had to forbear in loneliness.

Imam Hādī (A.S) told Dāwūd Sarumī: “O' Dāwūd! I would have been right if
I had stated that the one who ignores taqīyah is like the one who leaves
daily prayer”.13 In this tradition, giving up taqīyah is compared to
giving up the prayer.

Imam 'Askarī (A.S) told one of his Shi'ites who had advised his friend
to practice taqīyah: “You are the exemplar of what the Prophet (p.b.w.h)
stated that: One who advises another to the good, it is as though he
himself has done it.” Then Imam (A.S) continued:

God gave him reward for the sake of your friend's*taqīyah* as to the
number of those who practiced it and those who gave it up (rightly) from
among our followers and Shi'ites, as if the slightest amount of those
rewards would absolve sins committed in a hundred years. Moreover,
because of your advice you receive as much reward as your friend does.14

It is obvious that this much reward is for many fruits of*taqīyah.* The
amount of practice of*taqīyah* during Imam's (A.S) period was to such an
extent that he would send his Shi'ites a message that they had to point
or wave with their hands instead of say ing hello to Imam (A.S) in order
to save their lives.15

And once he (A.S) told one of his Shi'ites openly that: “If you did not
practice*taqīyah* you would be killed; [you have to choose] either
*taqīyah* and concealment or death and being killed.” 16

References
----------

[^1]: Al-Ghaybah, Sheikh al-Tūsī, p. 139 (cited in Tārīkh Siyasī
Gheybat-e Imam-e Davāzdahom, p.78); Bihār al-Anwār, Vol. 50, p.251;
Manāqib, Vol. 4, p.432; Dalāil al-Imamah, p.226.

[^2]: Al-Irshād, p. 333; Bihār al-Anwār, Vol. 50, p. 200; Ithbāt
al-Wasiyyah, p. 225 (cited in Tārīkh Siyasī Gheybat-e Emam-e Davāzdahom,
p.83).

[^3]: Imam (A.S) himself stated: “They brought me from Medina to Samarra
forcibly.” (Bihār al-Anwār, Vol. 50, p. 129).

[^4]: Muruj al-Dhahab, Vol. 4, p. 93; Al-Irshād, Vol. 2, p. 303.

[^5]: Dr. Jāsim Hussain wrote that: “Imamate [deputies'] network let its
followers to work inside Abbasid Caliphate's government; therefore,
Muhammad b. Isma'il b. Bazi, Ahmad b. Hamzah b. Qommī took prominent
positions in ministry. (Rijāl Najāshī, p.254) Nooh b. Darrāj first
became Baghdad's judge and then Kūfah's judge and he concealed his faith
during his working life because his relatives were among Imam Javād's
(A.S) officials. (Rijāl Najāshī, pp. 80 - 98) Some of the other Shi'ites
like Husayn b. 'Abdullah Neishabūrī became Sīstān's governor and Hakam
b. 'Ulyā As'adī was elected as the governor of Bahrain. Both these
people paid Khums (the one fifth tax) to Imam Javād (A.S) that suggested
their allegiance to the Ninth Imam (A.S) (Al-Kāfī, Vol. 5, p. 111);
(Al-Istibsār, Vol. 2, p. 58); Tārīkh Siyāsī Gheybat-e Emām-e Davāzdahom,
p. 79.

[^6]: Ref. Bihār al-Anwār, Vol. 50, pp. 140, 254, 269, 270 and 298.

[^7]: Ref. Bihār al-Anwār, Vol. 50, pp. 259, 304; also ref. Hayāt
al-Imām al-'Askarī, pp. 261- 266.

[^8]: Ref. Tārīkh Siyāsī Gheybat-e Emām-e Davāzdahom, pp. 85 - 89; Many
historians like Isfahānī say that 'Alawwiān's uprisings in 250 - 251 A.H
began in Kufah, Tabaristān, Rey, Qazvīn, Egypt and Hijāz. It is possible
that these uprisings had been led by one group or more precisely, one
leader…. Despite the Zaydi frontier of the uprising, many devoted Shi'ās
were involved. The leader of the insurgents was Yahya b. 'Umar who was
assassinated (250 A.H.) while he was praised by Abu al-Qāsim Ja'farī,
Imam Hādī's (A.S) deputy and gained his favor. (Tabarī, Vol. 3, p. 1522)

Additionally, Mas'ūdī said that Ali b. Mūsā b. Ismā'īl b. Mūsā al-Kādhim
joined in the Rey's uprising but the caliph arrested him. Because this
person was the grandchild of Ismā'īl b. Mūsā al-Kādhim and served as an
envoy of Twelvers in Egypt, it seems highly likely that his uprising was
for Twelvers' support (Murūj al-Zahab, Vol. 7, p. 404). In addition,
relevant information about secret activities of Twelvers and their role
in the uprising is mentioned by Tabarī. Government officials considered
the uprising to be by Zaydis rather than Twelvers. Mas'ūdī also said
that 'Abbāsī spies discovered some correspondence between the leader of
the uprising in Tabarestan called Hasan b. Zayd and his nephew, Muhammad
b. 'Ali b. Khalaf al-'Atār. Both of them were devotees of Imam Hādī
(A.S) (Tabarī, Vol. 3, pp. 1362, 1383; Ikhtiār, p. 68). The Twelvers
denied anyone among 'Alawis who claimed to be the promised Mahdi (A.S),
but they used to support some 'Alawis' uprisings who were loyal to them.
We can conclude that Imams (A.S) planned two ways to reach their goals.
First they developed scientific, cultural and religious activities among
people without their explicit engagement in political affairs. Next,
they covertly supported some of the uprisings of their devotees in the
hope that they could gain the power.

[^9]: Wasā'il al-Shī'a, Vol. 11, p. 160.

[^10]: Ibid.

[^11]: Ibid. p. 464.

[^12]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 3 (known as Shaqshaqiyyah).

[^13]: Wasāil al-Shī'ā, Vol. 11, p. 466 (quoted from Ibn Idrīs,
Sarā'ir); Bihār al-Anwār, Vol. 50, p. 181.

[^14]: Al-'Ihtijāj, Vol. 2, p. 266 (quoted from Hayāt al-Imām
al-'Askarī, p.240).

[^15]: Bihār al-Anwār, Vol. 50, p. 269. (quoted from Hayāt al-Imām
al-'Askarī, p. 237).

[^16]: Ithbāt al-Wasiyyah, p. 243. (quoted from Hayāt al-Imām
al-'Askarī, p.238).
