Conclusion
==========

The spiritual stations of the vicegerents and especially their secrets
are all with Allah Almighty, as the guardianship of their affairs is
with Him. Their names and descriptions have been annihilated into Him
the Almighty, and it is therefore not possible to comprehend their
stations.

He, the Almighty has said:

***“But they cannot comprehend Him in their knowledge.” Quran 20:110***

It suffices them to have the honor that the guardianship of their
affairs is with Allah the Almighty and He is their Teacher and
Instructor.

He, the Exalted said:

***“Be it known, verily, the friends of Allah, no fear shall be on them
nor do they grieve.” Quran 11:62***

And He described them as follows:

***“Those who believe and were pious.” Quran 41:18***

He described them as having characteristic of belief after they had the
characteristic of piety, and it is known that piety*(taqwa)* , which is
to be cautious of what displeases Allah, can only be established after
one believes in Allah and His Messenger (s.a.w.s.).

Therefore, the belief mentioned in the verse is different to the belief
that comes prior to piety, and this is only to emphasize that belief
should not be absent or fall behind the other form.

The basis of belief, which is to be submissive in general, can be
commonly associated with polytheism and other sins.

He, the Almighty said;

***“And most of them do not believe in Allah without ascribing partners
to Him.” Quran 12:106.***

However, complete perfection of belief in Allah necessitates the
adherence to what the fundamentals and branches of religion demand,
which means to refer back to the concept of submissiveness to whatever
the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) brought with him, as Allah the Almighty said:

***“But no, by your Lord! They will not believe until they make you a
judge in their disputes, then do not find within their hearts any
dissent to your verdict and submit in full submission.” Quran 4:65***

Submitting yourself to someone is to subordinate your will to their
will; in that you do not want anything other than what they want and do
not request anything other than what they request, and this is complete
subordination.

As He, the Almighty said:

***“Say, ‘If you love Allah, then follow me; Allah will love you and
forgive you your sins.” Quran 3:31***

And:

***“O you who have faith! Beware of Allah and have faith in His Apostle.
He will grant you a double share of His mercy.” Quran 57:28***

Allah Almighty confined the second belief*(iman)* to the Prophet
(s.a.w.s.), and this belief is absolute certainty*(yakin)* in Allah the
Almighty, His Names and Attributes, along with certainty in the truth of
what His Prophet (s.a.w.s.) brought and to completely follow and submit
to him (s.a.w.s.). Their actions are according to his actions and their
goals are his

goals. He (s.a.w.s.) is their Leader*(imam)* and he does not have any
goal other than gaining the satisfaction of Allah and completely
renouncing the world.

He, the Almighty said:

***“Content yourself with the company of those who supplicate their Lord
morning and evening, desiring His face, and do not lose sight of them,
desiring the glitter of the life of this world. And do not obey him
whose heart We have made oblivious to Our remembrance, and who follows
his own desire, and whose conduct is [mere] profligacy.” Quran 18:28***

He, the Almighty then promised them, saying:

***“And give good news to the faithful that they are in good standing
with their Lord.” Quran 10:2***

The expression having a good standing or on a true footing is a metaphor
for a fixed and true place, which is the level that Allah considers them
to be in.

He, the Almighty has said:

***“That which is with you will be spent but what is with Allah shall
last.” Quran 16:96***

He said whatever is with Him will permanently stay and will not perish
or ruin.

He also said:

***“Everything is to perish except His Face.” Quran 28:88***

He has informed of the perishing of everything other than His Face.

It becomes clear that what He, the Almighty has is His Face, and the
face of something cannot be detached from it, because it is the thing
that is in front and what one faces you with. These kinds of believers
are conversant with their firm footing in the Glory of His Face,
consumed in the Lights of Divinity and are outside the vicinity of
performers who do not belong to any particular place.

***“Whichever way you turn, there is the Face of Allah.” Quran 2:115***

He, the Almighty has also said:

***“Everyone is ephemeral; yet lasting is the Face of your Lord,
Majestic and Munificent.” Quran 55:26, 27***

The reciters of Quran have all agreed that the word (**ذو** ) should be
read as nominative*(raf’)* and it is not a divided adjective, meaning
that it is connected to the Face as an adjective, as these two verses
demonstrate:

***“Blessed is the Name of your Lord.” Quran 55:78***

***“Celebrate the Name of your Lord.” Quran 87:1***

The Majestic*(jalal)* and the Munificent*(ikram)* encompass all the
attributes of Beauty and Majesty, and none of His Elevated Attributes
and Beautiful Names are excluded from these two.

These saints of Allah are annihilated into Him and turn to manifest
between these Names, there is no name or attributes left in them other
than His Attributes and Names, Glory be to Him. Their veil has been
lifted and nothing has remained within them other than His Face, the
Majestic Munificent. Try to understand this point.

From this we can understand the meaning of the tradition of the Angels
bringing an inscription from Allah to his vicegerents in Heaven, and in
this inscription it is written:

“From the Living and Ever-lasting King to the living and ever-lasting
king.”

Allah the Almighty has promised them to bring them near to Him, and He
has called them the ones brought near*(al-muqarribin),* introducing them
as the foremost ones. He said:

***“And the Foremost Ones are the foremost ones; they are the ones
brought near [to Allah].”Quran 56:10-11***

He has defined the foremost ones as those who have restricted themselves
in only doing good deeds, He the Almighty said:

***“Then we made the inheritors of the Book (Quran) those whom we chose
from among Our servants; and of them is he who causes himself to suffer
a loss, and of them is he who follows the middle course, and of them is
he who is the foremost in goodness...”Quran 32:31-32***

And:

***“And Verily they who are thrilled for fear of their Lord, and those
who believe in the signs of their Lord, and those who associate not
(anything) with their Lord.”***

He negated from them any kind of polytheism, in knowledge or in action,
until He said:

***“It is they who are zealous in [performing] good works, and take the
lead in them.”***

They are the real believers, who have complete knowledge in Allah and do
everything for Him; they are the foremost, the ones brought near and
they have certainty.

Allah has promised that He will uncover the veil from their hearts; He
said:

***“No indeed! The record of the pious is indeed in ‘Illiyun. And what
will show you what is ‘Illiyun? It is a written record, witnessed by
those brought near [to Allah].”***

‘Illiyun is the celestial heavenly world. He, the Almighty said:

***“Thus did we show Ibrahim the dominion of the heavens and the earth,
that he might be of those who possess certitude.” Quran 6: 75***

This ultimate goal is the same as that also mentioned in another verse:

***“Thus we established Joseph in the land and that We might teach him
the interpretation of dreams.” Quran 12:21***

And,

***“And that God may know those who have sincerely believed, and that He
may take witness from among you.”***

But this goal is not similar to that of this verse:

***“So that mankind may not have any argument against Allah, after the
[sending of the] apostles.”***

The verse establishes that Allah, the Almighty will show His worshippers
who have certitude the dominion of the heavens and the earth. Moreover,
He, the Almighty also further explains this in His saying:

***“All His command, when He will something, is to say to it ‘Be’ and it
is. So immaculate is He in whose hand is the dominion of all things and
to whom you shall be brought.”***

The Dominion is the realm of command*(alam al-amr)* , which is the
celestial heavenly world. As the tradition says:

“If the devils did not hover around the hearts of the children of Adam,
they would see the dominion of the heavens and earth.”

Another proof that Allah will give the witnessing of the heavens and
earth as a gift to those who have attained certitude is Allah’s saying:

***“Were you to know with certain knowledge, you would surely see hell.
Again, you will surely see it with the eye of certainty.”***

And:

***“No indeed! Rather their hearts have been sullied by what they have
been earning.”***

Allah, the Almighty also points to such an implication in that
committing sins removes the precept of certainty, as He says:

***“They impugned them –though they were convinced in their hearts.”***

And:

***“Have you seen him who has taken his desires to be his god and whom
Allah has led astray knowingly, and set a seal upon his hearing and his
heart, and drawn a blind on his sight?”***

In conclusion, it is important that good deeds be accompanied with
certainty so that it results in an outcome which is fruitful. He said:

***“To Him ascend the good word, and He elevates righteous conduct.”***

Returning to our discussion, Allah has promised these vicegerents that
He will change their lives, that is, their existence. He said:

***“Is he who was lifeless, then We gave him life and provided him with
a light by which he walks among the people, like one who dwells in a
manifold darkness which he cannot leave?”***

He says that they have a light and walk with it among people, living
with them, and living is with the body and the senses. So, they have an
illuminated life, and divine senses and bodies.

He, the Almighty said:

***“Thus have we revealed to you the spirit of Our dispensation. You did
not know what the Book is, nor what is faith; but We made it a light
that we may guide by its means whomever We wish of our servants.”***

He Almighty explains that this light is an intellectual spirit, so it is
more important that it be within the Realm of Command, as He says:

***“[For] such, He has written faith into their hearts and strengthened
them with a spirit from Him.” Quran 58:22***

He then informed them that He, the Glorified, will guide them to His
Light, and He is the Light over all lights, and by Him all the heavens
and earth are illuminated. He said:

***“Allah is the Light of the heavens and earth.” Quran 24:35***

Then He gave the example of this light in which He illuminates the
heaven and earth, saying:

***“The parable of His Light is a niche wherein is a lamp –the lamp is
in a glass, the glass as it were a glittering star –lit from a blessed
olive tree,***

***neither eastern nor western, whose oil almost lights up, though fire
should not touch it. Light upon Light. Allah guides to His Light
whomsoever He wishes.” Quran 24:35***

His Light has two veils of light in which by them the heavens and earth
are illuminated. One of them is the niche, which is the less
illuminative and a lamp gives light to it, and the latter is, in turn,
illuminated by the glass.

So, the lamp oversees with the light of the glass and the niche, and the
glass oversees with the light of the niche, and it is the niche that
lights up and gives light to others.

It might be that the light of the earth is from the niche, and above it
is the glass, and maybe the light of the heavens is from the glass, as
He the Almighty has said:

***“He directs the command from the heaven to the earth.” Quran 32:5***

In this verse there is no mention of anything above and beyond the
heavens or the earth, or any explanation of the lamp mentioned in the
verse, other than what is understood from His saying:

***“Lit from a blessed olive tree, neither eastern nor western, the oil
whereof almost glows forth (of itself), and (even) though fire touch it
not.” Quran 24:35***

He, the Almighty then mentioned the examples of the niche He gave,
explaining it more:

***“(That lamp is lit) in houses which Allah has permitted to be exalted
and His name be mentioned therein, therein declare glory unto Him in the
mornings and the evenings. Men whom neither merchandize nor any sale
diverts them from the remembrance of Allah, and they are constancy in
prayer and paying the poor rate.” Quran 24:36-37***

He describes them as those who do not forget the remembrance and good
deeds. They are not veiled from His remembrance, and do not pay
attention to anything else other than Him the Almighty. They are devoted
to Him, and we have already stated some of the characteristics of the
sincere in the last chapter when the verses about them were mentioned.

He, the Almighty said:

***“Hallowed is Allah far above from what they ascribe unto Him. But not
so are the sincere chosen servants.” Quran 37:15-16***

***“So it was, that We might turn away from him all evil and indecency.
He was indeed one of our dedicated servants.”***

***“By your might, I will surely pervert them, except Your exclusive
servants among them.”***

***“So they will indeed be arraigned before Him – all except Allah’s
exclusive servants.”***

***“And you shall be recompensed not but what you were doing, Save the
servants of Allah, the sincere.”***

He, the Almighty explains that He is exalted from any praise other than
their praise. He will dissuade them from all evil and corruption, and
satanic insinuations will strike all except for them.

The frightening horror of Judgment Day, like the thunder strike, the
dreadful scream, the gathering of everyone, the giving of the book of
deeds, the judgment and the weighing, will not apply to those sincere
ones.

They are excluded from all these levels, and the reward they receive is
not for the actions they have done, because they did not have actions.

This is a friction of the Gifts of Allah the Almighty regarding His
Vicegerents.

It can be understood from all that was explained that the endowed Gifts
of Allah are their rights because of their annihilation in their
actions, characteristics, and essences.

The first thing that is annihilated is their actions, and the least of
that, as mentioned by some scholars are six things: death, life,
sickness, health, poverty and wealth.

They witness these six things from the Truth Almighty, like when one
sees a movement but doesn’t see the mover, but he knows there is a
mover. Allah Almighty takes the position of their actions, so their
actions become His actions, as the traditions in al-Kafi and al-Tawhid
refer, narrating from Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) regarding His saying:

***“So when they roused Our wrath, We took vengeance on them.” Quran
43:55***

“Verily Allah Almighty does not anger or regret the way we do, however
He created vicegerents for Himself, and they regret and accept, and they
are created and have a Lord. He Almighty has made their acceptance His
acceptance and their anger His anger.”

This is because He has made them callers unto Him and the guides towards
Him, and hence they became so. Of course, these features are not
attributed to Allah the same way as they are attributed to His creation,
but this meaning is what He Himself has stated.

Allah Almighty has also said:

“Whosoever insults one of my vicegerents has challenged Me to a combat,
and has called Me to it.”

He also said:

***“Whoever obeys the Apostle certainly obeys Allah.” Quran 4:80***

And:

***“Indeed those who swear allegiance to you, swear allegiance only to
Allah.” Quran 48:10***

These meanings all go back to the explanation we have already given, and
similar to this is contentment, anger, and other attributes of Allah the
Almighty that are similar to it.

The meaning for the word ‘similar’ in the words of Imam Jafar Sadiq
(a.s.) is meant to show the numerous verses and traditions that have
spoken of this matter, again like:

***“And you did not throw when you threw, rather it was Allah who
threw.” Quran 8:17***

And:

***“Nor does he speak out of his own desire: it is just a revelation
that is revealed to him.” Quran 53:3-4***

The pronoun in the second verse [‘it’/**و ﻫ** ] relates to
speaking*(nutq)* .

And:

***“You have no hand in the matter.” Quran 3:128***

Our Beloved Holy Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.s.) has also said:

“Fatima (s.a.) is a part of me! Whoever hurts her has hurt me, and
whoever hurts me has hurt Allah.”

Furthermore, the tradition narrated by al-Daylami will be mentioned
soon, by the will of Allah.

Then, Allah will annihilate the actions and characteristics of the
vicegerents, and the principle actions, that can be deduced from the
traditions of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) are five: life, knowledge, power,
hearing and listening. Allah Almighty has substituted and taken the
place of these vicegerents in these five actions.

It is narrated in al-Kafi, narrating a tradition from Imam al-Baqir
(a.s.) who had said:

“Verily Allah, may He be Glorified, said: “There is no servant of my
servants who can come near to Me by something more loved by Me than what
I have made obligatory on them. And, surely, a servant will come close
to Me with supererogatory prayers until I love him, and if I love him I
will become his hearing that he hears with, his sight that he sees with,
his tongues that he speaks with, his hand that he strikes with. If he
was to supplicate to Me I will answer him and if he were to ask Me I
would give him.”

This popular tradition is narrated in both the Sunni and Shia schools
and the Blessed Book of Allah gives evidence to this meaning when He
says:

***“Say, ‘If you love Allah, then follow me; Allah will love you and
forgive you your sins.” Quran 3:31***

And:

***“O you who have faith! Be wary of Allah and believe in His apostle.
He will grant you a double share of His mercy and give you a light to
walk by, and forgive you.” Quran 57:28***

In applying these two verses together, both ordering the following of
the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and belief in Him, which are one thing, we can
conclude that Allah’s love of His servants is mercy over mercy, and it
bequeaths to such a person a Light he walks with among the people,
living and socializing with them.

This person used to live and socialize with his physical self and its
parts, like hearing , seeing, touching and tasting, but then it changed
into a Light from his Lord.

This Light is a living soul through which human beings are revived, as
was already mentioned in the verse:

***“Is he who was lifeless, then We gave him life and provided him a
light by which he walks among the people...” Quran 6:122***

The outer context of ‘We made for him’ till the end of the verse is an
explanation for the raising and giving of life.

It is stated in*Ithbat al-Wasiyah* by al-Masudi, narrating from the
Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (a.s.) who had said in a sermon:

“Glory be to You, which eye has the ability to witness the Radiance of
your Light, and elevate to the gleaming Light of Your Power? Which
perception can perceive anything below that, other than the eyes whose
veils You have uncovered and ripped away the blinding veils? You
dispersed

their spirits to the sides of the wings of the Spirits, and they called
for You between your Pillars. They entered between the Lights of Your
Radiance, and oversaw from the level of the soil to the level of Your
Grandeur. The People of the Kingdom*(malakut)* called them
‘Visitors’*(zawwar)* , and the People of the All-Powerful*(jabarut)*
named them the ‘Builders’.

The tradition of Hisham, which refers to the same thing, has already
been mentioned in Chapter Three.

This meaning is very commonly elaborated and mentioned in the
supplications. In Imam Ali’s (a.s.) intimate supplication in Shabaan, he
says:

“O Allah, and inspire unto me the enthrallment of remembering You in
Your remembrance, and make my vitality towards the Spirit of Your Names
and Place of Sanctity”... “O Allah grant me total dedication towards
You, and illuminate the eyes of our hearts by brightening its sight in
seeing You, so the eyes of the hearts will tear pass through the veils
of light, and will reach the core of Greatness, and our souls will
become attached to the Glory of Your Sanctity.”

This intimate discourse (munajat) of Shabaan holds the introduction and
preliminary steps to wayfaring and witnessing.

It is narrated in Ibn Fahd’s ‘Uddah a-Dai’ that Wahab ibn Munabbih said:

“A part of what Allah revealed to Prophet David (a.s.) was: “O David My
remembrance is for those who remember, Me heaven is for those who obey,
My love is for those who yearn, and I Myself am only for the Lovers.”

After the annihilation of characteristics and actions, their essence is
annihilated, and their names and descriptions vanish. The Truth Almighty
will take their place. It is stated at the end of ‘*Risalah al-Tawhid’*
that this station is so exalted that it is beyond words and terms or for
a sign to touch it. It is being called a station*(maqam)* is a figure of
speech. It is this that Allah gave to His Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.),
and the Pure Progeny (a.s.) that followed after Him.

**I say:** Now He the Almighty has made the vicegerents of their nation
succeed them (a.s.), as abundant traditions prove that Allah Almighty
joins them (a.s.) with their followers in the levels of the Hereafter.
In the following tradition of al-Daylami, it says:

“They will transfer from the abode of annihilation to the abode of
subsistence, and the abode of satan to the abode of the Compassionate.”

From this it can be understood that the stations and miracles that Allah
Almighty has promised creation in the Hereafter are given with
blessedness to the saints in this world, and in it they are connected to
their Imam (a.s.).

This station as you now know is more glorified than a station itself,
and it has been expressed as such by the Imams (a.s.) in traditions that
are extensive and abundant in regards to the negation of Attributes.
Therefore, this station of the vicegerents of our nation is subjoined by
the inheritance of the stations of the Imams (a.s.). Understand this
point.

Moreover, one of the Divine Gifts that these vicegerents are endowed
with is their traversing the intermediate realms between them and their
Lord, and this point has already been explained.

It is stated in Bihar al-Anwar, narrating from al-Irshad by al-Daylami,
and two chains of narrations have been mentioned for this tradition,
part of which is in what follows:

“Allah Almighty said: “O Ahmad, do you know what kind of life is most
pleasant and what life subsists more?”

He said: “O Allah, no.”

Allah said: “For the pleasant life, it is that such a person does not
break away from My remembrance, does not forget My blessings, does not
neglect My rights, and night and day is after acquiring of My
satisfaction.

As for the subsisting life, it is for them to work on their selves so
that they no longer have any concern about the world and it becomes
belittled in their eyes. The Hereafter becomes greater for them, and
they prefer My desire over their desire. They seek My satisfaction, and
amplify My blessings.

They mention what I have done to them, and they confess to Me day and
night whenever they commit bad deed or a sin. They purify their hearts
from whatever I dislike. They hate the Satan and his temptations, and
they do not allow him to overcome their hearts. If they do so I will
grant their hearts love so that I make their hearts for Me, and their
leisure, concern, work, conversation will all be from the blessings I
bestow unto them with those who are of the people of My creation who
love Me.

I will open the eyes of their hearts and ears, so that they will hear
with their hearts, and see with their hearts My Glory and Magnitude. I
will narrow the world for them, and make them hate the delights which
are in it. I will warn them of the world and what is in it, the same way
a shepherd warns his sheep of the pastures that are dangerous.

If they become such, they would flee from the people, and they would
transfer from the abode of subsistence to the abode of remaining, and
from the abode of the satan to the abode of the Compassionate.

O Ahmad I will adorn them with awe and greatness, and this is the
pleasant life, and the life of subsistence. This is the station of
contentment.

So, whoever does according to My Pleasure I will grant them three
features: I will make them know gratitude that will not be mixed with
ignorance, remembrance that will not be mixed with forgetfulness, and a
love of Me that will not be preferred by the love of any creation.

If he loves Me I will love him, and will open the eye of his heart onto
My glory, and will not hide from him the elite of My creation. I will
converse with them in the dark of the night and the light of the day so
that he will sever his conversation with creation and gatherings with
them, and I will make him hear My speech and the sound of My Angels.

I will make him know the secrets I have hidden from My creation. I will
dress him with a dress of shyness so that all creation will be shy in
front of him. He will walk on the earth, all forgiven, and I will make
his heart aware and shrewd, and will not hide from him anything from
heaven and hell.

I will make him know what people will go through in the horror of
Judgment Day, and how I judge the poor and the rich, the knowledgeable
and the ignorant. I will make him sleep in his grave and bring down
Munkar

and Nakir to ask him, and he will not see the distress of death, the
darkness of the grave and burial, and the dismay of Judgment Day.

I will elect for him a scale, and open his Book of Deeds and put it in
his right hand. He will read it, and I will not put between Me and him
an explainer. These are the features of the Lovers.

O Ahmad, make your concern one concern, and make your tongue one tongue,
and make your body alive, and do not ever be inattentive, for whoever is
inattentive in remembering Me, I do not worry in which valley they
perish.”

In Bihar al-Anwar again, narrating from al-Kafi, al-Ma’ani, and
al-Rawandi’ Nawadir in different chains of narrators from Imam Jafar
Sadiq (a.s.) and Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.), narrating from the Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) and what is mentioned here is the same as that stated in
al-Kafi –where he said:

“The Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.s.) met with Haritha ibn Malik al-Numani
al-Ansari and said to him: “How are you O Haritha ibn Malik al-Numani?”

Haritha said: “O Messenger of Allah, I’m a true believer.”

The Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said to him: “For everything there is a reality,
so what is the reality of what you said?”

He said: “O Messenger of Allah, I have turned away from the world. I
have stayed up late at nights [in worship]. I have made thirsty my days
[in fasting]. Now, I see the Throne of My Lord, and He has brought
forward Judgment Day. It is like as if I see the people of heaven
visiting each other in heaven, and I hear the howling of the people of
hell in hellfire.”

The Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: “A servant whom Allah has lightened [his
heart] with insight*(basirah)* and steadfastness.”

If you were to contemplate properly on the verses and traditions that we
have transcribed here, and that which we have not mentioned is far more
than the brevity of what we have, and if you were to ponder over the
remarks and phrases, you would see in the traits of the awliya’ such
mysteries that it will be impossible for any kind of expression to
express.

Allah is the guide and the Helper. We now come to the end. Praise be to
Allah for us being able to finish, and praise and peace be to our Master
Muhammad and His Pure Progeny.

Wassalam.


