


![](http://alhassanain.org/english/books/0640-craig_and_his_concept_of_eternity_a_critique_from_the_standpoint_of_the_kalam/images/image002.gif)


C H A P T E R   O N E

Introduction
Patricia Hanna

The International Conference on Philosophy sponsored by the Athens
Institute for Research and Education (ATINER) has now been held for
three years. Each year, we have worked to make it better, and this
volume, the third that has been produced in connection with the
conferences, shows the results of these efforts.

We now have a five member Editorial Board which works closely with the
Editor in putting together the final volume. More importantly, however,
we have now established a pool of reviewers which allows us to send each
paper to at least two reviewers for their recommendations on the
suitability of the papers for publication. It is our aim to treat the
papers in a manner which parallels the review standards for professional
journals in philosophy; while blind reviewing is not entirely possible,
we take this as our model. Starting with Volume II (2007 Conference), we
have asked reviewers to base their recommendations on the same standards
they would use for reviewing papers for professional journals; for the
past two years, approximately 35% of the papers presented at the
conference have been accepted for inclusion in these proceedings.

One of the strongest motivations for raising the level of expectation is
that this conference is one of a vanishing breed: a small international
philosophy conference which is open to all areas of philosophy. It
provides an almost unique opportunity for philosophers from all over the
world to get together and share ideas with the aim of expanding our
understanding of our discipline, and to do so in a venue which allows
all of the participants to get to know one another. It is the hope of
the Editor and the Editorial Board that the conference will flourish in
future years, and that it will draw the best philosophers from every
country, regardless of their area or the specific approach or
methodology they follow.

The world faces new challenges in terms of shrinking oil supplies,
climate change and an uncertain political and economic future. Now, more
than ever, bringing philosophers from around the world together to
address the most fundamental questions confronting us as a species is
needed. At the 2008 conference, held from 2—5 June 2008, 71 philosophers
from over 20countries (including, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Cyprus,
Finland, Germany, Greece, Iran, Italy, Japan, Lebanon, The Netherlands,
Portugal, Romania, Singapore, South Africa, Taiwan, Turkey, Uzbekistan,
United Kingdom and the USA) met and talked with one another about the
human condition in the shadow of the Parthenon.

We have chosen to organize the volume along traditional lines. This
should not, however, mislead a reader into supposing that the topics or
approaches to problems fall neatly into traditional categories. The
selection of papers chosen

for inclusion here gives some sense of the variety of topics addressed
at the conference. However, it would be impossible in an edited volume
to ensure coverage of the full breadth and variety of subject matter or
the issues brought to the conference itself by the participants, some of
whom could not travel to one another's home countries without enormous
difficulty.

Chapter Thirteen:

Craig and His Concept of Eternity: A Critique from the Standpoint of the
Kālām
Engin Erdem

The issue of divine eternity which was dominant in medieval philosophy
and theology also has a very important place in the debates of modern
philosophy of religion. Looking at the views of the medieval
philosophers and theologians such as Ibn Sina (d. 1037), St Anselm (d.
1109), and St Thomas Aquinas (d. 1274), we see that they interpret
divine eternity as timelessness, being outside of time. According to
these philosophers there is a sharp distinction between God’s mode of
being and that of the creatures. A created being has its life in a
succession; past, present and future are real parts of its life.
However, because of the fact that God is a perfect, simple, necessary
and an immutable being, there is no change and succession in His life.
So Boethius (d. 524) defines eternity, as having an illimitable life all
at once. (1981, 430)  Here the term ‘all at once’ means not a moment of
time but the absence of temporal succession. (Helm, 2007)  Also, Anselm
depicts God’s relation to time as follows:

Thou wast not, then, yesterday, nor wilt thou be to-morrow; but
yesterday and to-day and to-morrow thou art; or, rather, neither
yesterday nor to-day nor to-morrow thou art; but simply, thou art,
outside all time. For yesterday and to-day and to-morrow have no
existence, except in time; but thou, although nothing exist without
thee, nevertheless dost not exist in space or time, but all things exist
in thee. For nothing contains thee, but thou containest all. (1962, 71)

For the medieval philosophers, whatever is in time is bounded by it; it
cannot stop the process of change and of time; so, it is subject to time
not its master. (Helm, 2007) Therefore, God must be timeless.

As for the modern philosophers of religion, their approach is radically
different from the medieval philosophers. These philosophers oppose the
classical view of eternity, saying that a timeless being cannot be God
of religion, especially ‘the Christian God’. (Davies, 1983, 11)
According to many of them, God, in scripture, is described as a loving,
suffering, redeeming being, in brief, an acting being. But if God is
unchangeable and immutable he cannot do such activities; thus, a being
that is not changeable cannot be an agent. Hence, it is necessary to
ascribe change and temporal properties to God and God must be temporal.
What does God’s being temporal mean? Almost all of modern philosophers
of religion answer this question in different ways. For example,
Swinburne, one of the leading defender of divine temporality, holds that
eternity means to have an everlasting life in time. He says that God
exists throughout all periods of time; God exists now, he has existed at
each period of past time and he will exist at each period of future
time. (1994, 137)  God exists in time but there is no beginning or end
for Him; so ‘a being who is both backwardly and forwardly eternal we may
term an eternal being.’ (1993, 218) Similarly, Wolterstorff maintains
that God exits in time and he does have a history like the creature.
(2001, 211) Although modern philosophers of religion have

relatively different views on the nature of divine temporality, they all
share the same opinion: God cannot be a timeless being.

As it is seen, there are mainly two views about the nature of divine
eternity: divine timelessness and divine temporality. But we see that
there is also a third way which is held by William Lane Craig. Craig has
a distinguished place among modern religious philosophers. According to
him, God is neither timeless nor temporal; God’s life has two stages:
the first is timeless and the second is temporal. It seems that, as we
shall see below, the turning point in his view of eternity is creation.
For he claims that God is timeless without creation and than becomes
temporal with creation. (2000, 152; 2001, 236) Why is God timeless; more
importantly why did he become temporal when he created the universe? In
what follows I shall deal with these questions in turn.

Let me begin with the first question. I think the answer of this
question is closely connected with Craig’s concept of creation*ex
nihilo* ; because, according to him a robust/strong doctrine of creation
implies that God is the Creator of everything except Himself and the
universe was created a finite time ago in the past. (2004, 161) To prove
such an idea of beginning for the universe he utilizes many scientific
and metaphysical arguments. Especially the cosmological argument plays a
key role in his thought. According to him, some Muslim thinkers such as
al-Kindi and al-Ghazali introduced a different version of the
cosmological argument, which he calls ‘The Kalām Cosmological Argument’
(2000). According to this argument, God is not only ontologically prior
to the universe but also He temporally precedes it. The argument can be
formulated as follows:

1- Everything that begins to exist has a cause of its existence.

2- The universe began to exist.

3- Therefore, the universe has a cause of its existence. (2000, 48-49)

For Craig, the crucial premise in this argument is the second one. He
asserts that the impossibility of actual infinity, The Big Bang Theory,
Thermodynamics and other many scientific evidences show that the
universe has a beginning. (2004, 219-248) Introducing those arguments in
detail he tackles the question whether the beginning of the universe
also entails the beginning of time. According to him, on the relational
theory of time the universe was created not in time but with time.
(1979) The view that there was an empty time before the beginning of the
universe gives rise to an old metaphysical question: ‘Why did not God
create the world sooner?’ (2001, 21) Craig argues that this question is
unanswerable in the absolute theory of time. (2001, 31) So there is no
time ‘before’ the beginning of the universe; the first event, that is,
the creation of the universe also indicates to the first moment of time.
(2001, 31; 1979) ‘When the first event occurred, the first moment of
time began.’ (1979) Craig concludes that time did start with the
beginning of the universe and without creation there was no time but God
only; therefore, in the first stage, that is without creation God is
timeless.(2001, 31 )

Now, we are coming to the second question, ‘Why God becomes temporal
with creation?’ According to Craig, as I said above, God is timeless
without creation and if God did not will to create the world he

would exist timelessly. (2000, 152) In other words, God could have never
stood in temporal relations with a temporal world had he not willed to
create the world. But Craig says that God has willed from eternity to
create and to become temporal at that moment. (2000, 152) Because of the
fact that with creation God enters into a new real relation which he did
no have before He changes and becomes temporal. (2000, 152) Craig
summarizes his view as follows:

4- God is creatively active in the temporal world.

5- If God is creatively active in the temporal world, God is really
related to the temporal world.

6- If God is really related to the temporal world, God is temporal.

7- Therefore, God is temporal. (2001, 141)

Thus, for Craig, ‘the first event is the event of creation, the moment
at which the temporal phase of God’s life begins.’ (2001, 31) I think
what has been said so far outlines sufficiently Craig’s main thesis of
eternity. Now, in light of the discussions between the classical and
modern philosophers on the nature of divine eternity, we can say that
Craig holds a hybrid view of eternity, partly timeless and partly
temporal. It is a well known fact that, taken separately, each of the
classical and modern interpretations of eternity brings about different
kinds of problems, either philosophical or theological. But it seems
that a mixed type of eternity held by Craig gives rise to further
difficulties.

Firstly, I think the main problem arising from a hybrid view of eternity
is the question that how the relationship between the timeless and
temporal parts of divine eternity can be explained. As Leftow said, the
expression that ‘God becomes temporal’ (1997, 259) means that God is
timeless first and later becomes temporal. So God’s timeless phase comes
earlier than His temporal phase, but the term ‘earlier’ or ‘before’
shows that there was a time before God’s becoming temporal and He did
exist in that time. (1997, 259) And this means that God had been already
temporal before having become temporal. Another problem is related to
the state in which God decided to become temporal. If God, as Craig
argued, did decide to become temporal, it might be asked: when did he do
so. ‘He could not’, says Leftow, ‘have done so timelessly, for then He
would have had to become temporal… If He did so at any time it was then
too late. As He was already at that time, He was already temporal.’
(1997, 259-260) It is seen that Craig’s idea that God decided to become
temporal requires a time in which God already has been.

The second problem I would like to discuss concerning Craig’s view of
eternity is the question that whether the act of creation really
requires God’s becoming temporal. I think it might be helpful on this
issue to look at the views of the defenders of divine timeless eternity,
especially to whom Craig refers in order to support his concept of
creation ex nihilo, such as al-Kindi (d. 873) and al-Ghazali (d. 1111).
We see that those thinkers never approve of the view that God changes
and becomes temporal with creation. To these philosophers, God, as a
necessary, simple, and an immutable being by definition is timeless and
there cannot be any change in Him, before or after creation. Let us take
al-Ghazali as an example. He criticizes the Muslim Aristotelian
philosophers, al-Farabi (d. 950) and Ibn Sina, from a religious

point of view and objects to their view of eternal creation which
implies that God is only ontologically prior to the universe. (1997, 31)
He maintains that without creation there was only God and than the
universe began to exist in accordance with God’s timeless will. (1997,
31) But he also argues that the inception of the universe does not
require God’s becoming temporal. (1962, 104) For, according to him, only
a timeless being can create temporal beings and can have an absolute
control over them.

In order to better understand his approach to this issue I would like to
touch upon his views on the relationship between God and time. He
defines time, like Aristotle, as the measure of motion in terms of
before and after. (1990, 172) In view of the fact that he sees an
essential relation between time and motion, a question as to divine
eternity might be, basically, answered in accordance with the answer
given to the question of whether God has been subjected to a change or
not. (Erdem, 2006, 3) Al-Ghazali tries to give an answer to this
question by pointing out the radical difference between God’s mode of
being and those of the created beings. (2006, 3) For him all the
creatures are temporally created (*hadith* ), which means that they came
into existence after they had not existed previously. (1962, 25; 1997,
61) The coming into existence of the temporally created is either
possible or impossible; its being impossible is not possible, because
what is impossible cannot come into existence. (1962, 25) Hence it is
necessary for a temporally created to be possible before it exists; a
possible being is at the same of level with regard to existence and
non-existence. (1962, 25) So, it needs a cause/decider that would prefer
its existence to its non-existence. (1962, 25-26) But, since the chain
of causes cannot continue infinitely, there must be a first cause which
does not require any other cause but itself. (1962, 35) Thus, this first
cause, with regard to its mode of being does not need to any other
cause, is said to be a necessary being. A necessary being is different
from a temporally created being, not only because it does not require
any cause except itself but also it is not subjected to any motion or
change. (2006, 3) Because, for him, motion is the actualization of a
potentiality; in order for a motion take place an agent is required to
actualize the potentiality. (1990, 172) So if a change and a motion were
to happen in God, this would mean that God had a potentiality and thus
God would need an agent apart from Himself to put this potentiality into
actuality. (2006, 3-4) In another words, if God changes, He would be at
the same level of being with the created and He cannot be regarded as a
First Cause. However, according to al-Ghazali since God is a necessary
being, there cannot be any potentiality and any change in Him and
therefore He must be timeless. (2006, 4) He expresses his view thus:

God, just like He was in eternity, in the infinite pasts, is always the
same today. Just like He was before He created the universe and heavens,
He would be exactly the same in the infinite future, too. Because change
and alteration can not be ascribed neither to His being nor to His
attributes. If one of His attributes were to change, He would be
imperfect or flawed; therefore, be imperfect and would be in need of
perfection and excellence. He who is in need can not be God. (1969, 112)

For al-Ghazali, God’s essence and all of His attributes, as well as His
will, are timelessly eternal. (1962, 142) God decides timelessly to
create the world in eternity. (1962, 104) God’s contemplation of
unactualized

possibilities and His decision to actualize one of them is one timeless
act. ‘This does not mean that different phases of that act cannot be
distinguished, but such a distinction can only be a conceptual, not a
temporal distinction. Consideration of possibilities is logically prior
to actualizing one of them, but both contemplation and actualization are
one eternal act of the divine nature, if God is timelessly eternal.’
(Helm, 1988, 179) To al-Ghazali, even though God’s decision to create is
a timeless act, the effects of this decision come into being temporally.
But the temporality of the effects does not require the temporality of
the cause. For, God’s act of creation is a different kind of causation,
it is a timeless causation. Timeless causation is a relation of a cause
and an effect between the Creator and the creation. (Markus, 2004,
32-33) To understand timeless causation, I think it might be helpful to
compare, as Davies does, the relation between the cause and the effect
with the relationship between a teacher and a student. When the student
learns some truth he changes from a state of ignorance to state of
having knowledge. It is a real change for her/him. But the learning of
the student does not require a change in the teacher. Similarly, it
might be coherently thought that God’s creation does not necessarily
imply a change in Him but only a change in the creature. (Davies, 1993,
147)

At this point it might be asked that why al-Ghazali and other medieval
philosophers insist so much on God’s immutability and timelessness and
why they do not accept the view of God’s becoming temporal. To these
philosophers, the attributes of necessity and timelessness are the marks
of the Creator and the contingency and the temporality are the signs of
the creature. For that reason, any explanation which implies God’s being
temporal, in fact, is not a philosophically coherent explanation.
Because in such a case, it would be nearly impossible to make any
distinction between God and His creature and this would lead to an
anthropomorphic conception of God. So from al-Ghazalian point of view,
Craig’s idea that God created the universe and became temporal with
creation, in fact, means that God created the universe at the expense of
His perfection. Craig might reply to this, saying that God ‘willingly’
did decide to become temporal at the moment of creation. (2000, 152) But
such a response also seems questionable. Because questions such as
follows always reasonably be asked: ‘Is it really possible that a being
can change his mode of being by her/his own will?’ and more importantly,
!For what reason did a perfect and a timeless being abandon His mode of
being?’ I think it is very difficult to find any philosophically
coherent answer to these questions in Craig’s view of eternity.

Lastly, I would like to add one point. Metaphysically thinking, an
effect is ontologically dependent on its cause, not vice versa. In the
classical view of eternity, God is conceived as a First Cause and
everything apart from Himself wholly dependent on Him. Accordingly, the
classical philosophers argue that the act of creation does not imply a
real change in God but only in the creature. But in Craig’s conception
of eternity, the effect is so much powerful that it can change the mode
of being of its cause substantially. I think such a view brings about
the question: ‘Which one, in fact, is the real cause, God or the
universe?’

In conclusion, in the classical philosophy and theology God is conceived
as an ultimate principle. In this view, God is the First Cause and
everything except him came into being thanks to His act of creation. The
fact that God is the First Cause means that there is a radical, sharp
distinction between God and his creatures in terms of mode of being. For
that reason, medieval philosophers never approve of the idea of God’s
becoming temporal and try to explain God’s relationship with the
temporal world in accordance with this metaphysical framework. But in
Craig’s view of eternity, because he concedes that God becomes temporal
with creation, it is very difficult to explain, at least after creation,
the difference between the Creator and the creature. Likewise, his idea
that God became temporal because of His relation with temporal beings is
controversial. For, if God, as Craig claims, becomes temporal due to His
relations with temporal beings it might also be thought that He becomes
spatial due to His relations with spatial things. Of course, God might
be conceived as a temporal and even a spatial being but it is clear that
such a conception of God is more anthropomorphic than the timeless one.


