The Feature of Sura Al-fatir
============================

This Sura has been revealed at Mecca, and contains forty five verses.

‘Fa-t?ir’ is one of the attributes of Allah and it means ‘the
Originator’. The name of this Sura has been taken from the first verse
of the Sura in which Allah has been introduced as ‘the Originator of the
heavens and the earth’.

Like other Meccan Suras, the main axis of the discussion in this Sura
is about Origin, Resurrection, and struggle against polytheism.

**The Virtue of the Sura:**

Imam S?a-diq (a.s.) in a tradition said: “There are two suras in the
Qur’a-n which are one after another and they begin with
/alhamd-u-lilla-h/ (the praise belongs (only) to Allah): Sura As-Saba’,
and Sura Al-Fa-t?ir. Whoever recites them by night, Allah will protect
him in His support, and whoever recites them during the day, there will
come to him no affliction (on that day) …” [^1] [^1] The Commentary of
Nu-r-uth-Thaqalayn, Vol. 4, P. 345


**Section 1 : Humanity exhorted to hold Commentary : Verse 1**

**Satan as its enemy**

Allah alone, the Creator, the Deputor of Angels – Who adds to His
creation whosoever He pleases – None can ever go against the Will of
Allah - The disbelievers warned against severe punishment and the
believers given the glad tidings of the Great Reward awaiting them

<p dir="rtl">
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
</p>

In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful

(1) الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ فَاطِرِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ جَاعِلِ
الْمَلآئِكَةِ رُسُلاً اُوْلِي أَجْنِحَةٍ مَّثْنَي وَثُلاَثَ وَرُبَاعَ
يَزِيدُ فِي الْخَلْقِ مَا يَشَآءُ اِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلي كُلّ‌ِ شَيْءٍ
قَدِيرٌ

1.“(All) praise belongs to Allah, the Originator of the heavens and the
earth, Who appointed the angels messengers having wings two, three, and
four. He adds to creation what He pleases; verily Allah is All-Powerful
over every thing.”

**Commentary:**

The Qur’a-nic word /fa-t?ir/ means: ‘Originator’, and the Arabic word
/’ajnih?ah/ is derived from /jina-h?/ in the sense of ‘wing’ which
allusively means power. In Persian it is also said ‘the wing of so and
so is burnt or broken’ which indicates he has no power.

Similar to Suras: Al-Hamd, Saba’, and Al-Kahf, this Sura begins with
the praise of Allah, too. His praise is for the sake of the creation of
the vast world of existence. Concerning the fact that all bounties and
merits of existence originate from His Exalted Being, the Qur’a-n
says:

“(All) praise belongs to Allah, the Originator of the heavens and the
earth, …”

The Qur’a-nic word /fa-t?ir/ is derived from /fut?u-r/ originally means
‘to cleave’ and since the creation of creatures is like cleaving the
darkness of nothingness and it is the appearance of the light of
existence, this meaning has been used in relation to creation
particularly in regarding to the modern science which says that at the
beginning the totality of the world of existence had been a single mass
which has gradually split and some parts have separated from it. The
application of the word Fa-t?ir for the Pure Essence of Allah produces a
new and clearer concept.


Yes, we do praise Him for His creative Power, because whatever exists
is from His side and none has anything from him except Allah.

And in view of the fact that the management of this world, because of
the fact that this world is the world of means, has been given to the
angels, the verse immediately speaks about their creation and the
considerable power that Allah, the Almighty, has bestowed on them. It
says:

“… Who appointed the angels messengers having wings two, three, and
four. …”

Then the verse continues saying:

“… He adds to creation what He pleases; verily Allah is All-Powerful
over every thing.”

Allah (s.w.t.) adds to the creation whatever His Will and His Wisdom
require including wings and other things. In this regard, the verse is
absolute and it contains any kind of adding, irrespective of tallness of
the body, moderation in face and bodily power and good intellect, and
other merits. Some of the commentators say that the purpose of ‘adding
to creation’ is: beautiful face, nice voice, and fair hair.

**Note:**

There are many verses in the Qur’a-n that are about the angels’
attributes, specialties, missions, and duties. Even the Qur’a-n has
considered the faith in angels in the row of the faith in Allah,
prophets, and heavenly Books, and this is an evidence upon the
fundamental importance of this subject. The Holy Qur’a-n says: “The
Messenger believes in what has been sent down to him from his Lord, and
(so do) the believers. (They) all believe in Allah, His angels, His
Books and His messengers. …” [^1]

No doubt the angels are among the Unseen things for proving which by
these attributes and specialties there is no way save the traditional
proofs, and because of belief in Unseen, we must accept them.

[^1] Sura Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 285


On the whole, the Qur’a-n explains the specialties of the angels as
follows:

1- The angels are some wise and intellectual beings of the honourable
servants of Allah. “… but (angels) are (His) honoured servants.” [^1]

2. They obey Allah (s.w.t.) and never commit sin. “They do not precede
Him in speech, and (only) according to His commandment do they act.”
[^2]

3. They have been given many important and various duties from the side
of Allah: Some of them bear the ‘Arsh (throne): “… bear the throne of
Your Lord above them.” [^3] A group of them manage the affair: “And those
who manage the affair.” [^4]

A group of them are the angels of taking souls: “… until when Our
messengers came to them to take them away, …” [^5]

A group of them are the recorders of the deeds of men: “And surely
there are Watchers over you,” “Honourable scribes:” “They know (and
understand) whatever you do.” [^6]

A group of them are the protectors of man from dangers and evil events:
“… and He sends guardians (to watch) over you until when death comes to
one of you, …” [^7]

A group of them are ordered to punish the disobedient people: “And when
Our messengers (the angels) came to Lot, he was grieved for them and
felt straitened to protect them. He said: ‘This is a distressful
day’.”[^8]

[^1] Sura Al-'Anbiya-', No. 21, verse 26

[^2] Sura Al-'Anbiya-', No. 21, verse 27


[^3] Sura Al-Ha-qqah, No. 69, verse 17

[^4] Sura Na-zi'a-t, No. 79, verse 5

[^5] Sura Al-'A'ra-f, No. 7, verse 37

[^6] Sura Al-'Infit)a-r, No. 82, verses 10-12

[^7] Sura Al-'An'a-m, No. 6, verse 61

[^8] Sura Hu-d, No. 11, verse 77

A group of them are Divine helpers to the believers in battles: “O you
who believe! Remember Allah’s blessing upon you when hosts came against
you, so We sent upon them a strong wind and hosts, that you saw not, and
Allah sees what you do.” [^1]

And, finally, a group of them are the bringers of revelation and
heavenly Books from Allah for Divine prophets: “He sends down the angels
with the inspiration of His commandment upon whomever of His servants He
wills …”[^2]

4- They are always busy glorifying Allah, as Sura Ash-Shura-, No. 42,
verse 5 says: “… and the angels celebrate the Praise of their Lord and
seek forgiveness for those who are on the earth, …”

Yes, because of talent and potentials of development that man has, he
is higher than and superior to the angels so much so that all angels,
with no exception, once for the sake of the creation of Adam fell in
prostration and Adam became their teacher. (Sura Al-Baqarah, No. 2,
verses 30-34)

6- Some angels appear for prophets and even other than the prophets in
the form of human beings, as we recite in Sura Maryam that the great
angel of Allah came to Mary as a handsome man: “… Then We sent unto her
Our Spirit (Holy Spirit) that presented himself to her a perfect man”.

In other occurrences of the Qur’a-n we recite that angels appeared in
the form of some men before Abraham and Lot, (Sura Hu-d, No. 11, verses
69 and 77). It is understood from the verses of this Sura that the
people of Lot, too, saw them in the form of some handsome men, (Sura
Hu-d, No. 11, verse 78).

Is the appearance in the form of man a concrete fact? Or is it in the
form of presentation and interfering in the perceptive

[^1] Sura Al-'Ah)za-b, No. 33, verse 9

[^2] Sura An-Nah)l, No. 16, verse 2

faculty? The outward of the verses of the Qur’a-n implies to the first
meaning, though some great commentators have chosen the second
meaning.

7- It is understood from Islamic narrations that the number of angels
is so large that they can never be compared with all human beings. Once
Imam S?a-diq (a.s.) was asked whether the number of the angels is larger
or that of the human beings, he said: “By Allah in whose hand is my
soul! the angels in heavens are more than the (number of) whole atoms of
the dust of the earth, and there is no place in heaven but an angel is
busy glorifying and praising Him therein.” (Biha-r-ul-’Anwa-r, Vol. 59,
P. 126).

8- They neither eat nor drink nor marry. Imam S?a-diq (a.s.) in a
tradition said: “Verily the angels neither eat, nor drink, nor marry,
and they do live only by the breeze of the (Divine) ’Arsh!)”
(Biha-r-ul-’Anwa-r, Vol. 59, P. 174)

9- They have neither sleep nor negligence, nor laziness. Ali (a.s.) in
a tradition said: “There is no cessation between them, nor there is
negligence with them, nor there is sin among them… sleep does not
overtake them, their wisdom never involves in mistake and forgetfulness,
their bodies do not tend to laziness, and they do not lie in the loins
of fathers and in the wombs of mothers.” (Biha-r-ul-’Anwa-r, Vol. 59, P.
175)

10- They have different proper positions and ranks. Some of them are
always in the state of ‘bowing’ while some others are in the state of
prostration.

The Qur’a-n, from the tongue of the angels, says: “There is not (any
one) of us but for his is an assigned place.” “And verily we are they
who range ourselves in order;” “And verily we are they who celebrate His
glory!” (Sura As-Sa-ffa-t, No. 37, verse 164-166)

Imam S?a-diq (a.s.) says: “Verily Allah has some angels who are (in the
state of) bowing until the Day of Hereafter, and verily Allah has some
angels who are (always in the state of) prostration until the Day of
Hereafter.” (Biha-r, Vol. 59, P. 174)

For more information about the specialties of the angels and their
classes, you may refer to the books entitled: As-Sama-’-i-wal-‘A-lam,
Biha-r-ul-’Anwa-r, Abwa-b-ul-Mala-’ikah, Vol. 59, P. 144-326. also,
Nahj-ul-Bala-qah, sermons number one and ninety one, Sermon ’Ishba-h?,
sermons 109, and 171.


Having these attributes mentioned for the angels in mind, are they
abstract or material?

Certainly, with these specialties, they cannot be formed from the dirty
elemental matter, but it does not matter that they have been created
from some tender matters, some things beyond this ordinary matter which
we are acquainted with. Of course, we know the angels as those who are
introduced by the Qur’a-n and by the certain Islamic narrations, and we
know them as a great part of the high and outstanding beings of Allah,
without considering any rank for them save the rank of servitude, and we
do not know them as the partner of Allah in creation or worship, because
this is absolutely polytheism and infidelity.

By the way, in many phrases of the Torah the angels are introduced as
gods, which is blasphemous and this is one of the signs of the
distortion in the present Torah. But the Qur’a-n is pure and far from
these meanings, since it has not considered any rank for them except
servitude and worship, and executing the commands of Allah; and, as we
said before, it is understood from the different verses of the Qur’a-n
that the rank of a complete man is higher than and superior to the
angels.


