Section 4 : the Inheritors of the Qur’an Commentary: Verse 27
=============================================================

Servants of Allah endued with knowledge – Qur’a-n inherited by the
Chosen Ones of Allah – The grievous punishment to the disbelievers and
the Great Reward which awaits the believers

(27) أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّ اللَّهَ أَنزَلَ مِنَ السَّمَآءِ مَآءً
فَأَخْرَجْنَا بِهِ ثَمَرَاتٍ مُخْتَلِفاً أَلْوَانُهَا وَمِنَ الْجِبَالِ
جُدَدٌ بِيضٌ وَحُمْرٌ مُخْتَلِفٌ أَلْوَانُهَا وَغَرَابِيبُ سُودٌ

27.“Have you not seen that Allah sends down water from the sky, then We
bring forth with it fruits of various colours, and in the mountains are
streaks, white and red, of divers hues and (others) intensely black?”

**Commentary:**

By means of the colourless water and from the earth of one colour,
Allah creates fruits of different colours.

In these verses, the Qur’a-n returns again to the subject of
Monotheism, and shows a new section of the book of creation to human
beings. This is a severe answer to the obstinate polytheists and the
headstrong rejecters of Monotheism.

In this beautiful section from this large and great book of creation,
the variety of soulless beings, and the different beautiful features of
life in the world of plants, animals and human beings have been regarded
to, that how He has brought hundred thousands of colours into being from
the colourless water, and He has created some completely diverse beings
from some defined and limited elements each of which is fairly more
beautiful than the other.

This skilful painter, by a single pen and ink, has produced kinds of
pictures which attract the attention of their visitors and charm them.
At first, it says:

“Have you not seen that Allah sends down water from the sky, then We
bring forth with it fruits of various colours, …”

This verse begins with a confessional interrogation and, besides moving
the curiosity sense of men, points to this fact that this matter is so
clear and vivid that whoever looks at it he seas that from the same
water and land, one of which is colourless and the other has only one
colour, there have been created these abundant different colours in
various fruits, beautiful flowers, leaves and blossoms with diverse
features.

The Qur’a-nic word /’alwa-n/ (colours) may refer to the apparent
colours of fruits that even in a single fruit, like an apple, there
exist different colours, let alone the diverse fruits. And it may refer
to the differences in their different tastes, constructions, and
properties, so much so that even in one kind of fruit you can find
various sorts. For example, there are, perhaps, fifty kinds of grapes
and more than seventy kinds of date.

In the continuation of the verse, the Qur’a-n has referred to the
variety of roads which exist in the mountains and these mountains cause
the ways to be recognized from each other. It says:

“… and in the mountains are streaks, white and red, of divers hues and
(others) intensely black?”

From one side, this difference of colours gives a special beauty to the
mountains and, on the other side, it is a cause for finding ways not
being lost in the crooked roads of the mountains, and, ultimately, it is
a proof upon the Power of Allah over everything.

The Arabic word /judad/ is the plural form of /juddah/ in the sense of
‘road and way’.

The Arabic word /bayd?/ is the plural form of /’abyad?/ which means
‘white’; and /h?umur/ is the plural form of /’ah?mar/ in the sense of
‘red’.

The Qur’a-nic term /qara-bi-b/ is the plural form of /qirbi-b/ which
means ‘black in full’, and that in Arabic ‘crow’ is called /qura-b/ is
also from this quality. Therefore, the mention of the word /su-d/, which
is also the plural form of /’aswad/, next to it is for an emphasis upon
the ‘intensely black’ colour seen in some mountain roads.

However, the construction of the mountains with diverse and completely
different colours, from one side, and the mountain roads with various
colours, on the other side, are some other signs for the Greatness,
Power, and Wisdom of Allah which every moment appear in a form and every
time decorate themselves in another clothing.


**Commentary: Verse 28**

(28) وَمِنَ النَّاسِ وَالدَّوَآبّ‌ِ وَالأَنْعَامِ مُخْتَلِفٌ
أَلْوَانُهُ كَذَلِكَ إِنَّمَا يَخْشَي اللَّهَ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ
الْعُلَمَآءُ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَزِيزٌ غَفُورٌ

28.“And of the people and beasts and cattle are of various colours
likewise; verily only those of His servants fear Allah who have
knowledge, verily Allah is Mighty, Forgiving.”

**Commentary:**

The difference of the colours of human beings and animals is one of the
signs of the Power and Greatness of Allah.

Having some knowledge and awareness over the secrets of existence is a
preparation for reaching the position of fearing Allah.

This verse refers to the variety of colours in men and in other living
animals. It says:

“And of the people and beasts and cattle are of various colours
likewise; …”

Yes, although human beings are all from the same parents, they have
diverse races and colours completely different. Some of them are as
white as snow while some others are as black as ink. Even in one race,
there is also difference of colours. If we look carefully of the twin
children who have passed the different stages of foetus with together
and have been in the bosom of each other from the beginning, they are
not sometimes completely in the same form from the point of colour,
though they are from one father and one mother and their life-germ has
combined in a single moment, and they have fed from one kind of food.

Besides the outward features, their innate colours, their characters,
their attributes and qualities, their talents and tastes may be
completely different so that they all with together form a single unit
with the whole needs.

In the world of moving creatures, there are many thousands kinds of
insects, birds, creepers, sea-animals, different desert wild animals
that, with all their specialties and wonders of creations, each of them
is a sign of the Power and Greatness and Knowledge of the Creator.

After stating these signs of Unity, finally, as a conclusion, it
implies that the matter is like that.

And, since enjoying from these great verses of creation is for the wise
and knowledgeable servants more than others, at the end of the verse, it
says:

“… verily only those of His servants fear Allah who have knowledge,
…”

Yes, from among all of Allah servants only scholars are those who gain
the high rank of ‘fear’, that is, the fear of responsibility accompanied
with perception of the greatness of the position of their Lord. This
state of ‘Fear’ is the result of contemplation on the extroversive and
introversive verses of the Qur’a-n, and knowing the Knowledge and Power
of Allah and the aim of His creation.

Ra-qib in Mufrada-t says: “The word /xas(yat/ means a ‘fear’ mixed with
veneration, and it is often used in some instances which originate from
knowledge and awareness of something.” Therefore, in the Qur’a-n, this
rank is counted specialized to the learned ones.

We have repeatedly said that this is a fear because of the
responsibilities that one has in front of Allah: a fear that he may not
fulfil his own duties well. Furthermore, in principle, perceiving the
greatness, that greatness which is unlimited and infinite, for a being
that is limited, such as man, causes fear. Upon the commentary of this
verse, Imam S?a-diq (a.s.) in a tradition said: “The purpose is that
there are some scholars whose deeds are consistent with their words. The
one whose saying and deed are not consistent is not knowledgeable.”
[^1]

Another tradition announces: “The most learned one of you is the one
whose fear to Allah is the most.” [^2]

Shortly speaking, from the view and logic of the Qur’a-n, the ‘learned
ones’ are those scholars and authorities that the light of knowledge has
made their whole selves enlightened with the light of Allah, faith, and
piety, and they intensively feel responsibility unto their duties and
they fulfil them more than the others.

At the end of the above verse, as a short reasoning upon what was said,
the Qur’a-n says:

“… verily Allah is Mighty, Forgiving.”

His Veneration and endless Power is the origin of the fear of the
learned ones; and His Forgiveness, which is the sign of His unlimited
Mercy, is the cause of their ‘hope’. Thus, these two holy names keep the
servants of Allah between ‘fear’ and ‘hope’. And we know that the
constant movement toward development is not possible without being
qualified with these two characters.


[^1] Majma'-ul-Baya-n, following the verse.

[^2] Ibid


