Commentary : Verse 32
=====================

(32) ثُمَّ أَوْرَثْنَا الْكِتَابَ الَّذِينَ اصْطَفَيْنَا مِنْ
عِبَادِنَا فَمِنْهُمْ ظَالِمٌ لّـِنَفْسِهِ وَمِنْهُم مُّقْتَصِدٌ
وَمِنْهُمْ سَابِقٌ بِالْخَيْرَاتِ بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ ذَلِكَ هُوَ الْفَضْلُ
الْكَبِيرُ

32.“Then We gave the Book (Qur’a-n) as inheritance unto those whom We
elected of Our servants. But of them are some who wrong themselves, and
of them are some who follow the middle course, and of them are some who
outstrip (others) through good deeds, by Allah’s leave. That is the
great (Divine) favour!”

**Commentary:**

To inherit from the Holy Qur’a-n is a great favour of Allah. The
election of Allah is wisely. Those are the inheritors of the science of
the Qur’a-n who are foremost in good works.

In this holy verse the Qur’a-n has referred to an important subject,
viz., the bearers of this great heavenly Book, the same ones who, after
the revelation of the Qur’a-n upon the pure heart of the Prophet
(p.b.u.h.), protected and preserved this luminous torch at that time and
during later centuries. It says:

“Then We gave the Book (Qur’a-n) as inheritance unto those whom We
elected of Our servants. …”

It is clear that the objective meaning of ‘The Book’ here is the same
thing that has been mentioned in the previous verses, (the Holy
Qur’a-n), and the Arabic signs ‘’Alif’ and ‘La-m’ are, so to speak, of
the kind of ‘Ahd.

The application of ‘inheritance’ here, and in some other instances
similar to it in the Qur’a-n, is for the reason that this word is used
for something which is gained without bargain and labour or trouble, and
Allah gave this very great Book to Muslims in such a way.

There is a great deal of traditions narrated from Ahl-ul-Bayt (a.s.) in
all of which the Qur’a-nic phrase: ‘the elected servants of Allah’ has
been rendered into the immaculate Imams. [^1]

As we have repeatedly said, these narrations are the statement of the
clear and first grade expansions of the case and they do not hinder that
the scholars, and learned ones of the Ummat, and those martyrs and
righteous ones who tried hard in the way of protecting this heavenly
Book and continuation of the performance of its instructions, are
counted under the title of “those whom We elected of Our servants”.

Then the Qur’a-n divides them into an important division in this
regard. It says:

“… But of them are some who wrong themselves, and of them are some who
follow the middle course, and of them are some who outstrip (others)
through good deeds, by Allah’s leave. That is the great (Divine)
favour!”

The apparent of the verse indicates that these three groups among ‘the
elected ones of Allah’ are the inheritors and bearers of the Book of
Allah. In a more clear meaning, Allah has given the protection of this
heavenly Book, after His Messenger, upon this Ummah, the ones who are
elected by Allah, but there are different groups among them. Some of
them fail to fulfil their great duty in protecting this Book and
performing its ordinances and, in fact, they did injustice to
themselves. These are the extension of “Some who wrong themselves”.

Another group did a considerable amount of this duty concerning the act
of protection and practicing on this Book,

[^1] Nu-r-uth-Thaqalayn, Vol. 4, P. 361 on

although they had some faults and shortcomings in their deeds, too.
These are the extension of “Some who follow the middle course”.

And, finally, there are some distinguished persons who fulfil their
heavy duties very well and, in this race-field they outstrip others.
This group, who are foremost in good deeds, are the same ones whom in
the above mentioned verse have been rendered into: “Some who outstrip
(others) through good deeds, by the leave of Allah.”

The Qur’a-nic phrase: /sa-biqun bil xayra-t/ (outstrip through good
deeds), in many traditions narrated from Ahl-ul-Bayt (a.s.) has been
interpreted into Imam and the Immaculate ones; and the phrase:
/za-lim-un-linafsihi-/ has been rendered into the ones who have not
knowledge unto Imam (a.s.); while the term /muqtas?id/ is used for those
who know Imam (a.s.) and follow him.[^1]

These interpretations are clear verifications upon what was said in the
commentary of the whole verse, and it does not matter that these three
groups can exist among the inheritors of the book of Allah.

Perhaps it is not necessary to mention that the interpretations in the
above mentioned traditions are from the kind of the statement of clear
extensions; that is the immaculate Imam is in the first row of “Some who
outstrip (others) through good deeds”, and scholars, learned men, and
protectors of the divine religion are in other rows.

The commentary which has been mentioned about /za-lim/ and /muqtas?id/
in the traditions are also from the kind of the statement of extension;
and if we see that in some narrations the existence of scholars in the
concept of the verse has totally

[^1] Nu-r-uth-Thaqalayn, the Commentary, Vol. 4, P. 461

been negated, in fact, is for attracting attentions to the existence of
Immaculate Imam in front of these rows.

It is noteworthy that in commenting these three groups some of the
former commentators and the modern commentators have delivered many
other probabilities that, in deed, all of them are from the kind of the
statement of extension.

Concerning the Qur’a-nic sentence which says: “That is the great
(Divine) favour”, some commentators have said that it is that very
inheritance, the Book of Allah.

Some other commentators believe that it is a hint to the success which
is given to those who outstrip (others) through good deeds and pave this
way by the leave of Allah. That is, they outstrip all nations in doing
good deeds: they outstrip in learning knowledge; in piety and morality;
in worshipping and serving the servants; in effort and endeavour; in
order and reckoning; in donation and self-sacrifice, and they are
usually the foremost in all these affairs.

Yes, the bearer of that heritage can be only such persons.


**Commentary : Verse 33**

(33) جَنَّاتُ عَدْنٍ يَدْخُلُونَهَا يُحَلَّوْنَ فِيهَا مِنْ أَسَاوِرَ
مِن ذَهَبٍ وَلُؤْلُؤاً وَلِبَاسُهُمْ فِيهَا حَرِيرٌ

33.“Gardens of Eden! They shall enter; therein they shall be adorned
with bracelets of gold and pearls; and their raiment there shall be of
silk.”

**Commentary:**

The reward of a temporary deprivation can be a permanent success.

This verse is, in fact, a conclusion for what was mentioned in the
previous verses. This holy verse implicitly says that the reward of
those who outstrip in good deeds is the eternal gardens of Paradise in
which all of them will wholly enter. The verse says:

“Gardens of Eden! They shall enter; …”

The Qur’a-nic word /janna-t/ is the plural form of /jannah/ with the
sense of ‘garden’ and /‘adn/ is in the sense of settlement and
stability; and ‘main’ is so called because it is the place of the
settlement of metals and the like. Thus, the Qur’a-nic phrase:
/janna-t-u-‘adn/ means ‘the eternal gardens of Paradise’.

However, this meaning shows that the great bounties of Paradise are
eternal and stable. And like the merits of the worldly material, they
are not mixed with anxiety originated from the fear of destruction. The
people of Paradise not only have a garden in Paradise, but also have
many gardens at their disposal.

Then the verse refers to three parts of the bounties therein, some of
which have material aspect and outward nature; some others have
spiritual aspect and inward nature; and the third part has pointed to
the negation of the existence of any kind of hindrance and trouble. It
says:

“… therein they shall be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls; and
their raiment there shall be of silk.”

In this world they were heedless to the dazzling glares and did not
make themselves as captives to the glare of ornaments and when the
deprived had not some cheep pieces of clothing, they did not tend to
have expensive garments. To recompense these, in the next world, Allah
will make them wear the best clothing and ornaments.

In this world, they adorned their outward with good deeds, then, in the
next world, which is the world of incarnation of deeds, Allah will adorn
them with kinds of ornaments, too.

We have repeatedly said that our words, which have been formed for the
limited life of this world, never can convey the concepts of the great
world of Hereafter. In order to state those bounties, we need to apply
another kind of Alphabet, culture and dictionary. But, however, in order
that an outline of those great bounties could be shown to us, the
prisoners of this world, we must take help from the slight ability of
these very words to explain those bounties.


