Commentary : Verse 44
=====================

(44) أَوَلَمْ يَسِيرُوا فِي الأَرْضِ فَيَنظُرُوا كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ
الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِهِمْ وَكَانُوا أَشَدَّ مِنْهُمْ قُوَّةً وَمَا كَانَ
اللَّهُ لِيُعْجِزَهُ مِن شَيْءٍ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَلاَ فِي الأَرْضِ
إِنَّهُ كَانَ عَلِيماً قَدِيراً

44.“Have they not travelled in the earth and seen how was the end of
those before them while they were stronger than them in power? Nor is
Allah to be frustrated by anything whatever in the heavens or on the
earth; verily He is Knowing, Powerful.”

**Commentary:**

None should become proud of his power since there have been many more
powerful people than them who have been destroyed; and nothing can
overcome the Will of Allah.

This verse invites the guilty polytheists to study the traces of the
former nations and the fate which they afflicted with. This is for the
sake that whatever they have studied in the history about those nations,
they would see by their eyes in the lands belonging to them, and they
would observe those things among their effects so that they actually see
what they have studied in the statements. It says:

“Have they not travelled in the earth and seen how was the end of those
before them …”

If they think that they are stronger than those nations, they are in an
earnest error, because the Qur’a-n continues saying:

“… while they were stronger than them in power? …”

The people of Pharaoh who had taken the land of Egypt under the control
of their own power, the people of Namru-d who were governing over the
land of Babylon and some other countries all were so strong that the
idolaters of Mecca, compared with them, were counted naught.

Moreover, the more men are powerful, comparing the power of Allah,
their power is naught, because nothing in the heavens nor in the earth
can escape from the realm of His Power, and will not frustrate Him. The
verse says:

“… Nor is Allah to be frustrated by anything whatever in the heavens or
on the earth; …”

Allah is both Knowing and Powerful. Neither does anything remain
concealed from His sight nor anything is difficult for His Power, nor
can anybody overcome Him.

If these blind-hearted, arrogant and deceitful persons think that they
can escape from the grips of His Power, they are in error, and if they
do not leave their committing ugly deeds, at last they will confront the
same fatal end of the former arrogant ones.

We repeatedly recite in the verses of the Qur’a-n that Allah invites
the faithless and disobedient persons ‘to travel in the earth’ and see
the traces of the nations who have afflicted the Divine chastisement.

In Sura Ar-Room, No. 30, verse 9 we recite: “Have they not travelled in
the earth and seen how was the end of those before them? …” These are
those who had a stronger power than these and changed the earth, and
they made it more populated than the amount these have done. Their
prophets came to them with clear proofs, but they continued their own
egotism, and were encompassed with painful divine punishment.

Never did Allah injustice to them, but they were unjust to themselves.
This verse from Sura Ar-Room continues saying: “… they were stronger
than them in strength, and they ploughed up the earth and cultivated it
more than they themselves have cultivated it; and their messenger came
to them with clear proofs (miracles) (which they rejected to their own
destruction); so Allah would never deal with them unjustly, but they
deal unjustly with their own selves.”

These frequent emphases of the Qur’a-n are some proofs upon the
extraordinary effect of these observations in the selves of human
beings. They must go to see by their eyes that which they have studied
in the history or heard from people.

They should go and see the former destroyed land of the Pharaohs, the
ruined castles of the ancient kings, the scattered graves of Caesars,
the rotten bones of people such as Numru-d, and the afflicted lands of
the people of Lu-t and Thamu-d from near and close distance, they can
hear the advice of these silent people and pay attention to the cry of
those who are buried under the dust, and watch by their eyes what will
finally happen to them.


**Commentary : Verse 45**

(45) وَلَوْ يُؤَاخِذُ اللَّهُ النَّاسَ بِمَا كَسَبُوا مَا تَرَكَ عَلَي
ظَهْرِهَا مِن دَآبَّةٍ وَلَكِن يُؤَخّـِرُهُمْ اِلَي أَجَلٍ مُّسَمًّي
فَاِذَا جآءَ أَجَلُهُمْ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ بِعِبَادِهِ بَصِيراً

45.“And if Allah were to seize the people (to punish them) for what
they have earned, He would not leave on the back of it any creature; but
He gives them respite till an appointed term. So when their term
expires, then verily Allah is seeing with respect to His servants.”

**Commentary:**

Allah is patient and He forgives people and gives them respite, and
does not immediately punish the wrong doers in this world for their evil
actions.

Allah’s giving respite to the sinners is a wisely action.

The abovementioned verse, which is the last verse of Sura Fa-tir,
concludes the earnest discussions and serious threats previously
mentioned in this Sura with Allah’s grace and mercy upon the people on
the earth, in the same manner that this Sura began with the Mercy of
Allah on humankind.

Thus both the beginning and the end of the holy Sura are consistent in
stating the Mercy of Allah.

More over, the previous verse which threatened the guilty faithless
persons to the evil fate of the formers brings this question forth for
many of them, as well as others, that if the manner of treatment of
Allah is the same about all of the arrogant ones, then why He does not
punish this arrogant polytheistic nation.

In answer to this question, the Qur’a-n says:

“And if Allah were to seize the people (to punish them) for what they
have earned, He would not leave on the back of it any creature; …”

In that case, there will be sent down so many frequent punishments, and
lightning, earthquakes and tempests will destroy the unjust ones in a
form that the earth will not be a suitable place for anyone to live on.
Yet, the verse continues saying:

“… but He gives them respite till an appointed term. …”

But this patience and respite of Allah has an account. It lasts until
when their appointed term has not come, but when their appointed term
reaches, He will recompense everybody, as the verse says:

“… So when their term expires, then verily Allah is seeing with respect
to His servants.”

He (s.w.t.) both sees their deeds and is aware of their intentions.

Here, there arise two questions the answer of which is made manifest by
what was said.

The first is that: Does this general command envelop Divine prophets,
friends of Allah, and righteous ones, too?

The answer of this question is clear, because these kinds of ordinances
refer to almost the mass of people and the decisive majority of them,
and surely the Divine prophets, Imams, and righteous ones, who are in
minority, are out of this circle. Shortly speaking, every ordinance has
an exception and such ones are as exceptions of this ordinance.

The second is that: Does the application of the Qur’a-nic term
/da-bbah/ (creature), mentioned in the above verse, refer to non-human
creatures, too? That is, will they be destroyed as the result of the
punishment upon human beings?

The answer to this question will be made clear in regard to this point
that the philosophy of the existence of other living creatures is for
the benefit of men from them, and when the human generation is whipped
out, their existence will not be necessary. The Arabic word /da-bbah/ is
derived from /dabi-b/ in the sense of ‘to work slowly’, but from the
philological point of view it refers to any living creature, and
sometimes the Arabic word /dawa-b/ is used for the animals fit for
riding, in particular.

At last, we put an end to this discussion with a tradition from the
Prophet of Islam (p.b.u.h.) which has been recorded upon the commentary
of this verse. According to this tradition, the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) says:
“Allah, the Mighty, the Glorious, has implicitly said: ‘O’ the children
of Adam! It is by My will and desire that you have been created free and
you can wish for yourself whatever you wish; and it is by My Will that
you have possessed a kind of will that you can decide for yourself
whatever you will.

You have got strength by means of the bounties I gave you and you have
committed sins; and it was by means of My Power and Safety that I gave
you and you could do the obligations I commanded you. Therefore, due to
your good actions, I am prior to you yourself, but due to your sins, you
are prior to Me.

By means of the bounties I have given you, the good things ceaselessly
come to you from My side, and the vice and wretchedness always come to
you from yourself because of your treacheries. I have never neglected
you for warning and advising and I did not punish you immediately at the
time of your pride and negligence, but I gave you enough respite that
you might repent and improve yourselves.” The verse says:

“… but He gives them respite till an appointed term. So when their term
expires, then verily Allah is seeing with respect to His servants.”

Then, the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said that this is the same thing that
Allah says: “And if Allah were to seize the people (to punish them) for
what they have earned, He would not leave on the back of it any creature
…” [^1]

O’ Allah! Appoint us among those who come forth before lasting the
respites and return to You, and enlighten their dark past course by the
light of good deeds and attracting Your consent.

O’ Allah! If Your Grace had not encompassed us, the fire from inside of
our evil deeds would have swallowed us into its bottom; and if the ray
of the light of Your forgiveness had not been showered on our heart, the
army of Satan would have occupied it.

O’ Allah! Protect us from any kind of polytheism, and lit the torch of
sincere Faith and Unity in our heart, and increase the light of piety in
our speech and deeds.


The End of Sura Al-Fatir


[^1] Nu-r-uth-Thaqalayn, Vol. 4, P. 370


