Section 2 : the Triumph of Truth Commentary : Verse 8
=====================================================

**prophesied**

The dead shall be resurrected – ‘The plan of the disbelievers against
the Truth shall be in vain – The Triumph of Truth prophesied

(8) أَفَمَن زُيّـِنَ لَهُ سُوءُ عَمَلِهِ فَرَءَاهُ حَسَناً فَإِنَّ
اللَّهَ يُضِلُّ مَن يَشَآءُ وَيَهْدِي مَن يَشَآءُ فَلاَ تَذْهَبْ
نَفْسُكَ عَلَيْهِمْ حَسَرَاتٍ اِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ بِمَا يَصْنَعُونَ

8. “Ishe, then, to whom the evil of his deed is made alluring so that
he looks upon it as good, (equal to one who is rightly guided)? Now
verily Allah makes err whom He pleases and guides aright whom He
pleases, so let not your soul waste away in grief for them; verily Allah
is Cognizant of what they do.”

**Commentary:**

The one who introduces the evil behaviour of a person as a pleasant
one, and instead of criticizing it, he flatters him, is counted a Satan,
because, in other verse, the Holy Qur’a-n says: “… Satan made their
deeds fair seeming to them …” [^1]

Imam Ka-zim (a.s.) says: “Seeing bad things as good ones is the premise
of haughtiness and self-administration.”[^2]

[^1] Sura Al-'An'a-m, No. 8, verse 48

[^2] Al-Ka-fi-, Vol. 2, P. 313

In view of the fact that in the previous verses people were divided
into two groups: a believing group and a disbelieving group, or ‘the
party of Allah’, who are the enemy of Satan, and ‘the Party of Satan’,
who are the followers of Satan, this verse has stated one of the
important qualities of these two groups, which, in fact, is the origin
of their other evil programs, where it says:

“Is he, then, to whom the evil of his deed is made alluring so that he
looks upon it as good, (equal to one who is rightly guided)? …”

In fact, this very subject is the key of all miseries of the misguided
and obstinate nations whose ugly deeds seem to them as fair because of
the fact that they are consistent with their lusts and their black
hearts.

It is also evident that such an obstinate person neither accepts any
admonition, nor does he usually show any fitness for listening to
criticisms, nor does he agree to change his way. He neither tries to
experience and analyse his deeds, nor is he anxious about their
sequels.

Further than that when the ugliness and beauty is spoken of, they
consider beauties as theirs, and attribute the true believers with the
ugly things. There were many obstinate pagans who when heard the
previous verses about the Party of Satan and their painful fate they
adapted them with the true believers and counted themselves as an
extension of the Party of Allah. And this is a very great calamity.

But, who makes the evil deeds of the wrong doers seem fair in their
view: Allah or the carnal desire or Satan? No doubt the main factor is
carnal desire and Satan, but since Allah has created this effect in
their deeds it can be attributed to Allah; because when people commit a
sin at the beginning that their nature is pure, their conscience is
vigilant, and their wisdom works fairly well, they become inconvenient
from their action, but the more they repeat it, the more their
inconvenience decreases.

Gradually they reach to the stage of indifference, and if they repeat
it more, the ugly things seem beautiful in their views, thus far that
they imagine it among their honours and virtues, while they have been
drowned in the dirty situation of corruption.

It is interesting that when the Holy Qur’a-n propounds this question,
saying: “Is he, then, to whom the evil of his deed is made alluring so
that he looks upon it as good, …?” it does not clearly express the
opposite point of it. As if it intends to give a vast respite to the
hearer that he illustrates in his mind all the different things that he
can consider opposite to it and understands more. It seems it wants to
say whether such a person is like the truth seekers.

Is such a person like the pure hearted persons who are always busy
examining their own selves?

Is there any hope of felicity for such a person?

Then, the Qur’a-n refers to the statement of reason of the difference
of these two groups. It adds:

“… Now verily Allah makes err whom He pleases and guides aright whom He
pleases, …”

If the ugly deeds of the first group are decorated in their views, this
is the consequence of the Divine mislead. It is He Who has put this
property in the repetition of ugly deeds to which the man’s self
accustoms itself, he gets the habit of it, and harmonizes with it.

It is He Who gives some penetrating and kin eyes, together with some
hearing ears to the pure-hearted believers for understanding the facts
as they exactly are.

It is clear that the Divine Will is accompanied with His Wisdom and
gives everyone whatever he is eligible to.

So, at the end of the verse, the Qur’a-n says:

“… so let not your soul waste away in grief for them; …”

This meaning is similar to the content of verse 3 in Sura As-Shu‘ara-’,
No. 26, which says: “Perhaps you will kill yourself with grief, for that
they do not become Believers.”

The application of the Qur’a-nic word /hasara-t/ which is an object for
the previous sentence refers to this fact that not only you grieve for
them one regret but also with several regrets.

They are the regret of losing the bounty of guidance, the regret of
wasting the jewel of humanity, the regret of losing the sense of
recognition thus far that they see an ugly thing as beautiful; and,
finally, the regret of their encountering the Fire of the Wrath of
Allah.

But why does Allah say: “… So let not your soul waste a way in grief
…”? It is because Allah is cognizant of their deeds and He gives them
what they deserve of. The verse continues saying:

“… verily Allah is Cognizant of what they do.”

The extraordinary sympathy of the Prophet of Islam (p.b.u.h.) unto the
misguided and deviated ones is completely understood from the tone of
the verse. And this is the state of a true Divine leader that, because
of the people’s lack of acceptance of the truth and rejecting the means
of their happiness, he pains so much that as if he tended to kill
himself.


**Commentary : Verse 9**

(9) وَاللَّهُ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ الرّ‌ِيَاحَ فَتُثِيرُ سَحَاباً
فَسُقْنَاهُ اِلَي بَلَدٍ مَّيّـِتٍ فَأَحْيَيْنَا بِهِ الأَرْضَ بَعْدَ
مَوْتِهَا كَذَلِكَ النُّشُورُ

9.“And Allah is He who sends the winds that stir up cloud then We drive
it to a dead land and there with revive the earth, after it is dead.
Even so is the Resurrection.”

**Commentary:**

In the same manner that by the Will of Allah, the Almighty, the
movement of the cloud and winds, and the fall of rain make the dead land
alive and plants shoot out of the soil, with His Will a great earthquake
will happen and the dead come out of the ground and will be quickened.

Regarding to the discussions, which were mentioned in the previous holy
verses about guidance, misguidance, faith, and disbelief, this holy
verse talks briefly and clearly about Origin and Resurrections and by an
interesting reasoning it proves both of them. It says:

“And Allah is He who sends the winds that stir up cloud …” “… then We
drive it to a dead land and there with revive the earth, after it is
dead. …” “… Even so is the Resurrection.”

The accurate system which runs the movement of winds and then the
movement of the pieces of cloud and after that the descent of the
life-giving rain drops and, next to it, reviving the dead lands, itself
is the best proof and the best evidence upon this fact the Might of a
Wise One exists beyond this system and directs it.

It is also necessary to note this point that the Qur’a-nic phrase
/tu?i-ru/ is derived from /’i?a-rah/ in the sense of ‘distribute and
scatter’, and here it refers to the rising of pieces of cloud as the
result of the blow of winds over the water of oceans, since the subject
of the movement of pieces of cloud has been mentioned in the next
sentence, saying: “… That stir up cloud …”

It is interesting that we recite in a tradition from the Prophet of
Islam (p.b.u.h.) that once one of his companions asked him: “O’
Messenger of Allah! How does Allah quickens the dead and what is the
sign of it in the world of creation?”

The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: “Have you not passed by the land of your
tribe while it has been dry and dead, and then you passed by it while it
has become green?”

I said: “Yes, O Messenger of Allah.”

He (p.b.u.h.) said: “In such a way Allah quickens the dead and this is
its sign in the creation.” [^1]

[^1] The Commentary book by Qurtabi-, Vol. 8, P. 5409


