Commentary : Verse 10
=====================

(10) مَن كَانَ يُرِيدُ الْعِزَّةَ فَلِلَّهِ الْعِزَّةُ جَمِيعاً
اِلَيْهِ يَصْعَدُ الْكَلِمُ الطَّيّـِبُ وَالْعَمَلُ الصَّالِحُ
يَرْفَعُهُ وَالَّذِينَ يَمْكُرُونَ السَّيّـِئَاتِ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ شَدِيدٌ
وَمَكْرُ أُوْلَئِكَ هُوَ يَبُورُ

10.“Whoever desires glory, the glory belongs to Allah wholly to Him do
ascend the good words and the righteous deed, He uplifts it; but those
who devise evil deeds, for them is a terrible chastisement, and their
plot shall come to naught.”

**Commentary:**

The real glory is with Allah, not with people, and it is found under
the light of ‘Faith’ and ‘righteous deed.’

Following to this monotheistic discussion, this verse points to the
great error of the pagans who asked their glory from their idols and
thought that believing in the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) caused the dispersion
of people from around them. They used to say: “… ‘If we follow the
guidance with you, we shall be driven out from our land.’ …” The Qur’a-n
says:

“Whoever desires glory, the glory belongs to Allah wholly …”

As Ra-qib has said in Mufrada-t, the Arabic word /‘izzat/ originally
means that state that makes man resisting and mighty. It is for this
reason that the hard and firm lands are called /‘aza-z/ in Arabic.

Since it is only the Pure Essence of Allah that is Mighty, else,
because of their limitation, all creatures can be defeated. Therefore,
the whole glory belongs to Him, and whoever obtains any glory it is from
the endless ocean of His blessing.

During the last hours of his lifetime when Imam Hassan (a.s.) was asked
by one of his companions named Juna-dat-ibn-’Abi-Sufya-n to advise him,
Imam stated some valuable and effective admonitions for him, among which
was this: “If you wish to be ‘honoured’ without having any tribe, and to
have reverence without the power of government, then come out from the
shade of sin of Allah, and settle in the glory of the obedience of
Allah.”

And if we see that some verses of the Qur’a-n introduce glory, besides
Allah, for the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and the believers, (like Sura
Muna-fiqu-n, No. 63, verse 8 which says: “… Honour belongs to Allah and
His Messenger and to the Believers, …”, it is for the reason that they
have earned glory from the rays of the glory of Allah, too.

Then the verse introduces the way of reaching to glory as follows:

“… to Him do ascend the good words and the righteous deed, He uplifts
it; …”

The Qur’a-nic phrase: /’al kalimut?-t?ayyib/ means: ‘pure words’, and
the purity of a speech depends on the purity of its content, and the
purity of content relates to the concepts which adapt to the pure,
brilliant, objective facts. What reality is higher than the Pure Essence
of Allah and His right and just religion, as well as the pure righteous
ones who pave the way of its distribution? Therefore, this holy phrase
has been rendered into correct belief in Origin, Resurrection and
Allah’s religion.

Some of the commentators have rendered the Qur’a-nic phrase: /’al
kalimut?-t?ayyib/ into: ‘there is no god but Allah’, while some others
have rendered it into:
/subha-n-allah-i-wal-hamd-u-lilla-h-i-wala--’ila-ha-’illalla-h-u-wa-lla-h-u-’akbar/,
and some commentators have rendered it, after mentioning there is no god
but Allah, into “Muhammad rasu-l-ulla-h wa ‘Aliyyan waliyyulla-h wa
xali-fata rasu-lihi-”.

Or in some Islamic narrations the Qur’a-nic phrase /’al
kalimut?-t?ayyib/ and /’al ‘amal-us?-s?a-lih/ have been rendered into
the love of Ahl-ul-Bayt (a.s.) or the like of it. All of them are of the
kind of the statement of clear extensions for that vast concept, and
they do not create any limitation in its concept, because every
statement which has a pure and excellent content is entirely found in
this title.

However, the same Lord Who, according to the previous verse, makes the
dead land alive by life-giving drops of rain, furnishes ‘the pure word
and righteous deed’, too, and causes them to reach to the neighbourhood
of His Mercy.

Then the Qur’a-n refers to the opposite point of it, where it says:

“… but those who devise evil deeds, for them is a terrible
chastisement, and their plot shall come to naught.”

Although the corruptive persons imagine that, by injustice, cruelty,
falsehood, and plot, they can obtain a kind of glory for them by means
of wealth, property, and power but at the end they shall understand that
not only they have provided a chastisement for them, but also their
efforts in this way will become naught.

As the Qur’a-n says, there were some people who behaved like this: “And
they have taken gods besides Allah that they might be for them a glory.”
[^1] And there were some hypocrites who imagined themselves as some
honoured ones and the believers as the meaner: “They say: ‘If we return
to Medina, surely the more honourable (element) will expel there from
the meaner’ …” [^2]

[^1] Sura Maryam, No. 19, verse 81

[^2] Sura Al-Muna-fiqu-n, No. 63, verse 8

There were some other persons, who considered the deceit of the
Pharaohs as their own glory, or they sought honour from sin, injustice,
and cruelty, but all of them were defeated. So, it is only faith and
righteous deed which go up toward Allah.

In philology the Arabic word /makr/ means any kind of device, but in
some instances it is used in the sense of the devices that are
accompanied with mischief, and the verse under discussion is among those
instances.

The term /sayyi’a-t/, mentioned in the above verse, refers to all ugly
and evil things which occur, irrespective of creedal evils and practical
ones, and that some commentators have rendered it into the pagans’ plots
for killing or banishing the Prophet of Islam (p.b.u.h.) from Mecca is,
in fact, one of the expansions of it, not its whole concepts.

The Qur’a-nic word /yabu-r/ is derived from /bawa-r/ and /bu-ra-n/
which originally means excess dullness of market, and since this kind of
dullness of market often causes destruction, this word has been used in
the sense of destruction and annihilation.

The whole glory belongs to Allah. Does this state mean something save
reaching to the stage of being Almighty? If it is so, where can glory be
sought, and what can give glory to man?

By a clear analysis we reach this fact that the reality of glory, at
the first degree, is the power which appears in the heart and entity of
man and dissuades him from having humility submission, and collusion in
relation with disobedient and rebellious persons to the command of
Allah. It is a power that with having it one never surrenders to
unlawful lusts and he never obeys his low desires.

It is a power which usually elevates him up to the stage of
impenetrability before any wealth and force.

Does this power originate from any source save from the Faith in Allah,
which is the main source of power and glory?

What was said is only in the stage of thought, belief, soul and spirit;
but in the stage of action, glory originates from some deeds that have
correct root and an accurate program and style. In other words, glory
can be found in ‘righteous deeds’. These two elements give man honour,
greatness, might, and glory.

The world loving sorcerers, contemporary to Pharaoh, began their tricks
in his name and glory. “… and said: ‘By Pharaoh’s dignity we shall
certainly be the victors.”[^1] Yet, before long, they failed from the
shepherd-stick of Moses (a.s.), but when they came out from the cover of
the disgraceful flag of Pharaoh and went under the light of Monotheism
and believed, they became so strong and mighty that the most severe
threats of Pharaoh did not affect on them. They eagerly lost their
hands, feet, and even souls in the cause of Allah and suffered
martyrdom. By this action, they proved that they would surrender neither
to money nor to force. They remained mighty and, today, their honourable
history contains a great deal of instructive lessons for us.

[^1] Sura Ash-Shu'ara-, No. 26, verse 44


**Commentary : Verse 11**

(11) وَاللَّهُ خَلَقَكُم مِن تُرَابٍ ثُمَّ مِن نُّطْفَةٍ ثُمَّ
جَعَلَكُمْ أَزْوَاجاً وَمَا تَحْمِلُ مِنْ أُنثَي وَلاَ تَضَعُ اِلاَّ
بِعِلْمِهِ وَمَا يُعَمَّرُ مِن مُعَمَّرٍ وَلاَ يُنقَصُ مِنْ عُمُرِهِ
إِلاَّ فِي كِتَابٍ اِنَّ ذَلِكَ عَلَي اللَّهِ يَسِيرٌ

11. “And Allah did create you from dust; then from a sperm-drop, then
He made you pairs. And no female conceives nor does she bring forth,
save with His knowledge and none is given long life who is given long
life neither is any diminished in his life, but it is in a Book. Verily
this, for Allah, is easy.”

**Commentary:**

The Arabic word /mu‘ammar/ is called to the owners of a long-life. The
word /‘umr/ is derived from /‘imra-n/ (flourishing state), and since a
person has the ability of flourishing during the time he is alive, the
length of his life is called ‘life-time’.

Some Islamic narrations indicate that charity and visiting one’s kin
cause the life-time to be long, but ‘breaking off connections with one’s
kindred’ and to disgrace parents cause the lifetime to be shortened.
[^1]

In this holy verse, the Qur’a-n states another part of the extroversive
and introversive verses which are, on one side, the evidence over the
Power of Allah and, on the other side, over His Knowledge.

At first, it points to the creation of man in different stages, when it
says:

[^1] Mi-za-n-ul-Hikmah, the word 'life-time'

“And Allah did create you from dust; then from a sperm- drop, then He
made you pairs. …”

These are three stages among the whole stages of the creation of man:
soil, sperm-drop, and the stage of matrimony.

It is certain that man is from dust, not only from this point that all
materials that form the man’s body are derived from dust, and that which
man takes food from, or wherefrom his sperm-drop originates all are
finally found in the materials which are in soil.

Some commentators believe that the concept of ‘the creation of man from
dust’ probably refers only to the first creation, while the creation
from sperm-drop refers to later stages. The first one is the stage of
men’s compendious creation, (because the entity of all human beings has
been extracted in the entity of Adam); and the second is the expansive
stages which are separate from each other.

However, the stage of person’s matrimony is the stage of continuation
of generation and man’s reproduction.

Then it refers to the fourth and the fifth stage of man’s life, viz.,
the subject of ‘pregnancy’ of mothers and their delivery. It says:

“… And no female conceives nor does she bring forth, save with His
knowledge …”

Yes, the subject of pregnancy, and the complicated and very amazing
changes of foetus, then reaching the stage of delivery and the wonderful
variations that, at that sensitive moment, come forth to mothers, from
one side, and to the foetus, on the other side, are so tender and
accurate that is not possible save by relying on the infinite knowledge
of Allah. It is done in a manner that if the governing regulation over
it changes, even very slightly, the program of delivery or delivery
itself will face with disturbance and confusion, and it will come to
destruction.

Each of these five stages of man’s life is more wonderful than the
other.

The inanimate dust is in one side and the wise, alert, and originative
man, the alive, is on the other side. How different they are!

The sperm-drop which has been formed of a few drops of fetid water is
on one end, and the handsome, beautiful, and talented man equipped with
different senses and organs is on the other end.

Next to this stage, there is the subject of variety of man into two
genders: male and female.

Regarding to the abundant differences in the body and soul, there will
come some physiological problems into being each of which takes its own
separate way from the very beginning of the combination of semen and
everyone of them goes toward the duty which has been given to them and
thus they develop.

The next subject is the responsibility of mother which is the
acceptance and bearing of this burden, its protection, its nutrition and
its growth, which has attracted the thoughts of great scientists to
them, and they confess that it is one of the most surprising subjects of
the world of existence.

The last stage of this part of foetus is the stage of birth. It is a
revolutionary stage and completely dangerous, that is accompanied with a
great deal of wonders.

What factors command foetus to come out from the mother’s womb?

How is the complete harmony arranged between this command and readiness
of the limbs of the mother for its execution.

How can foetus totally change the situation to which it has been
accustomed for nine months just in a moment: ceases its relation with
the mother, uses the fresh air, the way of his food from umbilical cord
is suddenly closed, the new way, i.e., the mouth begins to work, the
dark environment of mother is left and the bright environment full of
light is used, and it resists against all these changes and it
immediately adapts itself to them?

Are these things not the best signs to the endless power and knowledge
of Allah? It is a complete injustice that man judges so vainly about his
own creation.

Then the Qur’a-n refers to the sixth and seventh stages of this
wonderful program. It says:

“… and none is given long life who is given long life neither is any
diminished in his life, but it is in a Book. …”

What factors are effective in the length of man’s life? What factors
fight against the continuation of his life? And in short, what factors
must gather and help each other in order that man can continue his
living for one hundred years or less and more! And, finally, what
factors cause the difference in man’s life-time?

All of these things have also some complicated and exact computations
of which none is aware but Allah; and whatever we know in these fields
today comparing with what we do not know is very little and worthless.

The Arabic word /mu‘ammar/ is derived from the word /‘umr/ which is
originally derived from /‘ima-rat/ in the sense of ‘habitation’, and the
fact that the length of man’s living is called lifetime is for the sake
that the habitation of his body is in this time.

This word, /mu‘ammar/, means a person who has a long life. So, the
Qur’a-n concludes the verse with this sentence , saying:

“… Verily this, for Allah, is easy.”

The creation of this wonderful being from ‘dust’ and the initiation of
the creation of a complete man from ‘sperm-drop’, and also the whole
facts concerning ‘genetic state’, conjugality, pregnancy, delivery,
increase and decrease in life-time, whether from the point of power and
from the point of knowledge, and computation of all of them is entirely
easy and simple for Him. These are as a small part of the extroversive
verses that, from one side, they relate and acquaint us with the world
of existence, and, on the other side, they are counted as some valid
proofs upon the possibility of Resurrection.

He Who was able to create a being from ‘dust’ and from sperm-drop for
the first time, is He not able to revive men?

And does He, Who is aware of the minutes of these laws, have any
difficulty in protecting and reckoning of the deeds of people in the
scene of Resurrection?


