Commentary : Verse 12
=====================

(12) وَمَا يَسْتَوِي الْبَحْرَانِ هَذَا عَذْبٌ فُرَاتٌ سَآئِغٌ
شَرَابُهُ وَهَذَا مِلْحٌ أُجَاجٌ وَمِن كُلٍّ تَأْكُلُونَ لَحْماً
طَرِيّاً وَتَسْتَخْرِجُونَ حِلْيَةً تَلْبَسُونَهَا وَتَرَي الْفُلْكَ
فِيهِ مَوَاخِرَ لِتَبْتَغُوا مِن فَضْلِهِ وَلَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ

12.“And not are the two seas alike, the one (is) palatable, and
pleasant to drink, and the other, salt and bitter. Yet from the both you
eat fresh flesh; and you extract ornaments which you wear, and you see
the ships cleave through it that you may seek of His bounty and that you
may be thankful.”

**Commentary:**

The Divine bounties are from His grace and we are not His creditors,
but we may gain something because of our effort and endeavour, so noting
to blessings is a premise to the growth of the essence of
thanksgiving.

Another part of the extroversive verses, which are the signs of His
greatness and power in the creation of the seas, blessings, and their
benefits are referred to in this verse. It says:

“And not are the two seas alike, the one (is) palatable, and pleasant
to drink, and the other, salt and bitter. …”

The Arabic word /‘ao(b/, as Ra-qib says in Mufrada-t, means: pure and
cold, while Lisa-n-ul-‘Arab has rendered it into: ‘Pure water’.

Although, on the first day, the water of these two seas has been sent
down from the sky in the form of some sweet and wholesome drops of rain,
and both of them originate from one source, but they have appeared in
two completely different forms and with various benefits.

It is also wonderful that:

“… Yet from the both you eat fresh flesh; …”

“… and you extract ornaments which you wear, …”

Moreover, you can take enjoy both of them, not only for transportation
but also for carrying your goods, as the verse says:

“… and you see the ships cleave through it that you may seek of His
bounty and that you may be thankful.”

**Some points:**

1- As the Lisa-n-ul-‘Arab says, the Arabic word /fura-t/ is the water
which is in utmost purity and wholesomeness.

The Qur’a-nic word /sa-’iq/ means the water that because of its
wholesomeness is easily swallowed, contrast to the word /milh?/ (a salt
water) and the word /’uja-j/ (a bitter water) that as if this kind of
water hurts the throat and bars the way of the gullet.

2- Some commentators believe that this holy verse is an example to show
the lack of equality between believers and disbelievers, but the verses
before and after it all talk about the signs of creation. Even the last
part of this very verse is the evidence over this fact that this
sentence, too, discusses about the secrets of Unity, and it is an
indication to the variety of the seas and their different effects, and
their common benefits.

3- In this verse three benefits out of abundant benefits of the seas
have been mentioned: foodstuff, means of ornament, and the subject of
transportation.

We know that the seas are one of the important sources of man’s
foodstuff, and every year millions of tons of fresh flesh are taken from
them without that man bears a considerable trouble for it. The system of
creation has arranged a proper program in this regard so that men can
enjoy this vast blessing, the spread Divine food table, without the
least task.

Some different means of ornament, such as: pearl, shell, pearls and
coral are drawn out from the seas. The emphasis of the Qur’a-n on this
subject is for the sake that, contrary to the beasts, the man’s self has
different dimensions one of which is the sense of beauty. This sense is
the origin of the appearance of some artistic, literary and taste
issues, the satiation of which correctly and far from any kind of excess
and defect, and immoderation and extravagance pleases the self and gives
man mirth and calmness, and makes him ready for the heavy affairs of
life.

As for the subject of transportation, which is one of the most
important fillers of human civilization and the man’s social life,
regarding the fact that the seas (and oceans) have covered the main part
of the surface of the earth and, that they relate to each other, they
can do man the best favour in this regard.

The amount of the goods that are transported on the seas and the number
of the passengers who are removed from one place to another on them is
so large that they cannot be compared with any other means of vehicle.
Sometimes it happens that one ship can carry by it the loads as many as
the tens of thousand cars.

4- Of course, the benefits of the seas are not limited to what was said
in the above, and the Qur’a-n does not tend to limit them in these three
aspects. The formation of pieces of cloud, different medicines, oil, the
means of clothing, the fertilizing materials for the uncultivated lands,
having effect on winds, and so on are counted as other favours of the
seas.

5- The emphasis of the Holy Qur’a-n on ‘fresh flesh’ is an expressive
indication to the nutrition benefited from such

fleshes comparing the harms of the stale fleshes, the conserves, and
the like.

6- There arises a question here: the seas with salt water are spread
all over the globe, where is the sea with sweet water?

In answer it must be said: the seas and lakes with sweet water are not
so few in the earth, like the lakes of sweet water in the United States
and the others. Moreover, some great streams are sometimes called sea,
like the great river of Nile which in Arabic has been called /bah?r/
(sea) in the story of Moses. (Sura Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 50, Sura
As-Shu‘ara-, No. 26, verse 63, and Sura Al-’A‘ra-f, No. 70, verse 38)

Moreover, the advance of the water of the great streams into the seas,
regarding the fact that it goes through the salty water therein and does
not mix with it for a length of time, itself forms some seas of sweet
water in different places.

7- The Qur’a-nic sentence: ‘That you may seek of His bounty’ contains a
vast meaning which includes any economical activities which are done by
means of sea-ways.

The last sentence of the verse: ‘That you may be thankful’, has been
mentioned for awakening the sense of thanksgiving in men and it is a
means for theism and theology.

**Be Careful of the Following Points:**
1- The spiritual elements effective in prolongation and, shortening the
life-time: In relation to the discussion stated in the abovementioned
verses about the increase and decrease of lifetime by the command of
Allah, paying attention to the Islamic narrations concerning the
prolonging and shortening of lifetime, a group of Qur’a-nic commentators
have explained some matters in this regard. There are, of course, some
natural factors effective in increasing and decreasing the length of
lifetime most of which have been known to human beings yet,

like correct feeding free from excess and defect, being constantly busy
working and moving, avoidance from any kind of narcotic materials and
dangerous addictions and alcoholic liquors, avoiding the permanent
excitements, and having a strong Faith which can give man peace and
power in the difficulties of life and living.

But, besides these things, there are some factors that their outward
relation with the question of prolongation of life-time is not so clear
to us, while some Islamic narrations have properly emphasized on it. As
a few examples, pay attention to the following narrations:

1- The holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) says: “Verily alms-giving (in the way of
Allah) and union of kindred cause houses to be furnished and prolong the
life-times’.” [^1]

2- He (p.b.u.h.) also has said: “Whoever desires his sustenance to be
increased and his death to be postponed should perform union of
kindred.”

3- Concerning some of sins, like fornication in particular, Islamic
narrations indicate that such sins decrease the length of lifetime.
Among them is the famous tradition of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) in which he
has said: “O’ Muslims! Do avoid fornication which has six sequels: Three
of them are in this world and three of them are in Hereafter. Those
three which are in the world are as these: it causes the worth (and
light) of man to be vanished, brings indigence, and decreases the length
of lifetime. …” [^2]

4- Imam Ba-qir (a.s.) says: “Kindness and hidden alms-giving remove
poverty and increase life-time, and prevent seventy kinds of evil
death.” [^3]

[^1] The Commentary of Nu-r-uth-Thaqalayn, Vol. 4, PP. 354-355

[^2] Ibid

[^3] Safi-nat-ul-Bih)a-r, Vol. 2, P. 23

There are also some indications in Islamic narrations concerning some
other sins, such as injustice, and sins in absolute. Some of the
commentators who have not been able to make difference between the
‘appointed death’ and the ‘sudden death’ have attacked to these
traditions and believe that they are contradictory to the texts of the
Qur’a-n which consider the limit of the length of man’s lifetime fixed
and unchangeable. [^1] Explanation:

No doubt man has two kinds of ‘end of life’:

The appointed term, which is the end of potential ability of man’s body
for continuity of entity, and by its coming everything will end by the
command of Allah.

The sudden death that, with the change of circumstances, the length of
life-time changes. For example, someone commits suicide while if he had
not committed this great sin, he would have been alive for longer years.
Or as the result of using the alcoholic liquors and some narcotic
materials, and excess sensuality, he loses his bodily ability in a short
time, but if these things were absent in his life, he could live for
many longer years.

These are some vivid things which are experimental and comprehensible
for every body and none can deny them.

Concerning the unexpected events, there are also some affairs which are
naturally related to the sudden death; this is not deniable, too.

Therefore, if a great deal of Islamic narrations indicate that
alms-giving in the cause of Allah, or union of kindred cause the length
of lifetime to be prolonged and pests to be removed, in fact, they
depend on these very factors.

[^1] 'A-lu-si-, the Commentary, Vol. 22, P. 164

And if we do not separate these two kinds of the term of death from
each other, the comprehension of many of the issues in relation with
fore-ordination and destiny, and the effect of effort and endeavour in
men’s lives will remain insolvable.

This discussion can be made clear by a simple example. For instance, a
person provides a new car that, according to the different preparations
used in the structure of it, the car can work for example for twenty
years, but upon condition that it would be treated well and the
necessary protections should be applied. In this case the appointed term
of this car is twenty years, not more than that.

But if the necessary protections are not applied, and the car is given
to some unaware experienced and careless persons to ride and they use it
beyond its power and capacity, and every day they take it to work in
rough roads, the life-time of the car may decrease to half or less than
that. This is that very ‘sudden death’ of it.


**Commentary : Verse 13**

(13) يُولِجُ الَّيْلَ فِي النَّهَارِ وَيُولِجُ النَّهَارَ فِي الَّيْلِ
وَسَخَّرَ الشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ كُلٌّ يَجْرِي لأَجَلٍ مُسَمًّي ذَلِكُمُ
اللَّهُ رَبُّكُمْ لَهُ الْمُلْكُ وَالَّذِينَ تَدْعُونَ مِن دُونِهِ مَا
يَمْلِكُونَ مِن قِطْمِيرٍ

13.“He merges the night into the day and He merges the day into the
night, and He has made subservient (to you) the sun and the moon, each
of them running to an appointed time; such is Allah, your Lord; to Him
belongs the kingdom, and those whom you call upon, apart from Him,
possess not (so much as) the skin of a date-stone.”

**Commentary:**

The change of the length of the night and the day, or the gradual
transfer of each of them to another is not casual, but the nature is
subjected to Allah.

Again in this verse, the Qur’a-n points to another part of the signs of
Monotheism and the infinite blessings of Allah so that, by giving
awareness to human beings, it invokes their sense of thanksgiving
alongside the recognition of the real object of worship and dissuades
them from any partnership and superstitious worshipping. It says:

“He merges the night into the day and He merges the day into the night,
…”

The Qur’a-nic term /yu-lij/ is derived from /’i-la-j/ in the sense of
‘to merge’. It may refer to one of the following two meanings, or both
of them: the gradual increase and decrease of the nights and the days
during the year which cause the appearance of different seasons with all
their effects and blessings. The gradual decrease from the night and
adding to the day, and vice versa, is because of the existence of
twilight, which hinders the dangers of sudden transfer from darkness to
light and from light to darkness. It gives human beings enough
preparation to quietly and slowly transfer from one to another without
any danger.

Then the verse refers to the subject of making the sun and the moon
subservient, and says:

“… and He has made subservient (to you) the sun and the moon, …”

What a subservient is higher than this that all of them run in the way
of man’s interests and that they are the source of kinds of favours in
the man’s life. The cloud, the wind, the moon, the sun, and the universe
are all busy in order that men can provide his life well and he would
not be in negligence, and he should always remember the main real origin
of these merits. (Concerning the subservient of the sun and the moon we
had a rather detailed explanation mentioned in the commentary of Sura
Ar-Ra‘d, No. 13, verse 2, and in the commentary of Sura ’Ibra-hi-m, No.
14, verse 33)

But in the meantime that the sun and the moon in full regularity rotate
in their orbits and they are good servants for humankind, the system
which governs over them is not eternal, and even these great stars, with
their much light, will finally become dark and will be destroyed.

So, next to the subject of making them subservient, the Holy Qur’a-n
adds:

“… each of them running to an appointed time; …”

And according to Sura Takwi-r, No. 81, verses 1-2, which say: “When the
sun (with its spacious light) is folded up.” “And when the stars fall,
losing their lustre.” All of them turn to darkness and will become
extinguished.

Some other commentators have delivered here another commentary for the
Qur’a-nic term /’ajal-im-musamma-/ (the appointed term). It refers to
the rotations of the sun and the moon. The first prolongs one year and
the second ends in one month. [^1]

But, regarding to the different usages of this meaning in numerous
verses of the Qur’a-n which have been applied in the sense of ‘the end
of life’, it becomes clear that the said commentary is not correct, and
its commentary is that very first one, i.e., the end of the lifetime of
the sun and the moon. (In this relation, you may refer to Sura An-Nahl,
verse 61, Sura Fa-t?ir, verse 45, Sura Az-Zumar, verse 43, Sura An-Nu-r,
verse 4, and Sura Qa-fir, verse 67)

Then, as a conclusion upon this monastic discussion, the verse
continues saying:

“… such is Allah, your Lord; …”

Allah is the Lord Who has assigned the system of light and darkness and
the accurate movements of the sun and the moon with all their favours.

The verse continues again saying:

[^1] The Commentary of Rauh-ul-Baya-n, and Abul-Futu-h-i-Ra-zi-

“… to Him belongs the kingdom, and those whom you call upon, apart from
Him, possess not (so much as) the skin of a date-stone.”

The Qur’a-nic term /qit?mi-r/, as Ra-qib says in Mufrada-t, is the sign
which exists at the back of the date-stone (a small gap), and according
to Tabarsi- in Majma‘-ul-Baya-n, and Qurtabi- in his commentary book, it
is a thin white skin which has covered over the date-stone thoroughly.
In any case, it indirectly refers to some very small and worthless
beings.

Yes, these idols are neither the source of any benefit, and harm, nor
do they defend you nor of themselves, nor do they have any authority and
possession even over the skin of a dater-stone. Yet, why do you, the
unwise, worship them and demand them to solve your problems?


