Commentary : Verse 14
=====================

(14) إِن تَدْعُوهُمْ لاَ يَسْمَعُوا دُعَآءَكُمْ وَلَوْ سَمِعُوا مَا
اسْتَجَابُوا لَكُمْ وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ يَكْفُرُونَ بِشِرْكِكُمْ وَلاَ
يُنَبّـِئُكَ مِثْلُ خَبِيرٍ

14.“If you call upon them, they will not hear your prayer; and even if
they heard, they would not answer you; and on the Day of judgment they
will deny your partnership; and none can inform you like (the One Who
is) aware.”

**Commentary:**

On the Day of Hereafter, the naughty objects of worship will repudiate
and hate the polytheists. They will say to them that you polytheists did
not use to worship them (the idols) but you were the servants of your
own conjectures and your low desires.

Man reaches a point where he leaves out the invitation of Allah, the
Hearer, the Responder, “… Call on Me; I will answer your (prayer) …” and
goes to some dumb, blind and useless solid bodies. That is why
addressing the polytheists, the Holy Qur’a-n says:

“If you call upon them, they will not hear your prayer; …”

They do not answer you, because they are but some pieces of stone and
wood which are inanimate bodies and have no sense. And supposing they
were able to hear your moan, invocation, and persistence they would
never have the ability of answering to your needs. The verse continues
saying:

“… and even if they heard, they would not answer you; …”

It became clear that they do not own any benefit and harm even as much
as the thin skin of a date-stone in the world of existence, yet how do
you expect them to do something for you or to solve a problem?

Moreover, this fact is higher than that:

“… and on the Day of judgment they will deny your partnership; …”

They will say: O’ Lord! these did not worship us, but they, in fact,
worshipped their own carnal desire.

This witness is done by non-verbal language that whoever looks at idols
he hears this statement from them by the ear of his conscience. Or the
same Lord Who on that Day makes the man’s limbs, organs, and skin of the
body speak, will order them to talk and they will bear witness that
these deviated polytheists used to worship, in fact, their own
conjectures and carnal desires.

This holy verse is similar to the content of verse 28 in Sura Yu-nus,
No. 10 which says: “And the Day We shall muster them all, then We shall
say to those who associated others (with Us): ‘Get you to your place!
You and your associates’, then We shall set a space between them, and
their associates shall say: ‘It was not us (indeed) that you used to
worship!’ ”

For more emphasis, at the end of the verse the Holy Qur’a-n says:

“… and none can inform you like (the One Who is) aware.”

**A Notable Point:**

Through the commentary of the previous verses, it became clear that the
purpose of the sentence: “If you call upon them, they will not hear your
prayer, …”, mentioned in the verse under discussion, is idols which have
neither a hearing ear to listen to the demands of their worshippers, nor
if they had, they would not be able to solve any problem, nor do they
possess anything and any authority.

But in order to cease the communication of the Muslims with the Prophet
of Islam (p.b.u.h.) and the great leaders by the way of seeking
supplicating and intercession, some outwardly Muslims have taken hold of
this verse and the like of it and have said that all those whom you call
besides Allah, even the prophets, do not hear your word and if they
heard they would not answer. Or they have seized Sura Al-’A‘ra-f, No. 7,
verse 197 which says: “And those whom you call upon other than Him can
neither help you, nor help themselves.”, and the like.

Thus, they negate any supplicating to the souls of prophets and the
Imams and count it contrast to Monotheism. While a simple glance over
the verses which are before these verses and after them are sufficient
to perceive this fact that the purpose of the verse is idols, because
the words in all these verses are about idols; the words are about the
pieces of stone and wood that they considered as the partners of Allah.
And they believed in a power for them in the face of the Power of
Allah.

But who is the one who does not know that the Divine prophets and the
friends of Allah are like the martyrs in the cause of Allah about whose
life the Qur’a-n explicitly speaks, saying that they have the purgatory
life, and we know that in the purgatory life the activity of the soul is
vaster and more expanded, because it has been delivered from the worldly
needs and material curtains. This is from one side.

On the other side, no doubt, supplicating to these pure souls does not
mean that we have considered any independence for them against Allah,
but the aim is that we get help from their honour and their position
with Allah, and that we seek help from the reverence and greatness they
have in the Court of Allah, and this is the exact Unity and servitude of
Allah.

Therefore, as the Qur’a-n explicitly says in the subject of
intercession, they intercede only by the leave and command of Allah: “…
Who is it that can intercede with Him save by His leave? …” [^1] Also,
supplicating to them is from this way and of this kind.

Who can reject the clear verses of supplicating? Or may he imagine this
act as polytheism and stands against the Qur’a-n and claims Monotheism?
They are but some proud ignorant persons who bring these subjects forth
to create separation between Muslims.

We study in the biography of the companions of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.)
that for their difficulties they used to go beside the tomb of the
Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and resorted and sought help from his pure soul in
the Presence of God.

As Biyhaqi-, the famous traditionist of the Sunnites, Narrates that
there happened a draught and famine at the time of the second Kalif.
Then Bila-l, accompanied with a group of Companions of the holy Prophet
(p.b.u.h.), went beside the Prophet’s grave, and said such: “O’
Messenger of Allah! Seek rain for your Ummah … for verily they have
annihilated.” [^2]

Some of the commentators of the Sunnites, like ’A-lu-si-, have narrated
many traditions in this regard. After a discussion and strictness
concerning these traditions, at last he says:

“Next to all these statements, I do not see any hinder in resorting to
Allah by the rank of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) whether at the time of his
life and after his death.” Then he also adds the names of some others
who have a rank with Allah and confesses to the admissibility of
resorting to them. (Rauh-ul-Ma‘a-li-)

[^1] Sura Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 255

[^2] Kita-b-ut-Taqas)s)ul 'ila- Haghighat-it-Tawassul.


**Section 3 : Every people on earth had a Warner Commentary : Verse
15**

If Allah wills He will take of any people He pleases and bring a new
generation of His Own choice – None shall bear the burden of another –
Alike cannot be the blind and the seeing, darkness and light, shade and
heat or the living and the dead – There is no people which had not a
Warner, thus every people on earth had a Warner

(15) يَآ أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ أَنتُمُ الْفُقَرَآءُ اِلَي اللَّهِ وَاللَّهُ
هُوَ الْغَنِيُّ الْحَمِيدُ

15. “O people! You are the needy unto Allah; and Allah (alone) is He
Who is the Self-Sufficient, the Praised.”

**Commentary:**

None is there to be free from want from Allah (s.w.t.), and all beings
are needy, but since Man disobeys, he should be controlled.

Following to the emphasized invitation to Monotheism and struggle
against all kinds of polytheism and idolatry mentioned in the previous
verses, this misconception may appear in some individuals that what is
the need of Allah to our worshipping that He persists on it and
emphasizes it so much? Therefore, in order to state this fact that it is
we who are in need of his worship, and He is not in need of our worship,
in this verse the Qur’a-n says:

“O people! You are the needy unto Allah; and Allah (alone) is He Who is
the Self-Sufficient, the Praised.”

What a worthy and important statement it is that makes clear our
situation in the scene of the world of existence before the One Who has
given us our existence! The verse opens many puzzles in this regard and
answers to a great deal of questions.

Yes, the One really free from need and Self-Subsistent in the whole
world of existence is He Who is Allah. All human beings, or it is better
to say all beings are thoroughly needy and they are dependant to that
Independent Existence that if their relation is ceased from Him, even
for a moment, they are nothing.

Therefore, none should bow and submit to other than Him, and demand
other than Him to provide his needs, because they all are in need of
Him, too. Even dignifying the Divine prophets and leaders of the Truth
is for the sake that they are His messengers and His deputies and they
absolutely have no independence from themselves. Thus He is both
Self-Sufficient and Praised, that is, in the meantime that He is
Self-Sufficient, He is so generous and kind that He is worthy of any
sort of praise and gratitude; and also, in the mid-time that He is
gracious and kind to the servants, He is Self-Sufficient of all.

Being attentive to this fact produces two positive effects on the
believing persons. From one side, it causes them to come down from the
horse of pride, selfishness, and disobedience, and warns them that they
have not anything from themselves to boast for it, and whatever they
have they are the deposits of Allah with them. And on the other side,
they should not ask their needs from other than Allah, and they do not
put the yoke of servitude of other than Him on their necks. They must
deliver themselves from all possessions so that all others become
servants of theirs.

By this kind of concept and theology, whatever the true believers see
in the world they know them from His source, and no means may cause them
to be neglectful from the cause of causes.


