Publisher’s Foreword
====================

We are pleased to present this book, The Revolution of al-Husayn: Its
Impact on the Consciousness of Muslim Society, by Hujjat al-Islam Shaykh
Muhammad Mahdi Shams al-Din, Vice-President of the Supreme Shi’ite
Council in the Lebanon, to the reading public.

The Book
--------

Imam al-Husayn, peace be with him, created a momentous Islamic
revolution, which has continued to live as history has gone by and still
provides writers with vitality and inspiring material. Despite the
passing of time, it is a revolutionary torch whose light guides
revolutionaries and those who struggle to proclaim and support the truth
and to resist and oppose the symbols of falsehood. For more than
thirteen centuries, writers of different groups, inclinations and ideas
have continued to write books and studies about this revolution.

Yet neither has its spring been exhausted nor have the streams which
flow from it run dry. It is the same as it was at the blessed time it
took place in terms of its great significance.

This book about the revolution of al-Husayn is considered one of the
most original works on the subject, an originality which the author
indicates in his own preface. With this in mind, we wanted to have this
work translated from its original Arabic into English for two important
purposes.

Firstly, we wanted to make those non-Muslims, who only speak English in
many parts of the world, aware of the eternal quality of al-Husayn’s
revolution so that they could understand its social circumstances and
its influence on men.

This revolution is unique when considering the history of revolutions
aimed at reforming society which abound in Islamic history, in terms of
its ideology and its heroism. Similarly it represents the highest degree
of self-sacrifice for the sake of religious principles and to free man
from slavery and individualistic despotism.

Secondly, the secret of the lasting nature of this pioneering
revolution, which, despite the passing of thirteen centuries still keeps
alive the crucial position, which it had on the day it took place, as a
vital agent in creating acts of heroism, embodying self-sacrifice and
teaching men the way of noble sacrifice for the sake of achieving a
noble aim.

The rising of al-Husayn was not merely a tragedy arising spontaneously
out of the injustice of man. Nor was it a manifestation of family or
personal struggle against the government or authority. It was much more
exalted and greater than that. It was for the sake of preserving the
Islamic religion and its great benefits for saving humanity from
persecution and slavery.

The Author
----------

The author, Hujjat al-Islam Shaykh Muhammad Mahdi Shams al-Din, is one
of the scholars and illustrious personalities of the Ithna
‘Ashari’Shi’ites. He is from a family whose roots in learning are deep,
going back to al-Shahid al-Awwal, Jamal al-Din Muhammad ibn Makki
al-‘Amili (d.786 A.H.) This family has been well-known in Mount ‘Amil in
the Lebanon since the rise of scholarship in that region.

The author was educated at the Religious College in Najaf where he
studied the Arabic language, rhetoric, logic, jurisprudence, the
principles of jurisprudence and Tradition under the great figures and
teachers of that college. At the same time he acquired great knowledge
of literature, history and other aspects of human learning.

However, he did not consolidate his great ability as a scholar and
extend the area of his horizons until, after he had passed the first
stage of the studies required for students of religious education, he
moved on to the stage of being lectured directly by the mujtahids and
marji’s (the most important Shi’ite scholars who lead the Shi’ite
community in all aspects of faith while the twelfth Imam is in
occultation).

Then he studied under such great authorities in the sciences of
jurisprudence and the principles of jurisprudence as the late Ayatullah
Sayyid Muhsin al-Hakim and Ayatullah Sayyid Abu’l Qasim al-Khu’i.

He participated in the foundation of some of the cultural organizations
in Najaf and the College of Law, where he gave lessons in Islamic
history and jurisprudence. He represented the late Ayatullah Sayyid
al-Hakim, for a number of years, in the province of Diwaniyya, which is
one of the important tribal provinces in Iraq. He also took part in many
of the religious and cultural celebrations in Iraq.

After that he moved to Beirut in the Lebanon. There he worked with great
effort to initiate cultural and religious schemes, especially in matters
concerned with raising the standards in the south of the country. He was
given the office of Vice-President of the Supreme Shi’ite Islamic
Council. He has had to work there in a presidential capacity since the
disappearance of Musa al-Sadr.

Despite his being occupied with events in the Lebanon and the civil war
there, he has continued to support the Islamic Publishing House with his
valuable works which give expression to basic Islamic ideals and
spiritual direction to those setting out to study Islamic culture.

Among those works produced by Hujjat al-Islam Shaykh Muhammad Mahdi
Shams al-Din is this book, The Revolution of al-Husayn, which we present
to the English reading public. We have every confidence that we have
made a good choice. God, may He be exalted, is the One Who guides in the
right direction.

The Muhammadi Trust

Author’s Preface
----------------

What is the significance of giving the quality of immortality to any one
man, to any one historical event, or to any great accomplishment of mind
and heart which one man has achieved?

We constantly, or at least sometimes, feel the need for it. We go back
to such an immortal man to read, to listen and to see his story, and we
recall his life. We go back to such an immortal event so that we can
make it live again in our minds and hearts. We enrich our life by it, we
ennoble our existence through it, and we illuminate our paths through it
and its author. We go back to the glories of the human genius so that we
may quench our hearts’ thirst for truth and beauty through them.

How and why is immortality ordained for some men, or some events, or
some great acts?

It is because they encompass the eternally living reality.

There are men, events and impressions which are concerned with what is
false, counterfeit and artificial. However, the latter will not endure
in the life of man. Soon the false and the counterfeit in them will be
revealed, and then people will dismiss them from their lives which
constantly seek to correct themselves.

There are others which encompass only a limited extent of the reality.
The life of such a man is limited by his contribution to the life of
man.

There are others which encompass the eternal living reality which is
associated with the unceasing creative activity of mind and heart. This
is always immortal because it answers an increasing need in the mind and
heart of man and in his greatest aspirations and hopes.

This is the factor which applies, with a miraculous exactitude, to
al-Husayn and his revolution. We go back to him in all the stages of his
life and we go back to him in the climax of that life, his revolution.
We make it live again and we try to understand it. We live with him in
all its stages, from its beginning to its bloody but resplendent ending.
We are affected by it because, after we have discovered it, we have
discovered ourselves in it: we have discovered part of our heart, part
of our aspirations, part of our humanity in it. From it we have heard
more than a call which summons the noblest things which human creativity
encompasses.

This is the underlying reason for the fact that his revolution has
penetrated into the depths of the popular consciousness of the Islamic
community, in general, and of Shi’ite Muslims, in particular, so that it
has becomes part of the general cultural environment of a Shi’ite, which
has shared, and continues to share even now, an important role in the
formation of his cultural identity and his social and political
morality.

We should observe that the revolution of al-Husayn, among all the
revolutions in the history of Islam which, itself, abound in
revolutions, is the only revolution whose memory is still as alive and
fresh to Muslims in the present time as it was to Muslims in the past.

Of all the revolutions it is the only one which has entered into the
depths of popular consciousness so that it has enriched it and been
enriched by it. It has enriched popular consciousness by its slogans,
its ideas, its morality and its noble aims. It has been enriched by
popular consciousness by the latter’s endeavours and aspirations through
the ages.

That is only because it is the matrix of revolutions in the history of
Islam. It is, as we said in our book The Rising of al-Husayn: Its Social
Circumstances and Its Human Effects, ‘…the spearhead in revolutionary
history. It is the first revolution which mobilized people and set them
on the long bloody path, the path of struggle, after they had been about
to lose their spirit for struggle through the effects of the policy of
the Umayyads’.[^1]

It is the only one among the revolutions in Islamic history which has
set in motion a torrent of poetic and intellectual creativity, which
began in the year 61 A.H. and has not ceased to the present day.

This book is a pioneering attempt to study the existence of the
revolution of Imam al-Husayn and its manifestations in popular
consciousness. It follows my previous books about the revolutions of
al-Husayn:

(i) The Rising of al-Husayn: Its Social Circumstances and Its Human
Effects[^2] and

(ii) The Supporters of al-Husayn: A Study of the Martyrs of the
Revolution of al-Husayn – the Men and the Evidence.[^3]

If God grants us success, a fourth book about the revolution of
al-Husayn will follow these with the title, The Story of the Rising.
With that our study of all aspects of the revolution of al-Husayn will
be complete.

Then God willing, we shall be able to apply ourselves to the revolutions
which follow al-Husayn’s revolution, thereby fulfilling the promise we
made in The Revolution of al-Husayn when we said: The study of Islamic
history, by means of the revolution, will give a truer and more exact
picture than what emerges when this history is studied in the
traditional manner which has no difference between whether it is a study
of epochs or ruling dynasties.

We pray to God Almighty that He makes this work of ours and our other
works a step towards attaining His approval and that He accepts it
favorably and makes it of use. Praise be to God, Lord of the Universe.

**The Author**

[^1]: Thawrat al-Husayn: Zurufuha al-Ijtima’iyya wa-Atharuha
al-Insaniyya (5th ed., Beirut, 1977), 236.

[^2]: Op.cit.

[^3]: Ansar al-Husayn: Dirasa ‘an Shuhada’ Thawrat al-Husayn – al-Rijal
wa al-Dalalat (Beirut, 1975).


