The Nature of This Work
=======================

Our Philosophy is a collection of our basic notions concerning the world
and our way of understanding it. For this reason, the book, with the
exception of the Introduction, is divided into two investigations: one
concerned with the theory of knowledge, and the other, with the
philosophical perspective of the world.

The task of the first investigation undertaken can be summarized as
follows:

To provide evidence for the [rationality] logic which asserts that the
rational method of thought is sound, and that the mind - as it is
equipped with necessary knowledge prior to experience - is the primary
criterion of human thought. There can be no philosophical or a
scientific thought that does not submit to this general criterion. Even
the experience that empiricists claim to be the primary criterion is not
in reality anything but an instrument for applying the rational
criterion. The experiential theory cannot dispense with the rational
treasure.

To study the value of human knowledge, and to show that one can admit
that knowledge has a [true] value on the basis of rational logic, and
not on the basis of dialectical logic which cannot give knowledge a true
value.

Our basic purpose in this investigation is to determine the book's
method in the second investigation, since the positioning of a general
notion concerning the world depends, in the first place, on determining
the principal method of thought, the general criterion of true
knowledge,[^1] and the extent of (p. 8) the value of true knowledge.
That is why the first investigation is in fact a preparatory discussion
for the second. The second investigation of the work is the basic
investigation, to which we would like to direct the reader's attention
in particular.

The discussion of the second investigation is covered in five parts. In
the first part, we present the philosophical notions in conflict and
their identifications. We will also offer some clarification of these
notions.

In the second part, we will take up the dialectic ideologies, since it
is the best-known method on which modern materialism rests today. Thus,
we will study objectively and in detail all the major ideas of the
dialectic that were formulated by Hegel[^2] and Karl Marx[^3], the two
dialectic philosophers.

In the third part, we will study the principle and laws of causality
that govern the world, as well as the comprehensive philosophical
explanation of the world that causality offers us. We will also treat a
number of philosophical doubts that have emerged in light of recent
scientific developments.

From there, we will move to the fourth part [concerning] matter and
God[^4]. This discussion relates to one of the final stages of the
conflict between materialism and theology, so that we can form our
theological notion of the world in light of the philosophical laws and
the various natural and human sciences.

In the final part, we will study one of the most significant
philosophical problems namely, that of knowledge - which constitutes an
important area of conflict between materialism and metaphysics. The
discussion is treated on philosophical grounds and in light of the
various sciences that are related to the subject, be they natural,
physiological or psychological.

This is a general, comprehensive outline of the book. It is now in your
hands as a result of ten months of successful efforts that led to its
production in the present form. I greatly hope that it will carry out
faithfully and sincerely something of the holy message. (p. 9). I ask
the dear reader to study the investigations of this work in an objective
fashion, with complete concentration and reflection, judging, in
conformity, or against it, on the precise philosophical and scientific
criteria available to him, and not emotionally.

Further, I do not wish to have him read the book as he would read a play
or a kind of intellectual or literary luxury. The book is not a play, a
literary piece, or an intellectual luxury. Rather, at heart, it is
concerned about the problems of reflective human beings.

My success is only from God on Whom I have relied and to Whom I resort.

An-Najaf al-Ashraf, Rabi' ath-Thani, 29, 1879 A.H., Muhammad Baqir
as-Sadr

[^1]: Al-ma'rifa as-sahiha. But is it not redundant to speak of true
knowledge? Is there such a thing as false knowledge, for example?

[^2]: Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, German philosopher (1770-1831). He
taught that the rational is the real, and the real is the rational.
Opposites are essential elements of change, as Heraclitus had believed.
The pattern of change takes the form of triads: thesis, antithesis and
synthesis. His best-known works are: The Phenomenology of Mind (1807 ),
Science of Logic (1812-16), Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1817 ), The
Philosophy of Right (1820). His students' notes functioned as the basis
for his lectures on the philosophy of history and the philosophy of
religion which were published posthumously.

[^3]: Karl Marx (1818-83). Marx began his intellectual life as a left
Hegelian. In 1844, he became a political activist, a known radical
figure and a friend of Friedrich Engels. His friendship with Engels led
to their joint work, The Manifesto of the Communist Party (1848). The
first volume of his other important work, Capital, was published in
1859.

[^4]: AI-madda aw al-lah (matter or God). In this chapter, the author
tries to determine whether it is matter or God that is the primary cause
of the world.


