Introduction: The Social Issue
==============================

The world problem that preoccupies human thought today and touches its
core reality is that of the social system. This problem can be summed up
in the endeavour to give the most truthful answer to the following
question: 'Which system is good for human beings and provides them with
a happy social life?'

Naturally, this problem occupies an important position, and is, with its
complexity and variety of kinds of efforts for solving it, a source of
danger for humankind itself. This is so because the system is an aspect
of the consideration of human life and affects the innermost structure
of its existence.
This problem is deeply rooted in the distant times of human history.

Mankind has confronted is ever since it arose in actual social life.
[Primitive] communal human [living] began exemplified in a number of
individuals joined together, united by common relations and bonds. But
these relations, which were formed to satisfy the requirements of
instinct and nature, were, as a matter of fact, in need of guidance and
organization. It is on the basis of the extent of harmony between such
organization and human reality and welfare that the stability and
happiness of society depend.

This problem has driven humanity to plunge into a long struggle in the
ideological and political fields, and into different kinds of conflicts,
and of various intellectual doctrines (p. 12) that seek to establish and
construct the social edifice, as well as to formulate its designs and to
posit its principles. This is a delicate struggle full of tragedies and
injustice, and overflowing with laughter and tears.

Happiness and misery were linked together in it. All of this was due to
the expressions of deviation and estrangement from the proper social
condition that were represented in [various] social forms. Were is not
for flashes of light that shone at certain moments in the history of
this planet, human society would have been living in constant misery,
and continuously swimming in overwhelming waves.

We do not wish at the present to discuss [all] the aspects of the human
struggle in the social field. It is not our purpose in this study to
write a history of human misery and environments in which for a long
time humankind has experienced vacillation in fortune. Rather, we wish
to accompany mankind in its present reality and in the objectives it has
attained. By so doing, we know the end to which humankind's march must
lead, and the natural shore toward which the ship unavoidably pushes its
way, and then, anchors at its [side]; so that it attains peace and
goodness, and returns to a stable life full of justice and happiness,
after a long painful struggle, and wide travels to various points, in
different directions.

The Social Schools of Thought
-----------------------------

The most important social schools of thought that pervade general human
thought today, and that are ideologically or politically in conflict
among each other, according to the relevance of their social existence
to the lives of human beings are four in number. (1) the capitalistic
democratic system; (2) the socialistic system; (3) the communistic
system (p. 18); and (4) the Islamic system.

Two of these four systems partition the world today. The capitalistic
democratic system forms the basis of government for a large region of
the earth, while the communistic system prevails in another large
region. Each of the two systems enjoys great political stature that
protects it in its conflict with the other, and that arms it in the
gigantic battle that its heroes fight to seize the leadership of the
world and unify the social system in it.

Regarding the communistic and Islamic systems, they are in actuality
purely ideological. However, the Islamic system was tried as one of the
most magnificent and successful social systems. After that, it was
crippled when the scene became bereft, or almost bereft, of principled
leaders.

The attempt continued at the hands of pile who neither embraced Islam
nor felt the elision of its spirit and substance. Thus, it failed to
stand defiant and to continue. Hence, the Islamic structure was
destroyed. [With this], the Islamic system continued, [cherished] as an
idea in the mind of the Islamic nation, as a doctrine in the hearts of
Muslims, and as a hope seeking realization by the snuggling Muslim
children.

As for the communistic system, it is an idea that has not yet been fully
tried. Rather, a the present, its leaders attempt to prepare for it the
(proper] social atmosphere which they failed to apply when they seized
power. Then they proclaimed the socialistic system and applied it as a
step coward reel communism.

Now, why concerns us about these systems? For what position must we
devote our lives, and toward the shore of which position must we steer
the ship? (p. 14)

1. Capitalistic Democracy
-------------------------

Let us begin with the capitalistic democratic system. Thin system puts
an end to a kind of injustice in economic life, to dictatorial rule in
political life, and to the stagnation of the church and its ideational
life. Capitalistic democracy tightened the reins of power and influence
for a new group of rulers that replaced earlier ones, and adopted the
same social role played by their predecessors, but used a new style.

Capitalistic democracy is based on unlimited confidence in the
individual, and in the fact that the individual's personal interests
naturally ensure the interests of society in various areas. The idea of
such a state is that it seeks to protect the individuals and their
personal interests. Therefore, it is not permissible for it to go beyond
the limits of this purpose in its activities and in the fields of its
operations. The capitalistic democratic system can be summed up in the
declaration of the four types of freedom: political freedom, economic
freedom, ideational freedom and individual freedom.

Political freedom dictates that the words of every individual be heard,
and that his evaluation of the general life of the nation be respected,
[as in] laying down the nation's plans in its legislation,[^1] and in
assigning the powers entrusted with its defense. This is because the
social system of a nation and its ruling organization is a maser
directly related to the life of every one of its individuals and has a
great influence on his happiness or misery. It is, therefore, natural
that every individual has the right to participate in constructing the
system and government.

If the social condition is, as we have already stated, a matter of life
and death and a matter of happiness and misery for the citizens to whom
the laws and general systems are applied, it is then also natural not to
evolve its responsibility upon an individual or a specific group (p. 15)
of individuals, regardless of circumstance, as long as there is no
individual above emotions and errors because of his unblemished
intentions and his weighty mind.

It is necessary, therefore, to advocate complete equality of political
rights among all citizens; for all citizens are equally subject to the
effects of social conditions, and equally submit to the requirements of
legal and executive powers. It is on the basis of this [equality] that
the right to vote and the principle of a general election were
established. These ensure that the ruling organization, in all its
powers and members, comes from the majority of citizens.

Economic freedom relies on confidence in a free economy, and is
determined to open all channels [of opportunity] and to prepare all
fields. In the economic field the citizen is permitted ownership[^2] of
both consumption and production. This productive ownership, from which
capital is formed, is available to all people equally, without
limitation or restriction, and to all of them equally. Thus, every
individual ]gas the full freedom to pursue any approach and to take up
any path for acquiring, enlarging and multiplying his wealth in
accordance with his personal interests and benefits.

Some of the defenders of this kind of economic freedom make the
following claims. Firstly, the laws of political economy that are
naturally concordant with general principles insure the happiness of
society and the retention of its economic balance. Secondly, personal
interest, which is a strong incentive and a real goal of the individual
in his work and activity, is the best insurance of the general social
welfare.

Thirdly, the competition that takes place in the free market as a result
of producers and merchants exercising their equal right to economic
freedom is alone sufficient for realizing the spirit of justice and
fairness in the various contracts and deals.

Thus, natural economic laws almost mechanically intervene - for example,
to conserve the normal price level. That is, if the price becomes higher
than its normal and just limits, the demand falls, in accordance with
the natural law that dictates that a rise in price affects the fall in
demand, and that the fall in demand leads, in rum, (p. 16) to a lowering
of the price, in order that another natural law is satisfied. The fall
in demand persists in this fashion, until it brings the price down to
its previous level. With this, deviation is eliminated [in the long
run].

Personal interest always requires the individual to think of ways to
increase and improve production, while decreasing its cost and expenses.
This fulfills the interest of society, when at the same time it is also
considered something proper to the individual.

Competition naturally requires the fixing of the prices of goods and the
salaries of employees and service personnel justly, and free from
wrongdoing and prejudice. For every salesman or producer is weary of
raising the price of his goods or lowering the salaries of his
employees, because others, including salesmen and producers are
competing against him.

Ideational freedom dictates that people must have a life of ideological
and doctrinal freedom. That is, they must be able to think in any manner
that they see fit and that appeals to their intellects; and uphold
whatever [views] they have arrived at as a result of their own efforts
or the inspiration of their desires and inclinations, without being
hampered by the government. It also dictates the freedom of expressing
one's thoughts and doctrines and of defending one's points of view and
interpretations.

Individual freedom expresses the liberation of the personal conduct of a
human being from various kinds of pressures and limitations. Thus, he
has control over his will and its development in accordance with his own
desires, regardless of the complications and consequences that may occur
as a result of his exercise of this power over his personal conduct, as
long as his power does not conflict with others' powers over their
conduct.

Hence, the final limit on the individual freedom of everyone is the
freedom of others. Thus, unless the individual misuses this kind of
freedom, he will not be harmed by living in any manner he pleases, and
pursuing the various habits, traditions, slogans and rituals that he
seeks to enjoy, because it is a matter of his existence, his present and
his future. As long as he has this existence, he has the power to manage
it as he wishes.

Religious freedom in the opinion of capitalism that calls for it is
nothing but (p. 17) an expression of ideational freedom in its doctrinal
form, and of the individual freedom in the practical form, that is
related to slogans and conduct.

One can conclude from this exposition that a major ideological point in
this system is that, as mentioned, the interests of society are embodied
in the interests of individuals. Thus, the individual is the basis on
which the social system must be established. The good state is that
organization that can be used for the service and for the sake of the
individual, and that is a strong instrument for preserving and
protecting his interests.

These are the basic principles of capitalistic democracy due to which a
number of revolutions have occurred, and for whose sake many people and
nations struggled under leaders who, whenever they spoke of this new
system and enumerated its advantages, it was [as though] they described
the heavens with its paradise and its happiness, as well as the liberty,
well-being, dignity and richness that it promises.

Later on, a number of amendments were added to this kind of democracy,
but they did not affect its innermost substance. Rather, it continued
with its most important principles and fundamentals.

### I. The Materialistic Tendency in Capitalism

It is clear that this social system is a purely materialistic system
that people adopted, separating themselves from their source and final
end, and limiting themselves to the beneficial side of their material
life. People adopted[^3] [this system] along these lines.

But this system, which was at the same time full of a tyrannical
materialistic spirit, was not established on a materialistic philosophy
of life and a detailed study of it. Life in the social atmosphere of
this system was separated from any relation external to the limits of
material things and benefits. However, setting up this system did not
assume a complete philosophical comprehension of this process of
separation. I do not mean by this that the world did not have schools of
the materialistic philosophy and defenders of it.

Indeed, an advent of the (p. 18) materialistic tendency resulted from
the influence of the empirical mentality that had prevailed ever since
the Industrial Revolution.[^4] Its prevalence was due firstly to the
intellectual spirit of doubt and confusion that was caused by the change
in opinion concerning a number of notions that were considered among the
clearest and most sound truths;[^5] and secondly the spirit of rebellion
and anger against the alleged religion that caused thoughts and
intellects to stagnate, appealed to wrongdoing and power, and supported
social corruption in every battle is waged against the weak and the
persecuted.[^6] (p. 19)

These three factors helped materialism arise in many Western
mentalities. All of this is true, but the capitalistic system does not
center on a materialistic philosophical notion of life. This is a
contradiction and a failure; for the social consideration of life is
linked to the reality of life, and is not case in a sound form unless it
is established on a central basis that explicates life, its reality and
its limits.

The capitalistic system lacks this basis. It involves in its innermost
spirit deceit and misguidance, speed and impatience, since it freezes
the actual situation of life, and studies the social conditions in
isolation from it. This is so, in spite of the fact that the essence of
the ideological standard for the system [was] from the very beginning
defined by its view of the reality of life that supplies society with
social material - this being the relations exchanged among people - of
the method of its understanding this reality, and of discovering its
secrets and values.

Thus, if humankind existed on this planet due to the skill of a
governing and protective power who knew of their secrets and mysterious
affairs, their expressions and details of their lives, and took charge
of organizing and guiding them, it is then natural that in orientation
and style of living, they would submit to this creative power, since it
is more discerning of their affairs, more knowledgeable of their reality
and with loftier intentions, and is more moderate than they are.

Further, if this limited life is the beginning of an attempt to reach an
eternal life that proceeds from this present one, is colored by its
style, and has standards that depend on the degree of moderation and
loftiness shown in this life, then it is natural to organize the present
life in a way [befitting] to the initial stage of a life free from
destruction, and to establish it on both spiritual and material
principles.

Hence, the issue of faith in God and life's origin in Him is not a
purely intellectual issue unrelated to life and isolated from the fields
of life, nor is it something for which separate methods and rules must
be enacted, while ignoring and setting aside the issue of life. Rather,
it is an issue related to the mind, to the heart and to life together.

Capitalistic democracy itself offers evidence for the relation of faith
to life (p. 20) in the idea that this system is presented on faith in
the absence of an individual or a group of individuals who have attained
a certain degree of infallibility with respect to their intentions,
inclinations, opinions and interpretations that makes it possible to
entrust them with the social affairs [of the people] and to rely on them
for establishing a good life for the nation.

But there is no room for this basis [of faith], nor does it make any
sense, except if it is grounded in a purely materialistic philosophy
that does not admit the possibility that the system proceeds from
anything other than a limited human mind.

Thus, the capitalistic system is materialistic in every sense of the
term. It either internalizes materialism, while lacking the courage to
declare its being linked to it and based on it; or it is ignorant of the
extent of the natural link between the actual and social situations of
life. Due to this, capitalistic democracy is devoid of the philosophy on
which every social system must rest. In a word, it is a materialistic
system, even though it is not based on a dearly outlined materialistic
philosophy.

### II. The Position of Ethics in Relation to Capitalism

Because the capitalistic system was filled with the spirit of
materialism, morality was removed from the picture. It was nowhere to be
found in the system. Put more correctly, its notions and criteria
underwent a change. The individual interest was declared as the highest
objective, and all kinds of freedom as means for fulfilling that kind of
interest. This resulted in most of the severe trials, catastrophes,
tragedies and misfortunes that the modern world has experienced.

Supporters of capitalistic democracy may defend this system's
perspective on the individual and his personal interests by saying that
the individual's aim is in itself a fulfillment of the social interest,
and the results that morality achieves by its spiritual principles are
achieved in a capitalistic democratic society, yet not by way of
morality, but by way of having and serving individual motives. For when
a human being performs asocial service (p. 21), he also fulfills a
personal interest, since he is a part of the society for whose sake he
works.

Moreover, when he rescues the life of an individual in danger, he, too,
derives a benefit from that, since the [redeemed] living individual will
perform a service for the social organization. Thus, the rescuer regains
a portion of this service. Hence, the personal motive and beneficial
sense are sufficient for providing and securing the social interests
since, in the last analysis, these interests are reduced to personal
interests and individual benefits.

This defense is closer to vivid imagination than to evidence. Imagine
for yourself if the practical criterion in life for every individual in
the nation ware the fulfillment, on the largest scale and for the
longest term, of his benefits and personal interests, and if the state
provided the individual with freedom, glorified him without reservation
or limit, how would these individuals define social action?

Further, how could the linkage of social welfare to the individual
suffice for directing an individual to the anions called for by ethical
values when many of these actions do not benefit the individual? If, on
the other hand, it happens that such actions involve some benefit (to
the individual) since he is a member of society, that slight benefit,
which is not grasped by a human being except by means of analytical
scrutiny, is often rivaled by the absence of immediate benefits or
personal interests that find their assured attainment in freedom. Thus,
the individual abolishes any ethical scheme or spiritual consideration
for their sake.

### III. The Tragedies of the Capitalistic System

If we wished to present the links in the chain of social tragedies that
resulted from this system, which is neither well studied, nor
philosophically based, there would be no room for doing so in the space
designated for the present discussion. Because of this, we will [only]
make a brief allusion to this point.

The first of these links is the following. The majority governed the
minority, their vital interests and affairs. Political freedom meant
that the majority had the prerogative to lay down the system and its
laws (p. 22), as well as their management. Let us imagine that the group
which represents the nation's majority seizes the reins of power and
legislation, and adopts the capitalistic democratic mentality which is
purely materialistic in its orientation, inclinations, purposes and
desires.

What then would be the fate of the other group? Or what life would you
expect for the minority under laws legislated with the majority and the
preservation of its interests in mind? Would it be strange for the
majority to legislate laws, particularly in light of its own welfare, to
neglect the welfare of the minority, and to turn toward fulfilling its
desires in a manner unjust to others? Then who would preserve the
minority's vital structure, and defend it against injustice, if personal
interest is the [sole] concern of every individual, and if the
majority's social mentality lacks the notion of spiritual and moral
values?

It is natural that under (this) system, the despotic rule continues as
before, and that the phenomena of manipulation and neglect of the rights
and interests of others persist in the social atmosphere of this system
as they did in the old social atmosphere. Put briefly, the difference
[between the present and the old systems] is that neglect of human
dignity arose [in the older systems] because of individuals in the
nation; while in the present system, it arises because of groups that
represent majorities in relation to minorities. [But] the totality [of
these minorities] constitutes a large number of people.

I wish the matter ended there. (Had it not gone beyond that) the tragedy
would have been less and the stage would have witnessed more laughter
than tears. However, the matter became more grave and intense after
that, when the economic issue arose in this system. Thus, it determined
the economic freedom along the lines discussed earlier.

It allowed various methods and kinds of [acquiring] wealth, regardless
of how exorbitant the wealth is, and regardless of how deviant it is in
its methods and reasons. It also secured the realization of what it had
advocated at the same time as the world witnessed a great industrial
revolution, and when science became the product of the birth of the
machine that changed the face of industry and swept away manual labor
and the like.

Thus, bountiful wealth came to (p. 23) a minority of the nation's
individuals who were given the opportunity to utilize the modern means
of production,[^7] and who were supplied by unlimited capitalistic
freedom that provided sufficient assurances for exploiting these means
of production and benefiting from them to a great extent, as well as for
destroying many groups in the nation whose industry was swept away and
whose lives were shaken by the steam engine, and who found no way to
stand steadfast in the face of this storm, as long as the lords of
modern industries were armed by economic freedom and the rights to the
glorified freedom of these industries.

The scene became the sole province of an elite of the lords of industry
and production. The middle class became smaller and grew closer to the
general lower class. This left the destroyed majority at the mercy of
that elite whose thoughts and considerations were consistent with the
capitalistic democratic method only.

It was natural for this wealthy elite to withhold compassion and charity
from this large group of people, in order to keep them in the abyss and
deny them a share in the elite's own exorbitant profits. Why should the
elite not do so, as long as the ethical criteria are benefit and
pleasure; as long as the state secures for them absolute freedom of
action; and as long as the capitalistic democratic system has no room
for a moral philosophy of life and its specific concepts?

The issue must, therefore, be studied in a manner inspired by this
system. These powerful persons exploit the majority's need for them, and
their life supports. Thus, those who were capable were required to work
in the elite's fields and factories for an extremely long time; and for
salaries sufficient only for the necessities of life.

This is the pure reasoning of benefit. It was natural for the elite to
adopt it, thus dividing the nation into a group of immense wealth and a
majority in the deep abyss.

Here, the political right of the nation is crystallized once again in a
different form. Even though equality of political rights among
individual citizens, for example, was not erased from the records of the
system, nevertheless, after such tremors, it was nothing other than a
figment of the imagination or a mere thought. For when economic freedom
records the results that we have presented, it leads to the abominable
division (p. 24), Mentioned above.

Further, it would itself be in control of the situation and of the reins
of power, and would overcome the political freedom confronting it. Thus,
by virtue of its economic position regarding society, its capacity for
utilizing every means of propaganda, and its ability to buy defenders
and aids, the capitalistic group has the upper hand over key
positions[^8] in the nation.

It assumes power in order to exploit it for its own welfare and for the
pursuit of its aims. Legislation and the social system come under the
control of capitalism when, according to democratic notions, they are
the right of the nation as a whole.

Thus, in the last analysis, capitalistic democracy is reduced to rule by
a privileged minority, and to power used by a number of individuals to
protect their existence at the expense of others. This they do by means
of the benefit mentality which they derive from capitalistic democratic
thought.

We arrive now at the most abominable link in the tragedy played by this
system. Those gentlemen in whose hands the capitalistic democratic
system places full power and to whom it supplies every force and
capacity, will extend their vision -inspired by the mentality of this
system - to wider horizons. Also, inspired by their welfare and aims,
they will feel in need of new areas of power. Two reasons account for
this.

First, the availability of production depends on the extent of the
availability and abundance of raw materials. Thus, he who has a large
share of such materials also has productive capacities that are large
and strong. Such materials are spread all over the vast, God-given
earth. If it is necessary to obtain them, it is necessary to control the
land that has them, in order to absorb and exploit them.

Second, the intensity and strength of the movement of production
motivated, on the one hand, by the protection of profit and, on the
other hand, by the fall in the standard of living of many citizens due
to the materialistic ambitions of the capitalistic group and its
domination over the rights of the general public through their
self-interested methods which make the citizens incapable of (p. 25)
purchasing and consuming products create big producers who are greatly
in need of new markets to sell the surplus products existing in the
markets. Finding such new markets means chinking of a new country.

Thus, the issue is studied with a purely materialistic mentality. It is
natural for such a mentality whose system is not based on spiritual and
moral values, and whose social doctrines admit no ends except those that
bring pleasure to this limited life in various delights and objects of
desire, to see in these two reasons a justification or a logical formula
for assaulting and dishonoring peaceful countries, in order to control
their fate and their large natural resources, and to exploit their
wealth to promote surplus products.

All of this is reasonable and permissible, according to the notion of
individual interests on which the capitalistic system and the free
economy are based. From there, gigantic materialism proceeds to raid and
fight, to restrict and shackle, to colonize and exploit in order to
please the appetites and to satisfy the desires.

Reflect on how much the human race has suffered from the calamities of
this system due to its materialistic spirit, form, tactics and purposes.
This is so, even though it does not center on a well-defined philosophy
which is in agreement with that spirit and form, and concordant with
such tactics and purposes, as we have pointed out.

Estimate for yourself the lot of a society established on the basis of
this system and its conceptions of happiness and stability. In this
society, mutual love and confidence, real merry and compassion, as well
as all good, spiritual tendencies art totally absent. Thus, in it the
individual lives feeling that he is responsible for himself alone, and
that he is endangered by any interests of others that may cash with his.
It is as if he is engaged in a constant struggle and a continuous fight,
equipped with no weapons other than his personal powers, and provided
with no purposes other than his personal interests. (p. 26)

2. Socialism and Communism
--------------------------

There are many schools of socialism. The best-known of these is that
which teats on Marxist theory, or dialectical materialism, which
expresses a specific philosophy of life and a materialistic
understanding of it along dialectical lines.

Dialectical materialists have applied this theory to history, society
and economics; and thus, it became a philosophical doctrine concerning
the world, a method for studying history and society, a school of
economics and a plan in politics.

In other words, it shapes the entirety of humankind into a specific
mold, according to the kind of thinking they have, their outlook on life
and their practical actions. There is no doubt that the materialistic
philosophy, as well as the dialectical method, are not the creation and
innovation of the Marxist school.

The materialistic tendency existed in philosophical circles thousands of
years ago, revealed at times, while concealed at other times behind
sophistry and absolute denial. Similarly, some points of the dialectical
method of thinking have deep roots in human thought. All its points were
formulated at the hands of Hegel, the well-known idealist philosopher.
After that, Karl Marx adopted this [dialectical] method and that
[materialistic] philosophy.

He tried to apply them to all fields of life, and achieved two things.
First, by the dialectical method, he explained history from a purely
materialistic perspective. Second, he claimed to have discovered the
contradictions of capitalism and the surplus value that the possessor of
money steals from his employees in accordance with his doctrine.[^9]

On the basis of these two achievements, Marx based his faith on the
necessity of abolishing the capitalistic system and erecting, instead,
the communistic and the socialistic societies (p. 27) which he
considered as humankind's [first] step toward a full implementation of
communism.

In this philosophy, the social field is one of struggle among
contradictions. Every social situation that pervades this field is a
purely material phenomenon concordant with the rest of the material
phenomena and circumstances, and influenced by them.

However, at the same time, this social situation caries its own
contradiction within itself. Then struggle erupts among the
contradictions within its contents, until the contradictions accumulate
and create a change in this situation and the construction of a new
situation. Thus, the battle continues, until all people become of one
class, and the interests of every individual become represented in the
interests of this unified class.

At that point, harmony prevails, peace is realized, and all the bad
effects of the capitalistic democratic system are removed, because such
effects were produced by the existence of multiple classes in society.
This multiplicity of classes was, in turn, produced by society's
division into producer and employee. Therefore, it is necessary to put
an end to this division by means of terminating ownership.

In this respect, communism differs from socialism in some of its
principal economic ideas. The communist economy is based on the
following. First, private ownership must be canceled and fully
obliterated from society. All wealth must be appropriated by everyone
and handled by the state, since it is the legal trustee over society, so
that the state manages and exploits this wealth for the welfare of the
whole population.

The belief of the communistic school in the necessity of this absolute
nationalization was a natural reaction to the complications of private
ownership in the capitalistic democratic system. Such nationalization
was justified on the ground that its purpose was the cancellation of the
capitalistic class and the uniting of people in one class, in order than
to end the struggle, and to prevent the individual from employing the
various tactics and methods for enlarging his wealth, in an attempt to
satisfy his greed and appease the motive that drives him after personal
benefit. (p. 28)

Second, goods produced must be distributed in accordance with the
individual need for consumption. This point is summarized in the
following text: 'from everyone, in accordance with his capacity, and for
everyone, in accordance with his needs'. This is to say that every
individual has natural needs deprived of which he cannot survive. He
devotes all his efforts to society; in return, society satisfies the
necessities of his life and supports his living.

Third, this must be carried out on the basis of an economic plan put
forth by the state. In this plan, the state reconciles the needs of the
whole population with the quantity, variety and limit of production, in
order to prevent afflicting society with the same illnesses and
difficulties that occurred in the capitalistic society when absolute
freedom was allowed.

### I. Deviation from the Communist Operation

The leading authorities of communism who called for this system were
unable to implement it with all its features when they seized power.
They believed that, in order to implement this system, a development of
human thought, motives and inclinations was necessary.

They claimed that there would come a time when personal interests and
individual considerations would disappear from the human soul, replaced
by a social mentality and social inclinations. With that, a human being
would think only of the social welfare, and would be motivated only for
its sake.

Because of this, it was necessary, according to the tradition of this
social doctrine, to establish prior to that a socialistic system in
which people could rid themselves of their present nature and acquire
the nature which is consistent with the communistic system. In this
socialistic system, important revisions of the economic aspect of
communism were made.

Thus, the primary point of the communist economy - namely, the annulment
of private ownership - was changed to a more moderate stand. This stand
called for the nationalization of heavy industry, foreign trade, and
large domestic trade, as well as the imposition of government
restrictions on all of them. (p. 29) In other words, it called for the
elimination of large capital to help the advance of simple industries
and trades, and to give individuals power over these industries and
trades.

This is because the main point of the communist economy clashed with
actual human nature to which we have alluded earlier. Individuals began
to neglect performing their jobs and activities at work. They also
avoided fulfilling their social duties. This was due to the fact that
[under this system, they were only] supposed to secure an orderly life
and a satisfaction of their needs.

Also, under this system, one was not supposed to perform any work or
make any effort for more than this, regardless of its intensity. Why
then should the individual make any effort, work hard and earnestly, as
long as the result for him is the same whether he is lazy or active?

Further, why should he be motivated to make happiness available to
others, and to bring comfort to them by his own sweat and tears and by
the sap of his life and capacities, as long as he does not believe in
any values of life except in those that are purely materialistic? Thus,
the leaders of this school felt obliged to freeze absolute
nationalization.

They were also obliged to amend the second important point of communist
economics. They did this by creating differences among salaries, in
order to motivate the employees to become active and to carry out their
jobs - apologizing at the same time that these were temporary
differences which would disappear when the capitalistic mentality was
abolished and when humankind undergoes further development.

Due to this, they applied continual change, in accordance with their
economic methods and socialistic tactics, so that they could avoid the
failure of any one method by introducing a new method. However, until
now, they have not successfully eradicated all the basic principles of
the capitalistic economy. Usurious loans, for example, have not been
completely eliminated, even though in reality they are the basis of
social corruption in the capitalistic economy.

But none of this means that those leaders were failures or that they
were not serious about their teachings or sincere about their doctrine.
Rather, it means that they clashed with reality when they came to apply
[their ideas]. They found their way full of the contradictory elements
that human nature imposes in the face of the revolutionary method of
social reform (p. 80) that they preached. Thus, reality forced them to
retreat with the hope that the miracle would be accomplished in some
near or distant future.

Politically, communism, in the long run, aims to eliminate the state
from society when the miracle is accomplished and the social mentality
prevails among all people. At that point, everyone will think only of
the material interests of the whole society. But before that, when the
miracle is not yet accomplished, when people are not yet united in one
class and when society is still divided into capitalistic and labor
forces, the government must be purely that of the labor force. This
would be a democratic government within the limit of the labor circles,
and dictatorial with regard to the general public.

They tried to justify this by claiming that a dictatorial labor
government was necessary at every stage experienced by humankind with
the individual mentality. This is so, for the protection of the
interests of the labor class, for the stifling of the breath of
capitalism and for the prevention of capitalism from reappearing on the
scene.

In fact, this school, which is represented in socialistic Marxism and
then in communistic Marxism, is distinguished from the capitalistic
democratic system in that it is based on a specific materialistic
philosophy which adopts a specific understanding of life that does not
admit any[^10] of the moral ideals or values of life. It also explains
life in a way that leaves no room for a creator beyond the limits of
nature, nor for expected retributions beyond the boundaries of the
limited material life.

This is contrary to capitalistic democracy which, even though a
materialistic system, is not established on a definite philosophical
basis. Materialistic communism believes in proper linkage between the
issue of actual life and the social issue, but capitalistic democracy
does not believe in such a linkage, or does not attempt to make it
clear.

Thus, the communistic school was in reality the outcome of philosophical
study. It was tested by experiencing the philosophy on which it was
based, and from which it branched out. Judgement of any system (p. 81)
depends on the extent of the success of that system's philosophical
notions in understanding and portraying life.

From the first glance one casts on the communistic system, it is easy to
notice that, whether this system is diluted or complete, its general
characteristic is to destroy the individual in society and make him an
instrument to be manipulated for the purpose of realizing the general
standards that this system presupposes. Therefore, it is exactly the
opposite of the free capitalistic system that considers society for the
sake of the individual and subjugates it to his interests.

It is as if the individual personality and the social personality were
destined in the traditions of these two systems to clash and to struggle
against each other. The individual personality was the winner in the
system whose legislation was based on the individual and his specific
benefits. Thus, society was afflicted by economic tragedies that shook
its existence and malformed the life of all its people.

The social personality was the winner in the other system, which tried
to avoid the errors of the former system. Thus, it supported society,
and sentenced the individual personality to disappearance and death. As
a result of this, individuals were exposed to severe ordeals that
abolished their freedom, their personal existence, as well as their
natural rights to choice and thinking.

### II. Flaws of Communism

In fact, even if the communistic system treats a number of the maladies
of the free capitalistic system by means of abolishing private
ownership, yet in one respect, this treatment has natural complications
that render the price of treatment much too high. This is in addition to
difficulties that one encounters in the method of applying this
treatment. One cannot employ this method, unless[^11] all other methods
and procedures fail.

In another respect, this treatment is incomplete and does not ensure the
end of all social corruption. This is so because it is not accompanied
by a correct diagnosis of the illness and the specification of the point
from which evil proceeded and conquered the world under the capitalistic
system. That point continued (p. 82) in the communistic school to retain
its position with regard to social life. With this, humankind did not
win a decisive solution for their big problem, nor did they obtain the
remedy that heals their fits of illness and uproots their bad symptoms.

The complications of this treatment are enormous indeed. Its concern is
to terminate individual freedom, in order to establish communist
ownership in place of private ownership. But[^12] this enormous social
transformation is, at least until now, contrary to general human
nature - as admitted by its leaders - since the materialistic human
being still thinks in terms of himself and considers his interests from
his limited individual perspective.

Further, to put forth and try to fulfill a new design for society in
which individuals completely melt away and personal motives are totally
eradicated requires a firm power that holds the reins of society with an
iron hand. Moreover, this power quiets any voice that grows loud,
stifles any breath of freedom that circulates in society, monopolizes
all the means of propaganda and publicity, imposes limits on the nation
that the nation cannot exceed under any circumstances and punishes on
the ground of accusation and speculation, so that it does not suddenly
lose its grip on the reins of power. This is natural in any system one
seeks to impose on a nation, before the mentality of that system matures
in that nation, and before the spirit of that system prevails.

Indeed, if the materialistic human being begins to think in a social
manner, to consider his interests with a social mentality and to be free
of all personal sentiments, private inclinations and psychological
effects, is would be possible to erect a system in which individuals
melt away. With that, nothing would remain ac the scene except the huge
social giant. But the realization of this in a materialistic human being
who does not believe in anything except in a limited life, and who does
not perceive any sense of life except that of material pleasure requires
a miracle that creates heaven in the present life and brings it down
from the highest to earth.

The communists promise us this heaven. They await that day in which the
factory will put an end to human nature, recreate ideal humankind (p.
88) in thinking and acting even though they do not believe in any
idealistic and moral values. If this miracle is realized, we will then
have some words for them.

For the time being, to put forth the social design that they seek
requires confining individuals to the limits of the idea of this design
and ensuring its execution by setting the group that believes in it in
charge of protecting it and by taking precautionary measures for its
sake, through silencing human nature and psychological effects and using
any means to prevent them from bursting forth.

Under this system, even if the individual acquires full insurance and
social security for his life and needs because the social wealth
supplies him with all of this at the time of need, nevertheless, it
would be better for him to obtain this insurance without losing the
breath of righteous freedom, without melting away in fire as a person,
and without drowning in a stormy social sea.

How could a human being aspire to freedom in any field when he is
deprived of the freedom of his life, and when his nourishment is fully
linked to a specific organization - considering that economic freedom,
as well as freedom of life, are the basis of all kinds of freedom?

The defenders of this system apologize while asking: 'What would a human
being do with freedom, with the right to be critical and to express his
views, when he suffers from an abominable social burden? Again, what
benefit would he derive from debate and opposition, when he is more in
need of good nourishment and a secured life than of the protests and
clamor with which freedom provides him?'

Those who put forth such questions do not pay attention to anything
other than capitalistic democracy, as if it were the only social cause
which rivals theirs on the battleground. Thus, they diminish the value
and rights of individual dignity, because they see in it a danger for
the general social trend.

However, it is the right of humankind not to (p. 34) sacrifice any of
their essentials or rights as long as it is not necessary for them to do
so. Humans had to choose between dignity, which is one of their moral
rights, and satisfaction of need, which is one of their material rights.
Thus,[^13] they lacked the system that combines both sides and succeeds
in resolving both issues.

A human being whose capacities are the objects of extortion by others
and who does not enjoy a comfortable life, a fair salary, and security
in times of need is one who is deprived of the delights of life and has
no access to peaceful and stable living.

Similarly, a human being who lives continuously under threat, who is
judged on any movement he makes, who is exposed to detention without a
hearing and to imprisonment, who is exiled or executed for the slightest
mistake he commits is indeed scared and alarmed. Fear steals away his
good life and alarm disturbs its pleasures.

The third type of human being, who enjoys a tranquil life and is
confident of his dignity and safety, is the pleasant dream of
humankind.[^14] But how can this dream be realized, and when will is
become an actual reality?

We have stated above that the communist treatment of the social issue is
incomplete, in addition to having the complications to which we have
already alluded. Even though it represents human sentiments and emotions
that were stirred up by the general social tyranny - thus attracting a
group of thinkers to the new solution - nevertheless, these thinkers did
not grasp the cause of corruption so that they could eliminate it.
Rather, they eliminated something else. Therefore, they were not
successful in their treatment and in achieving a cure.

The principle of private ownership is not the cause of the absolute
evils of capitalism that shook the happiness and peace of the world. It
is not, for example, what imposes unemployment on millions of workers,
in order to utilize a new machine that will destroy their industries.
This is what (p. 35) happened at the dawn of the Industrial Revolution.
Again, the principle of private ownership does not impose a despotic
control over the salaries of employees with disregard for their efforts.

Further, it does not require the capitalist to damage large quantities
of his products for the protection of the price of commodities and the
preference for squandering these commodities instead [of using them] to
satisfy the needs of the poor. Further still, it does not call upon the
capitalise to turn his wealth into profitable capital, multiplying it
through interest and through the absorption of the efforts of those who
are in debt, and not through producing or working.

Moreover, the principle of private ownership does not drive the
capitalist to purchase all the consumer's goods from the markets, so
that he can monopolize them and then raise their prices. Finally, this
principle does not require that the capitalist open up new markets that
may infringe upon, or abolish, the freedom, rights and honor of nations.

None of these fearful tragedies was the result of private ownership.
Rather, they were the product of personal, materialistic interest that
was made the standard of life in the capitalistic system and the
absolute justification of all managements and dealings. A society based
on such an individualistic standard and personal justification cannot be
expected to do other than what it actually did.

It is from the nature of such a standard that those evils and
afflictions proceed to fall upon mankind as a whole, rather than from
the principle of private ownership. If such a standard is changed, and a
new, rectified objective of life in accord with human nature is put
forth, the real treatment of the big problem of mankind will have been
accomplished.

### III. The Correct Explanation of the Problem

In order for us to reach the first part of the explanation of the social
problem, we must inquire about the personal, materialistic interest that
the capitalistic system established as a criterion, as a justification
and as an objective. Thus, we ask: 'What was the idea that validated
this criterion in the capitalistic mentality, and what was the source of
its inspiration?' For it is this idea which is the real basis of the
social afflictions and failure of (p. 36) the capitalistic democracy to
achieve human happiness and dignity.

If we are able to kill this idea, we will put an end to all conspiracies
against social comfort, and to the unions against the rights and real
freedom of society. We will also succeed in exploiting private ownership
for the sake of the welfare and development of mankind and for their
progress in the industrial fields and areas of production. What then is
this idea?

This idea can be summarized in the limited materialistic explanation of
life on which the West erected the powerful edifice of capitalism. If
every individual in society believes that his only field in this great
existence is his personal material life, if he also asserts his freedom
of managing and exploiting this life and in his inability to achieve any
purpose in this life other than pleasure which is made available to him
by material factors; further, if he adds these materialistic beliefs to
self-love which is intrinsic to his nature, then he will follow the same
path trodden by the capitalists, and will fully carry out their
procedures, unless he is deprived of his freedom by an overwhelming
power and barred from selecting this path.

Self-love is the most general and the oldest instinct we know; for all
other instincts, including the instinct for life, are branches and
subdivisions of this instinct. The self-love that human beings have - by
which is meant their love of pleasure and happiness for themselves, and
their hatred of pain and misery for themselves - is what drives them to
earn their living and to satisfy their nutritional and material needs.
That is why a human being may put an end to his life by committing
suicide if he finds that bearing the pains of death is easier for him
than bearing the pains with which his life is full.

Therefore, the true, natural reality that is concealed behind all human
life and that directs life with its own hand is self-love, which we
express by our yearning for pleasure and hatred for pain. It is not
possible for a human being to carry freely the burden of the bitterness
of pain and forgo (p. 37) any pleasures just so that others may have
pleasure and comfort, unless his human nature is stripped away from him
and he is given a new nature that does not yearn for pleasure and detest
pain.

Even the wonderful forms of love which we witness in human beings and
about which we hear in their history are in reality subjugated to that
principal moving force - the instinct of self-love. A human being may
love his child or friend over himself, as he may make sacrifices for the
sake of some ideals or values.

However, he would not perform any of these heroic acts, if he did not
derive from them a specific pleasure and a benefit that outweighed the
loss resulting from his love for his child or friend, or from his
sacrifice for the sake of some of the ideals in which he believed.

Thus, we can explain human behavior in general, (as being well-grounded
in] the areas of selfishness and [self]-love alike. In human beings,
there are many propensities for taking pleasure in a variety of things,
such as taking pleasure in material things exemplified in food, drink,
the various kinds of sexual pleasures, and similar material pleasures.

Other examples of similar pleasures are those of the soul, such as moral
and emotional pleasures in moral values, in a spiritual companion or in
a specific doctrine. These pleasures are felt when human beings find
that those values, that companion, or that doctrine are a part of their
specific existence. Such propensities that prepare human beings for
enjoying those various delights differ in degree from one individual to
the other.

They also vary in the extent of their effectiveness, in accordance with
the difference in human circumstances and in the natural and educational
factors that affect people. While we find that some of those
propensities mature in human beings naturally - as does their propensity
for sexual pleasure, for example - we find, at the same time, that other
forms of propensities may never appear in people's lives. Rather, they
await the educational factors that help their maturation and blossoming.

The instinct of self-love, working behind all these propensities,
determines human behavior in accordance with the extent of the maturity
of those propensities. Thus, it drives a human being to give himself
exclusive access to food when somebody else is hungry. And it is the
same propensity that drives another human being (p. 38) to deprive
himself of food in order to give someone else exclusive access to it.

This is because the propensity of the former for taking pleasure in the
moral and emotional values that drives him to this love was latent. The
educational factors which help this propensity focus and grow were not
open to him. The latter, on the other hand, has acquired this kind of
education. Thus, he takes pleasure in the moral and emotional values,
and sacrifices the rest of his pleasures for their sake.

Whenever we wish to create any change in human behavior, we must first
change the human notion of pleasure and benefit, and then place the
behavior desired in the general frame of the instinct of self-love.

If the instinct of self-love occupies in the present life of humankind
the position [already mentioned], if the self, according to the view of
people, is an expression of a limited material power, and if pleasure is
an expression of the delights and joys that matter makes available, then
it is natural for people to feel that their opportunity for profit is
limited, and that the race for their goal is short, and that their goal
in this race is to acquire a certain amount of material pleasure.

Further, the way to this acquisition is, as a matter of fact, confined
to the nerve of the material life - that is, to money - which opens the
way for human beings to realize all their objectives and desires. This
is the natural succession in the materialistic notions which leads to a
complete capitalistic mentality.

Now, do you think that the problem can be decisively solved if we reject
the principle of private ownership and retain these materialistic
notions of life, as did those thinkers? Again, is it possible for
society to be delivered from the tragedy of such notions and to attain
secure happiness and stability by the mere elimination of private
ownership?

Take into consideration that securing its happiness and stablity
depends, to a great extent, on securing the non-deviation of those
personalities in charge of carrying out their reformative programs and
objectives in the fields of work and execution. (p. 39) Those who are in
such positions are supposed to uphold the same purely materialistic
notions of life on which capitalism was established.

The difference, though, [between them and the capitalists] is that they
laid these notions in new philosophical molds. [In accordance with their
teachings], it is reasonable to assume that quite often personal
interest stands in the way of social interest, and that the individual
fluctuates between a loss and a pain which he bears for the sake of
others, and a profit and a pleasure which he enjoys at the expense of
others. What security would you estimate there is for the nation and its
rights, for the doctrine and its objectives, under such trying times as
the rulers face?

Personal interest is not represented in private ownership only, so that
the cancellation of the principle of private ownership would destroy our
above-mentioned assumption. Rather, personal interest is represented in
[various] procedures, and takes on different forms. The evidence for
this can be seen in the revelations made by the present communist
leaders concerning acts of treason committed by earlier rulers and the
consolidation of these earlier rulers around the objectives they had
adopted.

The capitalistic group controls the wealth [of the nation], under the
auspices of economic and individual freedom, and manages this wealth
with its own materialistic mentality. [Similarly], when the state
nationalizes the whole wealth and eliminates private ownership, the
wealth of the nation is handed to the same state organization which
consists of a group adopting the same materialistic notions of life and
imposing on people the priority of personal interests, by virtue of the
judgement of the instinct of self-love which denounces a human being's
renunciation of personal pleasure or interest without any compensation.

As long as the material interest is the power in control due to the
materialistic notions of life, it will ignite once again the
battleground of struggle and competition, and expose society to various
kinds of danger and exploitation.

Thus, all the danger for mankind lies in these materialistic notions and
in the standards of goals and actions that proceed from these notions.
Unifying the capitalistic wealth, be it small or large, into one large
unit of wealth whose management is handed to the state - without any new
development (p. 40) of the human mentality -does not alleviate this
danger. Rather, it makes all people employees of one and the same
company, and ties their lives and dignity to the directors and owners of
that company.

Admittedly, this company differs from the capitalistic company in that
the owners of the latter are those who own its profits, and spend them
in any manner dictated by their desires. The owners of the former
company, on the other hand, do not own any of this, according to the
teachings of the system. However, the fields of personal interest are
still open to them, and the materialistic notion of life, which posits
this interest as a goal and as a justification, is still upheld by them.

3. The Islamic System: the Proper Treatment of the Problem19
------------------------------------------------------------

The world has two options for driving off the above-mentioned danger and
for erecting the principles of a stable society. The first option is to
replace the present human nature by another nature -that is, to create
in people a new nature that makes them sacrifice their personal
interests and the material acquisitions of their limited lives for the
sake of society and its interests. They do this with the conviction that
there are no values other than material values, and no gains other than
the gains of this limited life.

This can be accomplished only if self-love is stripped away from the
heart of their nature and is replaced by social love. Thus, human beings
would be born without self-love, except inasmuch as they constitute a
part of society, and without taking pleasure in their happiness and
interests, except inasmuch as their happiness and interests represent an
aspect of the general happiness and the social interests. The instinct
of social love would then insure in a mechanical manner and procedure
effort-making in the direction of achieving social interests and
fulfilling social requirements.

The second option open to humankind for eliminating the danger
threatening the present and future human generations is to develop
people's materialistic notion of life. (p. 41) With such a development,
human goals and standards would naturally develop, and the miracle would
be accomplished in the easiest way possible.

The first option is the one that the communist leaders dream of
realizing for the future human race. They promise the world that they
will reconstruct mankind in such away as to enable thorn to move
mechanically in the service of society and its interests.

Further, in order to accomplish this great deed, we must entrust them
with world leadership, as one would encrust the surgeon with the fate of
the patient and delegate to him the cure of the patient, the amputation
of the sick parts of his body and the readjusting of the misaligned
parts. No one knows the length of time required for such an operation,
which places mankind under the surgeon's dissecting knife.

People's surrender to that operation is the greatest evidence for the
extent of the injustice they have suffered under the capitalistic
democratic system, which, in the last analysis, deceived them with
alleged freedom, stripped them of their dignity, and sucked their blood
in order to serve it as a tasty drink to the representative ruling
group.

The idea of this point, which advocates treating the problem by
developing and reconstructing human nature, relies on the Marxist notion
of self-love. Marxism holds that self-love is neither a natural
inclination nor an instinctive phenomenon in the human nature. Rather,
it is a product of the social condition that rests on the ground of
private ownership.

The social condition of private ownership is what constitutes the
spiritual and internal content of the human being, and creates in the
individual his love for his personal interests and individual benefits.
Thus, if a revolution occurred with regard to the principles on which
the social structure is established, and if private ownership were
replaced by social and socialistic ownership, the revolution would be
reflected in all aspects of society and in the innermost being of
people.

With this, the individual feelings of a human being would be turned into
social feelings, and his love for his personal interests and benefits
into a love for the social benefits and interests. This would be in
accordance with (p. 42) the law of concordance between the state of
basic ownership and all the superstructural phenomena that are regulated
in accordance with the ownership.

In fact, this Marxist notion of self-love views, in a reverse order, the
relation between individual reality (the instinct of self-love) and
social conditions. If this were not so, then how could it hold that the
individualistic motivation is the product of private ownership and class
conflicts that result from this kind of ownership?

But if people did not already have individualistic motivation, they
would not have created such conflicts, nor would they have thought of
private ownership and exclusive personal possessions: Why would a human
being seek exclusive power over the acquisitions of the system and
employ this power in a manner that preserves his interests at the
expense of others, if he does not deeply feel an individualistic
motivation?

In reality, the social manifestations of selfishness in the economic and
political fields are nothing but a result of individualistic motivation
which in turn is a result of self-love. Thus, this kind of motivation is
deeper in human nature than the social phenomena of selfishness.[^15]
Hence, it is impossible to remove it and root it out by removing those
manifestations. An operation of this sort is simply a substitution of
certain manifestations by some other manifestations that may differ from
them in shape and form, but agree in substance and reality.

Add to this that if we explain objectively the individualistic
motivation, [which is the result of] the instinct of self-love,[^16] as
a reflection of the phenomena of individualism, such as the phenomenon
of private ownership in the social system (as Marxism does) this would
not mean that, by the removal of private ownership, the individualistic
motivation will lose its objective source, as well as its cause, which
is grounded in the social system.

This is because, even though it is a phenomenon marked by the
individualistic character, nevertheless it is not the only one of its
kind. There is, for example, the phenomenon of private administration
which is retained even in the socialistic system.

For even though the socialistic system eliminates private ownership of
the means of production, still it does not eliminate the private
administration of these means by members of the ruling group who
practice (p. 43) the proletarian dictatorship, and monopolize the
supervision over all the means of production as welt as over the
management of them.

After all, it is not possible that at the time of their nationalization
the means of production can be administered by all the individuals of
society in a collective and socialistic manner.

Therefore, the socialistic system retains prominent individualistic
phenomena. It is natural for these individualistic phenomena to preserve
the individualistic motivation and to reflect it continuously in the
innermost human nature, as did the phenomenon of private ownership.

Thus, we now know the value of the first option for solving the problem
that is, the communistic option which considers the cancellation of
legislating private ownership and its removal from the legal records as
alone sufficient for developing human nature and solving the
problem.[^17]

Regarding the second option discussed earlier, it is the option pursued
by Islam, due to its conviction that the only solution for the problem
is to modify the human materialistic notion of life. Thus, Islam did not
begin with the cancellation of private ownership.

Rather, it assaulted the materialistic notion of life and posited,
instead, a new notion of life. On the basis of this new notion, Islam
established a system in which the individual is not considered as a
mechanical tool in the social system, nor society as an organization
established for the sake of the individual. Rather, is gave to each -
the individual and society -their rights and insured for the individual
both his spiritual and material dignity.

Islam put its finger on the real source of the illness in the social
system of democracy and in other similar systems. Thus, is eradicated
this source in a manner concordant with human nature. [According to
Islam], the basic central point due to which human life was crowded with
various kinds of misery and different forms of tragedy is the
materialistic view of life which we can summarize in the following brief
statements. 'The assumption of human life in this world is all that
should count. Further, personal interest should be set up as the
standard of all action and activity.'

According to Islam, capitalistic democracy is a system destined for
definite collapse and failure; however, this not by reason of the claims
of the communist economy concerning the contradiction (p. 44) that are
natural to the capital and the destructive factors inherent in private
ownership. This is because Islam diverges from the notions and
dialectical method of such a claim in its logical method, in its
political economy and in its social philosophy.

This was pointed out in the book lqtisaduna (Our Economy). It insures
the placing individual ownership in a social plan free from those
alleged contradictions.

According to Islamic doctrine, the failure and painful condition that
afflicted capitalistic democracy can be ascribed to the purely
materialistic notions of this kind of democracy. People cannot be happy
under a system whose essence is drawn from such notions and whose
general ideas are derived from the spirit of these notions and at their
directions.

It is necessary, therefore, to be assisted by something other than the
materialistic notions of the universe from which the social system can
be drawn. It is also necessary to have sound political awareness based
on sound notions of life, upholding the greatest human cause, making an
effort to achieve this cause on the basis of these notions, and studying
the world problems from this point of view.

When this sort of political awareness is fully achieved in the world,
when it prevails over every other political awareness, and when is
assaults every notion of life that does not agree with its main
principle, it becomes possible for the world to enter a new life shining
with light and full of happiness.

This profound political awareness is the real message for peace in the
world. Further, this message for salvation is the eternal message of
Islam which drew its social system - that differs from any ocher system
we have discussed - from a new ideological principle of life and the
universe.

By means of this ideological principle, Islam provided human beings with
the cornet view of life. Thus, it made them believe that their lives
proceed from a principle which is absolutely perfect, and that their
lives prepare them for a world free from hardship and misery. Besides,
Islam set up a new moral criterion for human beings (p. 45) [with which
they may evaluate] all the steps they take and all the stages they
cross, this criterion being the satisfaction of God, be He exalted.

Therefore, not everything dictated by personal interest is permissible,
and not everything that leads to a personal loss is prohibited and in
bad taste. Rather, the goat that Islam set up for human beings in their
lives is the divine satisfaction, and the moral criterion by means of
which all actions must be weighed is only a measure of this glorified
goal that these actions can achieve. The righteous human being is one
who achieves this goal. And the complete Islamic personality is the one
which, in its various advances, moves by the guidance of this goal, in
light of this criterion and within its general scope.

This transformation of people's moral notions, criteria and objectives
does not signify a change in human nature and a new development of it,
as was intended by the communist idea. For self-love -that is, the love
that a human being has for himself - as well as the fulfillment of the
specific desires of this self, are natural to human beings. We do not
know of any inductive reasoning in any empirical field clearer than the
inductive reasoning experienced by people in their long history that
proves the essential character of self-love.

Indeed, if self-love were not natural and essential to humankind,
earlier human beings (that is, those who lived before any social
formation) would not have been driven to satisfy their needs, to repel
dangers from themselves, and to pursue their desires through primitive
methods by means of which they preserved their lives and continued their
existence. This resulted in their plunging themselves into a social life
and merging in relations with others for the purpose of fulfilling those
needs and repelling those dangers.

Since self-love enjoys such a [prime] position in the human nature, what
decisive solution for the great human problem must be established on the
basis of accepting this reality? If such a solution is based on the
notion of the development of this reality or on overcoming it, then it
is an idealistic treatment for which there is no room in the practical
realm of human life. (p. 46)

### I. The Message of Religion

Here, religion delivers its greatest message, whose burdens cannot be
carried except by it, and whose constructive objectives and well-guided
goals cannot be realized except on its bases and principles. Thus,
religion ties together the moral criterion which it lays down for people
and self-love which is centered in their nature. In other words,
religion unifies the natural criterion of action and life - this
criterion being self-love - and the criterion that must be laid down for
action and life; so that it can ensure happiness, comfort and justice.

The natural criterion requires that the human being advance his personal
interests over the interests of society and the elements of its
solidification. [ But] the criterion that must be the judge and that
must prevail is the criterion in accordance with which all interests are
equal, and in accordance with whose notions, individual and social
values are of equal weight.

How then can the two criteria be reconciled, and how can the two scales
be unified, so that human nature in the individual is once again one of
the factors leading to the happiness and goodness of society, this
nature having been a cause of tragedy with inclinations skilled ac
producing different forms of selfishness?

The reconciliation and unification occur through a process that religion
ensures for forlorn humankind. This process takes one of two forms. The
first form focuses [on] a realistic explanation of life, and on
spreading the understanding of life in its real form, as an introduction
that prepares the way for the second life in which the human being
achieves happiness proportional to his efforts in this limited life to
attain God's satisfaction.

Hence, the moral criterion, or God's satisfaction, be He exalted,
ensures personal interest, while at the same time is achieves its
greatest social objectives. Therefore, religion guides the human being
to participate in establishing a happy society, and in preserving the
issues in society that are concerned with justice and that help attain
God's satisfaction, be He exalted. (p. 47) This is part of his personal
profit, as long as every action and every activity in this area are
compensated for by the greatest and most splendid rewards.

According to religious notions and explanation of life, society's
problem is the same as that of the individual. But this form of
reconciliation cannot be held in a materialistic view of life. This kind
of outlook views people as naturally not attentive to anything other
than their present involvement and their limited life. This is contrary
to the realistic explanation of life which Islam offers. The latter
explanation broadens the horizon of a human being. It imposes on him a
more profound view of his interests and benefits. In the last analysis,
this profound view turns fast loss into real profit, and fast profits
into real loss:

He who does right it is for his soul, and he who does wrong it is
against his soul.[^18]
He who does right, whether male or female, and is a believer will enter
Paradise where he will be provided for, without restriction.[^19]

On that day, people will proceed in scattered groups to see their deeds.
He who does good an atom's weight will see it then, and he who does evil
an atom's weight will see it then.[^20]

That is because no thirst, hardship or hunger afflicts them on the path
of God. They do not take any step that harms the disbelievers. And they
do not gain anything from the enemy; but, by virtue of that, a good deed
is recorded for them. God does not lose the wages of the good. They do
not spend anything, be that small or large, nor do they cross any
valley; but it is recorded for them that God will repay them the best of
what they had done.[^21]

These are some of the beautiful images that religion offers as examples
of the first form that the above-mentioned process can take on, and that
religion pursues in its attempt to reconcile the two criteria and to
unify the two scales.

Thus, it builds a link between personal motives and the paths leading to
good in life. It also modifies the interest of individuals (p. 48) in
such a way as to make individuals believe that their personal interests
and the real general human interests - as defined by Islam - are
interrelated.[^22]

The second form that religion adopts for the purpose of reconciling
personal motivation with social values and interests is its attempts to
offer a specific moral education concerned with the spiritual
nourishment of human beings and their emotional growth and moral
sentiments. For, as we have mentioned earlier, there are in human nature
capacities and dispositions for various inclinations. Some of these
inclinations are of the material type, the desires for which open up
naturally, such as the desire for food, the desire for drink, and the
desire for sex.

Other such inclinations are of the spiritual type. These sprout and grow
as a result of education and commitment. Because of this, it is natural
for people, if left to themselves, to be dominated by the material
inclinations, for such inclinations open up naturally; while the
spiritual inclinations and their dispositions that are latent in the
soul remain concealed.

By virtue of believing in an infallible leadership guided by God,
religion entrusts the matter of the education of human beings and the
growth of their spiritual inclinations to this leadership and to its
branches. As a result of this, a number of noble emotions and sentiments
develop. Human beings begin to appreciate moral values and the ideals
that religion teaches them to respect, to desire defiance of death for
their sake and to eliminate any of their own interests or benefits that
stand in the way of these moral values and ideals.

This does not mean that self-love must be eliminated from the human
nature. Rather, action for the sake of such values and ideals would be a
complete fulfillment of the will to self-love. For, due to religious
teachings, values become desirable to people. The realization of the
desirable object itself expresses a specific personal pleasure. Thus,
the very nature of self-love dictates the pursuit of the desirable moral
values, for the purpose of achieving a specific pleasure pertaining to
moral values.

These are the two ways in which the linkage of the moral issue to the
individual issue occurs. (p. 49) The former can be summarized in giving
a realistic explanation of an eternal life, not in order that human
beings lose interest in the present life, nor in order that they yield
to wrongdoing and settle for what is unjust, but in order to regulate
themselves by the proper moral criterion supplied with sufficient
assurances by this explanation.

The latter can be summarized in the moral education which produces in
the human soul various emotions and sentiments that ensure the operation
of the moral criterion by inspiration from the self. Thus, the spiritual
comprehension of life and the moral education of the soul are, in the
teachings of Islam, the two causes that together treat the deeper cause
of the human tragedy.

Let us always express the understanding that the present life is a
preparatory stage for an eternal life through the spiritual
understanding of life. Let us also express the feelings and sentiments
that moral education nourishes a moral sense of life.

The spiritual understanding of life and a moral sense of life are the
two principles that are the ground of the new moral criterion which
Islam lays down for humankind. This criterion is the satisfaction of
God, be He exalted. The satisfaction of God that Islam erects as a
general criterion in life is that which steers the human ship to the
shore of righteousness, goodness and justice.
Thus, the basic distinguishing feature of the Islamic system is
represented in its being based on a spiritual understanding of life and
a moral sense of life.

A major point of this system is the taking into consideration of both
the individual and society, and the securing of a balance between life
of the individual and social life. The individual is not considered the
central principle in legislating and governing, nor is the large social
existence the only thing to which the state pays attention and for whose
sake it enacts its laws. (p. 50)

Any social system not proceeding from such an understanding and such a
sense is either a system that goes along with the individual and his
personal inclinations -thus exposing social life to the harshest
complications and the most intense dangers - or a system that confines
the individual's inclinations to himself, paralyzing his nature for the
purpose of protecting society and its interests.

With this, bitter and continuous struggle arises between the system and
its laws [on the one hand], and the individuals and their inclinations
[on the ocher hand]. Indeed, the social existence of the system becomes
constantly exposed to relapses at the hands of its own creators, as long
as they, too, have personal inclinations, and as long as these
inclinations find for themselves - by virtue of suppressing ocher
personal inclinations and by seizing total power - wide opportunity and
a unique field for advance and exploitation.

Any spiritual understanding of life and any moral sense of life that do
not result in a complete system of life in which every part of society
is taken into consideration, and every individual is given the freedom
that is rectified by this understanding and this sense, and that the
state determines in the cases of deviation from this understanding and
this sense, I say that any doctrine that does not produce this sort of
system for mankind does not do anything beyond rendering the atmosphere
amiable and reducing the [weight of] calamities.

It is not a definite treatment and a derisive judgement of the illnesses
and evils of society. A solid social edifice must be established only on
a spiritual understanding of life and a moral sense of life, proceeding
from both of them to fill life with the spirit of this sense and the
essence of that understanding. This is Islam, expressed in the briefest
and most beautiful statement.

It is a spiritual and a moral doctrine from which a complete system for
mankind proceeds, sketching for them their clear and well-defined
advance, setting up for them the highest goal of this advance, and
making known to them their gains from that goal.

As for terminating the spiritual understanding of life, stripping
mankind of its moral sense of life, and considering moral notions as
pure illusions created by material interests, and the economic factor as
the creator of all values and ideals -and after that, desiring happiness
and social stability for mankind - it is (p. 51) a wish that cannot be
fulfilled unless mankind is transformed into mechanical systems,
organized by a number of technical engineers.

Further, having people operate in accordance with the principle of this
spiritual understanding of life and this moral sense of life is not a
hard job. In human history, religions have fulfilled their mission in
this domain. For all the spiritual notions, moral sentiments, and noble
feelings and emotions, there is no clearer and more logical explanation
than that which bases its principles and fundamentals on the great
efforts that religions have made to educate mankind, to show them their
natural motivation and the life and actions they must pursue.

Islam carried the torch that overflows with light after mankind reached
a specific degree of awareness. Thus, it advocated spiritual and moral
principles on the largest scale, and for the longest term. On the basis
of these principles, it raised the human banner, and established an
ideological state that seized the reins of world power for a quarter of
a century. It aimed at uniting all people and rallying them around one
ideological principle that offers a way and an order of life.

Therefore, the Islamic state has two functions. The first is to educate
mankind in accordance with [its] ideological principle, and to impress
its own character on their tendencies and feelings. The second is to
observe them externally, and to bring them back to the principle if they
deviate from it in practice.

Because of this, the political awareness of Islam is not limited to the
formal aspect of social life. Rather, it is a profound political
awareness due to a general and complete outlook on life, the universe,
society, politics, economics and ethics. This comprehensive outlook is
the complete Islamic awareness.

Any other political awareness is either a shallow awareness that neither
views the world from a specific perspective, nor sets its notions on a
specific focal point, (p. 52) or an awareness that investigates the
world from the point of view of pure matter that provides mankind with
struggle and misery of all forms and types.

### II. A Final Point

Lastly, at the end of our investigation of the four social schools, we
reach the following conclusion. The basic problem that causes all the
social evils and that results in various kinds of misdeeds is only given
the proper treatment that determines such maladies, and roots them out
of the human social body, by the Islamic social school, to the exclusion
of other schools. It is necessary, therefore, to inquire about Islamic
philosophical convictions concerning life, the universe, society and the
economy.

We must also inquire about its legislation and procedures, in order to
acquire the complete outline of Islamic awareness and comprehensive
Islamic thought, comparing these Islamic convictions to other forms of
conviction regarding the procedures they pursue and the doctrines they
adopt.

It is natural that our investigation of any conviction begins with an
investigation of the basis of the general doctrine of life and the
universe, as well as the method of understanding both the universe and
life. The notions of any conviction regarding life and the universe form
the basic structure of the substance of that conviction. The primary
criterion for testing a conviction is experience of the basic
ideological principles on whose limit and soundness of judgements the
judgements and success of the superstructures depend.

We will therefore reserve the first portion of this work of ours for an
investigation of the primary structure, the point from which our
conviction proceeds. The superstructures will be investigated in the
remaining portions of this work, God willing, exalted be He.

The capitalistic democratic system does not proceed from a specific
doctrine concerning life and the universe, nor is it built on a complete
understanding of the values of life that are related to, and have
influence on, social life. For this reason, the capitalistic democratic
system is not a conviction in the real sense of the term. This is
because a conviction is a doctrine in life from which a system for life
proceeds. (p. 53)

As for Marxist communism and socialism, they are established on an
ideological principle which is the philosophy of dialectical
materialism. Islam, on the ocher hand, reserves for itself an
ideological principle of life that has its own method of understanding
life and its specific scales.

We stand, therefore, between two philosophies that we must study, in
order to find the sound ideological principle of life on which we muse
establish our social and political awareness of the affairs of the whole
world, and our social and political criteria by means of which we
measure the values of actions and weigh human events in instances of
national and individual difficulties.

The principle on which a conviction rests involves a method and an idea;
that is, it involves a determination of the method of thinking and a
determination of the notion of the world and of life. Since our purpose
in this book is not philosophical studies for their own sake, but rather
the study of the rational principles of convictions, we will limit
ourselves to a study of the two basic factors pertaining to every
rational principle from which a system proceeds.

These two factors are the method of thinking, and the philosophical
notion of the world. These two matters are the focus of the discussion
in this book. Since it is necessary to determine the method before
forming the notions, we will then begin with the theory of knowledge
that involves a determination of the [identifying] marks, method and
value of thinking. This will be followed by a study of the general
philosophical notion of the world in general.

It is better that the dear reader knows at the outset that the benefit
that lies at the heart of Islam is the method and the notion - that is,
the rational method of thinking and the theological notion of the world.
As for the various methods of demonstration and kinds of proof for this
or that matter, we do not add all of them to Islam. Rather, they are the
product of intellectual studies by prominent thinkers among Muslim
scholars and philosophers.

[^1]: Text: qawaninihima (the laws of both of them).

[^2]: i.e., control over.

[^3]: Text: wa -ftarad

[^4]: Experimentation acquired great importance in the scientific field,
and achieved an unexpected success in the discovery of many truths and
in the revelation of astonishing secrets which opened the opportunity
for men and women to exploit in their practical lives. (p. 18) The
success of this experimentation glorified it in the common mentality,
and led people to abandon rational thought, as well as all the truths
that do not appear in the empirical and experimental fields, so that
sense experience became, in the view of many empiricists, the only
ground of any knowledge or science. In this book, we will show that
experimentation in itself relies on rational thought and that the
primary ground of knowledge and science is the mind, which grasps the
truths that are not accessible to the senses, as are sensible truths.

[^5]: A group of general doctrines were very clear and simple to the
common understanding, even though they were not based on a rational
method or on philosophical evidence, such as the belief that the earth
is the center of the universe. But when such beliefs collapsed in the
face of sound experiments, the common belief was shaken, and a wave of
doubt prevailed, over many minds. Thus, there was a rebirth of Greek
sophistry influenced by the spirit of doubt, as it was influenced in
Greek times by the spirit of doubt which was the outcome of
contradiction among philosophical schools and disputes concerning them.

[^6]: The church played an important role in exploiting religion in an
ugly way. It used the name of religion as an instrument for fulfilling
its desires and objectives and for stifling the scientific and social
spirit. It established inspection courts to which it gave wide powers
over managing the fates of people. All of this led to discontent and
anger with religion, for the crime was committed in the name of
religion, even though in its pure reality and true essence, religion was
not less disturbed by that crime than those who were discontented and
angry with it, nor was it less repelled by the motives and consequences
of that crime.

[^7]: Text: wasa'il al-intaj al-hadith (the means of modem production).

[^8]: Text: tuhaymin 'ala taqalid al-hukm fi al-'umma.

[^9]: We have explicated these theories together with a detailed
scientific study in the book Our Economy.

[^10]: Text: bi -jami' (all).

[^11]: Perhaps the author means 'even'.

[^12]: Text: wa-dhalika li-anna (that is because).

[^13]: Text: idha (if).

[^14]: This is the type that everyone would like to be.

[^15]: In other words, self-love is responsible for the individualistic
motivation which, in turn, is responsible for the social manifestations
of selfishness in both the economic and political fields.

[^16]: The text here identifies individualistic motivation with the
instinct of self-love. But since the previous discussion shows that,
according to the author, the former is caused by the latter rather than
identified with it, we chose to break the identification by inserting
what is within the brackets.

[^17]: The text reads: 'for solving the problem and developing human
nature'. We made the switch in conformity with the spirit of the
discussion, according to which, the development of human nature is a
precondition for the solution of the problem.

[^18]: Al-Qur'an, XLI, 46.

[^19]: Al-Qur'an, XL, 40.

[^20]: Al-Qur'an, XCIX, 6, 7, 8.

[^21]: Al-Qur'an, IX, 120, 121.

[^22]: See Our Economy, p. 808.


