Chapter Two: The Value of Knowledge
===================================

In the previous investigation, we studied the primary sources of
knowledge or of human perception in general. We will now treat knowledge
from another point of view in order to determine its objective value and
the possibility of its disclosure of reality. The only way available for
mankind to capture the essence of reality and to uncover the secrets of
the world is through the totality of the sciences and the knowledge that
they possess.

Therefore, before anything, we must inquire as to whether this way can
really lead to the goal, and whether human beings are capable of
grasping an objective reality by means of the intellectual knowledge and
capacities that they possess.  
 Regarding this issue, Marxist philosophy believes that it is possible
for one to know the world, and that the human mind is capable of
discovering objective realities. [In other words], it rejects doubt and
sophistry.

In contrast to idealism which denies the possibility of knowing the
world and its laws, which sees no value to our knowledge, which does not
admit objective reality, and which believes that the world is full of
things subsisting by themselves and which science will never get to
know, the Marxist philosophical materialism rests on the principle which
states that it is possible to have exact knowledge of the world and of
its laws.

Our knowledge of the natural laws, which is the knowledge achieved by
practice and sense experience, is valuable and signifies objective
reality. The world does not contain anything that cannot be known.
Rather, it contains certain things that are still (p. 108) unknown, but
that will be discovered, and will become known by means of the
scientific and practical methods.[^1]

Again:  
 The strongest refutation of this philosophical illusion, i.e. the
illusion of Kant, Hume and other idealists, as well as of every other
philosophical illusion is practice, sense experience and industry in
particular.

Thus, if we can prove that we comprehend accurately a natural
phenomenon, i.e. a phenomenon which we have not created ourselves, or
made it occur by means of fulfilling its conditions in themselves; and
further still, if we can employ this phenomenon in achieving our goals;
then this would be a decisive blow to the Kantian notion of the thing in
itself which is inaccessible to knowledge.[^2]

These declarations show clearly that Marxist philosophy was not
satisfied with taking the side of sophistry and the schools of denial or
skepticism that declared their bankruptcy in the philosophical field.
This is because the edifice that Marxism wished to erect must be based
on absolute philosophical principles and decisive rules of thought.
Unless the principles are certain, then the intellectual edifice that is
based on them, cannot be solid and firm.

Now, we would like to try to know whether it is appropriate for this
kind of philosophy to claim for itself philosophical certainty, and to
claim further that decisive knowledge is possible. In other words, can
Marxist philosophy, whose method of thought is along dialectical lines,
assert a true knowledge of the world and its laws, and free itself from
the grip of skepticism and sophistry?

Put differently, is the philosophy in which the Marxist philosopher
rejoices of a higher value and a superior character than knowledge in
the philosophy of Kant, (p. 109) the idealists, and the relative
materialists who were among the philosophers of the schools of
skepticism that were criticized and attacked by Marxism?

In order for us to understand the problem, to find out whether it is
possible to solve it on the basis of Marxist philosophy, and to
understand the point of view of Islamic philosophy concerning it, we
must mention briefly the most important philosophical doctrines that
dealt with it, in order that the following will be clearly determined:
the position of Marxism regarding this problem, the kind of view that
Marxism must adopt in accordance with its main principles, and the
analysis and scrutiny that this problem merits.

1. The Views of the Greeks
--------------------------

In the fifth century B.C., a wave of sophistry pervaded Greek thought at
a time in which the method of disputation spread in the fields of
rhetoric and law, and philosophical views and non-empirical assumptions
strongly clashed. Philosophical thought had not yet crystallized, nor
had it reached a high degree of intellectual maturity.

Thus, such a conflict and clash among the contradictory philosophical
views were the cause of intellectual confusion and deep fear. The habit
of disputation nourished that situation by means of ambiguities and
invalid syllogisms which it provided to its disputant heroes. On the
basis of such ambiguities and invalid syllogisms, these heroes denied
the world by rejecting all the human intellectual principles as well as
the sensible and intuitive propositions.

Gorgias,[^3] one of the prominent leaders of this school, wrote a book
on non-existence. In this work, he tried to prove a number of points:
(1) nothing exists; (2) if anything exists, one cannot know it; (8) if
we assume that one can know it, one cannot communicate it to others. (p.
110)

For quite a while, sophistry had expressed in various ways its disregard
for philosophy and science, until Socrates, Plato and Aristotle emerged
and held strong positions against it. Aristotle laid down his well-known
logic for discovering the sophistical fallacies and for organizing human
thought. His epistemological doctrine may be summarized as follows.

Sense knowledge and primary or secondary rational knowledge, which are
acquired by taking into consideration logical principles, are truths
with an absolute value. Due to this, Aristotle permits in demonstration
(the absolute evidence in his logical sense) the use of both sense
knowledge and rational knowledge.

Later, an attempt was made to reconcile the two opposite tendencies -
that is, the tendency leaning toward absolute denial (sophistry), and
the tendency asserting affirmation (Aristotelian logic). This attempt
was represented in the skeptical doctrine thought to have been founded
by Pyrrho[^4] who is known for his ten proofs for the necessity of
absolute doubt. According to Pyrrho, every proposition can be stated in
one of two ways: it can be either affirmed or denied with equal force.

But the doctrine of certitude finally prevailed in the philosophical
field, and reason mounted the throne given to it by Aristotle, judging
and making decisions while bound by the logical criteria.

The fire of doubt died down for centuries, until around the sixteenth
century when the natural sciences became active and made discoveries of
unexpected truths, especially in astronomy and the general order of the
universe. These scientific developments were similar to the force of
disputation in the Greek period. Thus, they revived the doctrines of
doubt and denial which resumed their activities with various methods. A
conflict arose among the upholders of certitude themselves concerning
the limits of certainty on which human beings must depend. (p.111)

Descartes emerged in this atmosphere, which was saturated with the
spirit of doubt and rebellion against the authority of mind. He
presented the world with a philosophy of certitude that had a great
influence on bringing back some degree of certitude to the philosophical
tendency.

2. Descartes
------------

Descartes is one of the prominent rationalists, and one of the founders
of the philosophical renaissance in Europe. He began his philosophy with
sweeping and stormy doubt. [He reasoned that] because ideas are
incompatible, they are, therefore, susceptible to error.

Sense perception, too, is often deceptive; therefore, it must also be
discounted. With these two considerations, the wave of doubt raged,
rooting out the material and the spiritual worlds, since the way to both
of these worlds is through ideas and sense perception.

Descartes insists on the necessity of this absolute doubt. He
demonstrates its logic by the fact that it is possible for a human being
to be at the merry of a power that takes hold of his existence and mind,
and that attempts to deceive and mislead him.

Thus, it inspires him with ideas that do not correspond to reality, and
with false perceptions. Regardless of the clarity of such ideas and
perceptions, we cannot discount this assumption, which requires us to
take doubt as a perpetual doctrine.

However, Descartes excludes one truth which stands firm in the face of
the storm and is unshaken by the tendencies of doubt - this truth being
his thought, which is an indubitable, actual reality. Doubt does not
affect it, except perhaps by strengthening its stability and clarity;
for doubt is nothing but a kind of thought.

Even if that deceptive power were to exist, it could not deceive us with
regard to our conviction about this thought. The reason is that it would
have to deceive us by way of inspiring us with false ideas. This means
that thought is a fixed truth in (p. 112) any case; that is, whether the
issue of human thought is one of deception and misguidance, or one of
understanding and determination.

This truth, then, is the cornerstone of Descartes' philosophy, and the
point of departure for philosophical certitude. By means of this truth,
Descartes tried to move from conception to existence, and from
subjectivity to objectivity. Indeed, by means of it, he tried to prove
both the subject and the object. Thus, he began with himself. He
demonstrated his existence by this truth, saying: 'I think, therefore, I
exist.'[^5]

One may notice that this Cartesian proof contains an unconscious
acceptance of truths that, for Descartes, are still subject to doubt.
This proof is a non-technical expression of the first figure of the
syllogism in Aristotelian logic.

Technically, it takes the following form: 'I think, every thinker
exists, therefore I exist.' In order for this Cartesian reasoning to be
valid, Descartes must accept logic, and believe that the first figure of
the syllogism yields a conclusion and that its conclusion is true, even
though he is still at the beginning of the first stage, and doubt in his
mind is still in control of all knowledge and truths, including logic
and its rules.

We must warn against the fact that when Descartes began the
demonstrative stage of his thought by 'I think, therefore, I exist', he
had not felt the need for accepting the syllogistic figures in logic.
Rather, he believed that knowledge of his existence by way of his
thought is an intuitive matter that does not require the construction of
syllogistic figures and the acceptance of their minor and major
premises.

Since the proposition, 'I think, therefore, I exist', is true because it
is intuitive, such that it is not subject to doubt, anything of the same
degree of intuitiveness is also true. With this, Descartes added another
proposition to the first intuitive proposition, and admitted as true
that a thing does not come out of nothing. (p. 113)

After he accepted the subjective side, he went on to prove the objective
reality. Thus, he arranged human thought in three groups:  
***I. Instinctive or natural ideas***. These are the natural human ideas
that appear most evident and clearest, such as the ideas of God, motion,
extension, and the soul.  
***II. Vague ideas that occur in the mind on the occasion of motions
that come to the senses from without.*** These have no foundation in the
human mind.  
***III. Various ideas that human beings construct and compose from their
other ideas.*** These are exemplified in the idea of a human being
having two heads.

Descartes began by addressing the idea of God in the first group. He
decided that it is an idea having an objective reality, since in its
objective reality, it is superior to the human thinker and all his
ideas. This is because the human thinker is deficient and limited; while
the idea of God is the idea of a being absolutely perfect and infinite.
Because Descartes had already accepted the view that a thing does not
come out of nothing, he knew that there is a cause of this natural
concept in his mind.

He himself cannot be the cause of it, since it is more sublime and
complete than he is. A thing cannot be more sublime than its cause;
otherwise, increase [in the value of the] caused object would come out
of nothing. Thus, the idea of God must have proceeded from an infinite
being whose perfection and greatness are equal to its own. This being is
the first external objective reality that Cartesian philosophy admits -
this reality being God.

By means of this absolutely perfect being, Descartes proved that every
natural thought in the human nature is true and reflects an objective
reality. This is because the rational ideas in the first group proceed
from God. Thus, if they are not true, (p. 114) then their being given by
God to human beings would be deceptive and dishonest. But this is
impossible in the case of a being who is absolutely perfect.

Because of this, Descartes accepted the human innate or rational
knowledge and the fact that it is valid and true. He accepted the innate
ideas only, to the exclusion of any other ideas that proceed from
external causes. As a result of this, he divided ideas concerning matter
into two types: (1) the innate ideas, such as the idea of extension; and
(2) ideas that occur [later] and express specific reactions of the soul,
caused by external influences, such as the ideas of sound, odor, light,
flavor, heat and color.  
 The former are real primary qualities, while the latter are secondary
qualities that do not express objective realities. Rather, they
represent subjective reactions. They are successive mental concepts that
arise in the mental realm due to the influence of external bodies to
which they have no resemblance.

This is a very brief presentation of the Cartesian theory of knowledge.
To begin with, we must know that the fundamental principle on which
Descartes based his doctrine and philosophical certitude, 'I think,
therefore, I exist', was criticized in Islamic philosophy a few
centuries prior to Descartes' time. Ash-Shaykh ar-Ra'is, Ibn Sina,[^6]
presented it and criticized it as being unfit as a method of scientific
evidence for the existence of the human thinker himself.

A human being cannot prove his existence by means of his thought. This
is so, because if by saying, 'I think, therefore, l exist', he wishes to
prove his existence by means of his specific thought only, then he
proves his specific existence at the outset and admits his existence in
the very first phrase. If, on the other hand, he (p. 115) wishes to make
the absolute thought as an evidence of his existence, he is at fault,
because an absolute thought asserts the existence of an absolute
thinker, not a specific thinker. Thus, the specific existence of every
thinker must be known to him in a primary manner, regardless of any
considerations, including his doubt and his thought.

Subsequently, we find Descartes erecting the whole edifice of existence
on one point - namely, that the ideas which God created in human beings
signify objective realities. If they did not do so properly, God would
be a deceiver. But it is impossible for God to deceive.

It is easy to see in Descartes' proof the confusion between reflective
knowledge and practical knowledge. The proposition, 'Deception is
impossible', is an unfaithful translation of the proposition, 'Deception
is abominable'. But this latter proposition is not a philosophical
proposition.

Rather, it is a practical idea. How, then, did Descartes doubt
everything, without doubting this practical knowledge on which he based
the philosophical reflective knowledge? In addition, the succession of
knowledge plays a clear role in the Cartesian doctrine. When he accepted
the theological position, he based his acceptance on a proposition whose
truth is accepted a priori: 'A thing does not come out of nothing.'

But this proposition in turn requires an affirmation of the theological
position, in order to secure its truth. Unless it is shown that human
beings are ruled by an undeceptive, wise power, it is not permissible
for Descartes to accept this proposition and terminate his doubt
concerning a deceptive power in control of the human mind.

Finally, there is no need for us to point out another confusion that
Descartes made between the idea of God and the objective reality that
this idea signifies, when he asserts that it is impossible for this idea
to proceed from human beings, since it is more sublime than they are.
The truth is that this idea is not more sublime than human minds.
Rather, it is impossible for human beings to create the objective
reality of this idea (p. 116)

Actually, our purpose is not to elaborate the discussion on Descartes.
Rather, we intend to present his point of view regarding the value of
human knowledge, a view that may be summed up in the acceptance of the
absolute value of rational knowledge, especially innate knowledge.

3. John Locke
-------------

Locke is a primary representative of the empirical or experiential
theory, as we learned earlier. His view concerning the theory of
knowledge is that knowledge is divided into the following types:

***I. Intuitive knowledge (al-ma'rifa al-wijdaniyya):*** this is the
knowledge the mind can attain without need for recognizing something
else. An example of this is our knowledge that one is half of two.  
***II. Reflective knowledge (al-ma'rifa at-ta' ammuliyya***): this kind
of knowledge cannot occur without the help of previous information. An
example of it is our knowledge that the sum of the angles of a triangle
is equal to two right angles.  
***III. Knowledge that results from empirical knowledge of the known
object.***

Locke believes that intuitive knowledge is real knowledge, having
complete philosophical value. The same is true of the reflective
knowledge that can be clarified as valid reasoning. As for empirical
knowledge, it has no philosophical value, even though it is taken into
the consideration of the standard of practical life. Due to this, Locke
does not accept the objectivity of all of the qualities of matter that
are known by the senses. Rather, he considers some of them real and
objective, such as form, extension and motion, and some others
subjective reactions, such as color, flavor, odor and other similar
qualities.

This very Lockean theory of knowledge and its philosophical weight are
not in agreement with Locke's own view of the analysis of knowledge. For
all knowledge, according to him, is derived (p. 117) from the senses and
sense experience. Even intuitive knowledge, such as the principle of
noncontradiction and other similar primary principles in the human mind,
is not possessed by human beings except in this way.

The senses, the primary source of this knowledge, do not have an
absolute philosophical value in Locke's theory of knowledge. The natural
conclusion to this is the absolute doubt concerning the value of any
human knowledge, since in its essence and primary reality, knowledge is
nothing but a sense perception acquired by external or internal
experience.

Thus, it seems that Locke's division of knowledge into three groups, and
his distinction among these groups from a philosophical point of view,
are contradictory to the principles that he established. Similarly, his
division of the qualities of sensible bodies, which is analogous to the
Cartesian division, is not logically consistent with his principles,
even though it may be somewhat logically consistent with Descartes'
principles.

This is because Descartes divides knowledge into rational knowledge and
empirical knowledge, and accepts the former philosophically, but not the
latter. He claims that people's ideas concerning some bodily qualities
are among the innate rational ideas, while their ideas concerning some
other bodily qualities are empirical. Due to this, it was possible for
him to divide these qualities into primary and secondary, and to assert
that the primary qualities are real and objective, while the secondary
qualities are not.

As for John Locke, he began his philosophical endeavor by eliminating
the innate ideas, and asserting the mastery of the senses over all
knowledge. Thus, there is no way of knowing the bodily qualities except
through the senses. What, then, is the philosophical difference between
some of these qualities and some others?

4. The Idealists
----------------

Idealist doctrine has deep roots in the history of human thought, and is
of various forms. The term 'idealism' is one of the terms that played an
important role in (p. 118) the history of philosophy. It exchanged a
number of philosophical notions in which it crystallized. Due to this,
it acquired a kind of vagueness and confusion.

Idealism played its first role in the philosophical tradition at the
hands of Plato, who offered a specific theory of human reason and
knowledge. This theory was called 'the theory of Platonic forms'. Plato
was an idealist; however, his idealism does not mean a denial of
sensible realities, or a stripping of empirical knowledge from the
objective realities that are independent of the realm of conception and
knowledge.

Rather, he affirmed the objectivity of sense perception. He went further
than this to affirm the objectivity of rational knowledge, which is
superior to empirical knowledge, asserting that rational knowledge -that
is, knowledge of general types, such as knowledge of the ideas of 'human
being', 'water', and 'light', have an objective reality independent of
intellection, as was pointed out in the first part of this
investigation.

Thus, we learn that ancient idealism was a form of excessive acceptance
of objective reality. This is because it accepted the objective reality
of sense perception - namely, the knowledge of ideas pertaining to the
senses - and of rational knowledge -that is, the knowledge of ideas in
general. It did not involve any denial or doubt of reality.

In modern history, idealism took on a meaning completely different from
the above-mentioned one. While Platonic idealism emphasized the
objective reality of both rational and empirical knowledge, idealism in
its modern form was an attempt to shake the foundation of objective
reality and declare a new doctrine concerning the theory of human
knowledge, by means of which it can eliminate the philosophical value of
knowledge. Our concern in the present investigation is to explore and
study this new notion of idealism.

This notion was cast in various forms and shapes. (p. 119) Some writers
of philosophy went as far as to consider idealism as a description of
any philosophy that rests on doubt, that involves an attempt to remove
the objective aspect of things from the realm of human knowledge, or
that asserts a metaphysical principle of the world. Thus, spiritualism,
agnosticism, empiricism, rationalism, criticism and existential
phenomenalism are all idealistic philosophies, according to such
writers.[^7]

In order to clarify the role of idealism in the theory of human
knowledge, we will study the important tendencies of modern idealism.
These are: (1) the philosophical tendency; (2) the physical tendency;
and (3) the physiological tendency.

### I. Philosophical Idealism

This form of idealism was founded by Berkeley, who is considered the
leader of modern idealism. Berkeley's philosophy is viewed as the point
of departure for the idealistic tendency or the conceptual bent in the
recent centuries of philosophy.

The essence of idealism in Berkeley's doctrine can be recapitulated in
his well-known phrase: 'To exist is to know or to be known.'[^8] In
other words, it is not possible to assert the existence of a thing,
unless that thing knows or is known. The thing that knows is the soul;
and the known things are the conceptions and the ideas that subsist in
the sphere of sense perception and knowledge.

Thus, it is necessary that we accept the existence of the soul and the
existence of these ideas. As for the things that are independent of the
sphere of knowledge - that is, the objective things - they are
non-existent because they are not known.

Following this, Berkeley takes up for discussion the bodies that
philosophers call (p. 120) 'material substances' in order to eliminate
them from the realm of existence. He says that we do not grasp anything
about matter that [philosophers] suppose except a group of mental
conceptions and sensible phenomena, such as color, taste, shape, odor
and other similar qualities.

Berkeley pursues his idealistic notion of the world, saying that he is
not a sophist or a skeptic about the existence of the world and its
realities and beings. Rather, he admits that, from a philosophical point
of view, al! of this exists, and that in this he does not differ from
other philosophers. He differs from them only in the definition of the
notion of existence.

'Existence', according to him, does not have the same meaning that it
has for others. What exists to others also exists to Berkeley, but
according to his own way of interpreting 'existence'. This means that
the existence of a thing is nothing but its existence in our knowledge
of that thing.

Later, Berkeley asked himself this question: 'If matter does not exist,
then from where can we get the sensations that flow in us at every
moment, without the influence of our personal will over their flow and
succession?' Berkeley had the answer ready: God Himself causes these
sensations in us. Thus Berkeley ends his philosophical endeavor by
retaining for himself two realities in addition to knowledge. One of
these realities is the mind, the knowing subject; and the other is God,
the reality that creates our sensations.

This theory completely eliminates the issue of human knowledge and the
objective study of the value of knowledge; for this theory does not
admit the objectivity of thought and knowledge, or the existence of
anything outside their limits. (p. 121)

Berkeley's idealistic notion suffers from some vagueness, which makes it
possible to interpret this notion in a number of senses differing in the
degree of idealism and depth of the conceptual bent. [Of these] we will
take up the most idealistic sense - namely, the pure idealistic sense
that does not admit anything except the existence of the knowing soul
and the successive sense perceptions and knowledge in the soul.

This sense is the best-known among his philosophical statements and is
consistent with the proofs by means of which he tried to demonstrate his
idealistic notion. The proofs for this notion can be summarized as
follows.

The first proof is that all human knowledge is based on, and comes from,
the senses. Thus, the senses are the primary principle of knowledge. If
we attempt to examine this principle, we find it charged with
contradictions and errors.

For example, the sense of sight is always [self]-contradictory with
respect to its vision of bodies close up and at a distance. It perceives
them as small in size when they are remote from it; while it perceives
them as large when they are in its proximity. Similarly, the sense of
touch is also [self]-contradictory.

Thus, by means of it, we may have two different pieces of knowledge
about the same thing. For the sake of clarification, Berkeley adds:
immerse your hands in warm water, after you have immersed one of them in
hot water, and the other in cold water. Would not the water appear cold
to the hot hand, and hot to the cold hand? But should we then say that
the water is hot and cold at the same time? Would not these words be
fully nonsensical?

Therefore, you must conclude with me that water in itself does not exist
as a matter independent of our existence. It is nothing but a name that
we give to our sense perceptions. Therefore, water exists in us. In
short, matter is the idea that we posit about matter. If sense
perceptions are empty of any objective reality pertaining to the
contradictories recognized in them, then there will be no objective
value of human knowledge at all; for knowledge in general would rest on
the senses. If the basis collapses, then the whole pyramid collapses.
(p. 122)

But this proof has no value for the following reasons. First, not all
human knowledge rests on the senses and sense experience. For rational
doctrine, which we studied in an earlier chapter of the investigation,
'the primary source of knowledge determines the presence of necessary
primary knowledge in the human mind.

Such necessary knowledge does not arise from the senses, and no
contradiction at all appears in it. One cannot root out such knowledge
by the emotions that affect the senses and the sense knowledge. As long
as we possess knowledge free from the influence of emotions, it will be
easy to establish a sound objective knowledge on the basis of it.

Second, this proof contradicts the philosophical principle of Berkeley's
idealism -that is, the empirical theory and the empirical doctrine. For
in this proof, Berkeley considers the principle of non-contradiction as
a fixed truth and, from the very beginning, finds improbable the
possibility of contradiction in objective reality. On the basis of this,
he concludes from the contradictory knowledge and sense experience that
they are empty of objective reality. It escapes him that the principle
of non-contradiction in empirical doctrine is nothing but an empirical
principle demonstrated by sense experience.

Thus, if knowledge and sense experience are contradictory, then how is
it possible for Berkeley to accept the principle of non-contradiction
and demonstrate by means of it the non-existence of objective reality?

Further, why is it that, according to him, there cannot exist an
objective reality in which phenomena and things contradict one another?
The truth is that Berkeley unconsciously relied on his nature that
asserts the principle of non-contradiction as independent of the senses
and sense experience.

Third, it is necessary that we distinguish between two issues, one of
which is the issue of the existence of the objective reality of
knowledge and sense perception; and the other is the issue of the
correspondence of this reality to what appears to us in our knowledge
and sense perception.

If we distinguish between these two issues, we will be able to know that
the contradiction of sense perception cannot be taken as a proof of the
non-existence (p. 128) of an objective reality, as Berkeley thought.
Rather, it indicates a non-agreement between the idea known by the
senses and the external objective reality. This is to say that sense
perception need not fully agree with external things. But this is
different from Berkeley's attempt to deny the objectivity of sense
perception.

When we immerse our hands in water and one of them feels hot, while the
other feels cold, we are not required, for the purpose of eliminating
contradiction, to deny the objectivity of sense perception absolutely.
Rather, we can explain the contradiction in a different way namely, that
our sense perceptions are nothing but psychological reactions to
external things.

Thus, there must be an external thing if we are to have a sense
perception or if we are to have a reaction. But it is not necessary that
the sense perception agree with the objective reality; for, since sense
perception is a subjective reaction, it is not separate from the
subjective aspect.

On the basis of this, we can immediately judge that the water that
Berkeley supposes to be warm and not to be hot or cold is the objective
reality that causes in us the two contradictory sense perceptions, and
that the two sense perceptions contradict one another due to the
subjective aspect that we add to things when we know them or when we
have reactions to them.

The second proof is that the acceptance of the existence of things
outside our souls and conceptions rests on the fact that we see and
touch such things; that is, that we believe they exist because they
provide us with certain sense perceptions. However, our sense
perceptions are nothing but ideas contained in our souls. Therefore, the
things that our senses know are nothing but ideas, and ideas cannot
exist outside our souls.

In this proof, Berkeley attempts to make the issue of accepting the
objective reality of things dependent on direct conjunction with that
reality. As long as it is not possible for us under any circumstances to
have direct conjunction with things external to our souls, and as long
as we are necessitated to know such things in our private conceptions
and ideas, (p. 124) then in truth, there is no existence except for
these conceptions and ideas. If we destroy such conceptions and ideas,
there will be nothing left that we can know or whose existence we can
admit.

To begin with, we must notice that this argument, by means of which
Berkeley attempts to demonstrate his idealistic notion, is unsound, even
according to Berkeley himself. For he agrees with us, though
unconsciously, that it is untenable and insufficient for justifying the
idealistic notion. This is because it leads to subjective idealism that
denies the existence of other individuals, as well as the existence of
nature. If reality is limited to knowledge and consciousness themselves
because we have no conjunction with anything beyond the limits of the
mind and its conscious contents, then such knowledge and consciousness
will be my knowledge and my consciousness.

I will have no conjunction with the knowledge and consciousness of
others, as I will have no conjunction with nature itself. This will
impose on me isolation from everything, other than my existence and my
mind. Thus, it will not be appropriate for me to accept the existence of
other human beings, since they are nothing but the conceptions of my
mind and subjective thoughts.

Therefore, this inquiry leads to an incredible individualistic idealism.
Is it then possible for Berkeley to be driven to adopt an extreme form
of his argument and draw from it this kind of idealism? Had he tried
something like this, he would have contradicted himself before
contradicting others.

[If we are wrong], then with whom did he converse, for whom did he write
and compose, and for whose sake did he lecture and teach? Is this not a
firm assertion by Berkeley of the objective reality of other
individuals? Thus, it becomes clear that Berkeley himself shares with us
the non-acceptance of the argument that he had adopted, and the
acceptance, though unconsciously, of its falsehood.

Now, it remains for us to clarify the secret behind the fallacy in this
proof, in order to understand why people, including Berkeley himself,
cannot attain actual conviction concerning it. In this regard, we must
remember what we learned in the first part of (p. 125) the
investigation, 'the primary source of knowledge' - namely, that human
knowledge is divided into two main divisions: assent and conception. We
must also know the basic quality that distinguishes assent from
conception. This quality is what makes knowledge of the assent type a
link between us and the external world.

To put this more clearly, conception is nothing but the presence of the
form of one of the essences in our specific intellective faculties. The
form may be present in our senses. This sort of presence constitutes the
sense perception of this form. Again, the form may be present in our
imaginative faculty. By means of this presence, imagination occurs.

Further, the form may be present in the mind in its general abstract
nature. This kind of presence is called 'intellection'. Thus, sense
perception, imagination and intellection are various kinds of
conception, and different ways in which the forms of things are present
in the human intellective faculties. We conceive the apple on the tree
by perceiving it through vision. Our sense perception of it means that
its form is present in our senses.

Later, we retain this form in our mind after we depart from the tree.
This latter type of presence is imagination. After this, we can
eliminate from this form the qualities that distinguish it, from other
apples, retaining only its general idea -that is, the universal idea of
apple. This universal form is intellection.

These are the three stages of conception that human, knowledge crosses.
Every one of these stages is just the presence of a form in some of our
intellective faculties. Therefore, conception, on the whole, is no more
than the presence in our intellective faculties of the form of a certain
thing, be that a clear and evident conception, such as sense perception,
or dull and faint, such as imagining and intellecting.

Because of this, conception cannot pave the way for us to reach beyond
the form that we conceive in our intellective faculties, nor does it
ensure the movement from the subjective realm to the objective realm.
The reason for this is that the presence of the form of an essence in
our intellective faculty is one thing, while the objective and
independent presence of that essence in the outside is something else.
Due to this, sense perception may make us conceive numerous things that
we do not believe to have any independent objective reality. (p. 126)

For example, we conceive a stick immersed in water as broken; yet we
know that that stick is not actually broken in water. But we perceive it
as such due to the refraction of the light rays in water. Also, we
perceive the warm water as very hot, if we immerse our hands in it when
they are very cold, even though we are convinced that the heat that we
perceive is not objectively real.

Regarding assent - that is, the other type of human knowledge - it is
the proper point of our departure from conception to objectivity. Let
us, therefore, notice how this is accomplished.

Knowledge of the assent type is nothing but a judgement by the soul that
there is a certain reality beyond conception. This is exemplified in our
saying, 'A straight line is the shortest distance between two points'.
This judgement means that we assert that there is a reality beyond our
conception of straight lines, points and distances. That is why it is
completely different from the various kinds of pure conception.

First, this judgement is not a form of a specific essence that we can
perceive and conceive. Rather, it is a psychological act that links
forms. Because of this, it is impossible that it arises in the mind by
way of the senses. Rather, it is one of the internal acts of the knowing
soul.

Second, this judgement has a subjective property not present in any kind
of division of conception. This is the property of revealing a reality
beyond the limits of knowledge. For this reason, it is possible that you
can conceive or be aware of a thing without, at the same time, believing
that it has a reality beyond knowledge and consciousness.

However, it is not possible that you have knowledge of the assent type -
namely, that you believe that a straight line is the shortest distance
between two points, while at the same time doubting the existence of the
objective reality of which your knowledge and consciousness speak. (p.
127)

This makes it clear that knowledge of the assent type is the only thing
capable of refuting Berkeley's argument which states that we do not have
direct conjunction with reality, but that instead we have conjunction
with our ideas.

Thus, there is no existence for anything except for our own ideas.
However, even though the soul has no direct conjunction with anything
except with its knowledge, nevertheless, there is a kind of knowledge
which by nature has essential disclosure (kashfan dhatiyyan) of a thing
that lies outside knowledge. This is the judgement - that is, knowledge
of the assent type. Berkeley's argument is based on his confusion
between conception and assent, and on his ignorance of the basic
differences between the two.

In light of this, it is evident that the empirical doctrine and the
empirical theory lead to the idealistic tendency. Both are necessitated
to accept the argument offered by Berkeley. This is because, in
accordance with these two principles, the human soul does not at all
possess either necessary or natural knowledge. Rather, all its knowledge
arises from sense perception, and its various kinds of cognition are
based on this kind of perception - sense perception being but a form of
conception.

Thus, regardless of the multiplicity and variety of sense perception, it
does not extend beyond its conceptual limits, as it is impossible for
human beings to use it to move one step in the direction of objectivity.

The third proof is that if human knowledge and cognition are
characterized by essential disclosure of the realm that lies beyond
their limits, then all knowledge and cognition must be true. This is
because by nature and essence, it is revelatory; and a thing cannot be
free from its essential attributes. This is so, in spite of the fact
that all human thinkers admit that much of the information and many of
the judgements that people have are false and do not disclose anything
about reality.

Scholars may agree to accept a certain theory, yet later, this theory is
shown to be clearly false. How can this be understood in light of the
claims made by realistic philosophy - namely, that knowledge enjoys
essential disclosure?

Is there any way out for this philosophy other than to concede that
knowledge does not enjoy such a quality? (p. 128) But if it concedes
this, idealism becomes unavoidable; for then we would be unable to reach
objective reality by means of our ideas, as long as we have admitted
that they do not enjoy essential disclosure of that reality.

In order for us to respond to this proof, we must know what is meant by
the essential disclosure of knowledge. Essential disclosure means that
knowledge shows us the object to which it is related as fixed in a
reality external to the limits of our knowledge and consciousness.

Our knowledge that the sun rises, and that the triangle is other than
the square snakes us see the sunrise and the triangle's difference from
the square as fixed in a reality independent of us. Hence,-this
knowledge plays the role of a mirror, and its reflection of this
independent reality to us is its essential disclosure.

However, such a reflection does not mean that the sunrise truly exists
outside, and that the triangle's difference from the square is fixed in
reality. That is, the thing's fixedness in reality is other than its
being also reflected. From this we know that the essential disclosure of
knowledge is not detached from knowledge, even when there is error and
ambiguity.

The ancients' knowledge that the sun turns around the earth had the same
degree of essential disclosure that our knowledge that the earth turns
around the sun has. This means that they saw the sun's turning around
the earth as something fixed in reality and independent of them. Thus,
the objective existence of such turning was seen by them; that is, they
believed it, even though it was not fixed in reality.[^9]

Therefore, by knowledge of the assent type, human beings naturally move
from conception to objectivity (p. 129) due to the essential disclosure
of this knowledge. Whether knowledge is actually true or false, it is in
either case knowledge and disclosure.

The fourth proof is that if knowledge of the assent type may be
erroneous, and if its essential disclosure does not protect it from
being so, then why is it not permissible that all our knowledge of the
assent type is erroneous? Further, how can we rely on the essential
disclosure of knowledge, as long as such disclosure is a necessary
attribute of knowledge, both in its false and true matters alike?

This attempt differs in purpose from the previous attempt; for in the
latter, idealism seeks to consider human knowledge as a subjective
matter that does not pave the way to objective reality. But we have
thwarted that attempt by showing the essential disclosure that
distinguishes knowledge of the assent type from pure conception.

The present attempt, on the other hand, seeks the total elimination of
knowledge of the assent type from human thought. As long as such
knowledge may be erroneous, or as long as its essential disclosure does
not mean its constant truth, then why do we not doubt it and dispense
with it altogether? If we do so, we will have nothing to secure the
existence of the objective world.

Naturally, if human thought does not possess a number of pieces of
knowledge whose truth is necessarily secure, such doubt will be
unavoidable and inescapable. Further, it will be impossible for us to
know any reality, regardless of its kind, as long as such knowledge does
not rely on a necessary security [of truth], and as long as error is
possible in every field.

However, what overthrows this doubt is the rational doctrine which we
had studied in the first chapter of the theory of knowledge, the primary
source of knowledge. This doctrine asserts that there is necessary
knowledge whose truth is secure, or completely free from error.

Rather, error occurs sometimes in the method of making an inference from
this knowledge. On the basis of this, human knowledge divides (as was
pointed out (p. 130) in the above-mentioned discussion) into knowledge
whose necessity is secure, of which the main principle of thought is
formed, and secondary knowledge inferred from that principle. It is in
this latter type of knowledge that error may occur. Thus, regardless of
the degree of our doubt, we cannot doubt that principle, because its
truth is necessarily secure.

We would now like to find out whether it is possible for the idealist
philosopher, Berkeley, to deny that secure principle and reject the
presence of primary necessary knowledge above error and ambiguity. There
is no doubt that the answer is in the negative; for he is required to
admit the presence of knowledge whose truth is secure, as long as he
attempts to demonstrate his idealism by means of the previously
mentioned proofs.

A human being cannot demonstrate something, unless he based his
demonstration on fundamentals and rules that are to him of secure truth.
If we pay attention to Berkeley's proofs, we find him obliged to admit
the following:  
*a. The principle of non-contradiction on which the first proof is
based.* If contradiction were possible, one could infer from the
contradiction of sense perceptions that this principle is not
objective.  
*b. The principle of causality and necessity.* If Berkeley does not
admit this principle, his proof will be useless. For a human being bases
a proof on his opinion, only because he is convinced that a proof is a
necessary cause of knowing the truth of that opinion. If he does not
accept the principle of causality and necessity, the proof may be true,
but still one cannot demonstrate by it the opinion under consideration.

If knowledge with secure truth is proved in human thought, then there is
no (p. 131) doubt that our knowledge of the objective world which is
independent of us is a part of this knowledge. The mind finds itself
required to accept the existence of the external world as a whole, and
to reject all doubt concerning it, regardless of the difference between
the mind's awareness and actuality, or between the mind's thought and
reality.

Doubt concerning the existence of the independent world will be
considered a kind of insanity. We conclude from our discussions of
philosophical idealism that realism relies on two principles: the first
is the acceptance of the essential disclosure of knowledge of the assent
type, and the second is the acceptance of a basic principle of human
knowledge whose truth is necessarily secure. We have already found that
Berkeley is required to admit each of these two principles. Were it not
for the essential disclosure of knowledge of the assent type, he would
not have known other individuals, nor would he have fashioned his life
on the basis of their existence. Also, were it not for knowledge whose
truth is secure in the human thought, he would not have been able to
demonstrate his idealistic claims.

### II. Physical Idealism

Prior to the last century, physics used to explain nature in a
materialistic, realistic fashion as governed by the general laws of
mechanics. To the physicists, nature is real, in the sense that it
exists independently of the mind and consciousness.

It is also material because, according to their scientific analysis,
nature is reduced to small, solid particles not receptive to change or
division - such particles being the individual substances that were
spoken of in Greek philosophy by Democritus.[^10]

These particles or primordial masses of nature are in constant motion.
Matter is the sum of those particles, and the natural phenomena in it
are the result of the spatial transposition and motion of those masses.

Since this motion requires scientific explanation, physics explained it
mechanically, as it explained the motion of the pendulum of a clock or
sound waves. (p. 132) It also assumed that those masses involved forces
and specific relations among them in order to complete the mechanical
explanation of the natural phenomena. These forces and relations must,
in turn, also be subject to the mechanical explanation.

Thus, the presumptive notion of air developed in physics, to which a
number of functions were ascribed, such as the spreading of light that
air was assumed to carry when moving from some masses to some others, as
it carries heat, electricity and similar powers of nature. This
discussion can be summed up in [the statement] that nature is a
material, objective reality governed by a complete mechanical system.

But this physical notion was not able to remain steadfast in the face of
modern discoveries that imposed on the scientists a total conversion of
their theories about nature. Further, such discoveries proved to the
scientists that the scientific mind is still at its beginning. The
discovery of the electrons was one of the most important discoveries. It
proved that the atom has a composite structure and that its radiation
can be decomposed.

While the atom was the primary material unit of which nature is
composed, it proved to be composite in turn. But this is not the whole
story. It also became possible that the atom evaporates as electricity.

Moreover, while motion was restricted to the sphere of mechanical
motion - this being consistent with the mechanical explanation of
nature - other kinds of motion were discovered. Again, while the common
view asserted that the material mass (this is the mathematical
expression for the material substance) endures and cannot change,
scientific evidence showed that it is not stable but relative, and that
in the real sense, it does not express anything other than a latent
power. That is why the bodily mass fluctuates in accordance with its
motion.

Thus, it became dear to physicists that materialism had died out, and
that the materialistic view of the world became inconsistent with
science and the empirical evidence. (p. 183)

Due to this, the scientists were able to form a substantial notion of
the world that is more profound than the materialistic notion.
Materialism is just an aspect of this new notion. Indeed, some
physicists went further than this to claim that the world can be
attributed to pure motion. In this, they attempted to dispense with any
substantial reality in addition to the world.

In the words of Ostwald:[^11]  
 The stick that strikes Scaban? does not rise on the basis of the
existence of the external world. This stick does not exist. The only
thing that exists [of it] is its power of motion.[^12]

Also, Karl Pearson[^13] makes the following statement: 'Matter is the
nonmaterial in motion.'[^14]  
 In the midst of these new discoveries that shook the material edifice
and showed that matter is a general human illusion about the world, and
not a scientific notion that corresponds to the world, the idealistic
tendency in physics arose and attracted many physicists.

Thus, they said, because every day science offers a new evidence against
the objective value of human knowledge and the material aspect of the
world, atoms or the primary structures of matter become - after having
disappeared in light of science nothing but convenient ways for
expressing thought, and metaphors and signs that do not involve any
objective reality. We are told by Eddington:[^15]

There is nothing in the whole system of laws concerning natural science
that cannot be inferred with clarity from the consideration of, and the
reflection on the absolute comprehensive theory of knowledge.

The mind, which does not know our existence, yet (p. 134) knows the
order of thought by means of which it explains its empirical experience,
is capable of attaining the whole knowledge of natural science which is
acquired by way of sense experience. Finally, I say that what I know
about the universe is truly and precisely the exact, the very thing
which we add to the universe to make it intelligible.[^16]

Later, Eddington expressed his hope that  
 What was concealed in the nucleus of the atom will become known in the
very near future, in spite of the presumptions that our minds entertain,
namely that this was concealed prior to our time.[^17]

Actually, the idealistic tendency of these physicists was the result of
an error in philosophical thinking, and not the result of a physical
proof in the scientific field. The reason is that the primary issue in
philosophy, the response to which divided philosophers into idealists
and realists, appeared to them as fallacious.

This primary issue is whether the world has an objective reality
independent of our minds and consciousness. These physicists thought
that this issue is subject to [one of the] following two responses only.
Either the world is attributed to the mind and consciousness and,
therefore, has no objective existence; or it is a material reality that
exists outside the mind and consciousness.

If we discard the second response from the scientific proofs and
experiments that showed that materialism is nothing but a veil covering
the reality of the world, we are then required to adopt the first
response and accept the pure idealistic notion of the world. However,
the truth is that the two responses were not well stated above. The
reason is (p. 135) that advancing opposition along idealistic lines does
not require us to accept the necessity of the material aspect of
objective reality.

This is because realism, which is opposite idealism, does not mean more
than the admission of an objective reality independent of the mind and
consciousness. Whether this independent objective reality is matter,
power, motion or electric waves is another question that realism, which
accepts an objective world, must answer in light of science and the
experimental discoveries. When we draw a complete distinction between
the two issues, we can then attribute the abovementioned idealistic
tendency to the error on which it rests.

We have already learned that the first question is this: 'Is the world a
reality independent of the human mind?' The two responses to this
question are given by idealism and realism. Idealism answers negatively,
while realism answers affirmatively. Both answers must be based on
purely philosophical grounds. Science and sense experience have no say
in this matter.

The other question is the following: 'What is the independent objective
reality; and are the qualities or properties of matter primary
concomitants of it?'This question leans toward realism only, for there
is no room for it on the basis of the idealistic notion.

Some realists answer it by offering a materialistic notion of the
independent objective reality. Others offer different notions. The view
of science determines some of these responses. Scientific experiments
and discoveries form the realists' scientific notion of the objective
world. Thus, if science discards the materialistic notion of the world,
this will not mean that science rejects realism and has become
idealistic.

This is because scientific discoveries have not proved the non-existence
of (p. 136) an independent objective reality. Rather, they have shown
that the material aspect is not a necessary element of it. Whether the
world is attributed to potency, motion or anything else other than
matter is harmless to realism and cannot prove idealism, as long as the
world has an objective reality that exists independently of the mind and
consciousness.

Thus, if in light of science, matter is transformed into electricity,
mass into energy, energy into mass, and if nature expresses a motion
free from matter - if all this comes true - it will not change our
position at all concerning the first question. In any case, we believe
that reality is not just a product of consciousness, but a product of
the independent reality.

These scientific theories can make an impact if we have finished
answering the first question and taken up the second question, in order
to know the nature of the world. From this we learn that the discoveries
of modern science do not refute realism at all. Instead, they refute
materialism which claims to be the required description of that
[objective] reality in general.

It is strange to find some materialists attempting to retain for
materialism the same position that it had enjoyed, and to say that the
scientific and empirical evidence does not demonstrate the non-existence
of the material aspect of the world. Rather, it is a cause of
strengthening our understanding of matter and its qualities.

Let us quote from Lenin:  
 The disappearance of matter determines that the degree of the knowledge
of matter that we have reached also disappears, and that our awareness
becomes more profound. Thus, some qualities of matter, such as its
impenetrability, rest and mass, had appeared to us before as absolute,
fixed and primary, but are now disappearing.

They have become known as relative and necessary concomitants of some
states of matter only. This is because the only property (p. 137) of
matter, whose admission is determined by philosophical materialism, is
the state of matter as an objective reality existing outside our
awareness.[^18]

The principles of the materialistic notion of the world cannot be shaken
by any change in the scientific notion of the qualities of matter. This
is not because what is philosophically known about matter has no
relation to what is alleged to be scientifically known; but because it
is impossible for matter to lose this quality of existing as an
objective actual reality which is one of the basic qualities of
matter.'[^19]

By this, Lenin intended to falsify physical idealism and to strengthen
his materialistic notion. However, it is clear from his words that he is
ignoring every realistic philosophy, with the exception of the realistic
philosophy that rests on material grounds. In order to resolve the
contradiction between the materialistic notion and the truths of science
and physics, he offered a strange explanation of the notion of matter.

The explanation he gave was extensive and comprehensive enough to cover
the objectivity and independence of the reality of matter. By means of
this, he attempted to offer materialism instead of idealism as a unique
philosophical solution for the issue of the existence of the world. It
is clear that if matter is an exact expression of the independent
objective reality, and if its only necessary quality is its existence
and independence of our awareness, then theological metaphysics must be
precisely a materialistic philosophy according to this new notion of
matter.

And thus, opposition between metaphysics and the materialistic
philosophy and its notion of the world will be completely eliminated.
(p. 138) The theological philosopher who accepts metaphysics says
exactly the same thing about the world [as does the materialist]. The
world, to him, is an objective reality independent of our awareness. The
theological principle that is accepted by metaphysical philosophy is
nothing but an objective reality independent of our awareness.

The truth is that it is useless to play with words. The expansion of the
materialistic notion to the extent that would enable it to cover its
opposite notion, and to be consistent with it does not mean anything
other than its departure from its own philosophical reality, and its
inability to respond to the notions that are its opposite.

Add to this that dialectical materialism does not permit Lenin to admit
an absolute reality. For this would be contradictory to the dialectic
which asserts the development of all realities in accordance with the
contradictions that they involve. Is the basic quality of matter, in the
new Leninian sense, an absolute quality that does not develop and does
not submit to the law of dialectics and its contradictions?

If the answer is in the affirmative, then the absolute reality that the
dialectic rejects and that the Marxist dialectical principles do not
accept must exist. If, on the other hand, this quality is a dialectical
quality inclusive of the contradictions that cause it to develop and
change, as do other realities in the world, this would mean that
materialism also suffers from contradiction. Due to this, materialism
had to change, to transform and to free itself from the basic quality of
matter.

The conclusion that we can draw is that the idealistic tendency of the
physicists was the result of failing to distinguish between the two
philosophical issues discussed earlier, and not a direct product of
scientific evidence.

In spite of this, we must point out another factor that played an
important role in shaking the scientists' certitude about objective
reality. This was the collapse of the scientific axioms in the modern
scientific field. (p. 139)

Thus, while such axioms had been considered absolute and indubitable
truths, science succeeded in falsifying them and proving their
erroneousness. With this, the atoms of John Dalton[^20] quickly melted
away, and the law of the imperishability of matter was shaken.
Experiments showed that matter is an illusion that people held for
thousands of years.

As a reaction to this, doubt reappeared and took hold of the thoughts of
a number of scientists. Thus, if the scientific axioms of yesterday are
the errors of today, why should we not be doubtful about every reality,
regardless of its clarity to us? Further, why should we assume the basic
issue - that is, the issue of the existence of objective reality, to be
above skepticism or doubt?

Hence, the idealistic tendency or agnosticism arose, not because science
proved the correctness and soundness of this tendency, but because the
scientists' conviction concerning science was shaken, and their faith in
the absolute truth of its axioms collapsed.

However, this factor was only a psychological motive or a psychological
crisis that inspired the inclination toward idealism. But this crisis is
eliminated by little observation when the issue is studied
philosophically. This is because the acceptance of the existence of the
objective reality of the world is not the result of empirical and
scientific proofs.

We learned earlier that experiments cannot produce such an acceptance
and move human beings from conception to objectivity. Rather, it is a
natural and necessary acceptance in human nature. For this reason, it is
general. Everyone shares in it, including the idealists who rebel
against it verbally. They, too, have the very, same conviction, as their
practical lives indicate.

All the axioms whose falsehood became evident centered on the structure
of the objective world, and the determination of its primary reality and
elements. It is clear that axioms of this sort are only confirmed by
scientific experiments. Thus, their collapse and evident falsehood -
whether due to the incompleteness or imprecision of the experiments on
which these axioms rest, or to the unsoundness of the rational inference
of the theory from the experiment - does not in any way mean that the
necessary rational axioms may be false. (p. 140)

### III. Physiological Idealism

This is another sort of idealism adopted by some physiologists.
According to their claims, it rests on the physiological truths that
science discovers. This idealistic tendency proceeds from the following
indisputable point.

The determination of the subjective form of the human sense perception
depends on the composition of our senses and on the organic system in
general. Thus, the nature of sense perception which comes to us from the
external world does not by itself determine the form of the thing in our
sense perception.

Rather, this form is at the mercy of the nervous system more than
anything else. On the basis of this, they claimed that the senses do not
give us information about the external world. Rather, they inform us
about our private organic system. This does not mean that the senses
have no relation to external things. Rather, external things are the
primary causes that produce the acts of sense perception.

However, it is the nature of the private organic system that
crystallizes the acts of sense perception in the manner in which sense
perception expresses itself. Due to this, sense perception may be
considered symbolic, and not an exact form. This is because a form is
required to have some similarity to the thing that it represents. A
symbol, on the other hand, need not have any similarity to the thing
with which it is concerned.

This idealistic tendency is one of the unavoidable complications of the
materialistic notion of knowledge which we completely reject. If
knowledge were either nothing but a pure physiological act, or a
specific material interaction between the nervous system and the
external objective things, the quality of this physiological act must be
linked either to the nature of the nervous system [alone], or to both
the nature of this system and the nature of the objective things.

Even if this leads to clear idealism and to the negation of the reality
of the objective world, nevertheless, as long as we retain for external
things the aspect of causing the processes of the nervous system, (p.
141) it is permissible to doubt the degree of correspondence between
sense perception and objective reality, and to be skeptical as to
whether knowledge is a mere specific reaction that indicates its cause
symbolically, and without similarity [to it] in reality and content. We
will soon return to this physiological idealistic notion.

5. The Defenders of Modern Skepticism
-------------------------------------

In fact, modern skepticism can be attributed to the old doctrine of
skepticism that was upheld by the Greek school of skepticism headed by
Pyrrho, who claimed that human beings are incapable of passing any
judgement about things. Modern skepticism developed under circumstances
similar to those that surrounded this old school and helped its growth.
Greek skepticism arose as a compromise for the conflict that had reached
its most intense moments between sophistry and philosophy.

Sophistry was born a few centuries before philosophy. It rebelled
against all truths and denied scientific and empirical propositions
together. Philosophers confronted sophistry, pointing out its
contradictions, and showing its collapse at the hands of criticism,
until the wave of denial faded away.

At that point, the notion of doubt asserting absolute agnosticism came
about. It attempted to justify this agnosticism by showing the
contradictions of the senses and the conflicting ideas that strip it of
the quality of scientific confidence.

Thus, it was a light form of sophistry. The same is true of modern
skepticism. It attempted to advocate agnosticism as a solution for the
contradiction between idealism and realism - if it is appropriate to
consider surrendering to doubt as a solution for this contradiction. Due
to this, it was a lighter form of idealism.

Modern skepticism did not rely on showing only the contradictions of
sense perception and knowledge, but also on the analysis of knowledge
which leads to doubt, according to the claims of its proponents. David
Hume, who advocated the philosophy of skepticism as a result of
Berkeley's philosophy, (p. 142) believed that certainty about the
objective value of human knowledge is an inaccessible matter. The
instrument of human knowledge is the mind or cogitation.

It is impossible to have anything in the mind but knowledge. It is also
impossible to conceive or to form the idea of a thing, if that idea is
different from concepts and reactions. Let us direct our attention to
the outside as much as we please, and let our imagination survey the
skies or the furthest points of the universe, still we will never take
one step beyond ourselves.

Because of this, we cannot answer the basic issue in philosophy,
concerning which the idealists and the realists fight. Idealism claims
that reality is in consciousness and knowledge; while realism asserts
that reality exists in an objective and independent manner. Skepticism,
on the other hand, refuses to respond to this issue, because [according
to it], it is impossible to give an answer to such an issue. Therefore,
let this issue be suspended forever.

The fact is that David Hume did not add anything to Berkeley's proofs,
even though he has strengthened doubt about realities and disregard for
them. His skepticism was not limited to external matter. Rather, he
struck down the two realities that Berkeley's philosophy retained -
namely, the soul and God. This was in keeping with the extreme form of
the empirical principle. For this purpose, he adopted the same
Berkeleian style and method.

As the material substance was not, in Berkeley's view, anything but an
assembly of phenomena composed artificially in the mind, so also is the
soul nothing but an assembly of internal phenomena and their relations.
It is impossible to prove 'the I' (the self) by consciousness, because
when I penetrate to the heart of what I call 'the 1', I come across a
particular phenomenon. Thus, if all knowledge disappears, there will
remain nothing that I can call 'the I'.

As for the idea of God, it rests on the principle of causality. However,
it is not possible to admit the truth of this principle, according to
Hume's claim. The reason is that the senses do not reveal to us a
necessity between phenomena and events. Rather, the idea of causality is
attributed to mere habit or to a form of association of ideas. (p. 143)

Thus, Hume reached the ultimate points of the empirical theory and the
empirical doctrine to which this theory and this doctrine naturally
lead. Instead of proving by this method [the necessity of] refuting the
empirical or experimental principle in the mind, he was driven after
this principle, until it led him to the unavoidable end.

We do not wish to discuss David Hume once again, inasmuch as his
arguments are a repetition of Berkeley's proofs and views. Rather, we
will take up one point only, namely habit, to which Hume attributed the
principle of causality and many relations of things in the mind.

Let us therefore, ask: 'What is habit?' If it is nothing but a necessity
existing between the idea of the cause and that of the effect, then it
is another expression of the principle of causality. If, on the other
hand, it is something else, then it is not different from causality in
being an invisible idea to which we have no corresponding sense
perception or reaction.

But Hume must reject this [view], as he rejects all the truths that are
inaccessible to the senses. In criticizing the empirical doctrine
earlier, a response was given to this unsuccessful explanation of
causality attempted by Hume. Therefore, let that [response] be attended
to.

6. The Relativists
------------------

Relativism is considered one of the doctrines that assert the existence
of reality and the possibility of human knowledge. However, this
knowledge or reality, which the human mind may attain, is a relative
knowledge and a relative reality, in the sense that it is not a reality
free from subjective attachments, or an absolute reality. Rather, it is
a mixture of the objective aspect of the thing and the subjective aspect
of the knowing mind. Therefore, objective reality in thought is
inseparable from the subjective aspect, and is not free from some
foreign addition.

There are two main tendencies of relativism that differ in their idea
about relativism and its limits in the human sciences. One of these is
the tendency of relativism in the philosophy of Immanuel Kant. The other
is the tendency of subjective relativism of a number of modern
materialist philosophers. This latter tendency paved the way for
developmental relativism, which was advocated by dialectical
materialism. (p. 144)

### I. Kant's Relativism

To begin with, you must know that a rational judgement, according to
Kant, is of two kinds. First, analytic judgement: this is the judgement
that the mind uses for the purpose of clarification only, as in our
statements: 'The body is extended', and 'The triangle is three-sided'.

The source of the judgement here is the analysis of the notion of the
subject, i.e. 'body', or 'triangle', the inference of the elements
implied in this notion, such as'extension', which is implied in the
notion of 'body' and 'three-sided', which is implied in the notion of
'triangle', and then the attribution of these elements to the subject.
Analytic judgements do not give us new information about the subject.
Their only role is to explain and clarify.

Second, synthetic judgement: this is the judgement whose predicate adds
something new to the subject. Examples of this are: 'Bodies are heavy'.
'Heat expands corporeal particles.' 'Two plus two equals four.'  
 The quality that we impose on the subjects in these propositions is not
inferred from them by analysis. Rather, it is additional. Because of
this, a new knowledge that was not available before arises. Synthetic
judgements are sometimes primary judgements, while at other times they
are secondary judgements.

Primary judgements are those that are fixed in the mind prior to sense
experience, such as mathematical judgements, as in our saying: 'A
straight line is the shortest distance between two points.' The reason
for their being so will be pointed out later. Secondary synthetic
judgements, on the other hand, are those that are fixed in the mind
after sense experience, such as the judgements: 'The sunlight warms the
stone,' and 'Every body has a weight' (p. 145)

Kant's theory of knowledge may be summed up in the division of rational
knowledge or judgements into three groups.[^21]

a. Mathematics**:** All rational knowledge in this group is primary
synthetic judgements prior to sense experience because it treats natural
subjects in the human soul. Geometry specializes in space. The subject
of arithmetic is number. Number is nothing but a repetition of the unit.
Repetition means succession and following. And this is time, in the
Kantian philosophical sense.

Therefore, the two main poles around which the mathematical principles
center are space and time. In Kant's view, space (p. 146) and time are
two natural forms in people's formal sensibility. In other words, the
form of space and that of time are present in the formal sensibility
independently of sense experience.

The consequence of this is that all the judgements related to time and
space that we attribute to things are derived from our nature. In these
judgements, we do not rely on what we acquire from the outside through
the senses. That is why all mathematical propositions are derived from
the nature of our minds. This means that we create them ourselves, and
do not acquire them from the outside, since they focus on time and space
that are natural.

Thus, mathematics and the mathematical principles becomes knowable; and
mathematical truths become absolutely certain. Therefore, there is no
room in the mathematical field for error or contradiction, as long as
this field is natural in the soul, and as long as its propositions are
produced by us, and are not copied from an objective reality that is
independent of us; so that we may doubt the extent of the possibility of
knowing this reality and unraveling its innermost secret.

b. Natural science - that is, the human knowledge concerning the
objective world that is subject to sense experience: here, Kant begins
by dismissing matter from this field, because the mind does not know
anything about nature other than its phenomena.

He agrees with Berkeley that matter is not subject to knowledge and
sense experience. However, he differs from Berkeley in another respect.
He does not consider the above-mentioned point as a proof for the
non-existence of matter and a philosophical justification for its
denial, as Berkeley had claimed.

If matter is discounted, nothing will be left for the natural sciences
other than the phenomena that are subject to sense experience.
Therefore, such phenomena are the subject of these sciences. Because of
this, the judgements in these sciences are synthetic and secondary,
since they are based on a study of the objective phenomena of nature
that are known by sense experience. (p. 147)

If we wish to analyze these secondary synthetic judgements from the
perspective of the mind, we find them composed in fact of two elements,
one of which is empirical and the other rational. The empirical aspect
of these rational judgements is the sense perceptions that sense
experience acquires from the outside, after the formal sensibility pours
these perceptions in the time intuition and the space intuition.

As for the rational aspect, it is the natural link that the mind imposes
on the objects of sense perceptions, so that a science or a rational
knowledge may be formed out of them. Knowledge, therefore, is a mixture
of subjectivity and objectivity. It is subjective in its form and
objective in its matter. This is because it is the product of the union
between the empirical matter, which is derived from the outside, and one
of the forms of the mind which is naturally ready in the mind.

We know, for example, that bodily particles expand by heat. If we
consider this knowledge with some degree of analysis, we find that the
raw material of this knowledge - this being the phenomenon of the
expansion of bodily particles and the phenomenon of heat -was given by
way of sense experience. Were it not for sense experience, we would not
have known these phenomena.

On the other hand, the formal aspect of knowledge, - that is, the
causation by one phenomena of another - is not empirical. Rather, it can
be attributed to the category of causality which is one of the natural
categories of the mind. Had we not possessed this prior form, there
would not have been knowledge. Similarly, had we not acquired the
matters by means of sense experience, we would not have attained any
knowledge either.

Thus, knowledge arises as a result of the mind's adapting the empirical
subjects to its specific frames and molds, namely, to its natural
categories. The mind does not adapt, and its frames and molds do not
crystallize in accordance with the known subjects. In this, the mind is
similar to a person attempting to put a certain quantity of water in a
narrow bottle too small for it. Thus, he resorts to reducing the
quantity of water, so that it becomes possible to put it in that bottle,
instead of enlarging the bottle to give it the capacity to hold all the
water.

Thus, the intellectual revolution made by Kant concerning the issue of
the human mind becomes evident, since he made things center on the mind
and crystallize in accordance with its specific frames. (p. 148) This
was contrary to the common view - namely, that it is the mind that
centers on things and adapts itself in accordance with them.

In light of this, Kant distinguished between 'the thing in itself and
'the thing in us'. The thing in itself is an external reality without
any addition from us. This reality that is free from any subjective
addition is unknowable; for knowledge is subjective and rational in its
form. The thing in us, on the other hand, is a mixture composed of an
empirical subject plus the prior natural form which unites with it in
the mind.

That is why relativity is imposed on every truth representing external
things in our knowledge, in the sense that our knowledge indicates to us
the thing's reality in us, and not the thing's reality in itself. In
this, the natural sciences differ from the mathematical sciences. Since
the subject of the mathematical sciences is present in the soul
naturally, these sciences do not involve any duality of the thing in
itself and the thing in us.

The natural sciences, on the other hand, are the opposite of this. They
treat the external phenomena that are subject to sense experience. These
phenomena exist independently of us; and we know them by our natural
molds. No wonder then that the thing in itself is distinct from the
thing in us.

c. Metaphysics: Kant believes that it is impossible to attain knowledge
in metaphysics by means of the theoretical mind, and that any attempt to
establish metaphysical knowledge on philosophical grounds is an
unsuccessful and valueless attempt.

The reason for this is that there cannot be any primary or secondary
synthetic judgements in the propositions of metaphysics. Since the
primary synthetic judgements are independent of sense experience, they
cannot be applicable to anything other than the subjects that are
created in the soul by nature, and are ready in the mind without sense
experience.

Examples of this are time and space, the two subjects of the
mathematical sciences. (p. 149) As for the things dealt with in
metaphysics - namely, God, the soul and the world - they are not of this
sort. Metaphysics does not study mental entities. Rather, it attempts to
investigate self-subsisting objective things.

Secondary synthetic judgements, on the other hand, treat empirical
subjects such as the subjects of the natural sciences that are a part of
the empirical field. That is why these judgements are secondary: they
require sense experience. It is clear that the subjects of metaphysics
are not empirical.

Therefore, it is not possible to form secondary synthetic judgements in
metaphysics. Due to this, there is no room in metaphysics for anything
other than analytic judgements - that is, elaborations and explanations
of the metaphysical notions. But these judgements do not constitute real
knowledge at all, as we learned earlier.

The conclusion that Kant draws from this is the following. First,
judgements of the mathematical sciences are primary synthetic, and with
absolute value. Second, judgements that are based on sense experience in
the natural sciences are secondary synthetic. The truth in them cannot
be more than relative. Third, the subjects of metaphysics cannot involve
sound rational knowledge, neither on the basis of primary synthetic
judgements, nor on the basis of secondary synthetic judgements.

The main points in Kant's theory are these. Primary rational knowledge
is not a self-subsisting science independent of sense experience.
Rather, it is relations that aid in organizing and connecting things.
Its only role, therefore, 150) is one of making us know the empirical
things, in accordance with its specific frames. The natural consequence
of this is the discarding of metaphysics, since this primary knowledge
is not a science but relations. In order for it to be a science, it
would require a subject that the mind produces or knows by sense
experience.

But the subjects of metaphysics are neither produced by the mind, nor
known by sense experience. Another consequence of this is that truth in
the natural sciences always becomes relative, since those relations are
a part of the innermost structure of our knowledge of the external
phenomena, and are subjective relations. Thus, the thing in itself
differs from the thing in us.

This Kantian theory involves two basic errors. The first is that it
considers the mathematical sciences productive of the mathematical
truths and their principles. By this consideration, Kant raised the
mathematical principles and their truths above the possibility of error
and contradiction, since they are created in the soul and derived from
it, and not from the outside so that one may suspect they are erroneous
or contradictory.

However, the truth on which every realistic philosophy must be based is
that science is neither creative nor productive. Rather, it is
revelatory of what lies beyond its specific mental limits. Were it not
for this [quality of] essential disclosure, it would not be possible at
all to respond to the idealistic notion, as was previously done.

Thus, our knowledge that two plus two equals four is the knowledge of a
specific mathematical truth. But our knowledge of this truth does not
mean that we produce or create this truth in ourselves, as idealism
attempts to teach. Rather, knowledge in its nature is like a mirror.
Thus, as a mirror shows the real existence of the form reflected in it
as lying outside its limits; so also does knowledge reveal an
independent truth.

It is for this reason that two plus two equals four, whether or not
there exists a mathematician on the face of the earth; and whether or
not a human being knows this truth. (p. 151) This means that the
mathematical principles and truths have an objective reality. They are
operative and applicable laws. The mathematical sciences are nothing but
reflections of these principles and truths in the human mind. In this,
these principles and truths are very similar to the natural principles
and laws in that they are objective realities reflected in the mind.

Thus, we face the question concerning their mental reflection, and the
degree of its soundness and precision, as we face the same question in
the rest of the sciences. There is only one answer to this question. It
is the one offered by the rational doctrine: it states that since those
reflections of the mathematical principles in the human mind are natural
and necessary, their truth is essentially certain. Thus, the
mathematical truths are knowable, not because we create them, but
because we reflect them in necessary natural sciences.

The second is that Kant considers the laws that have their foundation in
the human mind as laws of the mind, and not scientific reflections of
the objective laws that govern and regulate the world as a whole. They
are nothing but mere relations present in the mind naturally, and used
by the mind to organize its empirical knowledge.

It was previously [mentioned] that this error resulted in the assertion
of the relativity of the truths known about the world of nature, and the
assertion of the impossibility of studying metaphysics rationally, as
well as the impossibility of basing it on the natural rational
knowledge, since this knowledge is nothing but relations by means of
which the mind organizes its empirical knowledge. As for the subjects of
metaphysics, we have no knowledge concerning them so that one can
organize it by such relations.

Adopting this critical doctrine unavoidably leads to idealism; for if
the primary knowledge in the mind is nothing but dependent relations
awaiting a subject in which to appear, then how could we move from
conception to objectivity?

Further, how could we prove the objective reality of our various sense
perceptions, (p. 152) - that is, the natural phenomena whose objectivity
Kant admits? We do know that the method of demonstrating the objective
reality of sense perception is the principle of causality that asserts
that every empirical reaction unavoidably results from a cause which
produces that particular reaction.

Therefore, if in Kant's view causality is attributed to a relation
between the empirical phenomena, then it will be naturally incapable of
performing anything in addition to relating our sense perceptions, as
well as the phenomena that appear in them.

At this point, it is our right to ask Kant about his philosophical
justification for accepting an objective reality of the sensible world,
when we do not possess a complete natural knowledge, such as the
principle of causality by means of which we can demonstrate this
reality. Instead, we possess a number of relations and laws for
organizing the mind and knowledge.

Due to this, realism must admit that the natural knowledge in the mind
is nothing but scientific reflections of independent objective laws.
With this, Kant's relativity, which he ascribes to our knowledge of
nature, is eliminated. This is because even though all knowledge in the
natural sciences requires some natural knowledge on the basis of which
scientific inference is drawn from experimentation; still, such a
natural knowledge is not purely subjective.

Rather, it is a natural reflection of an objective law that is
independent of the sphere of consciousness and knowledge.

Our knowledge that heat causes the expansion of bodily particles is
based on an empirical or experimental knowledge of heat and expansion,
as well as on a necessary rational knowledge of the principle of
causality. Each of these two pieces of knowledge reflects an objective
reality. Our knowledge that heat expands bodily particles results from
our knowledge of the two objective realities of these two pieces of
knowledge.

What Kant calls by the name 'form' (sura) is not a rational form of pure
knowledge. Rather, it is a knowledge characterized by the qualities of
science - that is, by essential disclosure and the reflection of
objective reality in this disclosure.

If we realize that the mind naturally possesses necessary knowledge of a
number of laws (p. 158) and objective realities, then we will be able to
base metaphysical propositions on a philosophical ground by studying
them in light of that necessary knowledge. This is because that
knowledge is not just pure relations. Rather, it is a primary knowledge
that can produce a new knowledge in the human mind.

### II. Subjective Relativism

Following Kant, the subjective relativists emerged to assert the
character of relativity of all that appears to people as true, according
to the role that the mind of every individual plays in acquiring the
truth.

According to this new notion, a truth is nothing but what is
necessitated by the circumstances and conditions of knowing. Since such
circumstances and conditions differ among the various individuals and
cases, therefore the truth in every area is relative to its specific
area, according to the circumstances and conditions involved in that
area. The truth is not the correspondence of an idea to reality, so that
it would be absolute with respect to all cases and individuals.

It is true that this kind of relativism carries the slogan of truth; but
this slogan is false. It is clear that this kind of relativism is
nothing but one of the doctrines of doubt or skepticism concerning every
objective reality.

The subjective relativism under consideration is supported by the
idealistic physiological tendency that asserts that sense perception is
only symbolic, and that what determines its quality and kind is not the
external thing, but the nature of the nervous system.

In fact, the fundamental cause that made it possible for subjective
relativism to emerge was the materialistic explanation of knowledge, and
the consideration of knowledge as involving a material process in which
the knowing nervous system interacts (p. 154) with the objective thing.
This is analogous to digestion, which is accomplished by the process of
a specific interaction between the digestive system and the nutritive
elements.

As nourishment does not interact [with the digestive system] and is not
digested except after it undergoes a number of changes and developments,
so also the thing which we know cannot be known by us except after
changing it and interacting with it.

This kind of relativism differs from Kant's relativism in two ways.
First, it subjugates all truths, without exception, to subjective
relativity; in contrast to Kant who considers mathematical principles
and knowledge as absolute truths. Thus, for him, 'two plus two equals
four' is an absolute truth not susceptible to doubt. But in the view of
the subjective relativists, this is a relative truth, in the sense that
it is necessitated by nothing other than the nature of our knowledge and
our specific system.

Second, the relative truth, according to the subjective relativists,
differs among individuals. Further, it is not necessary that all people
share some specific truths, since every individual has his own role and
activity to play.

Therefore, it is not possible to judge that what an individual knows is
the same as what another individual knows, as long as it is possible
that those two individuals disagree on the methods and nature of
knowledge. But for Kant, the formal molds are natural. All human minds
participate in them. This is why the relative truths are shared by all
people. In our future studies, we will discuss and refute the
materialistic explanation of knowledge on which subjective relativism is
based.

### III. Scientific Skepticism

We saw earlier that the doubt that spread among the natural scientists
after their great triumph in the field of physics was not a scientific
doubt, nor was it based on a scientific proof. Rather, it was a doubt
based on a philosophical error, or on a psychological difficulty. (p.
155)

But in other fields, we find scientific theories that unavoidably lead
to doubt, and to the affirmation of the denial of human kowledge - this
is in spite of the fact that their proponents did not think of reaching
such a result. Instead, they continued to accept the value and
objectivity of knowledge. Due to this, we called the doubt resulting
from such theories 'scientific skepticism', since these theories are
scientific, or, at least, appear scientific. The following are among the
most important of these theories: (1) behaviorism, which explains
psychology on the basis of physiology; (2) Freud's[^22] doctrine of
psychoanalysis; (3) historical materialism, which shapes the Marxist
views concerning history.

a. Behaviorism

Behaviorism is one of the well-known schools of psychology that
expresses a materialistic tendency in this science. The name
'behaviorism' was given to it, because it took the behavior of the
living being and his bodily movements, which may be subjugated to
scientific observation and experimentation, as the subject of
psychology.

It refused to admit the non-empirical subjects, such as the mind and
consciousness, which lie beyond scientific observation and
experimentation. It also attempted to explain the psychology of a human
being and the whole of his psychological and conscious life without
assuming that he has a mind and similar invisible ideas.

This is because the psychologist does not find or does not perceive the
minds of others scientifically when he carries out his experiments on
them. Instead, he perceives their behavior, their movements and their
physiological activities.

Therefore, in order for the research to be scientific, all the
psychological phenomena must be explained within the sensible framework.
This is done by considering a human being as a machine whose phenomena
and movements may also be explained in terms of the mechanical method,
and in light of the principle of the causation of the external stimuli
which proceed to the machine, thus affecting it.

According to behaviorism, when we study the psychological phenomena, we
do not find a mind, (p. 156) a consciousness or knowledge. Rather, we
are faced with physiological material movements and activities produced
by internal or external material causes.

Thus, when we say, for example, 'The history teacher thinks of preparing
a lecture on the individual ownership of the Romans,' we are in fact
expressing material activities and movements in the teacher's nervous
system that are produced mechanically by external or internal causes,
such as the heat of the fireplace in front of which this teacher sits,
or the digestive operation which follows his tatting of lunch.

Behaviorism found in the conditioned stimuli, which are based on
Pavlov's (50) experiments, great support which made it possible for it
to assert the multiplicity of stimuli that a human being receives 'due
to the growth and increase of these stimuli by way of conditioning'.

Thus, it became possible to say that the totality of 'the natural and
conditioned' stimuli corresponds to the totality of the ideas in a human
being's life. 'How did behaviorism benefit from Pavlov's experiments?'
'What are the conditioned stimuli that these experiments uncovered -
thus multiplying the number of stimuli, something in the light of which
behaviorism explained human ideas?' 'To what extent can Pavlov's
experiments prove the behavioristic point of view?'

These issues will be addressed in one of the discussions of this book
reserved specifically for the discussion of knowledge (Part 2, Chapter 1
of the present work). At the present, however, we are concerned with
expounding the behavioristic point of view which subjugates the human
intellectual life to a mechanical explanation, and understands the mind
and consciousness as physiological activities produced by various
material causes.

It is clear that any attempt to postulate a theory of knowledge in light
of this sort of behaviorism unavoidably leads to a negative position
with respect to the value of knowledge, and to the inadmission of its
objective value. Consequently, any discussion concerning the soundness
of this or that scientific notion, this or that philosophical doctrine,
or this or that social opinion becomes useless and unjustifiable. (p.
157)

This is because every notion, regardless of its scientific,
philosophical or social character or area, does not express anything
except particular situations that occur in the bodies of the same
individuals that have that notion.

Thus, on the philosophical level, we cannot ask which one of the two
philosophies is true: the materialism of Epicurus[^23] or the theology
of Aristotle; nor can we ask on the scientific level which of the
following is true: Newton's[^24] idea that asserts that the universe
must be explained in terms of gravity, or Einstein's[^25] general
relativity; Marx's economic thought, or Ricardo's,[^26] for example.

The same is true of all fields, because in light of behaviorism, this
sort of inquiry appears very much like an inquiry about the digestive
operations of the pair of thinkers -namely, which one of the two
operations is true.

Thus, as it is inappropriate to inquire about which of the two
operations is true - the digestive operations of Epicurus, Newton and
Marx, or those of Aristotle, Einstein and Ricardo - so also it is
inappropriate to inquire about whose doctrines or ideas are true. The
reason is that the ideas of these thinkers are, like the different
digestive operations in their stomachs, nothing but bodily functions and
organic activities.

Thus, whenever it becomes possible for the activity of the stomach to
reveal to us through the digestive operation the quality of nourishment,
and to describe to us the nature of nourishment, it becomes possible for
the neurological activity in the brains to reflect some external
realities. But as long as it is not permissible for us to ask whether
the activity of the stomach is true or false, it is also not permissible
for us to ask whether the intellectual activity is true or false.

We also find it clear that the idea, according to the behavioristic
school, is linked to its stimuli, and not to its evidence. Due to this,
the behavioristic school lost confidence in all human knowledge, since
it is possible for the idea to change and to be followed by a
contradictory idea if the stimuli and external conditions are different.

Therefore, it becomes useless for the thinker to discuss his idea and
its evidence. Instead, one must investigate the material stimuli of that
idea and their removal. If the idea, for example, was produced by the
heat of the fireplace that is in the room in which that thinker thinks,
and by his digestive operation, then the only way for eliminating this
idea is by changing such things as the atmosphere of the room, and
stopping the digestive operation. (p. 158) With this, human knowledge
becomes void and empty of objective value.

b. Freud

As for Freud's doctrine of psychoanalysis, it records the same
conclusions reached by behaviorism concerning the theory of knowledge.
Even though Freud's doctrine does not deny the existence of the mind,
yet it divides the mind in two. One division is the conscious elements:
these are a collection of ideas, emotions and desires of which we are
aware in ourselves. The other division is the unconscious elements of
the mind - namely, our appetites and instincts - which are concealed
behind our consciousness.

These are mental forces deeply rooted in ourselves. We cannot control
their activities or have any say in their formation and development. All
the conscious elements depend on these concealed elements of which we
are unaware. The conscious acts of an individual are nothing but a
distorted reflection of the appetites and motives that are hidden in the
unconscious.

Consciousness, therefore, comes about by way of the unconscious. This
enables the proponents of psychoanalysis to say that the unconscious is
that which determines the contents of consciousness, and consequently,
rules all human ideas and conduct.

With this in mind, our instinctive appetites become the real foundation
of what we believe to be true. The reasoning processes, which lead us to
the conclusions that are already imposed on us by our appetites and
instincts, are nothing but an elevation or a lifting of these instincts
to the conscious level which constitutes the upper division of the mind.
On the other hand, the unconscious elements or the concealed instincts
and appetites constitute the first level or the foundational lower
division.

We can easily realize the influence of this analytic doctrine on the
theory of knowledge. In light of it, the mind is not viewed as an
instrument for changing the actual world or for producing events in
reality.

Rather, its task is to express the demands of the unconscious, and
inevitably to attain the results that are imposed by our appetites and
instincts and that lie hidden in our innermost being. As long as the
mind is an instrument that serves the purposes of our instincts and
expresses them, and not reality or actuality, there will be nothing to
support (p. 159) the belief that the mind reflects reality.

This is so because it is possible for reality to be in disagreement with
our unconscious desires that govern the mind. It would also be
impossible to think of giving any assurance about the concordance
between our unconscious mental forces and reality. The reason is that
such thinking itself is the product of our unconscious desires and an
expression of them, and not of actuality or reality.

c. Historical Materialism

Following this, the role of historical materialism emerges, and again
reaches the same conclusion to which behaviorism and psychoanalysis led.
This is in spite of the fact that all the proponents of historical
materialism reject skepticism and accept philosophically the value of
knowledge and its capacity for revealing reality.

Historical materialism expresses the complete Marxist notion of history,
society and the laws of the composition and development of society. That
is why it treats general human ideas and knowledge as a part of the
composition of human society. Thus, it gives its opinion regarding the
manner in which the various political and social conditions arise.

The basic idea of historical materialism is that the economic condition,
which is determined by the means of production, is the real basis of
society in all its aspects. Thus, all social phenomena are the product
of the economic condition, and develop in accordance with its
development. In Britain, for example, when the economic condition was
transformed from feudalism to capitalism and the windmill was replaced
by the steam mill, all the social conditions there changed and adapted
to the new economic condition.

After historical materialism upheld this view, it became natural for it
to link human knowledge in general to the economic condition also, since
knowledge is a part of the social structure which, as a whole, depends
on the economic factor.

That is why we find it asserting that human knowledge is not the product
of the functional activity of the brain (p. 160) only. Rather, its
primary source lies in the economic condition. Human thought is a mental
reflection of economic conditions, as we' as of relations produced by
such conditions. [Thus] human thought grows and develops in accordance
with those conditions and relations.

It is easy to see here that in historical materialism, the economic
forces occupy the same position as that of the unconscious elements of
instincts and appetites in Freud's theory. Thus, while, according to
Freud, thought is an inevitable expression of the demands of hidden
instincts and appetites, in the view of historical materialism, thought
becomes an inevitable expression of the demands of the economic forces
and the general economic condition.

But in both, the result is the same. It is the lack of confidence in
knowledge, and the loss of confidence in the value of knowledge, since
knowledge becomes an instrument for carrying out the demands of a firm
force that controls thought - this is the force of the unconscious, or
the force of the economic condition. We do not know whether the economic
condition provides our minds with reality or with its opposite.

Further, even if we did know this, this knowledge would be, in turn, a
new expression of the demands of the economic condition. But the
correspondence of such knowledge to actuality is something of which we
are not yet certain.

From this we learn that the Marxist doctrine of history imposed on
Marxist skepticism. However, Marxism refused to yield to skepticism.
Instead, it declared in its philosophy that it accepts knowledge and its
value.

Later, we will touch upon the Marxist philosophical theory of knowledge.
But our concern at the present is to point out that the inevitable
results of the Marxist doctrine of history - that is, historical
materialism - are in contradiction with the Marxist philosophical theory
of knowledge. The reason is that the inevitable link between thought and
the economic factor in the historical doctrine of Marxism eliminates
confidence in any human knowledge, in contrast to the Marxist theory of
knowledge which asserts this confidence, as we will see later.

At this point, we will not enter any dispute against these three
theories: behaviorism, (p. 161) the theory of the unconscious and
historical materialism. We will dispute behaviorism and its alleged
scientific wealth of Pavlovian experiments in our study of knowledge
(Chapter 5 of Part 2 of the present work). There, we succeed in proving
that behaviorism does not provide an acceptable explanation of the mind.

Similarly, in the book Our Economy, we studied and criticized historical
materialism extensively, since it is the scientific foundation of
Marxist economics. The conclusions we reached condemn historical
materialism in its philosophical and scientific contents, and show
various contradictions between it and the direction of the historical
movement in actual life. As for Freud's theory of psychoanalysis, the
place reserved for its discussion is in the book Our Society.

Therefore, we are not concerned here with discussing these theories in
relation to their specific fields. Instead, we will limit ourselves to
mentioning them only in so far as they relate to the theory of
knowledge.

Within the limits of the relation of these theories to the theory of
knowledge, we can say that a proof by a scientific theory arguing
against human knowledge and its objective value involves a
contradiction, and consequently, a scandalous impossibility.

This is because a scientific theory, which is advanced against human
knowledge and for the purpose of eliminating confidence in knowledge,
also condemns itself, destroys its foundation, and is, therefore,
discounted from consideration, since it is nothing but a part of the
knowledge that it fights and whose value it doubts or denies. That is
why it is impossible to consider a scientific theory as an evidence for
philosophical doubt and as a justification for stripping knowledge of
its value.

The behavioristic theory portrays thought as a material state that
occurs in the body of the thinker due to material causes, just as the
state of blood pressure occurs in his body. Because of this, the
behavioristic theory strips thought of-its objective value.

However, from the point of view of behaviorism itself, this theory must
be nothing other than a specific state that occurs in the very bodies of
the advocates of this theory, and does not express anything but this.
(p. 162)

Similarly, Freud's theory is a part of his conscious mental life. Thus,
if it is correct that consciousness is a distorted expression of the
unconscious forces and an inevitable result of the control of those
forces over human psychology, then Freud's theory loses its value, since
in light of this it is not an instrument for expressing reality. Rather,
it is an expression of Freud's appetitites and instincts that are hidden
in the unconscious.

The same can be said about historical materialism which links the mind
to the economic condition, and consequently, makes itself a product of a
specific economic condition that Marx lived, and that was reflected in
Iris mind as an expression of his demands concerning the notions of
historical materialism. Hence, it becomes inevitable that historical
materialism changes in accordance with the change of the economic
condition.

7. The Theory of Knowledge in our Philosophy
--------------------------------------------

We can infer from the study and criticism of the above doctrines the
main points of our own doctrine concerning this subject. These points
may be summarized as follows.

First, human knowledge is of two kinds, one of which is conception and
the other assent. Conception, including its various forms, has no
objective value. This is because it is nothing but the presence of a
thing in our intellective faculties. If conception is stripped of all
additional elements, it will not demonstrate the objective existence of
a thing outside knowledge.

But assent or knowledge of the assent type is the only thing that has
the quality of essentially disclosing objective reality. Thus, it is
assent that discloses the existence of the objective reality of
conception.

Second, all knowledge of the assent type can be attributed to necessary
primary knowledge whose necessity cannot be proved and whose truth
cannot be demonstrated. However, (p. 163) the mind is conscious of the
necessity of accepting it and believing its truth. Examples of such
knowledge are the principle of non-contradiction, the principle of
causality and the primary mathematical principles. Such principles are
the first rational light rays.

By the guidance of these rays, all other knowledge and assents must be
made. The more careful the mind is in applying and directing this light,
the further away it is from error. It follows that the value of
knowledge is dependent on the degree to which knowledge rests on these
principles, and the extent to which it draws its conclusions from them.

For this reason, it is possible in light of these principles to acquire
true knowledge in metaphysics, mathematics and natural science. This is
so, even though the natural sciences differ in one respect: namely, that
acquiring natural knowledge by applying the primary principles depends
on experimentation, which prepares the conditions of application for
human beings. In metaphysics and mathematics, on the other hand,
application may not need external experimentation.

This is the reason why the conclusions of metaphysics and mathematics
are, for the most part, certain, in contrast to the scientific
conclusions in the natural sciences. Since application of the primary
principles in the natural sciences requires experimentation that
prepares the conditions of application, and since, on the whole,
experimentation is deficient and falls short of disclosing all the
conditions, the conclusions based on such experimentation, therefore,
are not certain.

Let us take heat as an example of this. If we wish to discover the
natural cause of heat, we perform a number of scientific experiments,
and at the end, we postulate the theory that states that motion is the
cause of heat. This natural theory is in fact the result of the
application of a number of necessary principles and pieces of knowledge
to the empirical data that we collected and studied. That is why this
result is correct and certain, inasmuch as it rests on those necessary
principles.

To begin with, the natural scientist gathers all the phenomena of heat
(the subject under consideration), such as the blood of certain animals,
hot iron, burned bodies, and other objects that are among the thousands
of hot things. Then he begins to apply to these objects a necessary
rational principle - the principle of causality that states that for
every event there must be a cause. (p. 164)

By this he knows that there is a specific cause of such phenomena of
heat; but even then, this cause is still unknown and fluctuates among a
group of things. How then can one determine this cause amid that group
of things? At this stage, the natural scientist seeks the aid of one of
the necessary rational principles - that is, the principle that states
that a thing cannot be separated from its cause.

In light of this principle, he studies that group that includes the real
cause of heat. He considers a number of things as improbable, and thus
eliminates them from further consideration. Animal blood, for example,
cannot be the cause of heat, for there are certain animals which are
cold blooded.

If animal blood were the cause of heat, it would not have been possible
for heat to be separated from it. But some animals have cold blood. It
is clear that considering as improbable that animal blood is the cause
[of heat] is nothing but an application of the above-mentioned principle
that dictates that a thing cannot separate from its cause.

In this way, the natural scientist studies everything that he believes
to be a cause of heat, and proves that it is not a cause by virtue of
the judgement of a necessary rational principle. If, by means of his
scientific experiments, he can grasp whatever may be a cause of heat and
prove that it is not a cause - as he did regarding animal blood - then
at the end of the scientific analysis he will grasp the real cause (of
course, after eliminating other things from consideration).

At that point, the scientific result becomes a decisive truth because it
rests on necessary rational principles. If, on the other hand, two or
more things remain at the end and he could not determine the cause in
light of the necessary principles, the scientific result in this area
will be presumptive.

From this we learn the following:  
 The necessary rational principles are the general ground of the
scientific truths, as was stated at the beginning of this investigation.

The value of scientific theories and results in experimental fields (p.
165) depends on the degree of the precision of those theories and
results in applying the necessary principles to the totality of the
empirical data collected. That is why one cannot give a scientific
theory with full certainty, unless the experiment covers all the
possible objects relevant to the issue under consideration, and is broad
and precise enough to make it possible to apply to these possible
objects the necessary principles; and consequently, to establish a
unified scientific result on the basis of that application.

In non-experimental fields, as in metaphysical issues, the philosophical
theory rests on the application of the necessary principles to those
fields. However, this kind of application may be made in those fields
independently of experimentation.

Thus, concerning the issue of demonstrating [the existence of] the first
cause of the world, for example, it is incumbent upon reason to apply
its necessary principles to this issue in order to posit its affirmative
or negative theory in accordance with these principles. As long as the
issue is non-experimental, the application occurs by means of an
operation of thinking and a pure rational inference independent of
experimentation.

In this, the metaphysical issues differ from natural science with regard
to many of their aspects. We say, 'with regard to many of their
aspects', because sometimes, drawing a philosophical or a metaphysical
conclusion from the necessary principles also depends on
experimentation. With this, a philosophical theory has the same value
and rank as the value and rank of scientific theories.

Third, we have learned that knowledge of the assent type is that which
discloses to us the objectivity of conception and the existence of an
objective reality of the concept present in our minds. We also learned
that this kind of knowledge is certain inasmuch as it rests on the
necessary principles. The new issue is the extent to which the mental
concept corresponds to the objective reality whose existence we believe
by virtue of this concept - in other words, whether this concept is
precise and correct. (p. 166)

The answer to this issue is that the mental concept that we form about a
specific objective reality is two-sided. One side is the form of the
thing and its specific existence in our mind. Due to this, the thing
must be represented in it; otherwise, it would not be a form of that
thing.

However, in another respect, it is fundamentally different from the
objective reality. The reason for this is that it does not have the
properties of the objective reality of that thing, nor does it have the
various forms of effectiveness and activities of that reality. The
mental concept that we form about matter, the sun or heat cannot,
regardless of its precision and detail, perform the same effective role
played by the external objective reality of the mental concepts.

With this, we are able to determine the objective side of the idea as
well as the subjective side; that is, the side drawn from the objective
reality and the side that is attributed to the private mental formation.

Thus, the idea is objective inasmuch as the thing is represented in it
mentally. But due to the subjective management, the thing that is
represented mentally in the form loses all the effectiveness and
activity that it enjoyed in the external world. This difference between
the idea and reality is, physically speaking, the difference between
quiddity[^27][ and existence, as we will see in the second investigation
of this work.[^28]

8. Developmental Relativism
---------------------------

Now that we have touched upon the various philosophical schools of the
theory of knowledge, we come to the role of the dialectic concerning it.
Dialectic materialists have attempted to distance their philosophy from
skepticism and sophistry.

Hence, they rejected idealism and subjective relativism, as well as the
various forms of skepticism and doubt to which a number of doctrines
led. They asserted the possibility of knowing the world. Thus, at their
hands, the theory of knowledge took the form of philosophical certitude
which rests on the principles of the empirical theory and the empirical
doctrine.

What then did they rely on for this important project and large
philosophical plan? They relied on sense experience for refuting
idealism. They also relied on motion for refuting relativism.

### I. Sense Experience and Idealism

Engels[^29] makes the following statement concerning idealism:  
 The strongest refutation of this philosophical illusion, and of every
other philosophical illusion is work, trial, and industry in particular.
If we can prove the soundness of our understanding of a certain natural
phenomenon, by creating this phenomenon in ourselves and producing it by
means of fulfilling its conditions, and further, if we can use it in
achieving our ends, then this will be a decisive judgment against the
Kantian notion of the thing in itself.[^30] (p. 168)

Again, Marx says:  
 The issue of knowing whether the human mind can grasp an objective
reality is not a theoretical, but a practical issue. This is because a
human being must establish the evidence for the reality of his mind on
the basis of the practical field.[^31]

It is clear from these texts that Marxism attempts to demonstrate
objective reality by sense experience, and to solve by scientific
methods the great basic problem in philosophy, namely, the problem of
idealism and realism.

This is one of many facets in which confusion occurs between philosophy
and science. Some have attempted to study many of the philosophical
issues by means of scientific methods. Similarly, some thinkers studied
a number of scientific issues philosophically. Thus, error occurred in
both philosophical and scientific issues.

The problem over which idealists and realists quarreled is one in which
sense experience cannot have the highest authority, nor the quality of
being scientific. This is because the dispute concerning this problem
centers on the issue of the existence of the objective reality of sense
experience.

The idealist claims that things do not exist except in our sense
perception and empirical knowledge. The realist, on the other hand,
asserts an external existence independent of sense perception and
experience. It is self-evident that this issue places sense experience
itself under examination and testing.

Thus, the realist cannot demonstrate the objectivity of sense experience
and sense perception by sense experience and sense perception
themselves, nor can he refute idealism (p. 169) by means of them,
since[^32] they themselves are the subject of disputation and inquiry
between the two groups, the idealists and the realists.

Hence, every objective problem can be considered scientific, and can be
solved by the experimental scientific methods, only if the validity and
objectivity of the scientific experiment has already been admitted.

Thus, one can employ scientific methods in studying and solving the
problem of the size of the moon, the distance of the sun from the earth,
the structure of the atom, the composition of the plant or the number of
simple elements. But if the same experiment is made the subject of
investigation, and if the discussion focuses on its objective value,
then by virtue of the experiment itself, there would be no room for
scientific evidence in this area concerning the validity of the
experiment and its objective value.

Therefore, the objectivity of sense perception and experimentation is
the foundation on which the structure of all the sciences depends. No
scientific study or treatment can take place except on the basis of it.
Hence, this foundation must be tackled in a purely philosophical manner,
before taking up any scientific truth.

If we study the issue philosophically, we find that the experimental
perception is nothing but a form of conception. Thus, regardless of
variation in the totality of experiments, nevertheless they provide
human beings with different empirical pieces of knowledge. We have
already discussed sense perception in our study of idealism. There, we
said that as long as sense perception is nothing but conception, it does
not prove objective reality and demolish the idealistic notion.

In fact, we must start with the rational doctrine, in order to establish
on its basis the realistic notion of sense perception and
experimentation. Thus, we must accept that there are necessary
principles in the mind that are true. In light of such principles, we
demonstrate the objectivity of sense perception and experimentation.

Let us now take as an example of this the principle of causality, which
is one of those necessary principles. This principle asserts that for
every event there is a cause external to it, and that on (p. 170) the
basis of such a cause, we are assured of the existence of the objective
reality of the sense perception and ideas that occur in us, for they
require a cause from which they can proceed, this cause being the
objective reality.

Thus, by means of the principle of causality, we can prove the
objectivity of sense perception or sense experience. Is it possible for
Marxism to adopt the same method? Of course not. The reasons are these.

First, it does not accept necessary rational principles. According to
it, the principle of causality, for example, is nothing but an empirical
principle demonstrated by sense experience. Therefore, it cannot be
considered a basis for the validity and objectivity of sense experience.

Second, the dialectic explains the development and events of matter by
means of contradictions internal to matter. According to its
explanation, natural events do not require an external cause. This point
will be studied in full detail in the second investigation.

Thus, if this dialectical explanation is sufficient for justifying the
existence of natural events, why then do we go further than this and are
required to suppose an external cause and an objective reality for any
knowledge that arises in our souls? Indeed, it becomes possible for
idealism to assert about the phenomena of knowledge and sense perception
exactly the same thing that the dialectic asserts about nature, and to
claim further that such phenomena are, in their occurrence and
succession, subject to the law of contradiction (qanun naqd
an-naqd[^33]) which attributes change and development to the internal
content.

From this we learn that the dialectic does not only veil us from a cause
external to nature, but consequently also veils us from this nature
itself, as well as from anything external to the world of consciousness
and knowledge.[^34] (p. 171)

Let us present some of the Marxist texts that had attempted to treat
this problem [in a manner] not in accordance with the nature and
philosophical character of Marxism.

We quote first from Roger Garaudy:  
 The sciences teach us that human beings appeared on the face of the
earth at a very late stage. The same is true of the mind accompanying
them. For us to assert that the mind had existed on earth prior to
matter, is to assert that such a mind was not the human mind. Idealism
in all its forms cannot escape theology.[^35]

Again:  
 The earth had existed even prior to any sensitive being, i.e. prior to
any living being. No organic matter could have existed on (p. 172) this
planet in the very early stages of the existence of this planet.
Inorganic matter, therefore, preceded life which had to grow and develop
throughout many thousands of years before the appearance of human beings
accompanied by knowledge. Thus, science leads us to ascertain that the
world had existed in states in which no form of life or sensibility was
possible.[^36]

This is how Garaudy considers the scientific truth which asserts the
necessary priority of the growth of inorganic matter over organic matter
as evidence for the existence of the objective world. For as long as
organic matter is the product of a long development, and one of the late
stages of the growth of matter, it is impossible for matter to be
created by the human consciousness which, in turn, is posterior to the
existence of living organic beings that have a central nervous system.
It is as if Garaudy had supposed in advance that idealism admits the
existence of organic matter. On this supposition, he based his
reasoning.

However, there is no justification for this supposition, for matter in
its various kinds and divisions - be they organic or otherwise - is not,
according to the idealistic notion, anything but a mental form that we
create in our perception and conception. The evidence that Garaudy gives
us involves a petitio principii (musadara)[^37], and begins with a point
that idealism does not admit.

Second, the following is a passage from Lenin:  
 If we wish to present the issue from the only sound point of view; that
is, from the point of view of dialectical materialism, we must ask
whether electrons, air, etc., exist outside the human mind, and whether
or not they have an objective reality.

The answer to this question (p. 173) must be given by the scientists of
natural history whose answer is always unwavering and affirmative, since
they do not hesitate to admit the priority of the existence of nature
over the existence of human beings [or] over the existence of organic
matter.[^38]

In this text, we notice the same sources that Garaudy used, together
with high praise for science and a consideration of it as a final
determinant of this issue. Since the science of natural history has
demonstrated that the existence of the world predates the appearance of
consciousness and knowledge, it is incumbent upon the idealists to
submit to the scientific truths and to accept them.

However, the science of natural history is only a form of human
knowledge. But idealism denies the objective reality of all knowledge,
regardless of its form. Science, according to it, is only pure
subjective thought. Is science not the result of various experiments,
and are not such experiments and sense perceptions the subject of the
debate that centers on whether or not they have an objective reality?
How then can science have the decisive word concerning this issue?

Third, this is what Georges Politzer says:  
 No one doubts that the material life of society is independent of human
consciousness, for there is none, whether a capitalist or a proletariat,
who desires an economic crisis, even though such a crisis occurs
unavoidably.[^39]

This is a new style that Marxism adopts in responding to idealism. Thus,
in this text, Politzer (p. 174) does not rely on scientific truths.
Instead, he bases his evidence on intuitive truths, on the ground that
every one of us is aware intuitively that he does not wish many of the
events that take place, nor desires their existence. Still, such events
occur and exist contrary to one's wishes. Therefore, events and their
continuous succession must have an independent objective reality.

However, this new attempt is no closer to success that the previously
mentioned attempts. The reason is that the idealistic notion, according
to which all things are attributed to conscious ideas and perceptions,
does not claim that such conscious ideas and perceptions are the product
of people's choice and their free will, nor subject to general laws and
principles.

Rather, idealism and realism agree that the world runs in accordance
with laws and principles that apply to it and govern it. They differ
from each other, however, in the explanation of this world and the
consideration of it as subjective [or] as objective.

Once again, the conclusion we assert is that it is not possible to
attribute a sound view to the realistic philosophy, and to accept the
objectivity (al-waqi'iyaa) of sense perception and sense experience,
except on the ground of the rational doctrine which asserts the presence
of necessary rational principles independent of sense experience. But if
we begin the investigation of the issue of idealism and realism with
sense experience or sense perception that is the source of conflict
between the idealists and realists, we will run in an empty circle from
which we will not be able to emerge with a result in favor of
philosophical realism.

### II. Sense Experience and the Thing in Itself

Marxism opposes some forms of the notion of the thing in itself as
presented by Kant. Similarly, it opposes the idealistic conceptual
notions. Let us, therefore, examine its method with regard to this
matter.

Georges Politzer makes the following statement: (p. 175)  
 In fact, the dialectic, including the idealistic dialectic of Hegel,
asserts that a distinction between the qualities of a thing and the
thing in itself is an empty distinction. If we know all the qualities of
a certain thing, we also know that thing in itself. [How then could it
be][^40] that the qualities of that thing are independent of it? It is
particularly in this, that the meaning of the materiality of the world
is determined.

However, since one knows the qualities of this objective reality, one
cannot say of it that it is unknowable. Thus, it is nonsense to say, for
example, that your personality is one thing and your qualities and
defects are another, and that I know your qualities and defects, but not
your personality. This is because the personality is precisely the
totality of the defects and qualities.

Similarly, the art of photography is the totality of the acts of taking
pictures. It is, therefore, nonsense to say that there are paintings,
painters, colors, styles and [painting] schools, [on the one hand], and
that there is also photography in itself which is suspended above
reality and is unknowable. There are no two divisions to reality.
Rather, reality is any unified thing whose various successive facets we
discover by application.

The dialectic has taught us that the different qualities of things
reveal themselves by means of the internal conflict of opposites, and
that it is this conflict that creates change. Thus, the state of
fluidity in itself is precisely the state of relative equilibrium whose
internal contradiction is revealed at the point of freezing or
boiling.[^41]

Concerning this, Lenin says:  
 There is no basic difference, and there cannot be such a difference
between the phenomenon and the thing in itself. Further, there is no
difference between what is known and what will be known later. The
deeper our knowledge of reality is, the more the thing in itself
gradually becomes a thing for us.[^42] (p. 176)

In order for us to study Marxism in this text, we must distinguish
between two meanings of the notion of separating the thing in itself
from the thing for us.

First, since human knowledge depends, according to the experiential or
empirical principle, on the senses, and since the senses do not deal
with anything except the phenomena of nature, and do not penetrate to
[its] heart and essence, human knowledge, therefore, is limited to these
phenomena that are accessible to sense experience. Due to this, there is
a gap separating the phenomena and the essence. The phenomena are the
things for us, since they are the external and knowable aspect of
nature. The essence, on the other hand, is the thing in itself to which
human knowledge does not penetrate.

Georges Politzer attempts to destroy this duality by eliminating either
the matter or the essence from objective reality. He emphasizes that the
dialectic does not distinguish between the qualities of the thing and
the thing in itself. Instead, it considers the thing as the totality of
the qualities and phenomena.

It is clear that this is a kind of idealism Berkeley advocated when
protesting against the philosophers' conviction that there is a matter
and an essence behind the qualities and phenomena that appear to us in
our sense experience. This is the kind of idealism which is made
inevitable by the empirical or experiential principle. As long as the
senses are the primary foundation of knowledge and do not grasp anything
except the phenomena, it is necessary to drop the essence out of
consideration. But if the essence is dropped out, there would remain
nothing on the scene other than the phenomena and qualities that are
knowable.

Second, the phenomena that one can perceive and know are not in our
cognitive faculties and senses as they are in their objective reality.
The duality here is not between the phenomena and the essence, but
between the phenomena as they appear to us and the phenomena as they
exist objectively and independently. Can Marxism destroy this kind of
duality and prove that the objective reality appears to us in our ideas
and sense perceptions as it is in its independent external realm? (p.
177)

Our answer is in the negative, since knowledge, according to the
materialistic notion, is purely a physiological act. With respect to
this, we must know the kind of relation that exists, according to the
materialistic notion - both on the basis of mechanical materialism and
dialectical materialism - between knowledge, thought and sense
perception and the objective thing.

On the basis of mechanical materialism, the concept or the sense
perception is a mechanical reflection in the nervous system of the
objective reality, as the reflection of a picture is in a mirror or a
lens. Mechanical materialism does not acknowledge that matter involves
motion and essential activity. Instead, is explains all phenomena in a
mechanical fashion. Due to this, it cannot understand the relations of
external matter to the mental activity of the nervous system except in
that fixed form of reflection.

At this point, mechanical materialism faces the following two questions:
(1) is there any objective thing in sense perception - that is, anything
which is independent of human beings, and which is transferred to the
senses from the external reality of matter? (2) if there is such a thing
in sense perception, then how is it transferred from the objective
reality to the senses?

Mechanical materialism cannot answer the first question affirmatively.
This is because if is affirms the presence of an objective thing in
sense perception, then it has to justify the manner in which the
objective reality is transferred to the private sense perceptions; that
is, it has to answer the second question and explain the process of
transference.

But this is something it cannot do. That is why it is necessary to posit
the theory of reflection and to explain the relation between the idea
and the objective thing as it explains the relation between the picture
in a mirror or a lens and the objective reality that is reflected in
them. (p. 178)

As for dialectical materialism, which does not allow the separation
between matter and motion, and considers as motion the manner in which
matter exists, it has attempted to give a new explanation of the
relation between the idea and the objective reality on the basis of this
(inseparability of matter from motion]. Thus, it claimed that the idea
is not a pure mechanical picture of that reality. Rather, reality is
transformed iota an idea; for each, the reality and the idea is a
specific form of motion.

The qualitative difference among the forms and kinds of motion does not
prevent the movement of the transformation from one form to another.
Thus, since in the manner of existing objective matter is a specific
form of motion, the physical motion of a thing changes into a
psychophysiological motion in our senses. The physiological motion
changes into a psychological motion of the idea.[^43] Thus, the position
of the mind is not one of negativity, nor is the reflection mechanical,
as mechanical materialism asserts.

This attempt an the part of dialectical materialism cannot succeed in
revealing the relation between a thing and its idea except as a relation
between a cause and its effect or a reality and its reflected picture.
The reason is that the transformation of the physical motion of a thing
into a physiological motion, and consequently into a psychological
motion, is neither a sound notion nor a reasonable explanation of sense
perception or thought.

The transformation means the perishing of the first form of the motion
and its transmission into a new form, as we say concerning the motion of
the hammer over the anvil - namely, that it is transformed into heat.
Heat and mechanical motion are two forms of motion.

The force which expresses its existence in a specific form of motion -
that is, mechanical motion - is transformed from that form into a new
form, heat, in which it expresses itself. Heat retains the same amount
of force that had expressed its existence in mechanical motion. This is
the exact meaning of the transformation (p. 179) of motion from one form
into another.

Let us assume that this is possible. Still, it is not possible to
explain sense perception or thought by means of such a process of
transformation. The reason is this. The physical motion of the sensible
objective reality is not transformed by sense perception into a
psychological motion; for transformation means the change of motion from
one form to another.

It is clear that the natural or physical motion of sensible matter is
not changed thus into a physiological and [then] into an ideational
motion. This is because its change in this way means the elimination of
the first form of the motion; and consequently, the elimination of the
matter which expresses its existence in that particular form.

The objective motion of a sensible thing is not like the motion of the
hammer. Again, sense perception is not a transformation of that
objective motion (the manner in which matter exists) into a
psychological motion, as the motion of the hammer is transformed into
heat; otherwise, sense perception would be a process of substituting
matter by the idea, as the mechanical motion is substituted by heat.

Because of this, the issue of perception is not one of the
transformation of the physical motion into a psychological motion which
is nothing in itself other than a transformation of the objective
reality into an idea. Rather, for die sensible or perceptible thing,
there is an objective reality; and for sense perception, there is
another reality in us.

But as long as there are two kinds of existence, a subjective existence
of sense perception and thought, and an objective existence of the
sensible thing, we cannot understand the relation between these two
kinds of existence except as we understand the relation between a cause
and an effect, or as we understand the relation between a reality and a
picture reflecting that reality.

With this, we clearly encounter the basic issue that concerns us. Since
the idea is an effect of the objective thing, and since. the understood
relation between both of them is that of causality, why then should we
assume that this effect and its cause differ from other effects (p. 180)
and their causes, and are distinguished from them by a certain
characteristic - namely, that this effect pictures for us its cause and
reflects it fully?

There are many physiological functions that are effects of specific
external causes. But we have not found any of these effects capable of
picturing its cause. Instead, they vaguely indicate that they have
causes external to their sphere. How then can we acknowledge that the
idea has more than this vague indication?

Suppose that Marxism succeeds in explaining thought and perception by
means of a process of transformation of physical motion into
psychological motion. Would this mean that the idea can fully correspond
to the objective reality? This explanation makes us view the idea and
its external reality as we view heat and the mechanical motion which is
transformed into heat. It is clear that the qualitative difference
between the two forms of motion in both heat and the mechanical motion
makes them non-correspondent to each other. How then can we suppose
correspondence between the idea and its objective reality?

The Marxist school appears troubled and confused at encountering this
problem. We can draw from a number of various confused texts two pieces
of evidence offered by this school concerning the present point. One of
these is philosophical evidence, and the other scientific biological
evidence.

The philosophical evidence is summed up in the following text:  
 Thought is capable of full comprehension of nature. This is because it
is a part of nature, due to the fact that it is the product of nature
and the highest expression of it. Thought is nature conscious of itself
in the innermost being of humanity.[^44]

Also, Lenin says:  
 The universe is the motion of matter which is governed by laws. Since
our knowledge is nothing other than a superior product of nature, it
cannot but reflect (p. 18 1) these laws.[^45]  
 In his book, Anti-Duhring, Engels tried to show the following:

Philosophical materialism is the only thing capable of establishing the
value of knowledge on firm principles, since it considers consciousness
and thought as two givens. At times, they were opposite nature and
existing things. Therefore, this unavoidably leads us to find as very
great the full agreement between our consciousness of nature, the
thought of existents, and the laws of thought.

But if we inquire about what thought and consciousness are and about
their origin, we find that human beings themselves are the product of
nature. They grew in a community and with the growth of that community.
Because of this, it becomes unnecessary to show how the products of
human thought, which in the last analysis are the products of nature,
are not in contradiction, but in agreement with the rest of the solid
nature.[^46]

Thought, in the Marxist view, is a part of nature or a superior product
of it. Let us assume that this view is true, [even though] it is not. Is
it sufficient for proving the possibility of full knowledge of nature?
It is true that if thought is a part of nature and a product of it, then
it will indeed represent the laws of nature.

But this does not mean that, by virtue of this, thought becomes a sound
knowledge of nature and its laws. Are not the metaphysical thought and
the idealistic thought thoughts, and consequently, part of nature or
products of it, according to the claims of materialism? Further, are not
all the contents of the physiological processes natural phenomena and
products of nature? (p. 182)

The laws of nature, therefore, are represented in the thought of
dialectical materialism and operate in accordance with it, as they are
represented in the idealistic thought and the metaphysical thought
alike. Similarly, they are represented in all the natural processes and
phenomena. Why then should the Marxist thought be the sound knowledge of
nature, to the exclusion of any other such thoughts, even though all
such thoughts are natural products reflecting the laws of nature?

From this we learn that the mere consideration of thought as a natural
phenomenon and product is not sufficient for constituting true knowledge
of nature. Indeed, the only relation it posits between the idea and its
subject is that of causality which is fixed between every effect and its
natural cause. Rather, an idea is true knowledge if we accept chat it
has the quality of disclosure and picture taking which distinguishes is
from everything else.

The biological evidence concerning the correspondence of knowledge or
sense perception to objective reality is expounded in the following
text:  
 At the level of sense perception, [an idea] cannot be beneficial
biologically in preserving life, except if it reflects objective
reality.[^47]

Again:  
 If it were true that sense perception is merely symbolic and has no
resemblance to the [actual] thing, and if, consequently, it were
possible for numerous different things to correspond, or for illusory
and actual things to have exact resemblance to each other, then the
biological adaptation to the community would be impossible - if we
assume that the senses do not permit the determination of our direction
with certitude concerning the position of things and the response to
them effectively.

However, all the biological practical activity of human beings and of
animals indicates the degrees of the completeness of this
awareness.[^48] (p. 183)

It is clear that the relativity of sense perception does not mean that
numerous different things share in one sensible symbol so that this
symbol becomes completely deficient in value, and cannot specify the
direction which preserves our lives and determines our stand regarding
external things.

Rather, the physiological relativity theory is based on the principle
that every kind of sense perception is a symbol pertaining to a specific
objective reality that cannot be symbolized by any other kind of sense
perception. In light of such symbols, we can determine our stand with
regard to things, and respond to them with the effectiveness which is
harmonious with the symbol and which the nature of life requires for the
symbol.

### III. The Dialectical Movement of Thought

Subsequently, Marxism took up the relativity theory of truth. It
considered it a kind of sophistry; for, according to this theory,
relativity means a change in the truths from a subjective point of view.
Marxism asserted relativity in a new form in which it clarified that
truths change in accordance with the laws of development and change in
the external matter.

Thus, there are no absolute truths in the human mind. Rather, the truths
that we know are always only relative. What is at one time true is
itself false ac another time. This is something on which both relativism
and Marxism agree. Marxism adds that this relativity and this change and
development are in fact nothing but a reflection of the change of
reality and the development of matter which we represent in the truths
of our ideas.

In truth, relativity in itself is an objective relativity, and not a
subjective relativity produced by the thinking subject. That is why it
does not mean the absence of true human knowledge. Rather, the
developing relative reality which reflects nature in its development is
the true knowledge according to the dialectical view. Again, we cite a
passage from Lenin: (p. 184)

The comprehensive complete flexibility of nations, i.e. the flexibility
that extends as far as to represent opposites is the crux of the matter.
If such flexibility is used in a subjective manner, it leads to purism
(al-intiqd'iyya) and sophistry. But the flexibility which is used
objectively, i.e. the flexibility that reflects all the aspects of the
movement and unity of the material development is the dialectic only
which is the proper reflection of the everlasting development of the
world (ad-Dafati*r al-Falsafiyya, p.* 84).[^49]

He also says:  
 By our proceeding from the pure relativity theory, we can justify all
kinds of sophistry (ibid, p. 328).[^50]

Further, Kedrov[^51] says:  
 But there may be a certain subjective tendency, not only when we
operate on the basis of the fixed and frozen categories of formal logic,
but also when we operate by means of flexible and changing categories.
In the former case, we reach metaphysics; while in the latter case, we
reach the relativity theory, sophistry and purism.[^52]

He adds:  
 The Marxist dialectical method requires that the reflection of the
objective world in the human mind corresponds (p. 185) to the reflected
thing, and that is involves nothing foreign to that thing, i.e. nothing
which is brought in by the subjectivity. From the point of view of
relativism and the flexibility of notions, the subjective interpretation
is a completely foreign addition. This is exemplified in the
exaggeration of subjective metaphysics concerning the abstract concepts
of formal logic.[^53]

These texts show that Marxism wished to erect its philosophical
certitude on the basis of its attempt to apply the law of the
dialectical to reality. If human beings do not possess one absolute
truth in the totality of their ideas, the denial that their ideas have
absolute truths is not due to the fact that their ideas are an aggregate
of absolute errors which makes sound knowledge completely impossible for
them, but to the fact that the truths possessed by the human mind are
progressive truths that grow and integrate in accordance with the laws
of the dialectic. For this reason, these truths are relative and in
continuous development.

Here is another citation from Lenin:  
 The mind, i.e. the human [mind] must not conceive truth as a mere
motionless, faint or dull scene or picture. Knowledge is the infinite
endless closeness of the mind to the thing. One must understand the
reflection of nature in the human mind not as a motionless static
abstract thing free from contradictions, but as an endless process of
the development of motion for creating contradictions, and for resolving
these contradictions (p. 186) (ibid, p. 167-8).[^54]

He continues:  
 In the theory of knowledge, as in all other areas of knowledge, it is
important that thought be dialectical, i.e. that no assumption be made
that our consciousness is fixed and resists development.[^55]

Kedrov says:  
 The dialectical method does not encounter this judgment as a complete
thing, but as an expression of an idea capable of growth and movement.
Regardless of the simplicity of a certain judgment, and regardless of
how common that judgment appears to be, it contains the seeds or
elements of dialectical contradictions within whose scope, all human
knowledge moves and grows.[^56]

Kedrov points to a statement in which Lenin determines the style of the
dialectical method of thought. This statement is the following:  
 The dialectical method requires that a thing be taken in its
development, growth, and change.[^57]

He follows this by saying:  
 Contrary to the dialectical method, formal logic resorts for solving
the problem of truth to solving this problem in the most basic manner;
that is, by means of the formula 'yes-no.' It knows in one word, and in
an absolute fashion the answer to the question: 'Does (p. 187) that
phenomenon exist or does it not?'

The answer, for example, is 'yes' to the question: 'Does the sun exist?'
And the answer is 'no' to the question: 'Does a square circle exist?' In
formal logic, a human being stops at very simple answers, [such as]
'yes' or 'no,' i.e. at a coral distinction between truth and falsity.
Due to this, truth is encountered as something given, stable, fixed,
final and fully incompatible with falsity.[^58]

From these Marxist texts, we draw three views that are closely linked to
one another. The first is that truth grows and develops in a way that
reflects the growth and development of reality. The second is chat truth
and falsity may come together, such chat one idea may be false and crate
[at the same time]. There would be no absolute incompatibility between
falsity and truth, as formal logic asserts, according to Kedrov. The
third is that any judgement, regardless of how clear its truth appears,
involves a specific contradiction; and consequently, an aspect of
falsity. It is such a contradiction that makes knowledge and crush grow
arid become whole.

But does the truth in the human mind develop and integrate as a truth?
Further, is it possible for the truth to come together with falsity?
Further still, does every truth involve its contradictory, and grow by
virtue of this internal contradiction? This is what we actually wish to
find out. (p. 188)

#### a. The Development and Movement of Truth

To begin with, we must know what is intended by the phrase 'the truth in
the human mind' whose growth and integration Marxism asserts. Realism
asserts the existence of a reality outside the limits of consciousness
and mind, and considers any kind of thinking as an attempt to reflect
and know this reality.

Due to this, the truth is the idea that corresponds to and resembles
this reality. Falsity, on the other hand, is represented in the idea,
opinion or belief chat does not correspond to this reality or resemble
it. The criterion that distinguishes between the true and the false, and
between truth and falsity, is the correspondence of the idea to reality.

Truth, according to this realistic notion, is the subject of the sharp
philosophical dispute between the realists on the one hand and the
conceptualists and sophists on the other hand. The realists affirm the
possibility of such a criterion, while the conceptualists and sophists
deny such a possibility, or waver as to whether human beings can attain
it.

However, the expression 'truth' has been used in a number of other
senses that are completely different from its above-mentioned realistic
sense. And thus, this different sense was distanced from the basic area
of disputation between the philosophy of certitude and those of
skepticism and denial.

The development of subjective relativism was one of the recent
developments chat truth underwent. This development sought to posit a
new meaning for the expression 'truth'. Thus, it considered truth as
nothing but the knowledge that agrees with the nature of the nervous
system and the conditions for knowledge in this system.

We have already discussed subjective realism, and have said that to
attribute this sense to truth means that truth is no more than a
subjective thing. Therefore, it would not be truth, except nominally.
That is why, in the sense given by subjective relativism, truth loses
its quality as the subject of the philosophical dispute and conflict in
philosophy between (p. 189) the tendency of certitude and that of
skepticism and denial. Hence, subjective relativism is one of the
doctrines of skepticism covered by the veil of truth.

There is another philosophical interpretation of truth. This is the
interpretation offered by William James[^59] in his new doctrine of
human knowledge - that is, pragmatism or the doctrine of
instrumentalism.[^60] But this interpretation is neither closer to
realism nor more distant from the philosophies of skepticism and denial
than the previous interpretation that was attempted by subjective
relativism.

The doctrine of pragmatism is summed up in advancing anew criterion for
measuring thoughts and for distinguishing between their truth and
falsity. This criterion is the capacity of a specific idea to accomplish
the goals of a human being in his practical life.

Thus, if opinions are in conflict and opposition, the most real and true
among them would be the most beneficial and useful - that is, the
opinion whose benefit is demonstrated by practical experience. The ideas
that do not achieve a practical value and do not have beneficial effects
when encountering life experiences are not at all true. Rather, they
must be considered empty expressions carrying no meaning whatsoever.

Thus, according to this doctrine, all truths can be attributed to a
higher truth concerning existence, namely, primarily, the preservation
of life and then, secondarily, its elevation to perfection. Hence, every
idea that can be used as an instrument for reaching this highest truth
is clearly proper and a truth that muse be accepted. On the other hand,
any idea that does not function in this way must not be adopted.

On the basis of this, Bergson[^61] defined truth as a creation of
something new, and not a discovery of something that had already
existed.[^62] Schiller[^63] defined it as that which serves human beings
alone. Dewey[^64] identified the function of the idea by saying that the
idea is an instrument for elevating life, and not a means for knowing
things in themselves. (p. 190)

This doctrine involves a clear confusion between the truth itself and
the basic goal of attempting to attain the truth. The goal of attaining
truths may be to utilize them in the practical field and to be
enlightened by them during life experiences. However, this is not the
meaning of truth in itself. In what follows, we will sum up our response
to the above view of truth.

First, to give truth a pure practical meaning and to strip it of the
quality of disclosing what exists and what is prior is an unrestricted
admission of philosophical skepticism for whose sake conceptualism and
sophistry fight. The mere retention of the expression of truth in
another sense is not sufficient for rejecting it or getting rid of it.

Second, it is our right to inquire about this practical benefit that
pragmatism considers the criterion of truth and falsity. Is it the
benefit of a specific thinking individual, or the benefit of a group?
(If the latter) then who is this group, and what are its limits? Does it
refer to humankind as a whole, or only in part? None of these
assumptions[^65] gives this new doctrine a reasonable explanation. If
the individual benefit is the proper criterion of truth, then truths
must differ in accordance with the interests of individuals.

But with this, a frightening social chaos would occur when every
individual chooses his own truths, without any attention to the truths
of others, which proceed from their own interests. This chaos
constitutes a serious harm to all individuals. If, on the other hand,
the general human benefit is the criterion, then this criterion will be
dependent on a number of investigations and fields, due to the fact that
human interests are often in conflict and at variance.

Indeed, at that point, one cannot determine any truth, regardless of its
kind, unless it were subject to long social experience. This means that
James himself cannot consider as true his doctrine of pragmatism, unless
it has undergone such experience, and has asserted its own worthiness in
practical life. Thus, James puts an end to this doctrine itself. (p.
191)

Third, the fact that there is a human benefit in the truth of a certain
idea is not sufficient for accepting this idea. The disbeliever cannot
accept religion, even if he agrees that it plays an effective role in
rectifying mankind, and even if he lives its hopes and consolation in
his practical life. George Santayana,[^66] for example, describes belief
as a beautiful mistake, more in harmony with the inclinations of the
soul than life itself.

Thus, accepting a certain idea is not the same as the other kinds of
practical activity that human beings can perform if assured of their
benefit. Thus, pragmatism is based on the undifferentiation between
acceptance (a specific mental activity) and the various practical
activities that human beings perform in light of their interests and
benefits.

We conclude from this study that the only notion of truth that realism
can adopt is that it is the idea that corresponds to reality. If Marxism
that preaches the possibility of true knowledge and, because of this,
rejects the conceptual, skeptical and sophistical tendencies means by
'truth' something ocher than the realistic sense, then it is not at all
incompatible with these tendencies.

For the tendency of skepticism and chat of sophistry reject truth only
in the sense of the correspondence of the idea to reality, and do not
reject truth in just any sense. Therefore, Marxism cannot be free from
the tendencies of skepticism and sophistry, just because it takes the
expression of truth and recasts it in a new notion.

For the purpose of truly rejecting those tendencies, Marxism must adopt
truth in the realistic sense on which the philosophy of realism rests,
if one is to consider Marxism a realistic philosophy that truly upholds
the objective value of mind.

If we understand the proper realistic notion of truth, it becomes
possible for us to find out whether truth, in this sense on which
realism rests, can develop and change through a linear movement, as
Marxism primarily taught. (p. 192)

It is impossible that truth develops and grows, while being limited at
every stage of its development by the specific limits of every stage.
Indeed, the idea, or every idea, must be one of two things: it is either
an absolute truth, or it is a falsity.

I know that these words evoke disgust in the Marxists and instigate them
to bombard metaphysical thought with the accusations they have become
accustomed to ascribe it. Thus, they say that metaphysical thought
freezes nature and considers it a state of fixedness and stability, for
metaphysical thought accepts absolute truths and rejects the principle
of development and movement in nature. But the principle of absolute
truth has completely collapsed due to the discovery of the development
and movement of nature.

However, the fact that our dear reader must understand is that
acceptance of absolute truths and the rejections of change and movement
in nature do not at all mean the freezing of nature, nor do they negate
the development and change of objective reality. Our philosophical
notions accept development as a general law in the natural world, and
its external presence as a continuous state of becoming. But at the same
time, we reject all temporality and change of truth.

To clarify this point, let us assume that a certain cause makes heat
more intense in a specific water. The temperature of this water is
actually in continuous movement and gradual development. This means that
every degree of temperature that this water reaches is a temporary
degree. In the rise of its temperature, water will bypass this degree to
a higher one. In this case, there is no absolute degree of temperature
for this water. This is also the case with the objective reality that
exists externally.

If we measured its temperature at a certain moment, and found that, when
the measurement has been affected by this reality's temperature, the
temperature has reached, for example, 90 [degrees centigrade], we would
have attained a. truth by means of experimentation. This truth is that
the degree of the temperature of water at that specific moment is 90
[degrees centigrade]. We say of it that it is a truth, because it is an
idea about whose correspondence to reality -that is, the reality of
temperature at a certain moment - we have been assured. It is natural
that (p. 198) the temperature of water does not stop at this degree.
Rather, it keeps on rising, until it reaches the degree of boiling.

However', the truth that we have attained is the truth unchanged, in the
sense that when we notice this particular moment at which we measured
the temperature of water, we judge with all certainty that the
temperature of water was at 90 [degrees centigrade].

Therefore, even if the 90-degree temperature that water reached is a
temporary degree at a specific moment in time, and is quickly superseded
by the temperature's rise to a higher degree, still the idea chat we had
acquired by means of experimentation - this idea being that temperature
at a certain moment was at 90 degrees - is a sound idea and an absolute
truth. Because of this, we can always assert its truth.

By 'always assert its truth', we do not mean that the 90-degree
[temperature] was always a fixed degree of the temperature of the water.
The truth that we have acquired by experimentation does not touch upon
the temperature of the water except at a certain moment.

Thus, when we describe it as an absolute, and not as a temporal truth,
we intend by this chat temperature at that particular moment has been
fully determined at 90 degrees. Thus, even if it were permissible that
the temperature of water reaches, for example, 100 [degrees centigrade]
after that moment, still, it is not permissible that what we have known
about the degree of temperature at that particular moment be false after
it had been true.

If we know that the truth is the idea that corresponds to reality, and
learn that if the idea corresponds to reality at a specific
circumstance, it cannot after that become contrary to that reality at
that specific circumstance; I say that if we know all of this, it
becomes clearly evident that it is erroneous to apply the law of
movement to truth. This is because movement affirms change in the truth
and makes it always relative and restricted to the time of its specific
stage of development. But we have learned that truths do not change and
are not temporal. Similarly, the development and wholeness of truth mean
that by means of movement, the idea becomes more intensely true. (p.
194)

Again, by movement, temperature rises to a higher degree, even though
truth differs from temperature. Temperature may become more intense and
stronger; but truth, as we have already learned, expresses the idea that
corresponds to reality, and it is not possible for the correspondence of
the idea really to become more intense and stronger, as is the case with
temperature. But it is possible for the human mind to uncover a new side
of that reality chat it had not known prior to that time.

However, this is not a development of the truth that had been known in
advance. Rather, it is a new truth that the mind adds to the previous
truth. Thus, if we know, for example, that Marx was influenced by
Hegelian logic, this knowledge would be the first truth we have about
the relation of Marx to Hegelian thought. If after that, we study Marx's
history and philosophy, we know that he was in opposition to Hegel's
idealism.

We also know that he applied his dialectic in a material fashion to
history, society and other intellectual relations between their two
personalities. All of this is a new knowledge that reveals various
aspects of reality, and not a growth or a development of the first truth
that we acquired at the beginning.

The enthusiasm of the Marxist school to subjugate truth to the law of
movement and development is just to abolish absolute truths which
metaphysical philosophy accepts.

However, the Marxist school does not know that it abolishes its own
doctrine by the enthusiasm for [upholding] this law. If movement is a
general law governing truths, then it is impossible to affirm any
absolute truth. Consequently, the law of movement itself would fall
short of being an absolute truth.

It is curious that Marxism asserts the movement and change of truth in
accordance with the law of the dialectic, and considers this revelation
the central point of the Marxist theory of knowledge. It ignores,
however, the fact that this revelation itself is one of those truths (p.
195) whose movement and change Marxism accepts.

Thus, if this truth moves and changes in accordance with the dialectical
method, as do all other truths, it must, therefore, involve a
contradiction that will be dissolved by its development and change, as
the dialectic makes inevitable. If, on the ocher hand, this crush were
absolute and free from movement and change, this would be sufficient for
rejecting the application of the dialectical laws and movement to [all]
truths and knowledge, and would constitute a proof that truth does not
submit to the principles of the dialectical movement.

The dialectic which is intended to govern human truths and knowledge
involves a scandalous contradiction and a clear assertion for destroying
itself in either case. If it is considered an absolute truth, its own
rules would be violated, and it becomes clear that the dialectical
movement is not in control of the sphere of truths. If it were in
control of this sphere, there would not be a single absolute truth, even
if this truth were the dialectic itself. If, on the other hand, it is
considered a relative truth subject to development and change, then by
virtue of its own internal contradictions, it will change. The
dialectical method will disappear and its contradictory will become an
established truth.

#### b. The Union of Truth and Falsity

In the Marxist texts presented above, it was seen that Marxism finds
fault with formal logic (as Marxism puts it) for accepting absolute
opposition between falsity and truth, even though the two can come
together, since falsity and truth are two relative matters and since we
do not possess an absolute truth.

The Marxist idea that asserts the union of truth and falsity is based on
two ideas. On of them is the Marxist idea of the development and
movement of truth. This idea affirms that every truth is in a continuous
movement and change.

The other is the Marxist idea of the contradiction of movement. This
idea affirms that movement is nothing but a series of (p. 196)
contradictions. Thus, the thing that moves at every moment is at a
specific point, and not ac that specific point. Due to this, Marxism
considers movement as a refutation of the principle of identity.

The result of these two ideas is that truth and falsity unite, and that
there is no absolute opposition between them. This is because, since
truth is in motion, and since motion means continuous contradiction,
truth, therefore, is truth, and it is not so by virtue of its moving
contradictories.

We are clear from the above about the extent of the falsity of the first
idea of the movement and development of truth. We will discuss the
second idea in detail when we take up the dialectic in a complete study
of the second issue, the philosophical notion of the world. At that
point, the error and ambiguity in the laws of the dialectic in general,
and in its application to the idea in particular, wilt become clearer.

It is evident that the application of the laws of the dialectic of
contradictions and development to ideas and truths in the alleged manner
leads to the collapse of the secure value of all rational knowledge and
judgements, regardless of their clarity and self-evidence. Even the
logical judgements or the simple mathematical judgements lose their
value, because they submit, by virtue of the contradictions that they
involve according to the dialectical view, to the laws of continuous
development and change.

Therefore, one cannot be sure of the truths that we now know, such as
'two plus two equals four', and 'the part is smaller than the whole',
[for] they change by virtue of the dialectical contradictions, so that
we know them in a different form.[^67]

### IV. Scientific Revisions and Absolute Truths

in criticizing the principle of absolute truth that asserts that
absolute truth cannot come together with falsity by way of the revisions
made in the scientific theories and laws, Engels tells us:  
 Let us illustrate this by the well-known Boyle's[^68] law which states
that the volumes of gases are inversely proportionate to the pressure
exerted on them - if the degree of their temperature remains fixed.

Regnault[^69] found that this law is not true in certain cases. If Renan
were one of the realists, he would have reached the following
conclusion: 'Since Boyle's law is susceptible to change, therefore, it
is not completely true. This means that it is not (p. 199) at all a
truth. Thus, it is a false law.'

If Renan followed this path, he would have committed a greater error
than that committed in Boyle's law. The little truth that his criticism
of this law involves would have been lost and buried in the midst of the
sand of falsity.

In the last analysis, this would have led him to distort the sound truth
that he had attained, and to transform it into a conclusion with clear
errors, if compared with the conclusion reached by Boyle's law which
appears as sound, in spite of the specific errors that attach to
it.[^70]

This criticism may be summed up in [the statement] that if the
metaphysical notion were correct in its assertion that truths are
absolute and totally incompatible with falsity, then it would be
necessary to reject every scientific law just because it is evident that
it is in part not true and inapplicable in some cases.

Thus, according to the metaphysical method of thought, Boyle's law is
either an absolute truth or a pure falsity. If in the experimental
field, this law is shown to be untrue at times, this necessitates its
being an absolute falsity having no truth at all; for truth cannot unite
with falsity. Because of this, science loses the aspect of truth of this
law.

According to the dialectical method, on the other hand, this relative
falsity is not considered a proof that the law must be completely
dropped out, but that, at the same time, it is a relative truth. Indeed,
truth and falsity unite.

If Engels knew well the metaphysical theory of knowledge, and understood
what it intends by 'absolute truth', he would not have criticized it in
this way. Truth and falsity do not unite in one truth, neither in
Boyle's law, nor in any other scientific laws.

The truth of Boyle's law is an absolute truth free from falsity, and
what is false of this law is completely false. The scientific
experiments, (p. 200) which Renan carried out and which showed him that
Boyle's law, for example, is not true when the pressure reaches the
point at which gases are transformed into fluids, did not convert truth
into falsity.

Rather, they divided the law into two parts. They clarified that one of
these two parts is a pure falsity. Therefore, the union of falsity and
truth is a nominal union and is not a union in the real sense.

Put clearly, every true scientific law involves truths equal to the
number of the cases with which it deals and to which it is applicable.
If experimentation shows its falsity in some of those cases and its
truth in some other cases, this does not mean that truth is relative and
that it unites with falsity. What this means is that the content of the
law is applicable to reality in some cases, to the exclusion of some
other cases. Thus, falsity has its place, and in that place, it is a
pure falsity. Truth also has another place, and in that place it is an
absolute truth.

Metaphysical thought does not impose on the natural scientist a complete
rejection of a law if it is proved that that law is untrue in some
cases. The reason is that metaphysical thought considers every case as
representing a proposition pertaining to that case. It is not necessary
that a proposition that pertains to a specific case be false if the
proposition pertaining to another case is false.

Instead of the childish attempts that Engels made to justify relative
truth and its union with falsity, he should have learned the difference
between simple and composite propositions. He should have learned that a
simple proposition is that which cannot be divided into two
propositions, as in our statement, 'Plato died before Aristotle,' and
that a composite proposition is that which is composed of a number of
propositions, as when we say, 'Bodily particles expand by heat'. This
statement is an assembly of propositions. We can express it in a number
of propositions, thus saying, 'Iron expands by heat,' (p. 201) 'Gold
expands by heat' and 'Lead expands by heat'.

Because a simple proposition is a single proposition, it cannot be true
in one respect and false in another. Thus, the death of Plato before
Aristotle is either true or it is false. But since a composite
proposition is the meeting place of a number of propositions, it is,
therefore, possible for one aspect of it to be true and for another to
be false.

If, for example, we assume that iron expands by heat, but not gold, then
the general natural law, i.e. chat bodily particles expand by heat, is
considered true in one respect and false in another. But this does not
mean that truth and falsity unite, thus rendering the same proposition
both true and false. Rather, falsity is in the proposition, for example:
'Iron expands by heat.' Therefore, neither falsity is true nor truth is
false.

In returning to the developmental movement of truth and knowledge as a
part of the dialectic for whose study we reserve the second chapter of
the following investigation, the philosophical potion of the world, we
will discuss the Marxist reasoning and forms of demonstration for the
development of truth and knowledge, as well as the extent of its
weakness and fallacy.

In particular, we will discuss the Marxist attempt at considering the
natural sciences in their remarkable development throughout history,
their multiple activities, and their powerful leaps as in agreement with
the developmental movement of truth and knowledge, even though the
development of the sciences, in the philosophical sense intended by
Marxism, has no connection to the development of truth and knowledge
throughout the long history of these sciences.

The sciences develop, not in the sense that their truths grow and become
whole, but in the sense that their truths are increased and multiplied
[in number] and their errors decreased and reduced. The clarification of
this matter will be reserved to a future discussion in the second
investigation.

The conclusion we draw from this study is the following. (p. 202) First,
truth is absolute and unprogressive, even though the objective reality
of nature continuously develops and moves. Second, truth is fully
incompatible with falsity. A single simple proposition cannot be both
true and false.

Third, the application of the dialectic to truth and knowledge imposes
on us complete skepticism concerning every truth, as long as truth is in
continuous change and development. Indeed, the dialectic also sentences
itself to death and change, since it itself is one of those truths that
must change in accordance with its specific developmental method.

### V. The Marxist Relapse into Subjectivism

Finally, we must point out that in spite of the fact that Marxism
insists on rejecting subjective relativism by raising [itself above this
form of subjectivism], emphasizing the objective character of its own
relativism, and [asserting] that Marxism is a relativism that
accompanies the progressive reality and reflects the relativity of this
reality.

In spite-of all of this, Marxism once again regresses and falls in the
grip of subjective relativism when it links knowledge to the class
element and asserts that it is impossible that philosophy, for example,
can rid itself of the class and political element. This led Morris
Cornforth[^71] to say the following: 'Philosophy had always expressed,
and cannot but express a class point of view.'[^72] Again, Chiang[^73]
says: 'Lenin has struggled with firmness and determination against the
objective tendency in theory.'[^74]

It is clear that this Marxist tendency links knowledge to subjectivity.
(p. 208) However, this is class subjectivity, and not individual
subjectivity, as the subjective relativists had asserted. Consequently,
truth becomes the correspondence of the thinker's idea to class
interests. This is because no thinker can know reality except from the
perspective of these interests. In light of this, no one can secure the
truth of any philosophical or scientific idea, in the sense of the
correspondence of that idea to objective reality. As long as Marxism
upholds the necessity of the class character, it cannot offer us its
notion of the universe and society as an expression corresponding to
reality. Rather, all that it can assert is that this notion reflects the
aspects of reality that agree with the interests of the working
class.[^75]

Author's Notes to Part One, Chapter Two

[50] Ivan Petrovich Pavlov, Russian physiologist (1849-1936). He was
awarded the Nobel Prize in medicine and physiology in 1904. Pavlov's
famous experiment ran as follows. h was observed that a hungry dog
salivates any time he is presented with food. This is an unconditioned
or natural reflexive act. A bell was made to ring anytime this dog was
presented with food. Eventually, the dog began to salivate whenever the
bell rang, even if he did not see the food. This is a conditioned
reflexive act. That is, the sound of the bell was associated with the
sight of the food, and hence brought about the same response that the
sight of the food produced. The result of this experiment was an
important contribution to physiological psychology. It led to the theory
that much behaviorial development is the result of conditioned reflexive
acts.

[^1]: Al-Maddiyya ad-Dialaktikiyya wal-Maddiyya at-Tarikhiyya, p. 17.

[^2]: Ludwig Feuerbach, p. 54

[^3]: Gorgias of Leontini, Greek philosopher, orator and teacher of
rhetoric (483-380 B.C.). He was born in Sicily and moved to Greece, and
he spent most of his life in Athens. He was known as a leader of
sophistry who plays a central role in Plato's dialogue, Gorgias. In this
dialogue the thesis held is that rhetoric is the art of persuasion which
results in belief about just and unjust things. His best known work,
which is lost, is On Nature or the Non-existent. In it Gorgias argues as
follows. (1) Nothing exists. if it does, it must come out of nothing or
out of something. It is impossible that something comes out of nothing.
Also, on the basis of Eleatic philosophy, it cannot come out of
something else. (2) If anything exists, it cannot be known, since
thought and things are different. (3) If anything can be known, it
cannot be communicated, since intention and understanding are different.

[^4]: Pyrrho, Greek philosopher (360-270 B.C.). Pyrrho was a skeptic who
taught the following. It is impossible to know the nature of anything.
Every statement has its contradictory which is equal to it in validity.
Since this is so, judgement must be suspended. But since judgement must
be suspended, silence must be maintained with regard to all things. This
requires that a human being must withdraw into himself and live in
serenity.

[^5]: See The Philosophical Works of Descartes, translators Elizabeth S.
Haldant and G.R.P. Ross, Cambridge University Press (1967), II, 101.

[^6]: Ibn Sina known to the West as Avicenna (A.D. 980-1037). Even
though he excelled .in many areas, such as medicine, astronomy, physics
and poetry, he is best known for being one of the most original and
important Muslim philosophers. His early philosophical career is
characterized by Aristotelianism, but his later works show a tendency to
mysticism. His most important works are: ash-Shifa' (an encyclopedic
work covering, among other things, logic, physics and metaphysics),
an-Najat (a summary of ash-Shifa'), al-Isharat wat-Tanbihat (a late, and
perhaps the latest work Ibn Sina wrote, consisting of four parts: logic,
physics, metaphysics and sufism). He also left a number of mystical
treatises, such as Hayy Bin Yaqzan and Risalat at-Tayr.

[^7]: Ma Hiya al-Madda, p. 5.

[^8]: The following are two passages that express Berkeley's view that
unless a thing is a mind, the only way for it to exist is to be
perceived or to be present to a mind. This is the only way, for example,
in which sensible things can exist: Sensible things are all immediately
perceivable; and those things which are immediately perceivable are
ideas; and these exist only in the mind . . . . unto me it is evident .
. . that sensible things cannot exist otherwise than in a mind or
spirit. Whence I conclude, not that they have no real existence, but
that seeing they depend not on my thought, and have an existence
distinct from being perceived by me, there must be some other mind
wherein they exist. As sure, therefore, as the sensible world really
exists, so sure is there an infinite, omnipresent spirit who contains
and supports it. (Dialogues Dolphin-Doubleday ed., pp. 253-6). That
there is no substance wherein ideas can exist besides spirit, is to me
evident. And that the objects immediately perceived are ideas, is on all
hands agreed. And that sensible qualifies are objects immediately
perceived, no one can deny. It is therefore, as evident that there can
be no substratum of those qualities but spirit, in which they exist, not
by way of mode or property, but as a thing perceived in that which
perceives it. I deny therefore that there is any unthinking substratum
of the objects of sense, and in that acceptation that there is any
material substance. But if by material substance is meant only sensible
body, that which is seen and felt (and the unphilosophical part of the
world, I dare say, mean no more), then I stn more certain of matter's
existence than you or any other . philosopher, pretend to be. If there
be anything which makes the generality of mankind averse from the
notions I espouse, it is a misapprehension that I deny the reality of
sensible things: But as it is you are guilty of that and not I, it
follows, that in truth their aversion is against your notions, and not
mine. I do therefore assert chat I am as certain as of my own being,
that there are bodies or corporeal substances (meaning things that I
perceive by my senses); and that granting this, the bulk of mankind will
take no thought about, nor think themselves considered in the fate of,
those unknown natures and philosophical quiddities which some men are so
fond of. (Ibid., pp. 280-1)

[^9]: In the technical philosophical sense, the close tie between that
which discloses (knowledge) and that which is disclosed by accident (the
thing which is external to the sphere of knowledge) is not fixed between
the existence of the former and the existence of the latter so that one
cannot detach from the other. Rather, it is between the essential
disclosure of knowledge and the accidental disclosedness of the thing
that lies outside the limits of knowledge. It is clear that the two
necessarily accompany each other and, therefore, cannot detach from each
other.

[^10]: Democritus, Greek philosopher c.460-c.362 B.C.). His philosophy
is materialistic and atomistic. Atoms are the ultimate elements of all
substance. They are indivisible and imperceptible. But although atoms
are solid, they are separated by void or empty space. Therefore, the
ultimate principles of reality are atoms and the void. Atoms differ
among themselves quantitatively. Their qualitative differences are
results of their quantitative differences. The atoms of fire and those
of the soul are different from other atoms in being round and small. The
more our souls lose of these aroma, the weaker is our consciousness.
Death is the complete absence of such atoms in us. Personal immortality
is impossible.

[^11]: Fredric Wilhelm Ostwald, Russian-German physical chemist
(1853-1932). His work on catalysts won him the Nobel Prize for chemistry
in 1909. Ostwald was one of the founders of the first journal of
physical chemistry, and one of the founder of modem physical chemistry.
He also started a journal in the philosophy of science.

[^12]: The author does not give any reference for this passage and we
have not been able to locate it.

[^13]: Karl Pearson, British scientist and philosopher of science
(1857-1936). Science, according to him, is descriptive, and its models
are intended to facilitate the correlation of data. His main
philosophical works are: The Ethic of Free Thought and The Grammar of
Science.

[^14]: Again, the author does not give any reference for this passage,
and we have not been able to locate it.

[^15]: Arthur Stanley Eddington, British astronomer and physicist
(1882-1944). Eddington showed that the larger the mass of a star, the
greater the internal pressure in that star, and the greater the
temperature and radiation pressure; hence, the more luminous is that
star. This is known as the 'mass luminosity law'. His principal work is
The Expanding Universe.

[^16]: No reference is given for this passage.

[^17]: No reference is indicated here either.

[^18]: Ma Hiya al-Mddda, pp. 20-21.

[^19]: Ibid., p. 23.

[^20]: John Dalton, British meteorologist and chemist (1766-1844). His
experiments led to the establishment of what came to be called 'Dalton's
law of partial pressures'. This law asserts that a component of a
mixture of gases exerts the same pressure that it exerts if it occupies
by itself the whole volume of the mixture at the same temperature. Also,
like Democritus twenty-one centuries earlier, Dalton asserts on the
basis of experimentation that all elements are composed of small
indivisible atoms and that all the substances around w are composed of
combinations of such stoma. Therefore, changing the combination of atoms
in a substance given to a different substance. His principal writings
are: Meteorological Observations and Essays and A New System of Chemical
Philosophy.

[^21]: The reader must know something about the analysis of knowledge in
Kant's view, so that he will be clear about Kant's theory of the value
and possibility of knowledge. Kant believes that sense experience takes
the empirical subjects in a confused manner. Owing to this, different
sense perceptions are produced. The flavor that hits the tongue has no
relation to the odor that penetrates the nose, nor to the quick flash of
light that affects the retina of the eye, nor again to the sound that
strikes the ear. These different sense perceptions unite in two sense
intuitions (text: qalabayn mawjudayn fi al-his bil-fitra [two molds
existing in the senses by nature]). These are the intuition of time and
that of space. This results in the sense perception or sense knowledge
of a specific thing. In its matter, this knowledge is derived from sense
experience, and in its form, it is natural and attributable to time and
space. Sense perception is a raw material presented, in rum, to the
mind, so that out of it rational knowledge may be formed. The mind
possesses a number of intuitions similar to the intuitions possessed by
the senses. Thus, the mind pours this raw material into its intuitions,
and shapes is in accordance with those frames. With this, rational
knowledge occurs. Thus, sensible things are composed of a matter grasped
by the senses and a spacio-temporal form produced by the formal
sensibility (al-hasasiyya as-suwariyya), i.e., the sensibility which
produces the unified form of the various sense perceptions. Rational
things are also composed of a matter which is the phenomena that are
woven by the formal sensibility in accordance with the spacio-temporal
frame, and a form which is the matrix which produces and unifies those
phenomena by means of formal understanding.

[^22]: Sigmund Freud, founder of psychoanalysis (1856-1940). Through a
study of the effect of hypnosis on hysteria, he reached his view on
psychoanalysis. In 1910, he founded the International Psychoanalytical
Association. His writings are numerous and well known. Among them are
the following: The Interpretations of Dream, The Psychopathology of
Everyday Life, Introductory Lectures in Psychoanalysis, Humor and Its
Relation to the Unconscious, The Ego and the Id, The Problem of Anxiety
and The Future of an Illusion.

[^23]: Epicures, Greek philosopher (341-270 B.C.). He was influenced by
Democritus, from whom he borrowed the atomistic theory. The permanent
subject of change is the atom, which is the smallest observable entity,
and which is simple and solid in its nature. The atoms differ only in
size and shape. It is the addition or subtraction of atoms that account
for the qualitative difference of objects. His main writings are: On
Nature and The Cannon.

[^24]: Isaac Newton, English physicist and natural philosopher
(1642-1727). Newton and Leibniz are thought to have invented the
differential calculus independently. His main writings are the
following: Mathematical Principles of Natural Science and Optics.

[^25]: AIbert Einstein, German, Swiss and American mathematician and
atomic physicist (1879-1955). He received the Nobel Prize in physics in
1921. It is interesting that as a child, Einstein appeared so slow
intellectually that there was some fear he might be retarded. He dropped
out of high school. And were it not for his competence ac mathematics,
he might not have made it to college, for he was a poor student in most
other subjects. Among Einstein's important contributions is the
relativity theory, according to which all motion is relative. He also
determined the interrelationship between mass and energy to be as
follows: E = mc2 - E being energy, m mass, and c velocity of light.
Energy and mass are different aspects of the same reality. Energy is a
form of mass, and vice versa. In light of this view, the older theories
of the conservation of energy and the conservation of mass could no
longer hold. It is this discovery that made it possible to transform
huge quantities of mass into energy, and hence, make the atomic bomb.

[^26]: David Ricardo, British economist (1772-1823). Ricardo is known
for an abstract and difficult style. He stressed the principle of
diminishing returns in connection with the rent of land. His main
writings can be found in David Ricardo: Works and Correspondence (11
vols.) ed. Piero Sruffa with the collaboration of M.H. Dobb.

[^27]: Al-mahiyya. The quiddity of a thing is its nature or essence in
abstraction.

[^28]: This subjective aspect which the mental concepts involve is,
according to us, different from the subjective aspect of which Kant
speaks, and which the subjective relativists assert. The subjective
element, according to us, is not due to the conceptual aspect of
knowledge, as Kent claims, nor to the fact that knowledge is the product
of a material interaction. An interaction requires action on both sides.
Rather, it is based on the difference between the two kinds of
existence, i.e. the mental and the external. Thus, contrary to the view
of the relativists, the thing that exists in the mental concept is the
same as that which exists outside. However, the kind of existence it has
in the concept is different from the kind of existence it has
externally.

[^29]: Friedrich Engels, (1820-1895). He was born in Bremen into a
wealthy family. In 1844, he met Karl Marx in France. Engels was in
agreement with Marx on the materialist theory of history. The two became
close friends and collaborated on a number of works, the best-known of
which is The Communist Manifesto (1848).

[^30]: Ludwig Feuerbach, p. 54.

[^31]: Ibid., p. 112.

[^32]: Text: ma' anna (even though).

[^33]: Literally, the law of contradicting contradiction. Instead, it
should read 'the law of contradicting non-contradiction', since it
asserts that contradiction is possible. Thus, it is the contrary of the
principle of non-contradiction which asserts the impossibility of
contradiction.

[^34]: Engels asserts in the above quoted passage that the creation and
development of a phenomenon have objective value, and that in this there
is a decisive refutation of the idealistic tendencies. I think that if
this assertion is made by the Marxist school, it would not involve any
specific philosophical meaning. This is in spite of the fact that it is
possible for the philosophical researcher to construct out of this a
specific evidence that shows that the objective reality rests on the
knowledge of the thing in itself (al-'ilm al-huduriyy), due to the fact
that the agent is known by means of its effects and by the knowledge of
the thing in itself that it creates. The knowledge of a thing in itself
is the same as the objective existence of that thing. A human being,
therefore, is in contact with the objective reality of the things that
he knows in themselves. Hence, if idealism discounts from objective
knowledge knowledge of the form of a thing (al-'ilm al-husuliyy), which
does not link us to anything other than our ideas, then knowledge of the
thing in itself will be sufficient for realism. However, this evidence
is based on a false notion of knowledge of the thing in itself. The
ground for our knowledge of a thing is nothing but the knowledge of the
form of that thing. The knowledge of the thing in itself, on the other
hand, does not mean anything other than the presence of the real, known
object to the knower. For this reason, every human being knows his soul
in itself, even though many people deny the existence of the soul. The
space designated for this study does not permit elaboration of this
point.

[^35]: Ma Hiya al-Madda, p. 32.

[^36]: Ibid., p. 4.

[^37]: A petitio principii is a logical fallacy assuming in the premises
the conclusion that must be proved.

[^38]: Ibid., p. 2 1.

[^39]: Al-Maddiyya coal-Mithaliyya ft al-Falsafa, p. 68.

[^40]: Text: ma yabga (it remains that).

[^41]: No reference to this passage is given by the author. It is not
clear that it ends here either.

[^42]: Ibid., pp. 108-9.

[^43]: See Ma Hiya al-Mfidda, p. 48.

[^44]: No reference to this passage is given by the author.

[^45]: No reference to this passage is given by the author.

[^46]: Ibid., pp. 46-7.

[^47]: Ma Hiya al-Madda, p. 62.

[^48]: Ibid., p. 36.

[^49]: AI-Mantiq ash-Shakliyy wal Mantiq ad-Dialaktikiyya, pp. 50-1.

[^50]: Ibid., p. 51.

[^51]: Kedrov, Boniface Mikhailovitch, Russian philosopher, chemist and
historian of natural science (1903-). His works, especially in the
various branches of science, are best known in Russia. Among his most
important works are the following: Engels and the Natural Science
(1947), The Atomism of Dalton (1949) and Great Discovery (1958).

[^52]: Ibid., p. 50.

[^53]: Ibid., p. 51.

[^54]: Ibid., p. 10.

[^55]: Ibid., p. 11.

[^56]: Ibid., pp. 20-1.

[^57]: No reference to this passage is given by the author.

[^58]: Ibid., p. 14.

[^59]: William James, American philosopher and psychologist, and the
brother of Henry James, the novelist (1842-1910). He received an M.D.
from Harvard, at which he later taught anatomy, psychology, physiology
and philosophy. From Charles Peirce he borrowed and popularized the term
'pragmatism'. According to this doctrine, the meaning and truth of any
statement can be reduced to a specific consequence in the future
practical life. His best-known works are: The Pins of Psychology, The
Will to Believe, The Varieties of Religious Experience, Essays in
Radical Empiricism.

[^60]: Pragmatism or the doctrine of instrumentalism is a recent
philosophical movement according to which the criterion of the meaning
and, according to some, such as William James, the truth of propositions
must be interpreted through their consequence.

[^61]: Henri Bergson, French philosopher (1859-1941). He taught that
philosophy must mold itself in accordance with the data of experience.
We are endowed with intuition and reason. The former perceives the
dynamic aspect of things - this is the more basic and real aspect of
consciousness - while the latter tends toward their static aspect. These
two states of consciousness correspond to two states in the universe.
His most important writings are: Matter and Memory, Laughter,
Introduction to Metaphysics, Creative Evolution and The Two Sources of
Morality

[^62]: Bergson: Hayatuh wa-Falsafatuh: Muntakhabat, Silsilat Zidni
'Ilman, (25), manshurat 'Uwaydat. [No page number is given.]

[^63]: F.C.S. Schiller, English philosopher (1864-1937). According to
Schiller, both truth and reality are similar to goodness and beauty in
that they are, in part, the result of human intention and desire.
Schiller is a strong believer in human freedom and creativity. His
best-known works are: The Riddles of the Sphinx, Humanism, Logic for
Use, Must Philosophers Disagree? and Our Human Truths.

[^64]: John Dewey, American philosopher (1859-1952). His most important
works are: Psychology, Ethics, Reconstruction Philosophy, Human Nature
and Conduct, Experience and Nature, The Guest for Certainty, Art as
Experience and Experience and Education.

[^65]: That is, no affirmative answer to any of these questions makes
sense in the context of the doctrine of pragmatism.

[^66]: George Santayana, Spanish-American philosopher: (1863-1952). He
was born in Madrid into a wealthy family, but his education and academic
experience was mostly achieved in the United States, at Harvard in
particular. His main works are the following: Sense of Beauty, Life of
Reason, Skepticism and Animal Faith and Realms of Beings.

[^67]: Those attempts that are made in the name of knowledge, for the
purpose of rejecting rational self-evident propositions, whether
mathematical or logical, are curious indeed. This is in spite of the
fact that knowledge cannot but rest on such propositions. In what
follows, examples of such attempts will be given by Dr Nuri Ja'far. He
mentions them in his book, Falsafat al-Tarbiya (Philosophy of
Education), p. 66: In light of what we have mentioned, we can say (p.
197) that all the laws of knowledge are relative. They operate in
specific areas, beyond which they do not extend. What we have said is
also true of the laws of mathematics and some of their expressions
which, at first glance, appear as if they are self-evident matters that
do not change by the change of time and space. Thus, for example, the
sum of 'two plus two' does not always equal 'four'. Similarly, for
example, if we add two volumes of alcohol to two volumes of water, the
result will be less than four mixed volumes. The reason for this is that
the parts of one of the two fluids differ from (the parts of) the other
fluid in the intensity of solidity. Thus, at the point of mixing, the
parts of the fluid that arc more solid, i.e. the part of water,
penetrate through the relative gaps that exist among the parts of the
alcohol. The result is similar to the mixture of a quantity of oranges
with a quantity of watermelon, where a part of the oranges penetrate
through the gaps that exist in the watermelon. Further, the result of
the addition of one gallon of water to one gallon of sulphuric acid is a
frightening explosion. If this union occurs with scientific precision
and in a manner in which the occurrence of the explosion is avoided, the
result will still be less than two gallons of the mixture. However at
some other time, two plus two equals two. If, for example, we mix two
gases, the temperature of each of which being two degrees centigrade,
the degree of the temperature of the mixture remains two. This text
presents us with three mathematical formulae. First, if we add 2 volumes
of alcohol to 2 volumes of water, the sum is less than 4 volumes. This
formula involves the following fallacy: in fact, we do not add 2 volumes
plus 2 volumes; rather, we lose something in the addition. Hence, the
loss appears in the result. This is because the volume of the alcohol is
not constituted by its parts only. Instead, it is constituted by its
parts and the relative gaps existing among its parts. Thus, if we
prepare 2 volumes of alcohol, these 2 volumes will express parts, and
gaps among those putts, and not parts only. When 2 volumes of water are
poured over the alcohol, and the parts of the water penetrate through
the relative gaps that exist among the parts of the alcohol thus
occupying such gaps - we would then lose these relative gaps that had
enjoyed a portion of the volume of the alcohol. Therefore, we do not add
2 volumes of alcohol to 2 volumes of water. Instead, we add 2 volumes of
water plus the parts of 2 volumes of alcohol. As for the relative gaps
that were present among such parts, they are eliminated. It becomes
clear that if we wish to be careful in positing this mathematical
formula, we must say that the addition of 2 complete volumes of water to
2 volumes of alcohol (excluding the gaps that are among its parts)
equals 4 volumes (excluding those gaps themselves). The case of these
volumes is not unlike thousands of natural analogs and examples that all
people observe in their daily lives. What can we say about a cotton body
whose length is t meter and a piece of iron whose length is also 1
meter? If (p. 198) we place one of these two bodies against the other,
will the result be the length of 2 meters? Further, if we place some
soil whose height is 1 meter against some water with the same height,
will the result be double that height? Of course not. Is it permissible
to consider this as a proof for rejecting the mathematical axioms?
Second, the addition of 1 gallon of water plus 1 gallon of sulphuric
acid does not produce 2 gallons. Rather, it produces a terrifying
explosion. This, too, is not incompatible with the mathematical axiom
concerning the addition of numbers. The reason is that I plus 1 equals 2
only if neither one of them nor both perish during the addition or
mixing; otherwise, there would be no addition in the real sense between
1 plus 1. In this example, the two units - i.e., the 2 gallons - were
not present at the point of completing the process of addition, so that
the result would be 2 [gallons]. Third, the addition of two gases, the
temperature of each of which is 2 degrees centigrade, produces a mixture
with the same degree of temperature, i.e. without multiplication. This
is another kind of distortion, for the process added and mixed the two
gases, and not the 2 degrees of temperature. The 2 degrees of
temperature would have been added, if (each) degree of temperature is
doubled in its subject. We have not added one temperature to another
temperature to expect a higher degree of temperature. Rather, we have
added and mixed something with a certain temperature to something else
with a certain temperature. Thus, it becomes clear that any skepticism
or rejection of the necessary rational self-evident propositions is
indeed attributed to a kind of fallacy or to the lack of a good
understanding of those self-evident propositions. This will become fully
clear when we present the Marxist criticism which attempts to refute the
principle of non-contradiction

[^68]: Robert Boyle, British physicist and chemist (1627-91). Boyle
studied gases and showed that the compressibility and expansibility of
air is inversely proportionate to the pressure exerted. This came to be
known as 'Boyle's law'. If pressure is increased ten times, for example,
the volume of air is decreased ten times. Conversely, if pressure is
decreased ten times, the volume expands ten times. His principal work is
The Skeptical Chemist.

[^69]: Henri Victor Regnault, French chemist and physicist (1810-78). He
is best known for his work on the properties of gases. In 1835, he began
a series of studies in organic chemistry on the halogen and other
derivatives of unsaturated hydrocarbons. His work in physics was careful
and accurate. He designed standard instruments for a large number of
measurements. He made precise determination of the specific heat of many
solids, liquids and gases. He studied the expansion of gases by heat,
and proved that no two gases have the exact coefficient of expansion, as
some had held earlier. He showed that Boyle's law of elasticity of a
perfect gas is only approximately true for real gases. Regnault's
hydrometer, an instrument for measuring humidity, was of his own design.
His principal work can be found in Memoires de l'Academie de Science,
Vols. 21 and 23.

[^70]: Did Duharnak al-Falsafa, p. 153.

[^71]: Text: Kunfurt. However, we assume this is the British professor,
Morris Cornforth.

[^72]: Al-Maddiyya ad-Dialaktikiyya, p. 32.

[^73]: Chiang. We are unable to identify this figure.

[^74]: Ar-Ruh al-Hizbiyya fi al-Falsafa wal-'Ulum, p. 70.

[^75]: For clarification, see the book Our Economics, by the author, pp.
93-100.


