Chapter One: Preliminary Notes
==============================

Ever since mankind attempted to determine its relations and links to the
objective world, the issue of forming a general philosophical notion of
the world has occupied a central position in the human mind. In this
investigation of ours, we do not intend to write the history of this
issue in its philosophical, religious and scientific progress, as well
as its long development throughout history.

Rather, our purpose is to present the basic notions in the modern
philosophical field, in order for us to determine the following: (1) our
position with regard to such notions; and (2) the notion, in the light
of which our general view must be formed and on whose basis our
principle in life must be based.

This notion can be attributed to two issues: one of them is the issue of
idealism and realism; and the ocher the issue of materialism and
theology.

In the former issue, the question is presented in the following way:
'Are the beings of which the world is constituted realities that exist
independently of consciousness and knowledge; or are they nothing but
forms of our thought and conception in the sense that reality is thought
or knowledge, and, in the last analysis, everything is attributed to the
mental conceptions?' Thus, if we eliminate consciousness or the 'I', (p.
208) then the whole reality will be removed.

These are two estimations of the issue. The answer, according to the
former estimation, recapitulates the philosophy of realism or the
realistic notion of the world. The answer, according to the latter
estimation, is that which offers the idealistic notion of the world.

In the second issue, the question is presented in light of the
philosophy of realism, as follows: 'If we accept an objective reality of
the world, do we stop with objectivity ac the limit of sensible matter,
which would thus be the common cause of all the phenomena of existence
and being, including the phenomena of consciousness and knowledge; or do
we seep beyond it to a further cause, an eternal and an infinite cause,
as the primary cause of what we know of the world, including both its
spiritual and its material realms?'

Thus, in the philosophical field, there are two notions of realism. One
of them considers matter as the primary foundation of existence; this is
the materialistic realistic notion. The other extends beyond matter to a
cause above both spirit and nature; this is the theological realistic
notion.

Therefore, there are three notions of the world at hand: the idealistic
notion, the materialistic realistic notion and the theological realistic
notion. Idealism may be expressed by spiritualism, since [it] considers
the spirit or consciousness as the primary foundation of existence.

1. Correction of Errors
-----------------------

In light of this, we must correct a number of errors committed by some
modern writers. The first is the attempt to consider the conflict
between theology and materialism as an expression of the opposition
between idealism and realism. They do not distinguish between the two
issues that we have presented above.

Thus, they claim that the philosophical notion of the world is one of
two kinds: either the idealistic notion or (p. 209) the materialistic
notion. Therefore, the explanation of the world does not admit of more
than two points of view. If you explain the world in a purely conceptual
manner, and believe that conception or the 'I' is the primary source [of
reality], then you are an idealist.

If, on the ocher hand, you wish to reject idealism and subjectivism, and
accept a reality independent of the 'I', then you must adopt the
materialistic notion of the world, and believe that matter is the
primary principle, and that thought and consciousness are nothing but
reflections of it and certain levels of its development.

But, as we have learned, this does not at all agree with the facts.
Realism is not limited to the materialistic notion. Similarly, idealism
or subjectivism is not the only thing that opposes and conflicts with
the philosophical materialistic notion. Indeed, there is another notion
of realism - namely, theological realism that accepts an external
reality of the world and nature. Both spirit and matter, according to
this notion, are attributed to a cause beyond the world and nature.

The second is the accusation made by some writers against the
theological notion -namely, that it freezes the scientific principle in
the natural sphere, and eliminates the natural laws and decrees that
science uncovers and that are made more evident day by day. According to
the claims of such writers, the theological notion links every
phenomenon and every being to the theological principle.

This accusation has played an effective role in the materialistic
philosophy, where the idea of God posits an intelligible cause of the
natural phenomena and events that people observe, and attempts to
justify the existence of such phenomena and events. With this, the
necessity of such phenomena and events is completely eliminated if we
can discover by science and the scientific experiments the real causes,
as well as the laws of the universe that govern the world, and in
accordance with which the phenomena and vents are produced.

The malicious role that the church played in fighting the scientific
progress and opposing the natural mysteries and laws disclosed by
science at the beginning of the scientific renaissance in Europe aided
in solidifying this accusation. (p. 210)

In fact, the theological notion of the world does not mean dispensing
with natural causes or rebelling against any one of the sound scientific
truths. Rather, it is the notion that considers God as a cause beyond
[nature]. It imposes on the chain of agents and causes an ascent to a
power above nature and matter. With this, opposition between it and any
scientific truth is completely removed.

The reason for this is that it gives science the widest opportunity for
discovering the mysteries and order oÂ£ nature. At the same time, in the
last analysis, it retains for itself the theological explanation which
is the positing of a higher cause in a principle above nature and
matter. Hence, the theological issue is not as its opponents wish to
claim - namely, an issue concerning an invisible hand that sprinkles
water in the atmosphere, that conceals the sun from us, or that acts as
an obstacle between us and the moon, thus creating rain, a sun eclipse,
or a moon eclipse.

If science reveals the causes of rain and the factors leading to its
evaporation; and further, if science also reveals the causes of the
sun's eclipse, and [if] we know that the celestial spheres are not
equidistant from the earth, that the moon is closer to them than to the
sun, and that it happens that the moon passes between the earth and the
sun, thus concealing the sun's light from us; again; if science reveals
the cause of the moon's eclipse, which is the passing of the moon in the
shadow of the earth - this shadow extends behind the earth for around
900,000 miles - I say that if this information is available to a human
being, then those materialists will imagine that the theological issue
will no longer have a subject, and the invisible hand, which conceals
from us the sun or the moon, is substituted for by the natural causes
given by science.

However, this is only due to the misunderstanding of the theological
issue, and to the undifferentiation of the place of the theological
cause in the chain of causes.

The third is the spiritual character that has dominated both idealism
and theology, so much so that spiritualism in the theological notion
began to appear as having the same meaning as that of the idealistic
notion. This caused a number of ambiguities. The reason is that
spirituality can be considered as an attribute of each of (p. 211) the
two notions.

However, we do not at all permit the negligence of the distinction
between the two forms of spiritualism. Rather, we must know that by
'spiritualism', in the idealistic sense, one intends the realm which is
opposite the sensible material realm that is, the realm of
consciousness, knowledge and the 'I'.

Thus, the idealistic notion is spiritual, to the sense that it explains
every being and every existent in terms of this realm, and attributes
every truth and every reality to it. According to the claims of
idealism, the material realm is attributed to a spiritual realm.

As for 'spiritualism' in the theological sense, or in the theological
doctrine, it is a method of viewing reality as a whole, and not as a
specific realm opposite the material realm. Hence, the theology that
asserts a supernatural, immaterial cause also asserts a link between all
that exists in the general realm - be that spiritual or material - and
the supernatural cause.

It believes that this link is one in whose light the human practical-
and social position regarding all things must be determined.
Spiritualism in the theological sense is a method for comprehending
reality. It is equally applicable to the material realm and to the
spiritual realm in the idealistic sense.

We can conclude from the previous presentation that the philosophical
notions of the world are three. We have studied in the theory of
knowledge the idealistic notion, since it is very much related to the
theory of knowledge. We have also discussed its errors. Let us,
therefore, take up in this investigation the study of the other two
notions, the materialistic and the theological.

In the materialistic notion, there are two tendencies: the instrumental
or mechanical tendency and the dialectical or contradiction tendency
(that is, dynamic materialism).

2. Clarification of a Number of Points concerning These Two Notions
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Before we discuss the materialistic notion, including both of its
tendencies, we must seek clarification about a number of points
concerning the theological and the materialistic notions. This will be
done in the following questions. (p. 212)

The first question is this: 'What is the basic feature that
distinguishes each of the materialistic tendencies (the philosophical
materialistic school) and the theological tendency (the theological
school) from one another; what is the main difference (between them)
that makes them two conflicting tendencies and two opposite schools?'

Casting one glance at these two schools determines for us a clear answer
to this question: namely, that the basic distinguishing feature of the
materialistic school in philosophy is negation or denial of what appears
to be above the capacity of the experimental sciences. Thus, in the
scientific field - that is, in the positive aspects of science that
experimentation demonstrates - there is not something theological and
something material.

Whether a philosopher is a theologian or a materialist, he accepts the
positive aspect of science. From the point of view of science, the
theologian and the materialist admit, for example, that radium produces
a power of radiation as a result of an internal division, that water is
composed of oxygen and hydrogen, and that the element of hydrogen has
the lightest atomic weight of all elements.

They both also accept the other positive truths that appear on the
scientific level. Hence, with regard to the scientific position, there
is no theological philosopher and no materialist philosopher. Rather,
these two sorts of philosophies exist, and materialism opposes theology
when the issue of the existence of the beyond is presented. The
theologian accepts a kind of existence free from matter that is, beyond
the experimental field, its phenomena, and its powers.

The materialist, on the other hand, denies this, and limits existence to
the specific experimental field. He considers the natural causes, which
are revealed by experiments and touched by the hand of science, as the
primary causes of existence, and nature as the only expression of this
existence; whereas the theological tendency affirms that the human
spirit or the 'I' is an immaterial subject, and that knowledge and
thought are phenomena independent of nature and matter.

The materialist denies this, claiming that, in his analysis of the human
body and in his observation of the operations of the nervous system, he
has not seen anything outside the limits of nature and matter, as the
theologians claim. (p. 213)

Further, the theological tendency asserts that the developments and
movements that are revealed by science - be they mechanical movements
subject to an external material cause, or natural movements not produced
by experimentation from specific material causes - are, in the last
analysis, attributable to an external cause beyond the fence of nature
and matter.

The materialist opposes this, claiming that the mechanical movement as
well as the natural movement are not linked to an immaterial cause, and
that the natural movement is dynamic. It is self-sufficient, since the
immaterial cause chat the theologians have accepted does not appear in
the experimental field.

Thus, it becomes fully clear that the opposition between theology and
materialism is not with regard to scientific truths. The theologian,
like the materialist, admits all the scientific truths that sound
experiments make clear about the human body, the physiology of its
organs, and the natural development and movement.

The theologian just adds and admits other truths. He demonstrates the
existence of an immaterial spiritual side of human beings other than
that which is exhibited by them in the experimental field. He also
demonstrates a non-sensible, primary, immaterial cause of the natural
and mechanical movements.

Since we have learned that the scientific field does not involve what is
theological and what is materialistic, we know that the philosophical
structure of materialism - since it is a school opposed to the school of
theology - is based solely on the negation of abstract truths, as well
as on the denial of existence beyond the limits of nature and matter,
and not on positive scientific truths.

The second question is this: 'If compatibility between theology and
materialism is the compatibility between affirmation and negation, then
which of the two schools is responsible for giving evidence and proof
for its own affirmative or negative position?'

It may appeal to some materialists to rid themselves of the
responsibility for giving proof, and to consider the theologian
responsible for giving evidence for his claim, because (p. 214) the
theologian is the one who has the affirmative position -that is, the one
claiming existence [beyond nature]. That is why the theologian must
justify his position and demonstrate the existence of what he claims.

The truth though, is that each of the two is responsible for offering
evidence and reasons for his own tendency. Thus, as the theologian must
demonstrate affirmation; so also is the materialist responsible for
providing evidence for the negation, since he does not make the
metaphysical proposition the subject of doubt. Instead, he denies it
without restriction. But absolute denial, like absolute affirmation, is
in need of proof.

Therefore, when the materialist claims that the immaterial cause does
not exist, he implies in this claim that he has known the whole
existence, and has not found in it room for an immaterial cause. He
must, therefore, advance a proof in support of this general knowledge,
and a justification of the absolute negation.

Here we ask again: 'What is the nature of the evidence that the
theologian or the materialist may offer in this area?' Our answer is
that the evidence for affirmation or for denial must be reason, and not
direct sense experience.

This is contrary to the materialist view that usually considers sense
experience as evidence for its own notion - claiming that the
theological notion or the metaphysical propositions cannot in general be
affirmed by sense experience, and that sense experience rejects those
claims, since it analyzes human beings and nature and shows that there
are no immaterial things in them.

If materialism is correct in its claim -namely, that sense experience
and scientific truths do not constitute a proof for the theological
tendency - then neither can they be a proof for absolute negation that
determines the materialistic tendency. For we have already learned that
the various kinds of scientific truths are not the subject of
disputation between theology and materialism.

Rather, the disputation is concerned with the philosophical
interpretation of those truths: the existence of a superior cause beyond
the limits of sense experience. It is clear that sense experience cannot
be considered as a proof for the negation of a truth outside its own
limits.

Thus, if the natural scientist does not find (p. 215) an immaterial
cause in his laboratory, this will not be anything other than a proof
for the non-existence of such a cause in the empirical realm. As for
negating the existence of such a cause in a realm above that of sense
experience, this is something that cannot be inferred from sense
experience itself.

In this clarification, we have asserted two things. First, materialism
is in need of proving the negative aspect that distinguishes it from
theology, as metaphysics is in need of proving the affirmation and
positiveness. And second, materialism is a philosophical tendency, as is
theology.

We do not have scientific or experimental materialism; for science, as
we have learned, does not affirm the materialistic notion of the world
in order chat materialism be scientific. Rather, all the truths and
secrets that science discloses about the sphere of nature leave room for
the assumption of a cause above matter.

Scientific experimentation cannot prove, for example, that matter is not
created by an immaterial cause, or that the forms of movement and the
kinds of development which science has discovered in the various aspects
of nature are self-sufficient and not produced by a cause above the
limits and sphere of experimentation. The same is true of every
scientific truth.

Therefore, the proof in support of materialism cannot be based on
scientific truths or direct sense experience. Rather, it is formulated
in a philosophical interpretation of those truths and experiences,
precisely as is the proof in support of theology.

Let us take development as an example of this. Science proves the
existence of natural development in a number of fields. It is possible
to posit two philosophical interpretations of this kind of development.
One of them is that it proceeds from the heart of a thing, and is the
result of a conflict assumed among contradictories in that thing. This
is the interpretation of dialectical materialism.

The other is that it is the product of an immaterial superior cause. The
progressive nature does not involve contradictories within itself.
Rather, it involves the possibility of development. It is that (p. 216)
immaterial superior cause that provides this possibility with actual
existence. This is the interpretation of the theological philosophy.

We notice with clarity that the scientific notion is just (the assertion
of] the existence of natural development. As for those two notions of
movement, they are two philosophical notions, the soundness of one of
which and the erroneousness of the other is not something about which
one can be sure from direct sense experience.

The third question is as follows: 'If scientific experimentation is not
sufficient by itself for demonstrating the theological and the
materialistic notions alike, then is it possible for the human mind to
find evidence for any of the two notions, since both of them lie outside
the realm of experimentation, or must the mind yield to skepticism, to
freeze the theological and materialistic issue, and to limit itself to
the fruitful field of science?'

The answer is that human intellectual capacity is sufficient for
studying this issue and for commencing with respect to it from
experimentation itself, not by considering experimentation as a direct
proof for the notion which we form about the world, but as a starting
point. Thus, the proper philosophical notion of the world - the
theological notion - will be posited by the independent rational
information in light of the interpretation of experiments and the
experimental phenomena.

No doubt the reader remembers our study in the first investigation
concerning the theory of knowledge of the rational doctrine, and how we
demonstrated the presence of independent rational knowledge in a way
that shows that the addition of rational knowledge to sense experience
is something necessary not only with respect to our philosophical issue
but also with respect to all scientific issues.

There is no scientific theory that rests on a purely empirical basis.
Rather, it rests on the basis of sense experience and in light of
independent rational knowledge. Therefore, our philosophical issue that
investigates the supernatural world does not differ from any scientific
issue that investigates one of the natural laws, or that reveals some
natural powers (p. 217) or secrets. In all of this, sense experience is
the point of departure. But in spite of that, sense experience is in
need of a rational explanation if a philosophical or a scientific truth
is to be inferred from it.

From these points, we draw the following conclusions. First, the
materialistic school differs from the theological school in a negative
aspect that is, in the denial of that which lies beyond the empirical
field. Second, materialism is responsible for providing evidence for the
negation, as theology must show evidence for the affirmation.

Third, sense experience cannot 6e considered a proof for the negation,
since the non-existence of a superior cause in the empirical realm does
not prove the non-existence of that cause in a superior realm not
touched by direct sense experience. Fourth, the method adopted by the
theological school in demonstrating its theological notion is the same
method by means of which we prove scientifically all the scientific
truths and laws.

3. The Dialectical Tendency of the Materialistic Notion
-------------------------------------------------------

We have said that there are two tendencies in materialism. One of them
is the mechanical, instrumental tendency, and the other is the
dialectical tendency. We have already touched upon the former tendency
briefly in the second chapter of the theory of knowledge, when we took
up in our study and scrutiny the physical idealism which was established
on the ruins of mechanical materialism.

The latter tendency of materialism, which explains the world in a
materialistic fashion according to the laws of dialectics, is the
tendency that was adopted by the Marxist school. Thus, this school
established (p. 218) its materialistic notion of the world on the basis
of the tendency under consideration. We quote from Stalin:[^1]

The Marxist materialism proceeds from the principle which asserts that
the world is naturally material, that the numerous events of the world
are various phenomena of the moving matter, that the mutual relations
among events and the mutual adaptation of these events to one another
are, according to the dialectical method, necessary laws for the
development of the moving matter, and finally, that the world develops
in accordance with the laws of the movements of matter and has no need
of any universal mind.[^2]

The materialistic notion considers matter or existence as the central
point of the Marxist philosophy, because this point determines the
Marxist view regarding life, and constructs for it a specific
understanding of reality and its values. Without this point, it would
not be possible to establish the purely material grounds of society and
life. It has imposed on the Marxist doctrine a specific progression of
thought and required it to establish its various philosophical aspects
in the interest of this point.

In order for Marxism to have the right to determine the central point
once and for all, it chose this point to be one of certainty, as we have
learned in the theory of knowledge. It declared that human beings have
the cognitive capacities that enable them to speak with certainty about
a specific philosophy of life and to unravel the innermost secrets of
existence and the world. It rejected the doctrine of absolute skepticism
and even frozen subjectivism. By doing so, it attempted to give the main
axis - the materialistic notion - a decisive quality. (p. 219)

Subsequently, it put forth a general criterion of knowledge and of the
truth of sense experience. It considered necessary rational knowledge as
improbable, and denied the rational logic which is independent of sense
experience. All of this was for the purpose of avoiding the elimination
of the possibility of the central point and the limitation of the human
capacity by rational logic, particularly in the empirical field.

At this stage, Marxism faced a new problem - namely, if the human
ideational criterion is the senses and the sense experience, then the
information that people acquire by means of the senses and the sense
experience must always be true and must be considered as a primary
criterion for weighing ideas and knowledge. Now, are the scientific
empirical conclusions indeed so? Further, is the truth of the theories
which are established on the basis of sense experience always secure?

Marxism falls between two dangers. If it admits that the information
which is based on the ground of sense experience is not free from error,
then sense experience falls short of being a primary criterion of truth
and knowledge. if, on the other hand, the Marxists claim chat the theory
which is derived from sense experience and application is above error
and ambiguity, then they clash with the reality which no one can deny:
the reality that many scientific theories, or many of the laws that
people have attained by way of studying the sensible phenomena have
proved to be false and not in agreement with reality. Thus, they fell
from the scientific throne that they had been mounting for hundreds of
years.

If the scientific or empirical notions should be false, and [if]
rational logic is eliminated, then how can one declare a philosophy of
certitude, or establish a school whose ideas are characterized by
decisiveness?

Marxism has insisted on erecting sense experience as the highest
criterion. It rid itself of this difficulty by positing the law of
movement and development of the sciences and ideas due to [its
consideration of] the mind as a part of nature. By virtue of this, the
mind realizes the natural laws (p. 220) in full. Thus, it develops and
grows as nature does.

The scientific development does not mean the elimination of the
previously mentioned scientific notion. Rather, it expresses an integral
movement of truth and knowledge. Truth and knowledge are truth and
knowledge, but they grow, move and ascend continuously.

Thus, all the self-evident propositions and truths are abolished; for
all thought moves along the path of development and change. Hence, there
is never a fixed truth in the realm of thought, nor can one be certain
of the self-evident propositions that we now know, such as our knowledge
of the following: 'The whole is greater than the part,' and 'Two plus
two equals four'. This knowledge acquires another form in its
developmental movement - thus, we know the truth at that point in
another manner.

Since the movement that Marxism posited as the law of thought and of
nature in general does not proceed other than from a power or a cause,
and (since), according to Marxism, there is no reality in the world
other than matter, it states that movement is the result of the
contradictions of the internal content of matter, and that these
contradictions are at war with one another, thus causing matter and its
development. For this reason, Marxism cancelled the principle of
non-contradiction. It took dialectics as a method of understanding the
world, and placed its materialistic notion within the scope of this
method.

With this, it became clear that all the philosophical aspects of
dialectical materialism are linked to the central point- that is, to the
materialistic notion - and are formed for the purpose of establishing
and preserving this point.

Eliminating the self-evident propositions and making them subject to
change, or accepting contradiction and considering it as a general
natural law, as well as reaching the other similar strange conclusions
chat Marxism drew, is nothing but an inevitable progression of the
advance that began from the Marxist materialistic notion, and a
justification of this advance in the philosophical field.

[^1]: Joseph Stalin, (1879-1953). He was a Marxist theoretician,
apolitical and a military leader. He was born in Soviet Georgia to a
modest family. His father was a shoemaker. At nineteen years of age, he
joined the revolutionary underground. In 1917, he became the
editor-in-chief of Pravda, and in 1922, he was appointed secretary
general of the Communist Party, and Lenin's successor. In 1942, he
became commander-in-chief, and led the war against Germany in 1943.

[^2]: Al-Madda ad-Dialaktikyya, p. 20.


