Chapter Two: Dialectics or Disputation
======================================

In classical logic, 'disputation' meant a specific method of discussion
and' a certain manner of debate in which contradictory ideas and
opposite points of view are presented. Every one of such points of view
attempts to show the weakness and falsity of its opposite, in light of
the knowledge already admitted and the propositions already
acknowledged.

By virtue of this, conflict between negation and affirmation develops in
the field of discussion and disputation, until a conclusion is reached
in which one of the points of view at odds is asserted, or a new point
of view reconciling all views evolves from the intellectual struggle
between the contradictories, after casting their contradiction aside and
showing the weakness of every one of them.

However, disputation in the new dialectic or the new disputation is no
longer a method of discussion and a certain manner of exchanging
opinions. Instead, it has become a method of explaining reality and a
general law of the universe applicable to the various realities and
kinds of existence.

Thus, contradiction does not only lie between opinions and points of
view. Rather, it is fixed in the heart of every reality and truth.
Therefore, there is no proposition that does not involve in itself its
own contradiction and negation. (p. 222)

Hegel was the first to establish a complete logic on the basis of this
[notion of dialectics]. Thus, the dialectical contradiction was the
central point in his logic and the main principle on which a new
understanding of the world is based and by means of which a new theory
about the world is constructed - a theory that is completely different
from the classical theory that mankind had adopted ever since they were
made to know and to think.

Hegel was not the first to formulate the principles of the dialectic.
These principles are deeply rooted in a number of ideas that had
appeared intermittently on the stage of human thought.

However, these principles were not formulated in light of a complete
logic which is clear in its explanation and view, and which is
determined in its designs and rules, except at the hand of Hegel who
constructed his whole idealistic philosophy on the basis of this kind of
dialectic. He considered it a sufficient explanation of society,
history, the nation and all aspects of life. After him, Marx adopted
this dialectic and cast his materialistic philosophy in a purely
dialectical form.

According to the claims of the dialecticians, the new dialectic is a law
of thought and reality alike. That is why it is a method of thought as
well as a principle on which the existence and development of reality is
based.

We are told the following by Lenin:
If there are some contradictions among people's ideas, it is because
the reality that our minds reflect involves contradictions. The
dialectic of things produces the dialectic of ideas, and not vice
versa.[^1] (p. 223)

Marx also says:
The movement of thought is nothing but a reflection of the movement of
reality, transmitted to, and transformed in the human mind.[^2]

Hegelian logic, with the dialectic and contradiction on which it rests,
is considered at the exact opposite end of the classical logic or the
general human logic. This is because general logic accepts the principle
of noncontradiction, and considers it a primary principle on the basis
of which every knowledge must be based, and a necessary principle by
which everything in the realm of existence abides, and without which no
truth can be proved.

Hegelian logic, on the ocher hand, completely rejects the principle of
noncontradiction. Further, it is not satisfied with emphasizing the
possibility of contradiction. Rather, it views contradiction, instead of
its opposite, as the primary principle for all true knowledge of the
world, and the general law that explains the whole universe by means of
a group of contradictions.

Every proposition concerning the world is considered as an affirmation;
while at the same time, it forms its own negation. Affirmation and
negation are synthesized in a new affirmation. Thus, the contradictory
method of dialectics or disputation that governs the world involves
three stages, called the thesis, the antithesis, and the synthesis -
that is, the affirmation, the negation and the negation of the negation.
In accordance with the requirements of this method of disputation,
everything unites with its contradictory. It is at the same time
affirmed and denied, existent and nonexistent.

Hegelian logic claims that, by the disputation it attributes to
existence, it has abolished the main points of classical logic.
According to Hegelian logic, these points are the following. (p. 224)
The first is the principle of noncontradiction, which asserts that a
thing cannot be simultaneously qualified by a certain attribute and by
its contradictory.

The second is the principle of identity. This is the principle that
states that every quiddity is what it is by necessity; that is, a thing
cannot be stripped of itself. The third is the principle of rest and
frozenness in nature. This principle asserts the negativity and
fixedness of nature, and denies that the realm of matter is dynamic.

In the new logic, there is no room for the first principle, since
everything pertaining to the reality of this logic is based on
contradiction. If contradiction prevails as a general law, it is then
also natural to drop the other principle of classical logic, the
principle of non-contradiction. Everything loses its identity exactly at
the moment of the affirmation, since it is in a continuous becoming.

As long as contradiction is the main foundation, it will not be
surprising that truth always means two contradictory things. Since this
kind of contradiction, which lies at the heart of every reality,
produces a continuous conflict in all things, and [since] 'conflict'
means movement and progression, therefore nature is continuously active
and developing, constantly moving forward and becoming. These are the
blows that dialectical logic claims to have directed against general
human logic and the familiar notion of the world, on which metaphysics
rested for thousands of years.

The new method of understanding existence can be summed up in the
assumption of a primary proposition that it views as a fundamental.
Later, this fundamental converts to its contradictory by virtue of the
conflict among the contradictories of the internal content. After that,
the two contradictories are synthesized in a unity. This unity, in turn,
becomes a fundamental and a new point of departure. Thus, this
tri-progression is repeated (p. 225) endlessly and without limit. It
moves with existence and extends as far as the phenomena and events of
existence extend.

Hegel began with the general notions and categories, applying the
dialectic to them, and inferring them in a disputational method based on
the contradiction represented in the thesis, antithesis and synthesis.
His bestknown and first triad in this area is that which begins from the
simplest and most primary of chose notions: the notion of existence.

Thus, existence is. This is the affirmation or thesis. However, it is
not a thing, because it can be everything. The circle, for example, is.
The same is true of the square, the white, the black, the plant, and the
stone. Existence, therefore, is nothing determined.

Consequently, it is not. This is the antithesis which the thesis
produces. It is in this way that contradiction occurs in the notion of
existence. This contradiction is resolved in the synthesis of existence
and non-existence which produces an existent that does not fully exist,
that is, becoming and movement. Hence, the conclusion to be drawn is
that real existence is becoming.

We gave this example in order to show how the master of modern
disputation moves in inferring the general notions from the more general
to the more particular and from the more empty and weaker to the richer
and closer to the external reality.

According to him, this kind of dialectic in inferring notions is nothing
other than a reflection of the dialectic of actual things in themselves.
Thus, if a certain idea causes an idea which is its opposite, that would
be because the reality that the former idea represents requires an
opposite reality.

A short glance at the thesis, the antithesis and the synthesis in the
issue of existence, which is the best-known Hegelian triad, indicates
clearly that Hegel did not really understand the principle of
non-contradiction when he cancelled it and replaced it by the principle
of contradiction. Further, I do not know (p. 226) how Hegel can explain
to us contradiction, or negation and affirmation that unite in the
notion of existence.

No doubt, the notion of existence is a general notion. That is why it
can be everything - it can be a plant or an inorganic thing, a white
thing or a black thing, a circle or a square. But does this mean that
these contradictories and opposite things unite in the notion of
existence, such that it becomes the meeting point for contradictories
and opposites? Of course not.

The union of opposite things in one subject is one thing, while the
possibility of the applicability of one notion to these things is
something else. Existence is a notion that does not involve anything
black or white, plant-like or inorganic. Rather, it can be either this
or that. But it is not this and that at the same time.[^3]

The basic points are four: the movement of development, the
contradictions of development, the leaps of development, and the
assertion of general linkage. (p. 227)

1. The Movement of Development
------------------------------

Stalin declares that
Contrary to metaphysics, the dialectic does not consider nature as a
state of rest, frozenness, stagnation, and stability. Rather, it
considers it as a state of constant motion, change, and uninterrupted
renewal and development. In nature, there is always something generating
and developing, and something disintegrating and perishing. That is why
we wish [to establish] the dialectical method, so that one would not be
satisfied with viewing events from the perspective of their relations to
one another and from the perspective of their mutual adaptation to one
another, but also from the perspective of their motion, change,
development, appearance, and disappearance.[^4]

Further, Engels says:
We must not view the world as if is were composed of complete things.
Rather, we must view it as if it were composed in our minds. This
passage (to the mental composition) indicates a continuous change of
becoming and disintegration, where at last the light of progressive
growth shines, in spite of all the apparent coincidence and temporary
relapses.[^5]

Thus, everything is subject to the laws of development and becoming.
There is no limit at which this development or becoming ceases. (p. 228)
For motion is the unlimited preoccupation of the whole existence.

The dialecticians claim that they alone consider nature in a constant
state of motion and change. Further, they reproach metaphysical logic,
or the traditional method of thinking for its procedure of studying and
comprehending things, as this logic or method supposes nature in a state
of absolute rest and frozenness.

Therefore, it does not reflect nature in its moving and progressive
reality. Thus, according to the dialecticians, the difference between
the dialectical logic, which attributes to nature a constant motion and
a continuous progression, and the formal logic is like the difference
between two persons each of whom wishes to explore the innermost
structure of a living being in its various roles.

Each of them carries out his experiments on this being. Then one of them
stops to observe the continuous development and motion of this being and
to study this being in light of its whole development; whereas the other
is satisfied with the first experiment, thinking that this being is
static in its structure and stable in its identity and reality. Nature
as a whole is similar to this living being, [whether as] a plant or as
an animal, in development and growth. Thus, the mind does not accompany
nature except if is resembles nature in its motion and development.

In fact, the law of dialectical development, which modern disputation
considers one of its own basic features, is not something new in human
thought. Rather, what is new is its dialectical character of which it
must be stripped, as we will know later.

In its proper limits, this law is in agreement with the general logic
and has no relation to dialectics, nor was it discovered by dialectics.
Thus, in order for us to accept this law and to know that metaphysics
realized is before [the dialectic], we need only to strip this law of
the form of contradiction and the ground of disputation on which the
dialectic bases it.

According to the claims of the dialectician, the metaphysician believes
that nature is frozen, characterized by rest, and fixed, stable and
unchanging in all its aspects. It is as if (p. 229) the poor
metaphysician were deprived of any kinds of knowledge and stripped of
both consciousness and sensation. Thus, he became unperceptive and
unaware of the kinds of changes and transformations in the realm of
nature, of which all human beings, including children, are aware.

It is clear to everyone chat the acceptance of the presence of change in
the realm of nature is a matter that does not require prior scientific
study, and is not the subject of controversy or dispute.

Rather, what is worthy of study is the nature of this change and the
extent of its profundity and generality. For change is of two kinds: one
of them is pure succession, and the other motion. The history of
philosophy relates a sharp struggle, not with regard to change in
general, but with regard to its essence and its precise philosophical
explanation. The struggle centers on the answer to the following
questions.

Is the change that occurs to a body, when that body traverses a certain
distance, nothing but numerous poses that quickly follow one another in
numerous places, thus forming in the mind the idea of motion? Or, can
this change be attributed to a single gradual advance in which there is
neither pose nor rest?

Further, does the change that occurs to water, when the water's
temperature is doubled and intensified, mean an assembly of successive
temperatures that follow one another? Or is it one temperature that
becomes more complete, and that alters and becomes of a higher degree?
We face these questions with regard to every kind of change that
requires a philosophical explanation in one of the two ways offered by
these questions.

Greek history relates that some philosophical schools denied motion and
adopted the other explanation of change - that which attributes change
to the succession of motionless things. One of the proponents of such
schools is Zeno,[^6] who asserted that the motion of a traveler from the
farthest point on earth to the farthest opposite point is nothing but a
series of successive rests. (p. 230) Zeno did not see the gradual
(motion) and process of completion of existence.

Rather, he believed that every phenomenon is static, and that change
occurs by the succession of static things, and not by the development
and gradual [motion] of one thing. With this, the motion of a human
being over a certain distance becomes an expression of his rest at the
first point of the distance, then at the second point and after that at
the third point, and so on.

If we see two individuals, one of whom is standing at a certain point,
while the other is walking in a specific direction, both individuals,
according to Zeno's view, are standing at rest. The first, however, is
constantly at rest in a specific point; while the other has as many
rests as the points he covers.

At every moment, he is in a specific space, but at no moment does he
differ at all from the first individual who stands at a specific point.
Both individuals are at rest, even though the rest of the first is
continuous, while the rest of the second quickly changes to another rest
at another point of the distance. Hence, the difference between the two
rests is the difference between a short rest and a long rest.

This is what Zeno as well as some ocher Greek philosophers attempted [to
show]. He demonstrated his point of view by his four well-known proofs
that did not meet with progress and success in the field of philosophy.
This is because the Aristotelian school, the greatest philosophical
school in the Greek age, accepted motion. It rejected and falsified
those proofs and demonstrated the presence of motion and development in
the neural phenomena and attributes.

This means that a natural phenomenon may not fully exist at one moment.
Rather, it exists gradually, and exhausts its possibilities step by
step. This results in the occurrence of development and the completion
of existence. When the temperature of water is doubled, this does not
mean that at every moment water receives a specific degree of
temperature that fully exists, then perishes, and then another degree of
temperature is freshly produced.

Rather, the essence of this doubling (p. 231) consists in that one
temperature had existed in the water yet not fully, in the sense that it
did not exhaust in its first moment all its powers and possibilities.
Due to this, it began to exhaust its possibilities gradually, and to
advance and develop later on.

In philosophical terminology, it is a continuous progressive motion. It
is clear that the process of completion or the developmental motion
cannot be understood except in this sense. As for the succession of
numerous phenomena- of which each one exists after the previous one and,
by its own perishing, opens the way for a new phenomenon - it is not
growth and completion. Consequently, it is not a motion, but a kind of
general change.

Motion, therefore, is the gradual advance of existence and the
development of a thing to the level permitted by its possibilities. That
is why the philosophical notion of motion is defined as the gradual
actualization of the potentiality of a thing.[^7]

This definition rests on the idea of motion presented earlier. Motion,
as we have already learned, is not the absolute perishing of a thing and
the existence of another new thing. Rather, it is the progression of a
thing in the order of existence.

Therefore, from the time it begins to the time it ceases, every motion
must contain one continuous existence. It is this-existence that moves,
in the sense that [it progresses] step by step and continuously becomes
more enriched. Every step is one of the stages of this one existence.
These stages exist only by virtue of motion.

Thus, a thing that moves or an existence that develops does not possess
these stages before its motion; otherwise, there would not be any
motion.[^8] Rather, at the starting point, that thing or existence is
represented to us as potentialities and possibilities. It is by motion
that those possibilities are exhausted. At every step of the motion,
possibility is substituted by reality and potentiality by actuality.

Thus, before water is placed on the fire, it possesses nothing of the
perceptible temperature other than (p. 232) its possibility. Further,
this possibility that it possesses is not the possibility of a certain
degree of temperature, but includes all the degrees of temperature that,
in the last analysis, lead to the vapor state. When water begins to be
acted upon and influenced by the heat of fire, its temperature begins to
change and develop.

This means that the potentialities and possibilities that water enjoyed
changed into a reality. At every stage of the motion, water proceeds
from possibility to actuality. For this reason, potentiality and
actuality are tied together in all the stages of the motion. At the
point at which all possibilities are exhausted, motion ceases. Motion,
therefore, is of two kinds at every stage. In one respect, it is actual
and real. This is because the step registered by a stage exists in a
real and an actual manner.

In another respect, it is a possibility and a potentiality of the other
progressive steps that motion is expected to register in its new stages.
Thus, if we observe the water in our example at a specific point of
motion, we find that it is actually hot at 80 degrees (centigrade), for
instance. However, at the same time, it involves the possibility of
exceeding this degree and the potentiality of advancing to a higher
degree. Hence, the actuality of every step in its specific stage is
linked to the potentiality for its perishing.

Let us take a more profound example of motion. This is the living being
that develops by a gradual motion. It is (at first) an ovum, then a
zygote, then a fetus, then an infant, then an adolescent, and finally an
adult. Indeed, at a specific stage of its motion, this being is an
actual sperm. However, at the same time, it is something else opposite
the sperm and superior to it.

That is, it is potentially an infant. This means that motion in this
being is such that both actuality and potentiality are combined in it.
If this living being does not have potentiality and possibility for a
new stage, it will not have any motion. Further, if it is nothing in
actuality, it will be pure non-existence; and hence, it will not have
any motion.

Development, therefore, always consists of something actual and
something potential. Thus, motion continues as long as a thing combines
both actuality and potentiality, existence and possibility. If
possibility is exhausted, and no capacity for a new stage remains in the
tiring, the life of motion ends. (p. 233)

This is the meaning of the gradual actualization of the potentiality of
a thing, or the entanglement or union of potentiality and actuality in
motion. This is also the precise philosophical sense that metaphysics
gives to motion.

Dialectical materialism has adopted this sense without understanding it
and knowing it as it is. Thus, it claimed that motion is not completed
except through the continuous contradiction at the heart of things, as
we will soon learn.

After this, Islamic philosophy played its role at the hands of the great
Muslim philosopher, Saar ad-Din ash-Shirazi.[^9] He posited the theory
of general motion, and demonstrated philosophically that motion, in the
precise meaning that has been presented above, does not only touch the
phenomena of nature and its accidental surface, but the motion of such
phenomena is just an aspect of the development that discloses a deeper
aspect: that is, the development at the heart of nature and the
substantial motion of nature.

This is. so, because since the outermost motion of the phenomena means
renewal and perishing, its direct cause must be a renewable thing whose
essence is also unfixed. For the cause of what is fixed is fixed, and
the cause of what is alterable and renewable is alterable and renewable.
Thus, the direct cause of motion cannot be a fixed thing; otherwise, the
parts of motion would not perish, but would become stagnation and
rest.[^10] (p. 234)

The philosopher ash-Shirazi did not only demonstrate substantial motion,
but also showed clearly that the principle of motion in nature is one of
the necessary philosophical principles (p. 235) of metaphysics. In light
of this principle, he explained the connection of the new with the
old,[^11] as well as a number of other philosophical problems, such as
the problem of time,[^12] the issue of the separability of matter, and
the relation of the soul to the body.[^13]

After all this, can one accuse theology and metaphysics of asserting the
frozenness and rest of nature? Actually, there is no reason for this
accusation other than the fact that dialectical materialism does not
understand motion in the proper philosophical sense. What then is the
difference between motion and its general law in our philosophy and the
theory of dialectical motion in dialectical materialism? The difference
between the two kinds of motion is summed up in two basic points.

The first point is that motion in the dialectical sense is based on (p.
236) the contradiction and strife among contradictories. Such
contradiction and strife are the internal power that causes motion and
produces development. In our philosophical view of motion, the reverse
of this is true.

According to our view, motion is considered as a progression from one
step to an opposite step, without the union of those opposite steps in
one of the stages of motion. For the purpose of clarifying this point,
we must distinguish between potentiality and actuality and analyze the
Marxist fallacy which rests on the consideration of potentiality and
actuality as contradictory units.

Motion is composed of potentiality and actuality. Potentiality and
actuality are tied up together in the various stages of motion. It is
impossible for the nature of motion to exist without either of these two
elements. Thus, existence in every stage of its progression toward
completion involves a specific actual rank and a higher rank than that
in' potentiality. At the moment at which it adapts itself to the
[specific actual] rank, it progresses in an ascending fashion and
supersedes its present rank.

Marxism has imagined chat this is a kind of contradiction, that the
progressive existence involves the thing and its contradictory, and that
the contradiction between the two contradictories is what produces the
motion. We quote from Engels:

The situation would be completely different if we see the existents
while in the state of their motion, change, and mutual influences on one
another; for at the beginning of such a site, we find ourselves immersed
in contradictions.

Motion contradicts the fact that the simplest mechanical change in place
cannot, in the last analysis, occur except by means of the presence of a
certain body in a certain place at a certain moment, and in (p. 287)
another place at that same moment. In other words, its being and
nonbeing are simultaneously in one place. The continuous succession of
this contradiction and the temporary reconciliation of this
contradiction with this succession is what is called motion.[^14]

Reflect on how nonsensical the idea of motion is in dialectical
materialism! Engels explains this idea on the basis of contradiction,
not knowing that if two ranks of motion actually existed in a specific
stage of the motion, development would not be possible; and
consequently, motion would be frozen. The reason for this is that motion
is a transposition of the existent from one rank to another rank and
from one limit to another limit.

Thus, if all limits and points were actually united, there would not be
any motion. Therefore, it is necessary not to explain motion except in
light of the principle of non-contradiction; otherwise, if contradiction
were permissible, then it would be appropriate for us to ask whether or
not motion involves a change in the ranks of the progressive thing, and
a substitution of the limits and quality of that thing. If motion does
not involve any change or renewal, then it is not motion.

Rather, it is frozenness and fixedness. If Marxism admits the renewal
and change of motion, [then the question is] this: for what purpose is
this renewal if all contradictions are actually present and have no
opposition among themselves? The simplest analysis of motion shows us
that motion is one of the phenomena that prevent and make impossible the
union of contradictories and opposites, something that imposes on the
progressive existent a continuous change in its rank and limit. The
alleged contradiction or dialectic in motion is only due to the
confusion between potentiality and actuality.

Hence, at no stage does motion involve two ranks or two actual
contradictories. Rather, it involves a specific rank in actuality and
another rank in potentiality. For this reason, (p. 288) motion is a
gradual actualization of potentiality. However, incomplete philosophical
awareness was the cause of the falsification of the idea of motion.

This makes it clear that the law of contradicting non-contradiction
(naqd an-naqd) and the explanation of motion in terms of this law, as
well as all the confusion and clamor surrounding this law, and the
displeasure with, and ridicule of the metaphysical notions that adopt
the principle of non-contradiction are attributed to the philosophical
idea of motion that we have already presented and that Marxism
misunderstood.

Thus, Marxism considered the entanglement of actuality with potentiality
or their union in all the stages of motion as a union of actual opposite
things, a continuous contradiction and a strife among the
contradictories. For this reason, Marxism rejected the principle of
non-contradiction and put down the whole general logic.

This Marxist attempt is not the first of its kind. Some metaphysicians
in the history of ancient philosophy had also attempted something
similar, but with one difference between the two: Marxism wished to
justify contradiction by this attempt; whereas those ancient
metaphysicians had attempted to demonstrate the negation of the
possibility of motion because motion involves contradiction.

AI-Fakhr ad-Din ar-Razi[^15] had also made a similar attempt in which he
mentioned that motion is a gradual progression - that is, a gradual
existence of a thing. He claimed that the gradual progression of
existence is unlikely, since it leads to a kind of contradiction.
Scholars of philosophy have shown that [this idea of motion] was the
product of misunderstanding the meaning of gradual progression and
gradual existence.

Since we now know with clarity that motion is not a strife among actual
things that are always in contradiction, but an entanglement of
potentiality with actuality, and the gradual departure of a thing from
one of these two states to the other, we can know that it is impossible
for motion to be selfsufficient or without an [external] cause, that the
progressive existence does not depart from (p. 239) actuality except due
to an external cause, and that strife among contradictories is not the
internal cause of that departure, since motion does not involve a union
of contradictories or opposites from whose strife it can result.

As long as at the beginning of the motion, the progressive existence is
empty of ranks or kinds, which it acquires throughout the stages of the
motion, and as long as it does not internally involve anything except
the possibility of those ranks and the readiness for them, there must be
a cause for bringing that existence from potentiality to actuality, in
order that its possibility which is fixed in its innermost being be
converted into a reality.

We learn from this that the general law of motion in nature proves by
itself the necessity of the existence of a principle external to the
material limits of nature. The reason is that motion, according to this
law, is the manner in which nature exists. Thus, the existence of nature
is another form of the motion and gradual progression of nature, as well
as its continuous departure from potentiality toactuality. The theory of
the self-sufficiency of motion due to its internal contradictions whose
strife among each other produces motion, according to the claim of the
Marxists, has already collapsed, since there is no contradiction and no
strife.

Therefore, there must be causation, and causation must be by something
external to the limits of nature. For everything existing in nature is
such that its existence is motion and gradual progression, since there
is no fixedness in the realm of nature according to the law of general
motion. Hence, in searching for the [primary] cause, we cannot stop at
something natural.

The second point is that motion, according to the Marxist view, does not
stop at the limits of the objective reality of nature. Rather, it is
also common to human truths and ideas. As the external reality of matter
develops and grows, so also do the truths and mental perceptions submit
to the same laws of development and growth that apply to the realm of
nature. On the basis of this, there are no absolute truths according to
the Marxist view of ideas. (p. 240)

We are told by Lenin: 'Therefore, the dialectic, in the view of Marx, is
the science of the general laws of motion, whether in the external world
or in the human mind.'[^16]

According to our opinion, however, the law of general motion is the
opposite of this. It is a natural law common to the realm of matter and
does not extend to the realm of thought and knowledge. Truth and
knowledge do not involve and cannot involve development in the precise
philosophical sense, as we pointed out with clarity in the first
investigation (the theory of knowledge).

Our present purpose of studying the alleged dialectical motion of
knowledge and truth is to present the main attempts that Marxism adopted
for demonstrating the dialectic and the movement of thought. These
attempts are summed up as three. The first attempt is that thought and
knowledge are reflections of the objective reality. In order for them to
correspond to this reality, they must reflect its laws, its development
and its movement. Nature develops and changes continuously in accordance
with the law of motion.

Truth could not portray nature in the human mind if truth were frozen
and at rest. Rather, truth exists in our thoughts, only if these
thoughts are such that they grow and develop dialectically, so that our
thoughts of things match the things themselves.

In this respect, we should pay attention to the following texts: (p.
241)
Reality grows, and the knowledge chat results from this reality
reflects it, grows as it grows, and becomes an effective element of its
growth. Thought does not produce its subject. Rather, it reflects and
portrays objective reality by disclosing the laws of the growth of this
reality.[^17]

The difference between formal logic and dialectical logic is confined to
the fact that both of them face in different ways the basic issue of
logic, i.e. the issue of truth. From the point of view of dialectical
logic, truth is not something given once and for all. It is not
something complete, determined, frozen, and at rest. Rather, it is the
opposite of this. Truth is a process of the growth of a human being's
knowledge of the objective world.[^18]

The Marxist dialectical logic treats the thing that it studies from a
historical point of view inasmuch as that thing is a process of growth
and development. It agrees with the general history of knowledge and the
history of science.[^19]

There is no doubt that thought and knowledge portray objective reality
in some form. But this does not mean that the motion of objective
reality is reflected in them and, therefore, that they grow and move in
accordance with its [growth and motion]. The reason is this.

The realm of nature - that is, the realm of change, renewal and motion
necessarily involves fixed general laws. No logic can deny this, except
if it denies itself. For a logic cannot be a logic, unless it
establishes (p. 242) its method of thinking and its understanding of the
world on fixed, specific laws. Even the dialectic itself asserts that a
number of laws are in control of nature and always govern it. One of
these laws is that of motion.

Therefore, the realm of nature -whether subject to the general human law
or to the law of dialectics or disputation - involves fixed laws chat
reflect fixed truths in the realm of thought and the area of human
knowledge. With regard to this objection, the dialecticians have to
choose between the following two considerations.

They either consider the law of motion as fixed and constant, thus there
would be constant truth; or that the same law is re-evaluated. This
would mean that motion is not constant, that it may be transformed into
rest, and that truths become fixed after they had been moveable. In
either case, the dialectic would be forced to admit the presence of a
third truth.

Thought, knowledge and truth do not reflect the actual properties of
nature. We have already pointed out in 'the theory of knowledge' that
the human mind comprehends the notions and natures of objective things.
The notions of those things that are reflected in the mind are different
from the external realities in existence and properties.

Thus, the scientist is able to form a precise scientific idea about the
microbe, its composition, its specific activity and its interaction with
the human body. However, no matter how precise and detailed an idea may
be, it does not involve the properties of the external microbe and
cannot play the same role played by its own objective reality.

The physicist may acquire a precise scientific notion of the radium atom
and may determine its atomic weight, the number of electrons it carries,
its negative and positive charges, the quantity of radiation it emits,
and the exact scientific proportion of this radiation to the radiation
emitted by the uranium atom, as well as other information and details.

However, (p. 243) regardless of the depth of this notion or its profound
disclosure of the mysteries of the radium element, it will not acquire
the properties of objective reality - namely, the properties of the
radium - nor will it emit the radiation emitted by the atoms of this
element. Consequently, our notion of the atom will not develop into
radiation, as do some atoms in the external world.

Thus, it becomes clear that the laws and properties of objective reality
are not present in the idea itself. Motion is one of those laws and
properties. Thus, even though it is a general property of matter and one
of its fixed laws, the truth in our minds or the idea that reflects
nature does not involve this property. A true idea need not reflect
objective reality in its properties and various kinds of activities;
otherwise, none of our ideas would be true.

In spite of the fact that metaphysics considers nature as a realm of
continuous motion and development, yet it differs from the dialectic in
rejecting the application of the law of motion to mental notions, for
such notions do not involve all the properties of objective reality.

This does not mean that if the metaphysicians form a notion about nature
in one of its stages, therefore, they freeze their ideas, stop their
research, and consider this notion sufficient for disclosing the
innermost secrets of nature in all its stages. We do not know any
reasonable person who would be satisfied, for example, with the
scientific notion that he forms about the ovum, thus discontinuing the
progression of the living being in its second stage, and contenting
himself with the scientific notion that he had formed about it in that
specific stage.

Thus, we .believe that nature develops, and we find it necessary to
study it in every stage of its growth and motion, and to form a notion
about it. This is not something restricted to the dialectic. What
metaphysics rejects is (p. 244) the existence of a natural dynamic
motion in every mental notion.

Therefore, metaphysics calls for a distinction between the ovum and our
scientific notion of the ovum. The ovum develops and grows naturally. It
becomes a zygote and then a fetus. But our notion of it is fixed. It
cannot under any circumstance become a sperm. Rather, for knowing what a
sperm is we must form another notion in light of observing the ovum in a
new stage.

Thought about the development of the ovum is like a movie film that
takes a number of successive pictures. The first picture in the film is
not the one that develops and moves. Rather, it is the succession among
the pictures that constitutes the movie film.

On the basis of this, human knowledge would not reflect reality, except
inasmuch as the movie film reflects the kinds of motion and activity
that it includes. Thus, knowledge does not develop or grow in a
dialectical manner, in accordance with the reflected reality. Rather, it
is necessary to form a fixed knowledge of every stage of reality.

Let us take as another example the element of uranium that exhibits the
alpha wave, the beta wave and the gamma wave, and gradually changes to
another element lighter than it in its atomic weight - this is the
radium element that, in turn, gradually changes to an element lighter
than it, and passes through [various] stages, until is becomes lead.

This is an objective reality explained by science. In light of it, we
form our specific notion about it. What then does Marxism mean by the
dialectical development of the mental notion or truth in accordance with
the development of reality? If it means by this that our very scientific
notion about uranium develops dialectically and naturally in accordance
with the development of the uranium - thus emitting the specific waves
of uranium and transforming, in the last analysis, into lead - this will
be closer to a charming, humorous chat than to a reasonable
philosophical discourse.

If, on the other hand, Marxism intends [by this] that human beings must
not view uranium as a frozen, motionless element, (p. 245) but as
something that continues its progression, and about every stage of which
human beings form a notion, this will close the discussion; [for] it
does not mean a dialectical motion in truths and notions. Every notion
we form about a specific stage of the development of uranium is fixed
and does not develop dialectically to another notion.
Rather, a new notion is added to it.

At the end of this process, we possess a number of fixed notions and
truths, every one of which portrays a specific level of the objective
reality. Where then is the disputation or dialectic of thought? Also,
where is the notion that develops naturally in accordance with the
external development? This is all that relates to the first Marxist
attempt and its refutation.

The second attempt made by Marxism to demonstrate the dialectic and
development of thought is that thought or knowledge is one of the
natural phenomena and a superior product of matter. Consequently, it is
part of nature. Therefore, it is governed by the same laws that
administer nature. It alters and grows dialectically, as do all the
phenomena of nature.

We must warn that this demonstration is different from the
abovementioned demonstration. In the previous demonstration, Marxism
attempted to show that motion is present in thought due to the thought's
character as a reflection of the moving reality. The reflection is not
complete if the moving reality is not reflected in thought in its motion
and growth. In the present attempt, however, Marxism endeavors to show
that the dialectical motion of thought is due to the thought's character
as a part of nature.

Thus, the laws of the dialectic apply to both matter and knowledge, and
extend to reality and thought alike, since each of them is an aspect of
nature. Thought or truth develops and grows, not only because it
reflects a reality that develops and grows, (p. 246) but also because it
itself is a part of the realm that develops in accordance with the laws
of the dialectic. As the dialectic dictates the existence of dynamic
motion, which is grounded on the basis of internal contradiction in the
innermost being of every objective phenomenon of nature, it also
dictates the existence of dynamic motion in all the phenomena of thought
and knowledge.

Let us go over what is related to this subject in the following texts:
Being is the motion of matter which is subject to laws. Since our
knowledge is nothing but a superior product of nature, it cannot but
reflect these laws.[^20]

If we inquire about the nature of thought, the nature of awareness, and
their source, we will find that human beings are themselves the product
of nature. They grow in a certain community and with the growth of that
community. At this point, it becomes evident that the products of the
human mind which are also, in the last analysis, products of nature, are
not in contradiction, but in agreement with the rest of the
interconnected nature.[^21]

The basic point on which this demonstration rests is the adoption of the
purely materialistic explanation of knowledge that imposes on knowledge
a sharing with all the laws and decrees of nature, including the law of
motion. We will analyze this basic point in an independent chapter of
this investigation.

At the present, however, we are attempting to inquire from the Marxists
whether the materialistic explanation of thought or knowledge is
reserved for the thoughts of the dialecticians in particular. Or does it
also pervade the thoughts of others who (p. 247) do not accept the
dialectic? If it pervades all thoughts - as the materialistic philosophy
necessitates - then all thoughts must be subject to the laws of the
general development of matter.

But because of this, it becomes curiously contradictory for Marxism to
accuse other thoughts of frozenness and stationariness, and to consider
its thought as the only one that develops and grows due to the fact that
it is a part of the progressive nature, even though all human thoughts,
according to the materialistic notion, are nothing but a product of
nature. All that there is to this matter is that the proponents of the
general or formal logic, as they claim, do not accept the dialectical
development of thought, as the Marxists do.

However, when was the acceptance of a natural law a condition for the
existence of that law? Do not the body of Pasteur,[^22] the discoverer
of the microbe, and the body of Ibn Send, who did not know anything
about the microbe, both share reaction to germs, in accordance with the
specific natural laws governing germs? The same holds true for every
natural law. Thus, if the dialectic is a natural law common to both
thought and matter, then it must apply to [all] human thoughts alike. If
there is anything to its discovery, it is only the speed of the
developmental motion.

The third attempt is the exploitation of scientific development and
wholeness in the various fields, and the consideration of this as an
empirical evidence for the dialectic and development of thought. The
history of sciences, according to the Marxist claim, is itself the
history of the dialectical movement of the human thought that becomes
more complete with the passage of time.

Here is a citation from Kedrov:
The absolute truth which results from relative truths is a historical
movement of development. It is the movement of knowledge. It is
precisely for this reason that the Marxist dialectical logic treats the
thing that it studies from a historical point of view, i.e. from the
point of view of that thing's being a process of growth and development.

This logic (p. 248) is in agreement with the general history of
knowledge and the history of science. By using as examples the natural
sciences, economics, politics, and history, Lenin shows that the
dialectic derives its conclusions from the history of thought, while at
the same time, he asserts that the history of thought in logic must
agree, in part and in whole, with the laws of thought.[^23]

No two persons disagree on the fact that the history of human knowledge
and science is full of advances and completion of knowledge in the
various fields and in the different types of life and experience.'
Casting one glance on science in its present and past makes us fully
believe the extent of the fast development and the remarkable completion
that science has attained in its latest races. But this scientific
development is not a kind of motion in the philosophical sense intended
by Marxism.

Indeed, it is nothing more than a decrease in the quantity of errors and
an increase in the quantity of truths. Science develops, not in the
sense that scientific truth grows and becomes complete, but in the sense
that its truths multiply and are increased in number, and its errors are
reduced and decreased in number, in accordance with the enlargement of
the experimental scope, the deeper plunge into experimentation, and the
precision of the means of experimentation.

In order to clarify this, it is necessary to give an idea about the
procession of the scientific development and the method of gradual
progression and completion in the scientific theories and truths, so
that we can see clearly the difference between the alleged dialectic of
thought, on the one hand, and the historical development of the human
sciences, on the other hand.

Scientific truths begin with a theoretical procedure, such as with a
research hypothesis that occurs to the natural scientist due to a number
of previous pieces of information and scientific or simple observations.
A hypothesis is the first stage that the scientific theory crosses in
its developmental procession.

After that, the scientist begins a scientific investigation and an
experimental study (p. 249) of that hypothesis. He performs all kinds of
tests by means of precise scientific observations and various
experiments in a field related to the hypothesis. If the results of the
observations or experiments agree with the hypothesis and are in harmony
with its nature and with the nature of its phenomena, the hypothesis
acquires a new character: that is, the character of a scientific law.

Subsequently, the theory enters the second stage of its scientific
procession. But this development that transfers the theory from the
level of a hypothesis to that of a law does not mean that the scientific
truth has grown and altered. Rather, it means that a specific idea was
the subject of doubt, but has attained the level of scientific trust and
certitude.

Thus, Pasteur's theory concerning microbic living beings, which he
posited on an intuitive basis, was then confirmed by careful
observations through modern scientific means. Also, the theory of
general gravity, the hypothesis for which was evoked in Newton's mind by
a simple scene (the scene of the fall of an apple on the ground), made
Newton inquire as to why it is that the force that made the apple fall
on the ground is not itself the force that preserves the moon's balance
and guides its motion? Later, experiments and scientific observations
confirmed the applicability of gravity to the celestial bodies, and
considered it a general law based on a specific relation.

The same is true of the theory stating that the difference in the speed
of the fall of bodies is attributed to the resistance of air, and not to
the difference in their mass, which was introduced as an [important]
scientific event whose truth was later proved by science through
experiments on various bodies in a place void of air - thus
demonstrating that all bodies share a certain degree of speed - I say
chat such a theory and thousands of other theories, which have all
passed through the above-mentioned stage of development by crossing the
level of a hypothesis to the level of a law.

They do not express by this crossing and development of a growth in the
same truth, but a difference in the level of its scientific acceptance.
The idea is the same idea, but it has passed scientific examination. (p.
250) Due to this, is became clear as a truth, after is had been the
subject of doubt.

When this theory attains its proper position among scientific laws, it
plays its role of application, and acquires the property of scientific
reference for explaining the phenomena of nature that appear in
observation, experimentation or disclosure of new truths and secrets.
The more such a theory can discover unknown truths, whose soundness is
later confirmed by experiments, the more established and the clearer
does it become in the scientific mentality.

For this reason, the scientists' discovery of the planet Neptune in
light of the law of gravity and its mathematical formula was considered
a great victory for the theory of general gravity. The existence of this
planet was then confirmed by scientific observations. This, too, is
nothing but a kind of strong scientific confidence in the truth and
soundness of the theory.

If the theory is constantly accompanied by success in the scientific
field, it is then confirmed for good. If, on the other hand, it begins
to shift from corresponding to the reality that is scientifically
scrutinized, after carefully examining the systems and tools, and after
making penetrating observations and tests, the theory begins at that
point the stage of adjustment and renewal.

In this stage, new observations and experiments may be required to
complete the previous scientific theory by means of new notions that are
added to the previous theory, so that a unified explanation of the whole
experimental reality will be attained. Pieces of scientific evidence may
reveal the falsehood of the previous theory. Thus, in light of
experiments and observations, this theory collapses and is substituted
by another.

In none of this can we understand scientific development in a
dialectical fashion or imagine the truth as it is supposed by the
dialectic - that is, that it grows and alters in accordance with the
contradictions that it involves internally; thus, taking on in every
stage a new foot, while in all those forms it is a complete scientific
truth.

This is quite different from the scientific reality (p. 251) of human
thought. Rather, what happens in the area of scientific adjustment is
the attainment of new truths that are added to the fixed scientific
truth, or the discovery of the falsehood of the previous truth and the
truth of another idea for explaining reality.

What occurred to the atomic theory (the theory of atomism) falls in the
first category: the attainment of new truths that are added to the fixed
scientific truth. This theory was first a hypothesis, and then, in
accordance with experiments, it became a scientific law. Later, in light
of experiments, physics was able to reach [the conclusion] that the atom
is not the primordial unit of matter, but that it itself also consists
of parts.

This is how the atomic theory was completed by a new scientific notion
of the nucleus and the charges of which the atom is composed. The truth
did not grow, but the scientific truths were increased in number.
However, the quantitative increase is other than the dialectical growth
and the philosophical movement of truth.

What occurred to the theory of general gravity (the mechanical
explanation of the world in Newton's theories) falls in the second
category (the discovery of the falsehood of a previous theory and the
truth of another idea). The disagreement of this explanation with a
number of electric and magnetic phenomena has been noticed. The same is
true of the inappropriateness of this explanation for explaining the
manner in which light forms and propagates as well as similar points
that were taken by later physicists to constitute an evidence of the
falsehood of the Newtonian notion of the world.

On the basis of this, Einstein put forth his theory of relativity that
he cast in a mathematical explanation of the world that differs
completely from that of Newton. Can we then say that Newton's theory for
explaining the world and that of Einstein are both true, and that the
truth has developed and grown such that it took the form of the
relativity theory after it had been in the form of (the theory of)
general gravity?

Further, is time, space, and mass,[^24] the absolute fixed triad in
Newton's explanation, the scientific truth that (p. 252) grew and
altered in accordance with the law of dialectical movement, and was then
transformed into the relativity of time, space and mass?[^25] Or has the
force of gravity in Newton's theory developed into a curvature in space
[time]; thus, the mechanical force by motion is a property of the
geometry of the world,[^26] by means of which the motion of earth around
the sun and other motions are explained, as is the bending of nuclear
radiation?

The only reasonable [interpretation] is that careful or numerous
experiments have led to the manifestation of error [of incompleteness]
in the previous theory, the absence of truth (or generality] in it, and
the evidence of the presence of truth [or generality] in another
explanation.[^27]

At last, our assertion becomes clear; namely, that scientific
development does not mean that the truth grows and comes into being
gradually. Rather, it means the completion of knowledge inasmuch as
knowledge is a whole; that is, inasmuch as it is an assembly of theories
and laws. Further, its completion means a quantitative increase of its
truths and a quantitative decrease of its errors.

Finally, we wish to know what Marxism seeks in the development of the
truth. Indeed, Marxism seeks two things in the assertion of the
development of the truth and the application of the dialectic to the
truth.

First, it seeks a negation of absolute truth. If the truth continuously
moves and grows, then there is no fixed and absolute truth.
Consequently, the metaphysical fixed truths, for which Marxism condemns
theology, will be destroyed. Second, it seeks to deny absolute falsity
in the march of scientific development.

Scientific development, (p. 253) in the dialectical sense, does not mean
that the previous theory is absolutely false, but that it is a relative
truth. This means that it is a truth at a specific stage of development
and growth. By means of this, Marxism placed the security of truth in
the various stages of scientific completion.

These two aims collapse in light of the sound and reasonable explanation
of scientific development that we have presented above. In accordance
with this explanation, the scientific development is not a growth of a
specific truth, but new discoveries of truths not known before, as well
as corrections of previous errors. Every corrigible error is an absolute
error, and every discoverable truth is an absolute truth.

Add to this that Marxism fell into a basic confusion between truth, in
the sense of thought, and truth, in the sense of independent objective
reality. Metaphysics asserts the presence of absolute truth in the
second sense. It accepts a fixed objective reality beyond the limits of
nature. This is not incompatible with the negation of truth in the first
sense and the continuous development of truth.

Suppose that truth in the human mind is in a constant and a continuous
development and movement. What harm would this cause the metaphysical
reality admitted by theology, as long as we accept the possibility of an
objective reality independent of consciousness and knowledge? Marxism
can fulfill its wish if we pursue idealism and say that reality is the
truth that exists in our minds only. Thus, if the truth in our minds
develops and changes, then there will be no room for belief in an
absolute reality. If, on the other hand, we distinguish between thought
and reality, and accept the possibility of the existence of a reality
independent of consciousness and thought, then there will be no harm to
the existence of an absolute reality external to the limits of
knowledge, even though there may not be any absolute truth in our minds.
(p. 254)

2. The Contradictions of Development
------------------------------------

The following passage is taken from Stalin:
Contrary to metaphysics, the starting point of the dialectic is the
view which rests on the fact that all natural events and things involve
contradictions, since all of them involve a negative aspect as well as a
positive aspect in the past and in the present.

Further, they all have elements that disintegrate or develop. Thus, the
strife of these opposites lies in the internal content responsible for
transferring the quantitative changes to qualitative changes.[^28]

Again, Mao Tse-tung says:
The law of contradiction in things, i.e. the law of the union of
opposites, is the basic and most important law in dialectical
materialism.

Lenin tells us: 'The dialectic, in the precise sense, is a study of the
contradiction in the innermost essence of things.'

Lenin often called this law 'the essence of the dialectic', as he called
it 'the heart of the dialectic'.[^29] (p. 255)

This is the basic law that the dialectic alleges to be capable of
explaining nature and the world, as well as justifying linear movement
and the developments and leaps that this-movement involves.

When Lenin discarded the notion of the first principle from his
philosophy, and considered as totally improbable the assumption of a
cause external to, and beyond [to nature], he found himself required to
provide a justification and an explanation of the continuous march and
the constant change, in the realm of matter, in order to show how matter
develops and cakes on different forms; that is, in order to determine
the source of motion and the primary cause of the phenomena of
existence.

He assumed that this source is in the internal content of matter; hence,
matter contains a continuous replenishment of motion. But how does
matter contain this replenishment? This is the main question regarding
this issue. Dialectical materialism answers this question by saying that
matter is a union of opposites and an assembly of contradictories. If
all opposites and contradictories melt in a specific unity, it will be
natural then that they struggle among each other for the acquisition of
knowledge. Development and change result from this struggle.

Consequently, nature attains the stages of its completion by way of this
method. On the basis of this, Marxism abandoned the principle of
non-contradiction. It considered it a characteristic of metaphysical
thought and one of the fundamentals of formal logic chat succumb to the
sharp pickax of the dialectic.

This is confirmed by Kedrov in the following statement:
By the expression 'formal logic' we understand the logic that rests on
nothing other than the four laws of thought: the law of identity, the
law of contradiction, the law of conversion, and the law of
demonstration. This logic stops at this point. But we consider the
dialectical logic, on the other hand, as the science of thought which
rests on the Marxist method which is characterized by the following main
points: admission of (1) the general linkage, (p. 256) (2) the movement
of development, (8) the leaps of development, and (4) the contradiction
of development.[^30]

Thus, we see that the dialectic discarded from its field most of the
intuitive human thoughts. It rejected the principle of
non-contradiction; instead, it assumed contradiction as a general law of
nature and existence. In this rejection and assumption, the dialectic
unconsciously applied the principle of non-contradiction.

When the dialectician admits the dialectical contradictions and the
dialectical explanation of nature, he finds himself obliged to reject
the principle of non-contradiction and its metaphysical explanation.
Clearly, this is only due to the fact that human nature cannot reconcile
negation and affirmation.

Rather, it essentially feels an absolute opposition between the two. If
this is not so, then why did Marxism reject the principle of
non-contradiction and assert its falsehood? Is it not because it
accepted contradiction and could not accept its negation, as long as it
had already accepted its affirmation?

Thus, we know that the principle of non-contradiction is the general
basic principle of which human thought was never free, even at the point
of enthusiasm for disputation and dialectics.

Dialectical contradiction also resulted in the elimination of the
principle of identity (a is a) from the dictionary of disputation. A
thing was permitted to be other than itself. Indeed, the general
dialectical contradiction makes this necessary, for everything involves
its contradictory and expresses its own negation at the time of its
affirmation.

Thus 'a is a' is not so absolutely. Rather, every being is the
contradictory and the negation of itself, as it is an affirmation of it.
This is so, because its being is essentially contradictory and involves
negation and affirmation that are always in conflict and that, by their
conflict, erupt (p. 257) in motion.

The Marxists have not attempted to prove the contradiction of things-
that is, the law of dialectics and its disputational basis - except by a
group of examples and phenomena, by means of which they tried to show
the contradiction and disputation of nature.

Thus, [to them], contradiction is just one of the laws of dialectical
logic, since nature itself is contradictory and dialectical. This is
made evident by the kinds of contradiction given by the senses or
revealed by science, which destroy the principle of non-contradiction
and make it inconsistent with the reality and laws of nature that govern
the various fields and areas of nature.

We have alluded earlier to the fact that Marxism did not find a way to
the dynamism of nature and to making the forces that are active by
motion as the internal content of the same progressive matter, except by
starting from contradiction and accepting the union of contradictories
in a progressive unity, in accordance with the struggle and strife of
these contradictories.

The issue, according to Marxism, is only two sided. First, we either
form our idea about the world on the principle that asserts
non-contradiction. Thus, there would neither be negation and affirmation
at the heart of things, nor would such things involve the strife of
contradictories.

Consequently, we must search for the source of motion and development in
a cause superior to nature and to its developments. Or else, second, we
establish our logic on the belief that contradiction penetrates to the
heart of things, and that in every being, opposites or negation and
affirmation unite.[^31] (p. 258) With this, we find the secret of
development in the internal contradiction.

Since, according to the claims of Marxism, nature provides in every
opportunity and in every field testimony and evidence for the
confirmation of contradiction and the union of contradictories and
opposites, one must, therefore, adopt the second point of view.

In fact, the principle of non-contradiction is the most general law and
the most common to the various fields of application. No phenomenon of
existence or being is an exception to it at all. Any dialectical attempt
seeking to reject it or to show nature as contradictory is a primitive
attempt that rests on the misunderstanding of the principle of
non-contradiction or on some misguidance.

Therefore, let us at the outset explain the principle of
non-contradiction in its necessary sense, which general logic considers
as a main principle of human thought. After that, we will take up the
phenomena of the alleged contradiction in nature and existence. It is on
these phenomena that Marxism relies for establishing its dialectical
logic, and for destroying the principle of non-contradiction and the
principle of identity.

We will show that those phenomena are harmonious with these two
principles, and that chose phenomena are empty[^32] of dialectical
contradictions. With this, the dialectic loses its support in nature and
its material evidence. Consequently, we determine the extent of the
dialectic's failure to explain the world and to justify its existence.
(p. 259)

### I. The Nature of the Principle of Non-Contradiction

The principle of non-contradiction states that contradiction is
impossible. Thus, negation and affirmation cannot agree under any
circumstance. This is clear; but what is the contradiction that this
principle rejects and that the mind cannot accept? Is it any negation
and affirmation? The answer is no, for not every negation contradicts
every affirmation, and not every affirmation is incompatible with every
negation. Rather, an affirmation is contradictory to its own negation,
and not to the negation of another affirmation.

Thus, the existence of a thing is basically contradictory to the
non-existence of that thing, and not to the non-existence of another
thing. What is meant by their incompatibility is that it is impossible
for both of them to unite or to come together. For example, a square has
four sides. This is a fixed geometrical truth. A triangle, on the other
hand, does not have four sides. This is also a fixed sound negation.

There is no contradiction at all between this negation and that
affirmation, for each of them deals with a specific subject that is
different from the subject with which the other deals. The four sides
are fixed in a square and are negated in a triangle. Hence, we have not
negated what we have affirmed, nor affirmed what we have negated. There
would be contradiction only if we affirm and also negate that a square
has four sides; or if we affirm and at the same time negate that a
triangle has four sides.

By virtue of this consideration, the metaphysical logic dictates that
contradiction exists only between the negation and the affirmation that
agree in circumstances. Thus, if the circumstances of negation differ
from the circumstances of affirmation, negation and affirmation will not
be contradictory. Let us take a number of examples of negation and
affirmation that differ in their circumstances.

'Four is even.' 'Three is not even.' Negation and affirmation in these
two propositions are not contradictory due to the fact that each of them
is different from the other in the subject with which it deals.
Affirmation is related to 'four', and negation is related to 'three'.
(p. 260)

'In infancy, a human being is quick to believe.' 'At the stage of youth
and maturity, a human being is not quick to believe.' Negation and
affirmation in these two propositions are related to 'human beings'.
However, each of them has its own time that differs from the time of the
ocher. Therefore, there is no contradiction here between the negation
and the affirmation.

'An infant does not know in actuality.' 'An infant knows in
potentiality; that is, it is possible that he knows.' Here, too, we are
confronted with a negation and an affirmation that are not
contradictory. This is because in the first proposition, we do not
negate the same affirmation involved in the second proposition. The
first proposition negates the attribute of knowledge in an infant. The
second proposition does not affirm this attribute.

Instead, it affirms its possibility - that is, the capacity of the
infant and his proper readiness for acquiring it. Therefore, it is the
infant's potency for knowledge that the second proposition affirms, and
not the infant's actual knowledge.

Thus, we know that contradiction between negation and affirmation is
attained only if both share the subject with which each deals, and agree
with regard to spatial and temporal conditions and circumstances, and
the like. But if negation and affirmation do not agree in all these
conditions and circumstances, then there will be no contradiction
between them. There is no person or logic that can assert the
impossibility of the truth of both in this case.

### II. The Manner in which Marxism Understood Contradiction

After having studied the notion of contradiction and the content of the
main principle of general logic - the principle of non-contradiction -
we must shed some light on the Marxist understanding of this principle
and on the justification to which Marxism resorted in its rejection of
this principle. It is not difficult for one to realize that Marxism was
not able to or did not care to understand this principle in the proper
sense.

Thus, it rejected it for the sake of attaining its own materialism. (p.
261) It gathered a number of examples chat it claimed are inconsistent
with this principle. Consequently, it posited contradiction and strife
between contradictories and opposites as a principle of its new logic.
It filled the world with noise about this principle and boasted to the
general human logic about constructing this principle and discovering
contradiction and strife between contradictories and opposites.

In order for us to see the extent of error in which Marxism fell and
which led it to reject the principle of non-contradiction and the other
principles that are based on it, such as the metaphysical logic, we must
distinguish with clarity between two things: the first is strife between
external opposites and contradictories; the second is strife between
opposites and contradictories that come together in a specific unity.

It is the second that contradicts the principle of non-contradiction. As
for the first, it has no relation to contradiction at all. This is
because it is not concerned with the union of two contradictories or two
opposites. Rather, it is referred to the independent existence of each
of them. The presence of strife between them leads to a specific result.

The shape of the shore, for example, is the result of a mutual action
between the waves and currents of water, on the one hand, that collide
with the land (thus making the bank recede) and, on the other hand, the
steadfastness of the land in the face of the currents and its pushing
back those waves to some extent.

Further, the shape of a clay bottle is the result of a process that
takes place between a quantity of clay and the hand of a potter.

If dialectical materialism intends this kind of strife between external
opposites, this would not be at all incompatible with the principle of
non-contradiction, and would not call for accepting contradiction which
human thought has rejected from the beginning of its existence. The
reason is that opposites never come together in a unity. Rather, each of
them exists independently in its own sphere.

They share in a mutual action by means of which they achieve a certain
result. Moreover, this principle does not justify self-sufficiency and
the dispensing with an external cause. The shape of the shore or the
shape of the bottle is not determined and does not exist through a
development based (p. 262) on internal contradictions.

Rather, it is the result of an external process achieved by two
independent opposites. This kind of strife between external opposites
and their shared processes is not something discovered by materialism or
the dialectic. Rather, iris something clear and affirmed by every logic
and by every philosopher, whether a materialist or a theologian, since
the oldest times of materialism and theology, and until today.

For instance, let us take Aristotle, the leader of the school of
metaphysics in Greek philosophy. We choose Aristotle in particular, not
only because he is a theology philosopher, but also because he has put
forth the rules, principles and foundations of general logic which the
Marxists call 'formal logic'.

Aristotle believes that there is strife between external opposites, even
though he erects logic on the basis of the principle of
non-contradiction. It did not occur to him that hundreds of years later,
somebody will emerge to consider this strife as a proof for the collapse
of this necessary principle.

Here are some of Aristotle's texts concerning strife among external
opposites:
Put briefly, something of the same genus may be actually accepted by
something else of the same genus. The reason for this is that all
opposites are of the same genus, and opposites act upon one another and
accept one another from one another.[^33]

It is in accordance with the forth, and hoc in accordance with matter
that a certain thing is added to every part in just any manner. In spite
of this, the whole becomes greater, for something is added to it. This
thing is what is called 'nourishment'. It is also called 'opposite'.

However, this thing is nothing but a change in the very kind [of the
whole]. For instance, when the damp is added to the dry, (p. 268) it
changes by becoming itself dry. In actuality, it is both possible chat
that which is similar grows by that to which it is similar, and on the
other hand, by that to which it is not similar.[^34]

Thus, it becomes clear that the common operations of external opposites
do not reveal the dialectic, nor refute the metaphysical logic, nor
constitute something new in the philosophical field. Rather, they are
truths determined with clarity in all philosophies from the beginning of
the history of philosophy. They involve nothing that helps attain the
Marxist philosophical aims that Marxism seeks to achieve in light of the
dialectic.

But if Marxism intends 'contradiction' in the real sense of the term,
which attributes an internal source to motion - something that is
rejected by the main principle of our logic - contradiction then will be
something that no healthy mind can accept. Marxism does not have any
example whatsoever of contradiction in this sense from nature or the
phenomena of existence. All the alleged contradictions of nature that
Marxism offers us are not related to the dialectic in any way.

Let us present a number of such examples by means of which Marxism
intended to prove its dialectical logic, so that we can see the extent
of its weakness and failure to demonstrate its own logic.

#### a. The contradictions of motion

The following is a passage from Georges Lefebvre:[^35]
When nothing goes on, then there is no contradiction. Conversely, when
there is no contradiction, nothing happens, nothing exists, no
appearance of any activity is noticed, and nothing new emerges. (p. 264)
Whether the matter is related to a state of stagnation, to a temporary
equilibrium, or to a moment of flourishing, the being or thing that is
not self-contradictory is temporarily in a state of rest.[^36]

Also, we quote from Mao Tse-tung:
A proposition with general contradiction or with the absolute existence
of contradiction has a dual meaning. The first is that contradiction
exists in the process of the development of all things. The second is
that from the beginning to the end of the development of everything,
there is a movement of opposites. Engels says that movement itself is
contradictory.[^37]

These texts make it clear that Marxism upholds the existence of
opposition between the law of development and completion and the law of
non-contradiction. It believes chat development and completion are not
achieved except on the basis of continuous contradiction As long as
development and motion are realized in the realm of nature, one must put
aside the idea of non-contradiction and take up the dialectic, which
will explain to us motion in its various forms and kinds.

Previously (when we studied the movement of development), we touched
upon the fact that development and completion are not at all
incompatible with the principle of non-contradiction, and that the idea
that asserts incompatibility between the two rests on the confusion
between potentiality and actuality. At every stage, motion is an
affirmation in actuality and a negation in potentiality.

Thus, when the germ of a living being develops in the egg until it
becomes a chick, and the chick becomes a chicken, this development does
not mean that the egg is not in its first stage an egg in actuality. (p.
265) Indeed, it is an egg in actuality and a chicken in potentiality;
that is, it can become a chicken.

Therefore, the possibility for a chicken and the character of an egg,
and not both the character of the egg and the character of the chicken,
unite in the essence of the egg. In fact, we know more than this,
namely, that the movement of the development cannot be understood except
in light of the principle of non-contradiction. If it were truly
possible for contradictories to come together in the essence of a thing,
there would be no change, and the thing would not be transformed from
one state to another. Consequently, there would be no change and no
development.

If Marxism wishes to show us that the process of motion involves
contradiction that is truly incompatible with the principle of
noncontradiction, let it then provide an example of development that
involves and does not involve motion - that is, in which both negation
and affirmation are applicable to the development.

Is it permissible for Marxism, after it had rejected the principle of
non-contradiction, to assert that a thing develops and does not develop
at the same time? If this were permissible, let Marxism then show us an
instance of it in nature and existence. If, on the other hand, this were
not permissible, it would be nothing but an admission of the principle
of non-contradiction and of the rules of the metaphysical logic.

#### b. The contradictions of life or of a living body

[Concerning this,] Georges Lefebvre tells us the following:
In spite of this, it is not clear that life is birth, growth, and
development? Still, a living being cannot grow without changing and
developing, i.e. without ceasing to be what he was. In order for him to
become a man, he must abandon and lose adolescence. Everything that
necessarily accompanies rest declines and falls behind . . . Every
living being, therefore, struggles against death, for he carries his
death within himself.[^38] (p. 266)

We also quote the following passage from Engels:

We have seen earlier chat the essence of life is chat a living body is
ac every moment itself; while at the same moment, it is not itself, i.e.
it is something other than itself. Life, therefore, is a contradiction
fixed in the beings and processes themselves.[^39]

There is no doubt that a living being undergoes two renewable processes:
life and death. As long as these two processes perform their function,
life continues. But this does not involve any contradiction. The reason
is that if we analyze these two processes, and, to begin with, add them
to one living being, we know that the process of death and that of life
do not meet in one subject.

A living being receives new cells at every stage and leaves behind
disintegrated cells. Death and life partition the cells [of that being].
The cell that dies at one moment is other than the cell that exists and
lives at that particular moment. This is how the living being at large
remains held together; for the process of life replaces in him the dead
cells with new cells. Thus, life continues until its possibilities are
exhausted and its light is extinguished.

Rather, contradiction obtains if death and life cover all the cells of
the living being at a specific moment. But this is not what we know
about the nature of life and living beings. A living being does not
carry within himself other than the possibility of death, and the
possibility of death does not contradict life. Rather, what contradicts
life is actual death.

#### c. The contradiction in people's capacity for knowledge

In his presentation of the principle of contradiction in the dialectic,
Engels says: (p. 267)
As we have seen, contradiction, for example, between the genuine and
unlimited human capacity for knowledge and the actual realization of
this capacity in people who are restricted by their external
circumstances and mental receptivity finds its resolution in the
indefinite succession of generations in the endless advance, at least
with respect to us and, according to the practical point of view.[^40]

In this, we find a new example, not of the principle of contradiction,
but of the Marxist misunderstanding of the principle of
non-contradiction. If it were true that people are capable of full
knowledge, and of acquiring such knowledge by themselves, this will not
confirm the dialectic, nor will it be a phenomenon that constitutes an
exception to the metaphysical logic and to the basic principle of this
logic.

Instead, it will be similar to our assertion chat the army is capable of
defending the country, and that no member of the army has this ability.
Is this contradictory, and is this something on whose rejection the
metaphysical logic is based? Indeed, no. Contradiction obtains between
negation and affirmation if their subject is one.

However, if affirmation deals with humanity as a whole, while negation
deals with every individual independently - as in the example given by
Engels - then there is no incompatibility between negation and
affirmation.

#### d. The contradiction in physics between the positive and the negative charges

[^41]This alleged contradiction involves two errors. The first is the
consideration of the positive charge and the negative charge as
belonging to the categories of existence and non-existence, (p. 268)
affirmation and negation [respectively] ; due to the fact that the
scientific term for the former is 'positive charge' and for the latter
'negative charge', even though we know that these expressions are just
technical physical terms.

This does not mean that both are two contradictories, as are
non-positiveness and positiveness, or negation and affirmation. Thus,
the positive charge is similar to the charge produced in the glass stick
that is touched by a piece of silk. The negative charge is similar to
the charge produced by the ion that is couched by the cat skin. Each of
the two charges is a specific kind of electric charge. Neither of them
is the existence of a thing, while the other the non-existence of that
thing.

The second error is the consideration of attraction as a kind of union.
On the basis of this, the relation of attraction between the positive
charge and the negative charge was explained as one of contradiction.
This contradiction was considered one of the dialectical phenomena, even
though, in fact, the negative and the positive charges are not united in
one charge.

Rather, they are two independent charges attracting each other, as the
two different magnetic poles attract each other, without indicating the
existence of one charge that is both positive and negative at the same
time, or the existence of one magnetic pole that is both north and
south. Thus, attraction between different charges (or repulsion between
similar charges] is a kind of interaction among external opposites that
are independent in existence from one another.

We learned earlier that interaction among external opposites is not at
all dialectical and has no relation to the contradiction that is
rejected by the metaphysical logic. The issue is one of two powers each
influencing the other, and not an issue of a power involving
contradiction in its internal content, as the dialectic claims.

#### e. The contradiction of action and reaction in mechanics

[^42]According to Marxism (and to Newton], the mechanical law that
asserts that for every action, there is a reaction equal to it in
quantity, and opposed to it in direction: [for every action, there is an
equal and opposite reaction] is one of the phenomena of dialectical
contradiction (p. 269)

Once again, we find ourselves in need of emphasizing that this Newtonian
law does not in any way justify dialectical contradictions; for action
and reaction are two powers that exist in two bodies, and not two
contradictories united in one body. Thus, the two rear wheels of a car
push against the ground with force; this is the action. The ground, on
the other hand, pushes the two car wheels with another force that is
quantitatively equal and directionally opposite the first force; this is
the reaction. By means of this, the car moves. Hence, the one body does
not involve two contradictory forces, nor does its internal content
undergo a struggle between negation and affirmation or between one
contradictory and another.

Rather, the car pushes the ground in one direction, while the ground
pushes the car in another direction. The dialectic attempts to explain a
thing's growth and movement by two internal repelling forces or two
internal contradictories at strife. Each struggles against the other,
overcomes it and forms the thing [containing them] in accordance with
itself.

Is this not different from two external forces of which one produces a
specific action and the other a reaction? We all know that the two
opposite forces produced by the action and the reaction are present in
two bodies, and that it is impossible for them to be present in one
body; they oppose and negate one another. This is so, only by virtue of
the principle of non-contradiction.

#### f. The contradictions of war discussed by Mao Tse-Tung in the following statement:

Actually, in war, attack and defense, advance and retreat, victory and
defeat are all contradictory phenomena. Neither one of the two [in any
pair] can be present without the other. These two extremes struggle
[against each other], as they unite with each other - thus forming the
totality of war, imposing their development, and solving the problems of
war.[^43] (p. 270)

The truth is that this text is the strangest of all the above-mentioned
texts. In it, Mao Tse-tung considers war as a real living being
involving the two contradictories, victory and defeat, even though this
notion of war is inappropriate except to a primitive mentality that is
accustomed to viewing things in a general framework.

War, in philosophical analysis, is nothing but a multiplicity of events
united in the manner of expression only. Victory is other than defeat, a
victorious army is other than a defeated army, and the methods or points
of strength that prepare for victory are other than the methods or
points of weakness that lead to defeat. The decisive results to which
war leads are not due to a dialectical struggle and united
contradictories, but to a struggle between two external forces of which
one overcomes the other.

#### g. The contradictions of judgements discussed by Kedrov in what follows:

Regardless[^44] of the simplicity of a judgment and regardless of the
ordinariness of that judgment, it contains seeds or elements of
dialectical contradiction which move and grow in the sphere of all human
knowledge.[^45]

Lenin emphasizes this point saying:
Beginning with any proposition, even with the simplest proposition or
with the most ordinary and most common proposition, etc., such as: 'The
tree leaves are green,' 'Ivan is a man,' 'Zhuchka is a dog,' and so on,
also involves a dialectic. The particular is the general; that is,
opposites (the particular is the opposite of the general) are identical.

But even here, there are primary principles, necessary notions, and an
objective relation to nature, etc. The accidental, (p. 271) the
necessary, the appearance, and the substance are all present here. Thus,
when I say: 'Ivan is a man,' 'Zhuchka is a dog,' 'This is the leaf of a
tree,' etc., I just reject a series of symbols, since they are
accidental, I separate the surface from the substance, and I affirm
opposition between the two. Similarly, in every proposition and in every
cell, we can disclose all the elements of the dialectic.[^46]

But it is our right to ask Lenin about the attribute of generality that
he ascribes to the meaning of the term 'man'. Is it an attribute of the
idea that we form in our minds about the word 'man', or of the objective
reality of this word? This question does not require much reflection, in
order for one to attain the correct answer, which is as follows.

Generality is an attribute of thought and not of reality. Our idea of
the word 'man' constitutes a general notion that expresses many
particulars having this name. Thus, Ivan is a man, Kedrov is a man, and
Lenin is a man, in the sense that the idea that we have of the
expression 'man' is the mental product that is common to these
individuals. The objective reality of man; on the other hand, is always
something determined and limited.

If we take this remark into consideration, we can then know that the
contradiction in our statement: 'Ivan is a man' obtains only if we wish
to judge our specific idea of Ivan as being the same as the general idea
that we have of man. This is a clear contradiction and cannot be true at
all. The reason is that the specific idea of Ivan cannot be the same
general idea of man; otherwise, the general and the particular would be
the same thing as Lenin thought.

Thus, if we take Ivan as a specific idea and man as a general idea, we
will find ourselves in contradiction when we try to unite the two ideas.
(p. 272) However, our statement, 'Ivan is a man', does not actually mean
a union between the two ideas, but a union between the objective reality
of the word 'Ivan' and the objective reality of the word 'man', in the
sense that the two expressions are one objective reality. It is clear
that the reality of man does not contradict the external reality of
Ivan; rather it is one and the same with it. Therefore, the union
between the two does not involve a contradiction.

Hence, it becomes clear that the contradiction, which is claimed by
Marxism to exist in the proposition 'Ivan is a man' is based on a false
interpretation of this proposition, which considers this proposition as
a union between two ideas, one of which is general and the other
particular, and not between two objective realities.

Once again, we inquire about this alleged contradiction in the
proposition 'Ivan is a man'. What is its consequence, what is the
struggle produced by it, and what is the development resulting from it?
According to Marxism, the internal contradictions ignite the struggle
and are considered as fuel for the development. How then can Marxism
explain to us the manner in which the proposition: 'Ivan is a man'
develops? Further, is it reduced to another form due to its
contradictions?

The conclusions we reach as a result of our study of the alleged
dialectical contradictions is that all the contradictions mentioned by
Marxism in the fields of philosophy and science or in the general,
ordinary sphere are not of the kind of contradiction rejected by the
basic principle of the metaphysical logic.

Moreover, such contradictions cannot be considered as an evidence for
refuting this principle. Rather, they are nothing but the 'opposites' of
the Maltese Chrysippus[^47] (2,000 years ago) to the principle of
non-contradiction. Chrysippus[^48] responded to this principle as
follows. If your father comes to you veiled, you do not recognize him.
Therefore, you know your father and you do not know him at the same
time.

But it is intuitive that these kinds of simple opposites cannot destroy
the general necessary principle of human thought: the principle of
non-contradiction. (p. 273)

The truth that was evident to us from a number of examples of
dialectical contradiction is the struggle and the interaction between
external opposites. We have already learned that this kind of
interaction between opposites is not one of the attributes of the
dialectic. Rather, it is one of the assertions of metaphysics, as we
have learned from Aristotle's texts.

If we wish to overlook the errors of Marxism in understanding
contradiction, and its failure in the attempt to demonstrate the law of
dialectics, we will still find that the dialectical contradiction does
not give us an acceptable explanation of the world, nor can it offer a
sound justification, as we will point out in Chapter 4 of this
investigation, 'Matter or God'.

It is interesting to point to an example of contradiction offered by one
of the modern writers[^49] for the purpose of falsifying the principle
of non-contradiction. He says that the principle of non-contradiction
asserts that every quantity is either finite or infinite. It cannot be
both finite and infinite at the same time due to the impossibility of
contradiction.

If this is the case, then half a finite quantity is always finite. It
cannot be infinite; otherwise, the sum of two infinite quantities would
be finite. But this is impossible. Thus, the chain containing the
following quantities:

1; 1/2; 1/4; ⅛; 1/16; 1/32

(where each quantity has half the previous quantity), every part of this
chain must be finite, regardless of the length of the chain. If the
chain is infinite, we will have an infinite succession of quantities
every one of which is finite. Thus, the sum of the parts of the chain
(p. 274) would then be the sum of an infinite number of finite
quantities. That is why it must be infinite. However, a little knowledge
of mathematics shows us that it is finite, since it is 2.[^50]

Thus, this writer wishes to conclude that the contradiction between the
finite and the infinite permits the two contradictory poles to unite in
one quantity. But he misses the point that the infinite quantity in his
example is other than the finite quantity. Thus, there is no
contradiction. It is not the case that one quantity is both finite and
infinite in spite of the principle of non-contradiction, as this modern
writer attempts to conclude.

We can consider the quantities that he supposes in this chain, of which
each has half the previous quantity, inasmuch as they are units, and
count them as we would count the units of nuts, or as we would count the
rings of a long iron chain. In this case, we will face an infinite
number of units. Thus, the complete number (1) is the first unit; while
the fraction (1/2) is the second unit. Further, the fraction (1/4) is
the third unit. In this way, the sum is increased one by one to
infinity. Therefore, while adding these numbers, we are not faced with
something like the units of (2). Rather, we are faced with an enormous,
infinite number. If, on the other hand, we wish to add the quantities
symbolized by these numbers, we will then get (2) only.

This is because the mathematical sum of those deficient quantities is
just that. The infinite, therefore, is the quantity of the same numbers
that can be added inasmuch as they are units that we add to each other,
as we add a pencil to a pencil or a nut to a nut. But the finite is not
the quantity of the numbers that can be added inasmuch as they are units
and things that can be added, but the quantities that are symbolized by
those numbers.

In other words, there are two quantities. One of them is the quantity of
the same numbers inasmuch as they are units; while the other is the
quantity of what is mathematically symbolized by them, due to the fact
that every number in the chain symbolizes a certain quantity. The first
is infinite, and it is impossible that it be finite. The second is
finite, and it is impossible that it be infinite. (p. 275)

### III. The Political Purpose beyond the Contradictory Movement

Movement and contradiction, the two dialectical points that we have
criticized in detail, together constitute the law of dialectical
movement or the law of contradictory movement whose development is
based, constantly and always, on the dialectical principles.

Marxism has adopted this law as an eternal law of the world. Its purpose
was to exploit this law in the political sphere for its own interest.
Thus, political action was the first goal that required Marxism to cast
this law in a philosophical form that helps it construct a new policy
for the whole world. This was stated by Marx somewhat carefully:
'Philosophers have done nothing other than interpreted the world in
various ways. But the issue is one of its development.'[^51]

The issue, therefore, is the suggested political development that must
find a logic to justify it and a philosophy on whose principles it
rests. That is why Marxism put forth the law that agrees with its
political plans, and then sought for evidence for this law in the
scientific fields, convinced in advance and before any evidence that it
is necessary to adopt this law, as long as this law sheds some light on
the path of action and struggle.

On this occasion, we must listen to Engels discussing the research he
carried on in his book, Anti-Duhring:
Needless to say, I had resorted to a quick and brief presentation of
the subjects (p. 276) of mathematics and natural science for the purpose
of acquiring peace of mind regarding the details of what I had not
doubted in general, [namely] that the same dialectical laws of movement
that govern the apparent spontaneity of events in history also pave
their way in nature.[^52]

In this text, Marxism summarizes for us its method in its philosophical
attempts, the manner of its confidence in discovering the laws of the
world and accepting them before it realizes the extent of their
actuality in the scientific and mathematical fields.

After that, it was careful to apply these laws to those fields and to
subjugate nature to the dialetic in a quick presentation, as Engels
says, regardless of the cost that this may incur, and despite the
protest of mathematicians and natural scientists themselves that this
may cause. This is admitted by Engels in a phrase close to the text
quoted above.

Since the basic aim of constructing this new logic is to arm Marxism
with a mental weapon in its political battle, it was, therefore, natural
for Marxism to begin -primarily and before anything else - by applying
the dialectical law to the political and social spheres, thus, it
explained society, including all its parts, in accordance with the law
of contradictory movement or the moving contradiction.

It subjugated society to the dialectic that it claims to be the law of
both the mind and the external world. Therefore, it assumed that society
develops and moves in accordance with the class contradictions that are
internal to society. At every stage of development, society takes on a
new social form that agrees with the dominant class in society.

Subsequently, struggle begins again on the basis of (p. 277) the
contradiction is involved in that form. As a result of this, Marxism
concluded that the analysis of the social content of capitalistic
society is struggle between the contradictories that this society
involves - that is, between the working class on the one hand and the
capitalistic class on the other hand.

This struggle provides society with the developmental movement that will
dissolve the capitalist contradictions when the leadership is handed to
the working class represented by the party that was established on the
basis of dialectic materialism, that can adopt the interests of the
working class with a composed scientific method.

At the present, we do not wish to discuss the Marxist dialectical
explanation of society and its development, an explanation that
collapses naturally, so that we can criticize and falsify the dialectic
as a general logic, as has been determined in this study. We will
reserve a detailed critical study of historical materialism in Our
Society or in Our Philosophy.[^53]

Rather, what we intend at the present is to clarify an important point
in this social application of the dialectic that relates to the
dialectic itself in general. This point is that the social and political
application of the dialectic in the manner pursued by Marxism leads to
an immediate refutation of the dialectic.

If the developmental movement of society derives its necessary fuel from
the class struggle between contradictories contained in the general
social structure, and if this contradictory justification of motion is
the only explanation of history and society, then, in the last analysis,
motion would inevitably come to rest.

Also, the differences between contradictories and between the motion
spans of contradictories come to rest and frozenness; for Marxism
believes that the stage which is produced on the basis of such
contradictories, and to which it seeks to lead the march of the human
race, is the stage (p. 278) in which classes are abolished and society
becomes one class. If the variety of classes in the suggested socialist
society is abolished, the blaze of conflict is extinguished, the
contradictory movements completely disappear, and society reaches a
fixed stability from which it does not diverge.

The reason for this is that the only fuel for social development,
according to Marxism, is the myth of class contradiction that the
development invents. Thus, if this contradiction is removed, that would
mean the liberation of society from the influence of the dialectic; and
thus, disputation would abandon the position of controlling and
governing the world.

We know, therefore, that the Marxist explanation of social development
on the basis of class contradiction and dialectical principles leads to
a complete halt of this development. But the contrary holds true if we
place the blaze of development or the fuel of movement in awareness or
thought, or in anything other than class contradiction that Marxism
considers as a general source of all development and movement.

Is it not appropriate after all this to describe the dialectical
explanation of history and society as the only explanation that imposes
frozenness and fixedness on mankind, and not the explanation that places
the source of development in a resource that never dries up - namely,
awareness in its various kinds?

Add to this the frozenness that Marxism itself produced and that
afflicted the human mental dialectic of which Marxism is proud, when the
dialectic and the infinity of the world were taken as absolute truths,
and when the state adopted the dialectic as an official doctrine above
any discussion and debate, and as a final reference to which all science
and knowledge must be subjugated. Any thought or mental effort that is
not in harmony with it and that does not begin with it must be stopped.

Thus, human thought in the various fields of life fell captive to a
specific logic. All the intellectual talents and capacities were pressed
into the circle that was designed for mankind by the official
philosophers of the state. (p. 279)

In future chapters, God willing, be He exalted, we will discuss how we
can abolish the myth of class contradiction, how we can lift the curtain
to show the fallacies of the Marxist disputation in specifying the
contradictions of ownership, and how we can give a sound explanation of
society and history.[^54]

#### The Leaps of Development

Stalin tells us the following:
Contrary to metaphysics, the dialectic does not consider the movement
of development as a simple movement of growth in which quantitative
changes do not lead to qualitative changes. Rather, it considers it as a
development that moves from small and hidden quantitative changes to
expressed and basic changes, i.e. to qualitative changes.

These qualitative changes are not gradual; but fast and sudden. They
happen by leaps from one stage to another. It is not [only] possible
that these changes occur; they are necessary. They are the result of an
accumulation of non-sensible and gradual quantitative changes. That is
why, according to the dialectical method, it is necessary to understand
the movement of development, not inasmuch as it is a circular movement
or a simple repetition of the same procedure, but inasmuch as it is a
linear progressive movement and a transmission from a previous
qualitative stage to a new qualitative stage.[^55]

The dialectic asserts in this point that the dialectical development of
matter is of two kinds: (p. 280) one of them is a gradual quantitative
change that occurs slowly. The other is a sudden qualitative change that
occurs at once as a result of the gradual quantitative changes. This
means that when the qualitative changes reach the point of transition,
they are then transformed from a certain quantity to a new quality.

This dialectical development is not a circular motion of matter in which
matter returns to its same source. Rather, it is a motion of completion
that is constantly and continuously ascending.

If one objects to Marxism at this point, saying that nature may have
circular motion, as in the fruit which develops into a tree, and
consequently goes back to being a fruit as it was, Marxism responds as
follows: This motion is also one of completion; and is not circular, as
the motions that are drawn by the compass.

However, the completion in it is due to the quantitative and not to the
qualitative aspect. Thus, even if the fruit goes back in its linear
march to being a fruit once again, still it will achieve a quantitative
completion. The reason is that the tree that was produced by one fruit
branches out into hundreds of fruits. Thus, there is never a return to
the [original] motion.[^56]

To begin with, we must notice the purpose that lies behind this new
dialectical point. We had learned that Marxism posited the practical
plan for the required political development, and then sought for the
logical and philosophical justification of that plan. What then is the
plan for which this dialectical law was constructed?

It is very easy to answer this question. Marxism saw that the only thing
that can pave the way for its political control or for the political
control of the interests it adopts is a conversion. Thus, it went on to
search for a philosophical justification of such a conversion. It did
not find this justification either in the law of motion (p. 281) or in
the law of contradiction. This is because these two laws require society
to develop in accordance with the contradictions that unite in it.

The principle of contradictory motion is not sufficient for clarifying
the method and immediacy of development. That is why it became necessary
to posit another law on which the notion of conversion rests. This was
the law of the leaps of development that asserts the immediate
transformation of quantity into quality.

On the basis of this law, conversion became not only possible, but
necessary and unavoidable in accordance with the general laws of the
universe. Thus, the gradual quantitative changes in society are
converted in great historical turns to a qualitative change. Hence, the
old qualitative form of the general social structure is destroyed and
changed into a new form.

Therefore, it becomes necessary, and not only good, that the
contradictions of the general social edifice result from a sweeping
principle of conversion, according to which the class that was
previously in control, and that became secondary in the contradiction
process, be removed and sentenced to destruction, so that the new
contradictory that has been nominated by the internal contradictions to
be the main side in the contradiction process will have the opportunity
to be in control.

Both Manx and Engels say:
Communists do not come close to hiding their views, intentions, and
plans. They declare with frankness that their purposes cannot be
attained and realized except through the destruction of the whole
traditional social system by violence and force.[^57]

Also, Lenin says: (p. 282)
The proletariat revolution is not possible without destroying by
violence the bourgeoisie system of the state.[^58]

After Marxism posited the law of the leaps of development, it had to
give a number of examples, 'presenting them in a quick manner', as
Engels says, so that it can demonstrate by means of them the alleged law
in its general and particular cases. This is exactly what Marxism did;
it gave us a number of examples on which it based its general law.

One of the examples that Marxism gave of this law is that of water when
placed on the fire. The temperature rises gradually. Due to this gradual
rise, slow quantitative changes occur. At first, these changes do not
have any effect on the state of the water inasmuch as it is a fluid.
However if its temperature rises to 100 degrees [centigrade], then at
that moment, it will shift from the state of fluidity to that of
vapor.[^59] Quantity is changed to quality. Similarly, if the
temperature of water falls to zero [centigrade], the water will
immediately change to ice.[^60][^61]

Engels presents other examples of the dialectical leaps from the organic
acids in chemistry, of which every one has a specific degree [of
temperature] at which it melts or boils. By virtue of reaching that
degree, the fluid leaps to a new qualitative state.

Thus, formic acid, for example, boils at 100 degrees [centigrade]. But
it melts at (p. 283) 15 degrees [centigrade]. Acetic acid boils at 118
degrees [centigrade]. Its melting point, on the other hand is 17 degrees
[centigrade], and so on.[^62] Thus, in boiling and melting, the
hydrocarbonic compounds operate in accordance with the law of immediate
leaps and transformations.

We do not doubt that the qualitative development of a number of natural
phenomena happens by instantaneous leaps, as does the development of
water in the previously mentioned scholastic example or the development
of the organic or carbonic acids in the two states of boiling and
melting, as well as (the development of] all other compounds whose
nature and qualities are dependent on the proportions from which each is
composed.[^63]

But this does not mean that it is always necessary in all fields that
the development take a leap in specific stages, so that it be a
qualitative development. Giving a number of examples is not sufficient
for demonstrating scientifically or philosophically the necessity of
these leaps in the history of development, especially when Marxism
selects such examples and neglects those examples that it used for
clarifying another dialectical law, only because they are not in
agreement with this new law.

Marxism had represented the contradictions of development in the living
germ inside the egg that tends to become a chick,[^64] and in the seed
that involves its contradictory, thus developing and becoming a tree due
to its internal conflict.

Is it not our right to ask Marxism to reconsider these examples, so that
we would know how it can explain for us the leaps of development in
these examples? Is the seed's becoming a tree or the germ's becoming a
chick (the development of the thesis into an antithesis) or the chick's
becoming a chicken (the development of the antithesis into a synthesis)
produced by one of the dialectical leaps, thus changing the germ at once
into a chick, the chick into a (p. 284) chicken, and the seed into a
tree, and that such transformations occur by a gradual linear motion?

Even in the chemical elements that are liable to melt, we find both
kinds of changes together. As change occurs in these elements by a leap,
it may also occur in agradual manner. We know, for example, that the
crystal elements change from the state of solidity to the state of
fluidity suddenly, such as the ice that melts at a temperature of 80
degrees [centigrade]. At that point, the ice changes immediately into a
fluid.

The non-crystal elements, such as glass and honeywax are the converse of
this; they do not melt and do not change qualitatively at once. Rather,
their melting occurs gradually. Thus, the temperature of the wax, for
example, rises during the process of melting, so that if it reaches a
certain degree, the solidity of wax is weakened. The wax begins to
become, gradually and independently of other things, more flexible and
malleable. In the state of flexibility, it [changes] gradually; it is
neither solid nor fluid. This continues until it becomes a fluid
element.

Let us take another example from social phenomena - namely, language as
a phenomenon that develops and changes and that is not subject to the
law of the dialectic. The history of language does not tell us anything
about the immediate qualitative changes of language in its historical
march.

Instead, it expresses gradual transformations of language with respect
to quantity and quality. If language were subject to the law of leaps,
and if the gradual quantitative changes were transformed into a decisive
and immediate change, we would have been able to grasp decisive points
in the life of language, in which language changes from one form to
another due to the slow quantitative changes. But this is something not
true of any language that people have adopted and employed in their
social life.

Therefore, in light of all the natural phenomena, we are able to know
that a leap and immediacy are not necessary for qualitative development.
Further, as development may be immediate, it may also be gradual. (p.
285)

Let us now take the previously mentioned scholastic example - of water
in its freezing and boiling [states]. We notice the following. First,
the developmental movement in the example is not dialectical, for
experimentation does not demonstrate that this development is a result
of the internal contradictions of water, as the contradictions of the
dialectical development require. We all know that were it not for the
external temperature, water would remain water and would not change to
vapor. Thus, the conversional development of water is not achieved in a
dialectical fashion. If we wish to consider the law that governs the
social conversions as the same law according to which the immediate
conversion of water or of all chemical compounds occurs (as Marxism
assumes), this would lead to a result different from that intended by
Marxism.

The reason is this. The developmental leaps in the social system become
conversions caused by external factors, and not. by the mere
contradictions contained in the same system. The attribute of
inevitability would no longer pertain to those leaps. Those leaps would
not be necessary if the external factors are unavailable.

It is clear that as we can preserve the state of the fluidity of water,
and distance the water from the factors that make it leap to the state
of vapor, we can also preserve the social system and distance it from
the external factors that necessitate its destruction. Therefore, it
becomes clear that the same application of the law of tire dialectic to
the immediate development of water in its boiling and freezing, and to
society in its conversions, registers conclusions contrary to those
expected by the dialectic.

Second, the developmental movement of water is not linear. Rather, it is
a circular movement in which water changes into vapor and vapor returns
to its original state, without producing a quantitative or a qualitative
completion. If this movement is considered (p. 296) dialectical, this
would mean that it is not necessary for the movement to be linear and
always progressive. Also, is would rust be irritable that the
dialectical development in the natural or social realm be ore of
completion and progression.

Third, the same leap of water to vapor achieved by the temperature's
reaching a certain degree must not cover all the water at once. Every
human being knows that various quantities of the waters of the seas and
oceans evaporate gradually. It is not the case that all of such waters
make a one-time leap to the state of vapor.

This shows that the qualitative development in the areas in which this
development is immediate does not necessarily cover the developing being
as a whole. Rather, this development may begin in the parts of that
being leaping with them to the state of vapor. The leaps follow
consecutively, and the drives are repeated until the whole is
transformed. The qualitative transformation may not be able to cover the
whole, thus remaining limited to ate parts in which the external
conditions of the conversion are met.

If this is all that s meant by the dialectical law with respect to
nature, why then should the leap in the social sphere be imposed on the
system as a whole? Also, why should it be necessary, according to the
natural law of society, to destroy the social structure at every stage
through a comprehensive and an immediate conversion?

Further, why should it be that the alleged dialectical leap in rte
social sphere cannot adopt the same method is adopts in the natural
sphere - thus not affecting anything other than the aspens in which the
conditions of the conversion are met, and then moving gradually, until
the general transformation is at last achieved?

Finally, the charge of quantity into quality cannot be faithfully
applied to the example of the water chat is transformed into vapor or
ice, in accordance with the rise or fat in the degree of the temperature
of water, as Marxism thought. This is because Marxism considered
temperature as a quantity and vapor and ice as qualities. Thus, it
affirmed that quantity in this example changes into quality.

This Marxist notion of temperature, vapor and ice has no (p. 287)
foundation, for the quantitative expression of temperature used by
science in its assertion that the temperature of water is 100 degrees or
5 degrees, (for example,) is not the essence of temperature. Rather, it
is an expression of the scientific method for reducing the natural
phenomena to quantities, in order to facilitate their regulation and
determination.

Thus, on the basis of the scientific method of expressing things, it is
possible to consider temperature as a quantity. But the scientific
method does not only consider temperance as a quantitative phenomenon.

Rather, the transformation of water into vapor, for example, is also
expressed quantitatively. It is exactly like temperature in being a
quantitative phenomenon in the scientific language. This is because
science determines the transformation from the state of fluidity to that
of vapor by a pressure that can be measured quantitatively, or by
relations and properties of atoms that can also be measured
quantitatively, as is the case with temperature.

Therefore, from the point of view of science, the above example does not
have anything but quantities that change to one another. From the
empirical point of view, on the other hand - that is, the idea of
temperature that sense perception provides when we immerse our hand in
water, or the idea of vapor that sense perception provides when we see
water change into vapor -temperature is a qualitative state as is vapor,
this state disturbs us when the temperature is high. Hence, quality
changes into quality.

Therefore, we find that water in its temperature and evaporation cannot
be given as an example of the transformation of quantity into quality,
except if we contradict ourselves, thus considering temperature from the
scientific point of view, and the state of vapor from the empirical
point of view.

Finally, it is appropriate for us to close this discussion of the leaps
of development with the example of this kind of development given by
Marx in his book Capitalism. Marx mentions that not every quantity of
money can be transformed haphazardly into capital. Indeed, in order for
such transformation to occur, it is necessary that the individual owner
of the money had acquired prior to that point a minimum amount of money
that gives him the opportunity for a life twice [as comfortable as] that
of the ordinary worker.

This depends on his ability to employ eight workers. (p. 288) Marx cried
to clarify this point in light of his main economic notions of the
surplus value, the transformable capital and the fixed capital. Thus, he
took as an example the worker who works eight hours for himself - that
is, for producing the value of his salary - and, subsequent to that,
works four hours for the capitalist to produce the surplus value that
the owner of the money gains.

The capitalist is necessitated under such a circumstance to have at his
disposal a certain amount of money sufficient to enable him to supply
two workers with the raw material, tools for work and salaries, so that
he can make a daily surplus value sufficient to enable him to have the
same kind of food that one of his workers has.

However, since the purpose of the capitalist is not only to have food
but also to increase his wealth, this producer with two workers remains
a non-capitalist. In order for him to have a life twice [as comfortable
as] that of the ordinary worker, he must be able to employ eight workers
in addition to transforming half the resulting surplus value into
capital.

Finally, Marx comments on this, saying that in this, as in the natural
science, the soundness of the law discovered by Hegel - namely, the law
of the transformation of quantitative changes into qualitative changes -
is confirmed when the quantitative changes reach a certain limit.[^65]

This Marxist example shows clearly the extent of tolerance exhibited by
Marxism in presenting examples of its alleged laws. Even though
tolerance in every area is a good and a virtue, it is an unforgivable
shortcoming in the scientific field, especially when the purpose is to
discover the secrets of the universe, in order to construct a new world
in light of such secrets and laws. (p. 289)

Indeed, we do not wish at the present to discuss the actual economic
issues on which the above example rests, such as the issue that is
related to the surplus value and the Marxist notion of the capitalist
profit. Rather, we are concerned with the philosophical application of
the law of leaps to capital. Let us, therefore, close our eyes to other
aspects, directing our attention to a study of this aspect [only].

Marx holds that money passes through simple and gradual quantitative
changes. If the capitalist profit reaches a certain limit, an essential
conversion or a qualitative transformation occurs immediately. The money
becomes capital. This limit is twice as much as the salary of the
ordinary worker, after half [the surplus value] is transformed once
again into capital.

Unless the money reaches this limit, it will not have the basic
qualitative change, nor will it be capital. 'Capital', therefore, is an
expression given by Marx to a specific amount of money. Every human
being is completely free to have his own application and usage [of
language].

Thus, let us take this Marxist usage as correct. Still, it is incorrect
and does not make sense philosophically to consider the money's
attainment of this specific limit as a qualitative change of the money
and a leap from one quality to another. The money's attainment of this
limit does not mean anything other than a quantitative increase. No
qualitative transformation of the money is produced other than what is
always produced by the gradual quantitative increases.

If we wish, we can go back to the previous states of the development of
the elements of money in its consecutive quantitative changes. If the
individual owner has had the money that would make it possible for him
to supply seven workers with their equipment and salaries, then what
would his profit be according to Marx?

According to the Marxist calculations, his profit would be a surplus
value equal to the salaries of three-and-a-half workers; that is, what
is equal to twenty-eight hours of work. Because of this, he is not a
capitalist, for if half the surplus value is transformed into capital,
not enough of it remains that can secure for him twice the salary of one
of the workers.

If we suppose an increase in the simple value of the money that the
owner has, such that it becomes within his ability to purchase, in
addition (p. 290) to what he had already owned, the efforts of half a
day of a worker who works for him six hours, and for somebody else
another six hours, he would then gain from this worker half what he
gains from the work of every one of the other seven workers. This means
that his profit will be equal to thirty hours of work and will enable
him to have a salary better than what he had before.

Again, we repeat the assumption. We can imagine the owner, who can as a
result of the new additional amount of his money, purchase from the
eighth worker three-quarters [of an hour], thus leaving the worker with
no relation to another employer, except in the amount of three hours. Do
we face at this point any increase in the amount of profit and in the
owner's living standard other than what we had faced at the point of the
occurrence of the above quantitative change?

Suppose that the owner is able to enlarge his money by adding a new
amount that allows him to purchase from the eighth worker all his daily
input. What would happen then to the increase in the surplus value and
living standard other than what used to happen as a result of the
previous quantitative increases? Indeed, one thing occurs to the money
that had not occurred on the previous occasions.

This is something related only to the aspect of utterance - namely, that
Marx had not given this money the name of capital. But now it is
appropriate to call it by this name. Is this the change in kind and the
transformation in quality that occurs to the money? Further, is the
whole distinction between this stage of the money and the previous
stages a point of pure utterance, such that if we had applied the
expression 'capital' to a previous stage, then a qualitative change
would have occurred at that time?

#### The General Linkage

Stalin asserts the following:
Contrary to metaphysics, the dialectic does not consider nature as an
accidental accumulation (p. 291) of things or events, of which some are
separate, isolated, or independent from some others. Rather it considers
nature as one firm whole in which things and events are linked together
organically and dependent on one another. Some of these things and
events serve as mutual conditions for some others.[^66]

Nature, with its various parts, cannot be studied in accordance with the
dialectical method when these parts are separated from one another and
stripped of their circumstances and conditions, as well as of any past
or present thing that pertains to their reality, contrary to metaphysics
that does not view nature as a net of linkage and conjunction, but from
a purely abstract perspective. Thus, according to the dialectical
notion, no event makes sense if isolated from the other events that
surround it, and if studied in a purely metaphysical fashion.

Indeed, if unjustified accusations against a certain philosophy were
sufficient to eliminate that philosophy, then the accusations that
Marxism makes against metaphysics in this new point would suffice to
destroy metaphysics and refute its isolationist view of nature that
contradicts the spirit of firm linkage among the parts of the universe.

But let Marxism tell us who is in doubt about this linkage, and which
metaphysics does not accept it, if it is stripped of the points of
weakness that represent it as having a dialectical character, and if it
rests on a firm philosophical basis of the principle of causality and
its laws, for the study of which we have reserved the third chapter of
this investigation.

According to the general view of the universe, events cannot be except
one of three kinds:
First, they are either an assembly of accumulated coincidences, in the
sense that every event occurs by pure chance, without there being (p.
292) any necessity that requires its existence. This is the first
perspective. Second, the parts of nature are essentially necessary.
Every one of them exists by virtue of its own essential necessity
without need for, or influence, by anything external. This is the second
perspective. Neither of the above perspectives is in harmony with the
principle of causality, according to which every event is linked in its
existence to its specific causes and conditions. The reason is that this
principle rejects the coincidence and chance of events, as it rejects
their essential necessity.

Consequently, according to this principle, there is another perspective
of the world. It is this. Third, the world is considered as completely
linked together in accordance with the principle and laws of causality.
Every part of the world occupies the specific place in the universe
required by the conditions of its existence and the assembly of its
causes.

This is the third perspective that establishes metaphysics on the basis
of its own understanding of the world. That is why it is asked: 'Why
does the world exist?' This is one of four questions[^67] the proper
answer to which is required, according to the metaphysical logic, for
the scientific knowledge of anything. (p. 293)

This clearly means that metaphysics does not at all admit the
possibility of isolating the event from its environment and conditions,
or not extending the question to the event's relations to other
events.
The assertion of general linkage is not, therefore, dependent on the
dialectic. Rather, it is one of those things to which the philosophical
principles established by metaphysics in the investigation of causality
and its laws necessarily lead.

The designs of this linkage among the parts of nature and the disclosure
of its details and secrets are matters that metaphysics leaves for the
various kinds of science. The general philosophical logic of the world
lays out the main point only. It establishes its linkage theory on the
basis of causality and its philosophical laws. It remains for science to
explicate the details of the fields that are accessible to the
scientific methods, and to clarify the kinds of actual linkage and the
secrets of these kinds, thus giving every point its due.

If we wish to be just to both the dialectic and metaphysics, we must
point out that the novelty that the Marxist dialectic introduced is not
the general law of linkage itself, of which metaphysics had already
spoken in its own way and which is at the same time clear to all and is
not subject to discussion; rather, Marxism was the first to advocate the
political aims or the political applications of that law which gave
Marxism the possibility of carrying out its plans and designs. Thus, the
point of innovation is related to the application and not to the law,
with respect to its logical and philosophical aspect.

On this occasion, let us read what was written by the Marxist author
Emile Burns[^68] concerning the linkage according to the Marxist view.

He says: (p. 294)
Nature or the world, including human society, was not formed out of
distinct things that are completely independent of one another. Every
scientist knows this and finds it extremely difficult to determine the
causes even of the main factors that affect the specific things chat he
studies. Water is water; but if its temperature is raised to a certain
degree, then water is transformed into vapor. If, on the other hand, its
temperature is lowered [to a certain degree], then it becomes ice. There
are also other factors that affect water.

Further, every common person realizes, if he or she experiences things,
that there is nothing which is completely independent by itself, and
that everything is influenced by other things.

[He continues]:
This linkage among things may appear intuitive, such that every cause
that turns one's attention to it is evident. However, the truth is this.
People do not always apprehend the linkage among things, nor do they
apprehend that what is real under specific circumstances may not be so
under other circumstances.

They always apply notions that they have formed under specific
circumstances to other circumstances that are completely different from
the former circumstances. The best example that one can give in this
regard is the point of view concerning the freedom of speech. Freedom of
speech in general serves the purpose of democracy and helps people
express their will. That is why it is useful for the development of
society.

However, the freedom of speech of fascism (the foremost principle that
attempts to suppress democracy) is something very different, since is
stops the progress of society. Regardless of the repetition in calling
for the freedom of speech, what is true of it under normal circumstances
with respect to the parties that seek democracy, (p. 295) is not true
with respect to the fascist parties.[^69]

This Marxist text admits that the general linkage is understood by every
scientist, indeed by every common person who has experienced things, as
Emile Burns asserts, and is not something new in the general human
understanding.

Rather, the novelty is what Marxism sought from this (linkage], by
virtue of the extent of the solid linkage between the issue of the
freedom of speech and other issues that it considered. The same is true
of a number of ocher similar applications that we can find in a group of
other Marxist texts. Where then is the powerful logical disclosure of
the dialectic?

Two Points concerning the General Linkage
In pursuing this discussion about the theory of general linkage in
metaphysics, it is necessary to point out two important points. The
first is that, according to the metaphysical view, the linkage of every
part of nature or the universe to the causes, conditions and
circumstances relevant to it does not mean that one cannot notice it in
an independent manner, or posit a specific definition of it.

That is why definition is one of the subjects with which metaphysical
logic is concerned. Most likely, this is what led Marxism to accuse
metaphysics of not accepting the general linkage and of not studying the
universe on the basis of such linkage.

The reason is chat Marxism found that a metaphysician takes up one
thing, and tries to identify it and define it independently of other
things. Owing to this, Marxism thought chat the metaphysician does not
accept the linkage among things and does not study things except when
some of them are isolated (p. 296) from others.

Thus, when the metaphysician defines 'humanity' as 'life and thought',
and 'animality' as 'life and will', he has isolated 'humanity' and
'animality' from their circumstances and attachments and viewed them as
independent.

However, in face the definitions that the metaphysical logic is
accustomed to give to any specific thing are not at all incompatible
with the principle that asserts the general linkage among things, nor
are they intended to indicate the disentanglement among things or the
sufficiency of studying these things by giving them those specific
definitions.

When we define 'humanity' as 'life and thought', we do not seek by this
a denial of the linkage of humanity to the external factors and causes.
Rather, by this definition, we intend to give an idea of the thing that
is linked to those factors and causes, in order for us to investigate
the factors and causes that are linked to that thing.

Even Marxism itself considers definition as a method for achieving the
same purpose. Thus it defines the dialectic, matter and so on. Lenin for
example, defines the dialectic as 'the science of the general laws of
motion'.[^70] He also defines matter as 'the objective reality which is
given to us by the senses'.[^71]

Can one understand from these definitions that Lenin isolated the
dialectic from the other parts of human scientific knowledge, and did
not accept the linkage of the dialectic to such parts? Similarly, can
one understand that he viewed matter as independent, and studied it
without attention to its links (p. 297) and interactions? The answer is
no.

A definition does not mean, either as a whole or in part, bypassing or
disregarding linkage among things. Rather, it determines for us the
notion whose various links and relations we attempt to discover, so that
it facilitates the discussion and study of those links and relations.

The second point is that linkage among the parts of nature cannot be
circular. By this we mean that the two events, such as warmth and heat,
that are linked cannot each be a condition for the existence of the
other. Thus, since heat is a condition for the existence of boiling,
boiling cannot also be a condition for the existence of heat.[^72]

In the records of the general linkage, every part of nature has its own
rank that determines for it the conditions that affect its existence and
the phenomena whose existence it affects. But if each of the two parts
or events is a cause for the existence of the other and at the same time
indebted to the other for its own existence, this will make the causal
linkage circular, returning to the point of its departure. But this is
impossible.

Finally, let us study for a moment Engels' statements about general
linkage and the abundance of scientific proofs for it. He says:
In particular, there are three discoveries that helped advance (p. 298)
the steps of giant thinkers with regard to our knowledge of the linkage
of the natural progressive processes.

The first is the discovery of the cell as the unit from which the whole
organic plant and animal element grows by way of multiplicity and
distinctiveness. We had not known that the development of all the
primary organic elements and what resembles them follow one another in
accordance with one general law only.

But also the capacity of the cell to change points to the way according
to which the organic elements can change their kinds. By means of this,
they achieve a larger development than that which every one of them can
achieve separately.

The second is the discovery of the transformation of energy which shows
that all 'the forces having primary influence on nature are other than
the organic elements. This indicates that all such forces are different
manifestations of a general motion. Every one of these manifestations
passes to the other by specific quantitative proportions.

The third is the comprehensive proof of which Darwin[^73] was the first
to speak and which states that all the products of nature, including
people, that surround us at the present time are nothing but products of
along process of development.[^74]

In fact, the first discovery is one of the scientific discoveries in
which metaphysics scored a victory, because this discovery proved that
the source of life is the living cell (the protoplasm). Thus, it removed
the delusion according to which it is possible to have life in any
organic element in which specific material factors are available.

It also drew a distinction between living beings and non-living beings,
by virtue of the fact that the specific germ of life is alone
responsible for carrying its own great secret.[^75] Therefore, the
discovery of the living cell, which pointed to a unified origin of
living beings, also showed us at the same time the degree (p. 299) of
difference between living and non-living beings.

The second discovery is also considered a great victory for metaphysics
since it proved scientifically that all the forms that energy takes,
including the material quality, are accidental qualities and
characteristics. Thus, they are in need of an external cause, as we will
point out in the fourth chapter of this investigation. Add to this that
the present discovery is incompatible with the laws of the dialectic.

It assumes that energy has a fixed and a limited quantity not subject to
the dialectical motion that the Marxist disputation claims to be true of
all the aspects and phenomena of nature. If science proves that a
certain aspect of nature is an exception to the laws of the dialectic,
then the necessity and absolute character of the dialectic is discarded.

Darwin's theory of the development of species and the evolution of some
of them from some others is also not consistent with the dialectical
laws. It cannot be taken as a scientific support of the dialectical
method of explaining events. Darwin and others who contributed to the
construction and emendation of this theory explained the development of
a species into another on the basis that some individuals of the former
species acquire attributes and characteristics, either by mechanical
coincidence or by defined external causes, such as the community and
environment.

Every attribute that an individual acquires remains fixed in him and is
transferred by heredity to his offspring. With this, a strong
generation[^76] is produced due to such acquired attributes. The law of
the struggle for survival fulfills its function in the midst of a
struggle for food and survival between the strong members of this
generation and the weak individuals[^77] of the species who have not
acquired such attributes.

The weak individuals are destroyed, while the strong survive. The
characteristics are gathered by having every generation transmit to the
succeeding generation by way of heredity the characteristics it had
acquired due to the circumstances and community in which it had lived.
This goes on, until a new species is formed that enjoys all the
characteristics that its ancestors had acquired with the passage of
time. (p. 300)

We can clearly see the extent of contradiction between this Darwinian
theory and the general dialectical method. The mechanical character of
this theory is made clear in Darwin's explanation of the animal's
development due to external causes. The individual characteristics and
differences which the strong generation of the individuals of a species
acquires are not the result of a developmental process nor the fruit of
an internal contradiction.

Rather, they are the product of a mechanical occurrence or of external
factors, such as the community and environment. It is the objective
circumstances which the strong individuals live that provide them with
the elements of their strength and the characteristics that distinguish
them from others, and not the internal struggle in their innermost
being, as the dialectic assumes.

Further, the characteristic that the individual acquires mechanically-
chat is, by means of external causes that are of the [environmental]
circumstances he lives -does not develop by a dynamic motion and does
not grow by an internal contradiction, so that it transforms the animal
into a new kind. Rather, it remains fixed, and is transferred by
heredity and without development. It continues by a fixed and simple
form of change.

After this, another characteristic is added to the previous one that, in
turn, is produced mechanically by means of objective circumstances.
Thus, another simple change takes place. This is how the characteristics
are produced mechanically. They continue their existence in their
offspring by way of heredity. They are stable and fixed. When they are
gathered, they finally constitute a loftier form of the new kind.

There is also a big difference between the law of the struggle far
survival in Darwin's theory and the idea of the struggle of opposites in
the dialectic. The idea of the struggle of opposites, according to the
dialecticians, expresses a struggle between two opposites that, in the
last analysis, leads to their union in a loftier composition consistent
with the triad of the thesis, antithesis and synthesis. (p. 301)

In the class struggle, for example, the battle is waged between two
opposites in the internal structure of society, these two opposites
being the capitalistic class and the working class. The struggle ends
with the absorption of the capitalistic class by the working class. The
two classes are united in a classless society, all of whose individuals
are owners and workers.

On the other hand, the struggle for survival or the strife between the
strong and the weak in Darwin's theory is not dialectical, since it does
not lead to the union of opposites in a loftier composition. Instead, it
leads to the destruction of one of the two opposites and the retention
of the other.

It completely eliminates the weak individuals of the species and retains
the strong. Further, it does not result in a new composition in which
both the weak and the strong (the two opposites in struggle) are united,
as the dialectic assumes in the triad of the thesis, antithesis and
synthesis.

If we discard the idea of the struggle for survival or the law of
natural selection as an explanation of the development of the species,
replacing it by the idea of the struggle between the animal and his
community, a struggle which helps form the organic system in accordance
with the conditions of the community, and if we say that the latter kind
of struggle (instead of the struggle between the weak and the strong) is
the source of development, as Roger Garaudy asserts[^78] - I say that if
we develop this theory and explain the progress of the species in light
of the struggle between the animal[^79] and his environment, we will not
reach a dialectical conclusion either.

This is because the struggle between the community and the organic
system does not result in the meeting and union of the two in a loftier
composition. Rather, the thesis and the antithesis remain separate. In
this case, even if the two opposites in struggle - that is, the
animal[^80] and the environment -remain in existence at the end of the
struggle, with neither of them being destroyed in the conflict, still
they do not unite in a new composition, as the capitalistic and the
working classes unite in a new social composition. (p. 302)

Finally, where is the Darwinian immediacy and biological perfection? The
dialectic asserts that the qualitative transformations occur immediately
in contrast to the quantitative changes that occur slowly. Further, it
asserts that motion is continously heading in the direction of
perfection and ascent.

Darwin's theory or the biological idea of development demonstrates the
possibility of the exact opposite. Biologists have shown that in the
living nature, there are cases of gradual motion, as there are cases of
motion by sudden leaps.[^81]
Moreover, the interaction that Darwin points out between a living being
and nature need not secure the perfection of the developing being.
Rather, due to it, the living being may lose some of the perfection that
it had acquired, in accordance with the laws specified by Darwin in his
theory of interaction between life and nature. This is exemplified in
the animals who had a long time ago to live in caves and to abandon the
life of light.

Thus, according to Darwin, they lost their sight due to their
interaction with their specific environment and their disuse of the
organ of sight in the fields of life. For this reason, the development
of their organic composition led to regression. This is contrary to the
Marxist view that asserts that the developmental processes that are
interconnected in nature and that arise from internal contradictions
always seek perfection, since they are linear progressive processes.

[^1]: AI-Maddiyya wal-Mithaliyya fi al-Falsafa, p. 83.

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: Add to this that the alleged contradiction in the triad of
existence rests on another confusion between the idea of a thing and the
objective reality of that thing. The notion of existence is nothing but
the idea of existence in our minds. It is other than the objective
reality of existence. If we distinguish between the idea of existence
and the reality of existence, the contradiction will disappear. The
reality of existence is determined and limited. One cannot at all strip
it from the attribute of existence. Our idea of existence, on the other
hand, is not a real existence. Rather, it is a mental notion taken from
the real existence.

[^4]: AI-Maddiyya ad-Dialaktikiyya wal-Maddiyya at-Tarikhiyya, p. 7.

[^5]: Hadhih Hiya ad-Dialaktikiyya, pp. 97-98.

[^6]: Zeno of Elea, Greek philosopher (490-430 B.C.). A student and a
defender of Parmenides. He is known for his paradoxes of space, time,
motion and change. Some fragments of his work in which he presented his
paradoxes are still extant.

[^7]: Potentiality is the possibility of a thing, while actuality is the
real existence of a thing.

[^8]: In other words, motion is for the sake of acquiring these stages
of development or completion. Therefore, when such stages are attained,
motion, ceases.

[^9]: Sadr ad-Din ash-Shirazi, better known as Mulla Sadra (A.D.
1572-1641). He was born in Shiraz where he held a teaching position at a
religious school. He is said to have made the pilgrimage to Mecca on
foot seven times. He believed that ancient philosophy combined with
revealed truth gives the highest form of truth. He wrote commentaries on
as-Suhra Wardi's wikmat al-Ishraq and on parts of Ibn Sina's ash-Shifa'.
He also wrote a number of original works, the best of which is Kitab
al-Hikma al-Muta'aliya, the other title of thin work is Kitab al-Asfar
al-Arba'a (The Four Journeys, i.e. of the soul).

[^10]: The main evidence for the substantial movement may be summed up
in the following two points. First, the direct cause of the accidental
and outermost motion of bodies - whether mechanical or natural - is a
specific power in the body. This idea is true, even of the mechanical
motion that at first appears as if proceeding from a separate power. For
instance, if you force a body in a horizontal or a vertical line, the
primitive notion of this motion is that it is an effect of the external
force and the separate agent. But this is not true. The external agent
is just one of the conditions for the motion. As for (p. 234) the real
mover, it is the power that exists in the body. Because of this, the
motion continues after the separation of the moving body from the
external force and the separate agent; and the moveable mechanical
system continues moving for a while, after the moving instrumental agent
seizes. On this basis, modern mechanics posited the law of essential
limitation (ganun al-qusur adhdhatiyy). This law states that if a body
is moved, is continues moving, unless something external stops it from
continuing its moving activity. However, this law was misused, since it
was considered as a proof that when motion begins, after that, it does
not need a specific reason or a particular cause. It was taken as a
means for rejecting the principle of causality and its laws. But the
truth is that scientific experiments in modern mechanics show only that
the separate external agent is not the real cause of motion; otherwise,
the motion of a body would not continue after that body is separated
from the independent external agent. Due to this, the direct cause of
[continued] motion must be a power existing in the body [known as
momentum], and the external agents must be conditions for, and
influences on that power. Second, the effect must be appropriate to the
cause in stability and renewability. If the cause is stable, the effect
must also be stable; and if the effect is renewable and progressive, the
cause must also be renewable and progressive. In light of this, it is
necessary that the cause of motion be moveable and renewable, in
accordance with the renewal and progression of the motion itself. For,
if the cause of motion is stable and fixed, anything it produces will be
stable and fixed. Thus, motion becomes rest and fixedness. But this
contradicts the meaning of motion and development. On the basis of the
above two points, we conclude the following, First, the power that
exists in a body and that moves it is a moveable and progressive power.
Owing to its progression, this power is a cause of all the accidental
and outermost motions. Further, it is a substantial power, since it
inevitably leads to a substantial power; for an accident exists by
virtue of a substance. This demonstrates the existence of substantial
motion in nature. Second, a body is always composed of a matter made
evident by motion, and a progressive substantial power by virtue of
which the outermost motion occurs in the phenomena and accidents of the
body. At the present, we cannot touch upon the substantial motion and
its proofs at greater length.

[^11]: The problem of the relation of the new to the old is this. Since
the cause is old and eternal, it must be a cause of what is appropriate
to it and agrees with it in oldness and eternity. On the basis of this,
a number of metaphysicians imagined that belief in the Eternal Creator
philosophically necessitates belief in the oldness and eternity of the
world, so that the effect will not be separated from its cause.
Ash-Shirazi solved this problem in light of the substantial motion,
according to which the following holds. The realm of matter is in a
continuous state of renewal and development. Thus, on this ground, the
world's coming into being was a necessary effect of its own renewable
nature, and not the effect of the coming into being and the renewal of
the First Creator.

[^12]: Ash-Shirazi offered a new explanation of time, in which time is
attributed to the substantial motion of nature. Thus, time becomes in
this philosophical view of ash-Shirazi a constitutive element of the
body, and no longer separate and independent from it.

[^13]: We will discuss the separability of matter and the relation of
the soul to the body in the last chapter of this investigation.

[^14]: Did Duharnak al-Falsafa, p. 202.

[^15]: Fakhr ad-Din ar-Razi, Muslim theologian and philosopher of
religion (1149-1209). He was an Ash'arite and had many debates against
the mu'tazilites. However, at the end of his life he saw no value in the
dialectic method. Early in his career, he wrote Lubab al-Isharat (a
commentary on Ibn Sina's al-Isharat wat-Tanbihat. This commentary was
the subject of criticism by Nasir ad-Din at-Tusi). Other early works
are: al-Mabahith al-Mashriqiyya and a somewhat autobiographical work,
Munazarat al-'allama, Fakhr ad-Din (a description of his encounters with
certain scholars). His most important theological work is a commentary
on the Qur'an, Mafatih al-Ghayb. Another important work is Manaqib
al-Imam ash-Shafi'i.

[^16]: Marx, Engels wal-Marxiyya, p. 24.

[^17]: Ma Hiya al-Madda, p. 56.

[^18]: AI-Mantiq ash-Shakliyy wal-Mantiq ad-Dialaktikiyy, p. 9.

[^19]: Ibid., p. 12.

[^20]: See p. 172 [of the original text].

[^21]: See p. 172 [of the original text].

[^22]: Louis Pasteur, French chemist and microbiologist (1822-95).
Pasteur showed that fermentation and certain diseases are caused by
microorganisms. He was a pioneer in the use of vaccines. He was the
first, for example, to use a vaccine for rabies. He is said to have
saved the wine, beer and silk industries of a number of European
countries. To him we owe our knowledge of pasteurization. His principal
publication is Studies on Beer (1876). In 1879, this was translated into
English under the title Studies on Fermentation.

[^23]: Al-Mantiq ash-Shakliyy wal-Mantiq ad-Dialaktikiyy pp. 12-13.

[^24]: Text: ath-thiql (weight).

[^25]: Text: ath-thiql (weight).

[^26]: Fa-asbahat al-quwwa al-mikanikiyya khassat handasa lil-'alum.

[^27]: Compare what we have mentioned with the Marxist explanation of
transformation in the mechanical sciences. This explanation was offered
by Dr Taqi Arni in his book, Materialism Diyalaktic, p. 28. He bases
this explanation on the presence of truth in both Newton's mechanics and
relativity mechanics, and on the development of the truth in both of
these mechanics, in accordance with the dialectic.

[^28]: Al-Maddiyya ad-Dialaktikiyya wal-Maddiyya at-Tarikhiyya, p. 12.

[^29]: Hawl at-Tanaqud, p. 4.

[^30]: Al-Mantiq ash-Shakliyy wal-Mantiq ad-Dialaktikiyy, p. 9.

[^31]: One notices that all Marxist texts misuse the terms
'contradiction' and 'opposition'. Thus, Marxism considers both of these
terms in the same sense, even though they are not synonymous in
philosophical traditions. Contradiction is the state of negation and
affirmation; while opposition means two contrary affirmations. The
straightness and the non-straightness of a line are contradictions,
since they are an affirmation and a negation [respectively]. However,
the straightness of a line (p. 258) and the curvature of a line are two
opposites. Contradiction in the philosophical sense is not applicable to
the last pair, for neither of them is a negation of the other. Rather,
it is an affirmation parallel to the affirmation of the other.
Similarly, Marxism misunderstood opposition, or misused the term
'opposition'. It considered a thing which is different from another as
its opposite. Thus [according to it], a chick is the opposite of an egg,
and a chicken is the opposite of a chick, even though opposition in the
philosophical sense is not just a difference among things. Rather,
opposition is an attribute which cannot unite with another attribute in
one thing. In this work, we [use these terms] in accordance with the
Marxist sense for the purpose of facilitation and clarification.

[^32]: Text: wa-khuluwwihima (the emptiness of these two principles).

[^33]: Al-Kawn wal-Fasad, pp. 168-9.

[^34]: Ibid., p. 154.

[^35]: Georges Lefebvre, French historian (1874-1959). His contribution
is mainly in the socio-economic field. He studied the agrarian history
of the French Revolution. His main writings are: The Agrarian Question
during the Reign of Terror (translated into Russian in 1936), The French
Revolution and A Study of the French Revolution.

[^36]: Karl Marx, p. 58

[^37]: Hawl at-Tanaqud, p. 13.

[^38]: Karl Marx, p. 60

[^39]: Did Duharnak, p. 203.

[^40]: Ibid., pp. 203-4.

[^41]: Hawl at-Tanaqud, p. 14

[^42]: Ibid., pp. 14-15.

[^43]: Ibid.

[^44]: Ayyam.

[^45]: Al-Mantiq ash-Shakliyy wal-Mantiq ad-Dialaktikiyy, pp. 20-1.

[^46]: Ibid.

[^47]: Text: Ubulidas. We have not been able to identify any author by
this name. We suspect though that the reference here is to Chrysippus
who is said by Diogenes to have given the argument of the veiled father
(Life of Diogenes, VII, ch. 44 and 82).

[^48]: Text: Ubulidas.

[^49]: Al-Mas'ala al-Falsafiyya, Muhammad 'Abd ar-Rahman Marhaba, p.
103.

[^50]: It never reaches 2, it approaches 2.

[^51]: Karl Marx, p. 21; Hadhih Hiya ad-Dialaktikiyya, p. 78.

[^52]: Did Duharnak: al-iqtisad as-siyasiyy, p. 193.

[^53]: Our Economics has already been issued. It includes one of the
most extensive studies of historical materialism, in light of the
philosophical principles and the general course of human history in real
life.

[^54]: See Our Economics, by the author.

[^55]: Al-Maddiyya ad-Dialaktikiyya wal-Maddiyya at-Tarikhiyya, pp. 8-9.

[^56]: i.e., to the original state.

[^57]: Al-Bayan ash-Shuyu'i, p. 8.

[^58]: Usus al-Lininiyya, p. 66.

[^59]: It must be mentioned that this is so only under normal pressure
(76 centimeters of mercury).

[^60]: i.e., only if water is not completely pure and is under constant
normal pressure.

[^61]: Did Duharnak, pp. 211-12; al-Maddiyya ad-Dialaktikiyya
wal-Maddiyya at-Tarikhiyya, p. 10.

[^62]: Did Duharnak, p. 214.

[^63]: But these phase changes from solid to liquid to vapor are not
strictly we in any of the compounds cited.

[^64]: Hadhih Hiya ad-Dialaktikiyya Mabadi' al-Falsafa al-Awwaliyya,
George Politzer, p. 10.

[^65]: Did Duharnak, p. 210.

[^66]: AI-Maddiyya ad-Dialaktikiyya wal-Maddiyya at-Tarikhiyya, p. 6.

[^67]: The four questions are as follows: 'What is it?' 'Does it exist?'
'What is it like?' 'Why is it?' For the sake of clarification, we will
apply these questions to one of the natural phenomena. Let us take heat
and apply these questions to it. 'What is heat?' By this question, we
seek an explanation of the specific notion of heat. Thus, we answer this
question, for example, (by saying) that heat is a form of power. 'Does
heat exist in nature?' Our answer is of course in the affirmative. 'What
is heat like?' In other words, what are the phenomena and properties of
heat? The answer to this question is given by physics. Thus, it is said,
for example, that among the properties of heat are warming, expanding,
contracting, changing some natural characteristics of matter, etc.
Finally, 'Why does heat exist?' This question is attributed to an
interest in understanding the factors and causes that lead to heat, and
the external conditions on which heat depends. The answer, for example,
is that the earth derives the power of heat from the sun, and then emits
it, etc. With this, you know that the metaphysical logic places the
issue of the linkage of a thing to its causes and circumstances in the
same class as the other main issues concerned with reality, existence,
and properties of this thing.

[^68]: Emile Burns, British Marxist (1899- ).

[^69]: Ma Hiya al-Marxiyya, pp. 75-6.

[^70]: Marx, Engels wal-Marxiyya, p. 24.

[^71]: Ma Hiya al-Madda, p. 29.

[^72]: One cannot take the interaction between external opposites as a
proof for the possibility of this, for the interaction between external
opposites does not mean that each of these opposites is a condition and
a cause for the existence of the other. Rather, this interaction is
actually due to the fact that each opposite acquires an attribute which
it did not have and which pertains to the other opposite. Thus, the
negative and the positive charges interact, not in the sense that each
of the two charges comes into existence as a result of the other, but in
the sense that the negative charge produces a specific state of
attraction in the positive charge. The converse of this is also true.

[^73]: Charles Robert Darwin, English naturalist (1809-82). One of the
strongest and best-known defenders of organic evolution. His most
important work is The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection
(1859).

[^74]: Ludwig Feuerbach, p. 88.

[^75]: It must be noted, though, that this distinction is no longer
recognized.

[^76]: i.e., an adapted generation.

[^77]: i.e., unadapted.

[^78]: Ar-Ruh al-Hizbiyya fi al-'Ulum, p. 43.

[^79]: Text: al-bi'a (community)

[^80]: Text. al-bi'a (community).

[^81]: Ibid., p. 44.


