Preface
=======

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ. ص:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنِّي تَارِكٌ فِيكُمُ الثَّقَلَيْنِ: كِتَابَ اللهِ وَعِتْرَتِي أهْلَ
بَيْتِي، مَا إنْ تَمَسَّكْتُمْ بِهِمَا لَنْ تَضِلُّوا بَعْدِي أبَداً،
وَإنَّهُمَا لَنْ يَفْتَرِقَا حَتَّى يَرِدَا عَلَيَّ الْحَوْضَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Messenger of Allah (*s*) said:

“Verily, I am leaving among you two precious things [*Thaqalayn*]: The
Book of Allah and my progeny [*‘itrah*], the members of my Household
[*Ahl al-Bayt*]. If you hold fast to them, you shall never go astray.
These two will never separate from each other until they meet me at the
Pond [*hawd*] (of *Kawthar*).”

**Some of its references**:

Al­Hakim an­Nayshaburi, *Al­Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn* (Beirut), vol.
3, pp. 109-110, 148, 533.

Muslim, *As-Sahih*, (English translation), book 31, *hadiths* 5920-3.

At­Tirmidhi, *As-Sahih*, vol. 5, pp. 621-2, *hadiths* 3786, 3788; vol.
2, p. 219.

An-Nassa’i, *Khasa’is ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib*, *hadith* 79.

Ahmad ibn Hanbal, *Al-Musnad*, vol. 3, pp. 14, 17, 26; vol. 3, pp. 26,
59; vol. 4, p. 371; vol. 5, pp. 181-182, 189-190.

Ibn al­Athir, *Jami ‘al­Usul*, vol. 1, p. 277.

Ibn Kathir, *Al­Bidayah wa’n­Nihayah*, vol. 5, p. 209.

Ibn Kathir, *Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Azim*, vol. 6, p. 199.

Nasir ad-Din al-Albani, *Silsilat al-Ahadith as-Sahihah* (Kuwait: Ad-Dar
as-Salafiyyah), vol. 4, pp. 355-358.

****

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**In the Name of Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful**

The preservation of the precious legacy left behind by the Holy
Prophet’s Household [*Ahl al-Bayt*] (may peace be upon them all) by
their followers from the menace of extinction is exemplified by an
all-encompassing school [*maktab*], which covers all the different
branches of Islamic knowledge and trains sincere seekers of the truth.
It has on its list of scholars many talented personalities who have
benefited from this immense wealth of knowledge. This school has
presented scholars to the Muslim *ummah* who, by following the Holy
Prophet’s Household (*‘a*), have been granted the authority to remove
doubts and skepticism encountered by various creeds and intellectual
trends both inside and outside Muslim society, and have throughout the
past centuries, presented the firmest answers and solutions to these
doubts.

Anchored in the responsibilities it is shouldering, the Ahl al-Bayt
(*‘a*) World Assembly has embarked upon defending the sanctity of
*risalah* [apostleship] and its authentic beliefs—truths which have
always been opposed by chiefs and leaders of anti-Islamic sects,
religions and trends. The Assembly regards itself as a follower of the
upright pupils of the Ahl al-Bayt’s (*‘a*) school—those who have always,
based on the expediencies of time and space, logically refuted all
accusations and been foremost in their efforts to clarify all
misunderstandings.

The empirical knowledge preserved in their books (of the scholars of the
Ahl al-Bayt’s (*‘a*) school) is unique because it is based upon
intellect and reasoning, devoid of any iota of blind prejudice, whims or
caprice. It addresses experts, scholars and thinkers in a manner that is
acceptable to a healthy human mind [*fitrah*].

In order to disseminate the truth, the Ahl al-Bayt (*‘a*) World Assembly
has included this valuable knowledge within the framework of research
and writing of contemporary Shiah writers or those who, through divine
guidance, embrace this noble school.

This Assembly is also engaged in the study and publication of valuable
works of pious predecessors and outstanding Shi‘ah personalities so that
seekers of truth can quench their thirst from this refreshing fountain
of knowledge offered by the Holy Prophet’s Household (*‘a*) as a gift to
the entire world.

It is hoped that our readers do not deprive the Ahl al-Bayt (*‘a*) World
Assembly of their valuable views and suggestions as well as constructive
criticism in this arena.

We also invite scholars, translators and other institutions to assist us
in propagating the pure Original Islam of Muhammad (*s*).

We ask God the Exalted, to accept this trivial effort and enhance it
further under the auspices of His vicegerent on earth, Hadhrat al-Mahdi
(may Allah the Exalted, expedite his glorious advent).

We express our utmost gratitude to Professor Ayatullah Muhammad Taqi
Misbah Yazdi for writing the book, Mr. Mansoor Limba for translating it,
and all our honorable colleagues, especially the dear ones in the
Translation Office for accomplishing this task.

***Cultural Affairs Department***

**The Ahl al-Bayt** **(*****‘a*****) World Assembly**


