Session 32: The Exigency of Elucidating the Ideological Position of the Islamic System
======================================================================================

Different levels of understanding the Islamic government
--------------------------------------------------------

In previous discussions we described the structure of the Islamic system
and described the Islamic government as a pyramid having at its top a
person who is directly or indirectly designated and appointed by God.
This idea is advanced in political philosophy as a theory, but to prove
that this idea is indeed the theory of Islam and the best one that can
be presented about governance and the macrocosmic management of Islamic
society, requires meticulous academic study and examination. There are
relevant questions which the experts and *fuqaha* must answer after
conducting extensive academic research. These questions can be answered
on three levels.

### 1. General understanding

Sometimes, in order to know their responsibilities and duties people
refer to an expert or specialist who can answer their questions and
specify their responsibilities according to his knowledge. For example,
laities refer to *maraji‘at-taqlid* [sources of emulation], asking them
questions and requesting them to determine their practical
responsibilities in religion. It is also like the referral to the
experts of every field. For example, patients consult their physicians
and ask for medicine that will cure them. People refer to a civil
engineer for their house design and plans. In these cases, general and
practical answers are given and there will be no mention of the
intellectual basis of an answer. Actually, the product and extract of
extensive scientific efforts, *ijtihad* and assiduous investigations are
presented to people.

Evidently, our society already has a general knowledge of the Islamic
government because of the establishment of the Islamic system in our
country. Perhaps, prior to the victory of the Islamic Revolution, there
might had been people here and there who were unaware of the Islamic
government or the theory of *wilayah al-faqih* and who needed to be
informed. But now no one asks about the realization and establishment of
the Islamic government. Of course, it does not mean that the notion of
Islamic government does not need any elaborate, comprehensive and
complete explanation. Rather, the point is that the theory of *wilayah
al-faqih* and the Islamic government has already been settled and
clarified to our society so much so that even opponents and foreigners
are aware of it although they sternly oppose Islam and the Islamic
Revolution.

Our people who have discerned the truthfulness of our system faithfully
defend the great achievements of the Islamic Revolution, i.e. the
Islamic government or the *wilayah al-faqih* system, and will continue
to do so in future. While facing the enemies of the Islamic Revolution
and system, these people chant the slogan “Death to the anti-*wilayah
al-faqih*” [*marg bar* *dhidd-e wilayat-e faqih*] as a political symbol
and emblem of opposition to the opponents of *wilayah al-faqih*. They
even chant it as a supplication and form of worship in political and
religious gatherings as well as in mosques.

Apart from a general reply to the question on the Islamic government and
*wilayah al-faqih*, there are two other levels of examining it. One is
the high level of academic and jurisprudential examination of the theory
of *wilayah al-faqih* for the experts and authorities. The other is an
average level for the students and researchers.

### 2. Specialized and technical understanding

An accurate, scientific, intensive or academic study of the subject of
Islamic government and *wilayah al-faqih* shall be done by those who
occupy a high academic standing, by utilizing their utmost knowledge,
talent, means and time. For example, the doctoral student who wants to
write his dissertation on the Islamic government or one of its branches
must have a comprehensive and intensive knowledge of the subject. He
must take into account all its aspects, spend many years studying and
examining it, refer to authentic and reliable authorities, consult
professors specialized in the field and entertain their suggestions in
order to present his arguments, so that his dissertation is approved.

An endeavor similar to this extensive academic research, is also being
conducted in our religious seminaries. Those taking advanced studies
[*bahth al-kharij*] to obtain the license to exercise *ijtihad*
sometimes conduct a thorough study and examination of a specific and
seemingly simple subject, reading tens of books and consulting and
discussing with *fuqaha* and scholars, so that they can finally express
their expert opinion. In all theoretical discussions on beliefs, ethics,
secondary laws, social, political and international issues, meticulous,
comprehensive and intensive studies are conducted by authorities in
order to preserve the richness, loftiness and dynamism of the Islamic
culture. It must be noted, however, that this level of examination of
the Islamic government or *wilayah al-faqih* is neither necessary nor
useful for the public.

### 3. Average understanding

While dealing with the average level of understanding we will neither
present a general answer on the Islamic government as a rector [*mufti*]
or *marja‘ at-taqlid* answers a question [*istifta’*] and explains an
issue in his treatise on the practical laws of Islam [*risalah
al-‘amaliyyah*], nor approach the issue in an academic and elaborate
manner which requires many years of research, studies and reading of
many reference books. Our aim is to give the different strata of society
an average awareness and understanding so that they can counter the
objections raised by enemies and opponents and confront conspiracies and
threats.

Culturally, the present state of affairs in our society is like that of
a society facing a contagious disease like plague, and are on the verge
of being afflicted with an epidemic. In combating this disease or plague
it is not enough to give only a single piece of advice or only an
expert’s opinion in the newspapers or other media. Through constant
reminders as well as necessary and sufficient admonitions, the level of
awareness of the masses should be elevated to attain a healthy cultural
condition to combat a social plague. Besides admonition, holding
seminars, roundtable conferences, sufficient explanations and
information drives must be held so that the people are fully informed of
the ever looming threats.

Now, I would like to present the average understanding with information
about the Islamic government and *wilayah al-faqih* because I feel that
our new generation does not have sufficient information about the issues
of the Islamic Revolution including the issue of *wilayah al-faqih*
which is the main pillar of this system, and wicked whisperers have led
them to the verge of deviation and misguidance.

Our future inheritors of this revolution need to become aware of these
issues and not be afflicted with cultural plagues and satanic mischief.
I am offering average level discussions to pave the necessary social and
cultural ground to improve their insight and certainty on the theory of
*wilayah al-faqih* to enable them to struggle and resist deviant
eclectic ideas prevalent in society today. Also, if someone asks them
about their acceptance of the Islamic government and the exigency of
*wilayah al-faqih*, they can answer and defend their beliefs. If they
are asked questions that require a thorough study and more profound
knowledge, they must refer them to the concerned authorities. With this
aim in mind, I have divided this series of discussion into two parts,
viz. (1) legislation and (2) statecraft.

A review of the characteristics of law and its necessity
--------------------------------------------------------

The first part of the discussions came to the following conclusions:

(1) Man in his social life is in need of law because life devoid of law
means chaos, disorder and savagery, and leads to the collapse of human
values—something which cannot be denied by any intelligent person.

(2) According to Islam, any law considered for the social life of man
must ensure his material and spiritual interests. Some philosophers have
asserted that no law can cover both worldly and otherworldly issues. A
political system must be either world-oriented whose only pursuit is to
ensure worldly and material interests, or otherworld-oriented that
should not interfere in worldly interests and material needs. This
criticism is the most ignominious of all those ever expressed against
the Islamic political system. Unfortunately, some of those who hold
government posts misguide others by employing a grandiloquent style
while criticizing our political system.

The bedrock of Islamic thought is that life in this world is a prelude
to life in the hereafter and what we do in this world can be a source of
our eternal felicity or endless perdition in the hereafter. Religion is
essentially meant to lay down a set of programs and plans for this
worldly life which ensure comfort and prosperity in this world besides
guaranteeing eternal bliss in the otherworld.

By following the set of programs received by the prophets (*‘a*) from
God for the guidance of mankind, man’s success in both worlds is
guaranteed. In view of the clarity and self-evident nature of these
points, it is surprising that those who have enough knowledge of the
Qur’anic verses and traditions and cannot be regarded as ignorant,
spitefully close their eyes to the truth and introduce in their talks
issues and matters related to the world as separate from those related
to the hereafter.

They say, Religious affairs and otherworldly interests are dealt with
only in the temples, churches and mosques. Also, social and worldly
problems can only be solved by the human mind and experience, and
religion cannot and should not play any role in them! This satanic
assertion of Muslims who say they know the fundamentals of religion is
against the essential principles of all revealed religions, Islam in
particular.

(3) The third preliminary point is that it is incumbent upon human
beings to secure their material interests through acquired experience,
use of intellect, skills and various sciences, but they can not secure
their spiritual and otherworldly interests[^1] because they do not have
any spontaneous knowledge of their spiritual and otherworldly interests.
Man does not know what is useful for his eternal felicity in the other
world simply because he has no experience of life in the hereafter.
Neither can he benefit from the experience of others as no one has any
experience of the hereafter. As such, he cannot find the way to a
blissful life in the hereafter on his own.

Keeping in view what has been said, it is clear that worldly and
otherworldly interests can only be identified by God and those who are
endowed with divine knowledge, and the law that emanates from God the
Exalted, must be implemented in society to secure worldly, otherworldly
and spiritual interests*.*

Another review of the qualities of the implementers of Islamic laws
-------------------------------------------------------------------

During the “legislation” part of the discussion, we enumerated three
main qualities that a person with divine connections must possess, if
his main duty is implementation of the law which guarantees worldly and
otherworldly interests.

**First condition or qualification:** The implementer of law and any
Islamic ruler, in general, must know the law. Of course, there are
different degrees and levels of knowledge and learning, the ideal one
being impeccable knowledge of divine laws. He who possesses this quality
and attains this station is an infallible person who does not err in his
gnosis, perception and discernment and knows the law revealed by God
perfectly. Naturally, in the presence of such a person, i.e. an
Infallible, his sovereignty over society becomes indispensable and
exigent. But in the absence of the Infallibles, the government and the
implementation of laws shall be delegated to the person who knows the
laws better than anyone*.*

**Second condition or qualification:** The implementer of law should not
be influenced by personal or factional interests, whims and caprice. In
other words, he must have moral integrity. Like intellectual competence,
moral integrity also has different degrees and the ideal degree can be
found in an infallible person who is never influenced by ungodly
motives, threats and temptations. He will never sacrifice collective
interests before the altar of personal, familial or factional interests.
Of course, in the absence of the Infallibles, the person who is morally
nearest to them has the right to rule and implement law.

**Third condition or qualification:** The possession of managerial skill
and talent to apply general laws to specific cases. He is supposed to
know their various applications and how to implement them so that the
spirit of law and purpose of legislation are preserved. Of course, to
reach this degree of managerial skill requires specific experiences and
wisdom that a person acquires throughout his life of management. The
highest level of this quality is also possessed by the Infallibles. They
are immune from any error in knowledge and understanding of divine laws,
not influenced by carnal desires, and possess special divine blessings.
They do not deviate or err in discerning what is good for society while
applying general laws to particular cases.

Theoretical connection of Islamic government with ideological principles and foundations
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It will be easier for a person to believe in the truthfulness of the
Islamic political system who acknowledges that human society must have
law that ensures both material and spiritual interests of human beings,
and is convinced of the qualifications of Islamic rulers and
administrators. Of course, the acceptance of these preliminaries is
itself based upon certain presumptions. First and foremost, man has to
accept that there is God and that a prophet has been commissioned by God
to expound divine laws.

He has to equally accept that beyond this life man has an eternal life
in the hereafter, and life in this world and the other have a causal
relationship. These presumptions are the essence of the subject of our
discussions. Their proofs are included in theology, scholasticism and
philosophy. One cannot deal with each of them in a social, legal and
political discourse as it would take many years before one arrives at a
conclusion.

Our addressees are Muslims who believe in God, religion, revelation, the
Day of Resurrection, apostleship, and the infallibility of the Prophet
(*s*), and who want to know whether Islam has a distinct political
system or not. They are not those who deny God, or say that man can
demonstrate and chant a slogan against God! They do not reject the
religion and laws of Islam or say that even the Prophet might have
committed an error in understanding the revelation.

Similarly, others who oppose us in principle are not the focus of our
present discourse. If they are open to dialogue and willing to listen,
we must discuss our ideological principles by means of rational and
philosophical proofs, and persuade them to believe that there is God and
the Day of Judgment; that God has revealed ordinances for the felicity
and prosperity of mankind in this world and the hereafter; obliged His
Apostle (*s*) to convey them to His servants; also, the Apostle (*s*) is
immune from committing error in understanding the revelation; otherwise,
he could not have been a prophet.

Can any intelligent person accept another person on top of the hierarchy
of power notwithstanding the presence of a person who is infallible in
knowledge and action and the best one to identify what is good for
society? Everybody knows that preferring the inferior to the superior in
optional affairs is shameful and indecent, and no intelligent person
accepts it. Our talk is not meant for those who claim to be Muslims but
deny the existence of a *ma‘sum*, believing that neither the Apostle nor
the Imams have been infallible. We have no business with them. My
assumption is that we all accept the thematic principles of the
discussion and acknowledge that the Apostle (*s*) is *ma‘sum* and
according to Shi‘ah beliefs the Imams (*‘a*) are also infallible.

Now, assuming that a *ma‘sum* is present in society, should the
government and the implementation of law be entrusted to a fallible
person? Delegation of the affairs to a non-*ma‘sum* is tantamount to
allowing error in understanding law. Permitting what is not supposed to
be permitted [*tajwiz*] means that one prefers his interests to that of
society, sacrificing the latter before the altar of the former. *Tajwiz*
means that one who has no competence in managing society becomes the
ruler! All of these forms of *tajwiz* are condemnable and rejected by
reason.

Therefore, in the presence of a *ma‘sum* no intelligent person will ever
deny that it is expedient for the *ma‘sum* to rule, and to choose
another person instead of him is an irrational and foolish act. No one
has any qualms in accepting this proposition. Reason dictates it and we
do not need to cite Qur’anic verses and traditions to prove it,
indicating that it is obligatory to obey the Apostle (*s*) and the Imams
(*‘a*), such as these:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا
الرَّسُولَ وَأُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنكُمْ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O you who have faith! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those vested
with authority among you…”[^2] and

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿مَّنْ يُطِعِ الرَّسُولَ فَقَدْ أَطَاعَ اللّهَ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoever obeys the Apostle certainly obeys Allah...”***[^3]

Logical and rational basis of Islamic government’s linear degrees
-----------------------------------------------------------------

In connection with the exigency of the rule of a *ma‘sum* when he is
present and accessible, our argument is rationally acceptable. But our
main concern is to present the Islamic viewpoint for the period of
occultation of Imam al-Mahdi (*‘a*) when the people are deprived of his
presence and have no access to him to benefit from his government. We
are also concerned with the period when a *ma‘sum* was present but the
oppressive powers deprived him of ruling over the Muslims, or the social
circumstances were not conducive for him to assume political power.

For any post or position, certain conditions and qualifications are laid
down. The one who possesses all the qualifications is chosen. If such a
person cannot be found, the one who possesses most of these
qualifications is chosen. Let us cite another example. If you know a
doctor who has thirty years of medical experience, but you consult a
young doctor who has recently opened a clinic, and he aggravates your
condition instead of curing you, will you not be condemned by both
reason and the reasonable?

They will ask you why you left the proficient and consulted the
inefficient. You could be excused if the proficient doctor was demanding
a huge amount as medical fee, or you had to travel abroad in order to be
treated by a specialized doctor and could not afford it. But our
assumption is that you had access to a proficient and specialized doctor
and the medical fee he was demanding was less than the rest, or the
same. In this case, if you consulted a neophyte doctor and your health
condition got worse, you will not be excused by the reasonable.
Everybody will reproach and criticize you.

The above rational rule is applicable in all social affairs and
acceptable to all reasonable people, Muslims and non-Muslims. Its
support is the dictate of reason and needless of religious proof.
According to this rule, if the ideal form of Islamic government which is
rationally also the best form of government is not possible and we have
no access to an infallible person with the most knowledge, piety and
skill, what will be the dictate and verdict of reason? Will our reason
give us freedom to do whatever we like and choose anyone we like as the
ruler?

Or, will our reason demand that in case of the unavailability of an
infallible person who is the ideal one to rule, we have to choose the
most competent person who is the most proximate to the station of the
Infallibles? If the perfect grade is not available, we have to choose
the grade of 99, 98, 97, so on and so forth. Once the perfect grade is
unobtainable, all other grades should not be treated identically and
count 99 as equal to 1 on the pretext that our target being the ideal
was not available, so it made no difference whom we chose! Undoubtedly,
reason will not accept it.

We have to look for the person who is competent to rule over the Muslims
and who is nearest to the Infallibles in knowledge, piety and managerial
skill. This rational proposition can easily be grasped and understood by
every intelligent person and there is no need to substantiate it with
intricate juristic and theological proofs.

Presenting some questions regarding Islamic government
------------------------------------------------------

There are other questions regarding Islamic government which must also
be addressed. Has Islam, only laid down the conditions and
qualifications of the person who heads the government and not specified
the form of government? That is, does Islam only recommend who must head
the government and leave other things including the form of government
to the whims of people and change according to the

changes in social circumstances?

A more technical question which is comprehendible and understandable to
those who are acquainted with juristic and legal discourses is this: Is
the government a foundational [*ta’sisi*] or conventional [*imdha’i*]
matter? A set of Islamic laws or juristic rulings is foundational.
Before their actual forms are shown to the people, the sacred religion
mentions these laws as well as describes their actual manifestations.
For example, the ritual prayer [*salah*] is a foundational form of
worship.

The religion of Islam has mentioned it and the manner of performing it
has also been demonstrated to the people by God through the Prophet
(*s*). Besides, before this obligatory act and the manner of its
performance were conveyed to the people, no one had been aware of it. In
general, the forms and manners of all ritual acts of worship are
foundational as the people learned them from the Prophet (*s*).

For example, obligatory acts like fasting, *Hajj* pilgrimage and other
devotional laws are all foundational.

In contrast to these foundational laws of Islam, there is a set of
Islamic laws which in the parlance of jurisprudence [*fiqh*] is called
‘conventional’. That is, in their social interactions and intercourses,
people have formulated a series of rules, regulations, contracts, and
agreements, some of which are unwritten but people are bound to them;
for example, trade and barter.

At the beginning the sacred religion had not ordered the people to
engage in trade or barter whenever they needed a commodity. The people
of wisdom knew of the necessity of this affair and they formulated the
ways and manners of engaging in them. Then, religion approved this wise
practice and gave it a religious credence, stating, for example:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَأَحَلَّ اللّهُ الْبَيْعَ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allah has allowed trade.”[^4]

God allowed and made permissible [*halal*] the same trading and
transactions practiced by people. This approval and permission of trade
is a conventional [*imdha’i*] and not a foundational [*ta’sisi*]
religious ruling. It is like the acceptance of a system formulated by
people of wisdom on how to conduct their mutual transactions.

Now, this question is raised concerning government: Before God ordered
people through the prophets (*‘a*) to abide by the divine government,
had the people themselves founded a particular form of government which
was later endorsed by religion? Or, did people also acquire knowledge of
the form of government from God, and that if the prophets (*‘a*) had not
ruled over people by God’s leave and permission and people were not
obliged to follow and obey them, they would not have known the form of
government?

In sum, once we say that the Islamic government is a well defined system
with a religious legal standing and God has made it incumbent upon
people to submit to it, the question asked is whether this government
has been ordained and founded by God? Or, did the people themselves
choose this form of government and found it on the basis of a social
contract and God only endorsed and approved it, and therefore, this
government has been considered Islamic as it has been endorsed, approved
and sanctioned by God?

[^1]: Of course, worldly interests can be secured only by securing the
otherworldly interests. Without benefiting from the divine ordinances
and revelation, man could not be able to secure his material interests.

[^2]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:59.

[^3]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:80.

[^4]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:275. [Trans.]


