Session 33: Islam and Different Forms of Government
===================================================

Skepticism on Islam’s alleged lack of government planning and program
---------------------------------------------------------------------

During the last session we dealt with a question related to the form of
government—Has Islam specified a form of government or delegated it to
the people? If it has specified the form, is it confined to a specific
period or can be applied at all times to all places? Or, does it
constantly change with the change in social circumstances? Some say: “It
is true that during the time of the Holy Prophet (*s*) there was a
specific form of Islamic government, but it was related to that period
only.

The sacred religion specified that form of government only for the time
of the Prophet, and thereafter new forms had to be chosen. It is even
possible that at a given period, social conditions will demand the
establishment of an Islamic government within the framework of a liberal
democratic government, since these two forms do not contradict each
other. Just as we have applied some Western modes of implementation—for
example, the parliamentary system, constitutionalism[^1] and now
republicanism and believe both are not against Islam—it is possible that
a time will come when we will accept the liberal democratic model and
come to believe that it is not repugnant to Islam!?”

In reply to the above, it is necessary to point out the ambiguity and
erroneous thinking surrounding it. As we all know, the Islamic Republic
was established in our country by the great architect of the Islamic
Revolution, His Eminence Imam Khomeini (*q*) and at its very inception,
the Constitution was drafted and ratified by the people and approved by
the Imam. Similarly, with his approval the foundation of the government
was laid down and in the course of time some changes were also made in
some of its parts. It is clear that neither the structure of our system
is rooted in the time of the Holy Prophet (*s*) nor a system with the
Islamic characteristics established during the period of the Commander
of the Faithful (*‘a*).

The separation of powers existed neither during the time of the Prophet
(*s*) nor that of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) but the principle
of the separation of powers has been accepted in our constitution, and
the governments has three branches—executive, legislative and judiciary.
Under this system the person who occupies the highest government post
and formulates the general policies is the Supreme Leader. Next to him
is the President. The chief justice heads the judiciary and the Speaker
of the Islamic Consultative Assembly heads the legislature.

They are recognized as the highest officials after the Supreme Leader
and the President. Twenty years after the Revolution, the Constitution
has undergone some amendments related to the structure of some branches
of government. In the beginning, the prime minister used to be the chief
executive and form the cabinet subject for approval by the President and
Islamic Consultative Assembly. After an amendment of the Constitution,
premiership was omitted and the President became the chief executive.
This structure has no precedence in Islam and Islam has no specific
decree or program in this regard. So, one cannot claim that Islam
explicitly ordered people to vote and elect their president and also
play their role in choosing the heads of other powers.

Some people think that the reason behind what we have said is that Islam
has not specified any form of government. So, we should acknowledge that
Islam has delegated this affair to the people who have the right to
choose the form of their government as well as their legal code.
Similarly, other affairs of the government are relegated to the people.
Therefore, the contention that the government must be determined by God
is in conflict with people’s political self-determination, and there is
contradiction between what is being practiced and the claim that the
government must be determined by God.

Even the notion of “Islamic republic” is self-contradictory, because
“republicanism” means that people take control of government and
determine its form. On the other hand, once we add the modifier
“Islamic” to the “republic” and say that the *wali* *al-faqih* must head
the government especially if we believe that *wilayah al-faqih* acquires
legitimacy from God and the Imam of the Time (may Allah expedite his
glorious advent), we regard the system as divine and not popular.

That is, the legitimacy of this system is acquired from above.
Initially, God gives legitimacy to the government and then the Prophet
(*s*) and the infallible Imams (*‘a*) are designated and granted
legitimacy by God and then the *wali* *al-faqih* by the living
infallible Imam (*‘a*) and the political organs under his authority are
granted legitimacy. If the government is a republic, these issues should
no longer be raised, and whatever the people have chosen should be
granted official status.

Refuting the abovementioned skepticism and stating the Islamic viewpoint on the form of government
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Unfortunately, this skepticism is reflected in our own newspapers and
magazines and presents the Islamic government in Iran as
self-contradictory and religious despotism. As such, we need to tackle
these issues lucidly and examine their bases from the Islamic viewpoint.

Once we say that our system is an “Islamic republic”, does ‘Islamic’
mean that the form and structure of government have been determined by
God and introduced in the Qur’an, traditions, and at least, in the
conduct of the Holy Prophet (*s*) and the pure Imams (*‘a*)? If the
Islamic nature of the system does not imply that its structure has been
introduced by God—just as pieces of evidence show—then what is the
criterion for the Islamic nature of the system?

No one claims that Islam has mentioned the specified form and structure
of government. It is not claimed in the Qur’an and traditions, the
conduct of the Infallibles, the words of the late Imam (q), the Supreme
Leader and other leaders of the system that the Islamic government is a
government whose structure and hierarchy of power have been determined
by God and the leaders of religion, and that Islam, for example, has
ordered that the wali al-faqih must be the highest authority and then
the president, and that the three powers must be separated from one
another. So, if its organizational structure and the separation of
powers are not Islamic, the Islamic nature must be sought somewhere
else.

The impossibility of presenting a fixed government structure
------------------------------------------------------------

At this point the skeptics say: Is the non-specification of the
structure and form of government not an indication of Islam’s
shortcoming? Is Islam not a complete religion and has it not indicated
all the individual and social needs of man? Then, why has it not
specified the form of government?

In reply, we have to say that Islam, which administered a small society
within a short period during the time of the Prophet of Islam (*s*) also
wants to administer the most complex and extensive human societies and
even a global government, so, it cannot present a specific and fixed
structure of government. The government founded by the Prophet (*s*)
controlled a population of about ten thousand people whose way of life
and culture were simple and most of whom were nomads and villagers along
the suburbs of Medina.

Naturally, the government had a simple and restricted structure
consistent with the social fabric and demographic density of that time.
Gradually, the domain of Muslim countries and territories expanded and
during the periods of the caliphs including the time of the Commander of
the Faithful (*‘a*) only half a century after the advent of Islam, the
Islamic government encompassed countries like Iran, Egypt, Iraq, Syria,
Hijaz, and Yemen. In view of the expansion of the territories under the
control of Islam, it was not feasible to adopt the same form of
government of the Holy Prophet (*s*) in Medina.

If the structure and form of government suitable for vast Islamic
territories and large populations had been introduced by the Messenger
of Allah (*s*), it would have been treated by the people during his time
as unnecessary and overambitious. Besides, since there was no practical
ground for its realization, it would have been considered an exercise in
futility.

If the Prophet (*s*) tried to determine in advance a specific form of
government for every period, it would have required the writing of an
encyclopedia of hypothetical forms of government in various periods and
an explanation of their organizational structure. However, at that time
since literate people were very few, let alone scholars who could
discern these points and distinguish one from another, there was neither
opportunity to deal with the subject nor the capability to preserve,
publish and propagate it.

Government structures constantly change and evolve according to the
circumstance of time and place as well as socio-cultural developments.
One cannot determine a single form of government applicable for all
times, places and conditions. The structure of government is part of the
alterable and secondary laws of Islam that change according to the
circumstances of time and place.[^2] To identify and present them has
been part of the duties of the Master of Affairs of Muslims [wali al-amr
al-muslimin]. During the presence of an infallible Imam, he is the wali
al-amr al-muslimin. During this period of occultation [ghaybah], his
deputies shall be regarded as the wali al-amr al-muslimin.

Therefore, it was unfeasible for Islam to have specified beforehand the
form of government suitable for every period and place. It is not an
indication of Islam’s shortcoming. Yes, if Islam had not introduced a
general framework for determining the forms of government under
different conditions, we might have admitted that Islam is defective in
this respect. Fortunately, Islam has set a way to determine the
structure of government, in particular, and the alterable laws, in
general.

As stated in the “legislation” part of the discussions, to determine and
present alterable laws suitable to changing circumstances of time and
place is part of the duties of the wali al-amr al-muslimin who presents
those laws including the structure of government by basing them on the
general principles and values of Islam, considering changing interests
in every period and consulting experts and authorities. Thereafter,
people are bound to act upon them. Given this solution offered by Islam,
the people are saved from destruction and confusion, and differences and
discord removed.

Skepticism on alleged temporal and worldly nature of government and obsoleteness of Islamic laws
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Nowadays, those who are under the influence of Western culture,
liberalism in particular, believe that administrative issues are
temporal and worldly and have nothing to do with Islam, staunchly
supporting and advocating it in their articles, speeches and
discussions. They argue that Islam talks neither about a republican
government, nor about a monarchical government, nor about other forms of
government. So, it is clear that administrative issues are not among the
issues that we expect religion to have dealt with and that God and the
Prophet (*s*) might have talked about. Rather, these issues are related
to the world and people themselves have to decide about them.

They also say: “People must determine not only the form and structure of
government but even enact laws, except those laws that are against
Islamic standards!” We ask them: "If administrative issues are part of
the temporal and worldly affairs and relegated to people, why have many
laws and decrees about administrative issues like those related to
judiciary, taxation and penal laws been mentioned in the Qur’an and
*mutawatir*[^3] traditions?" This poses an impasse for them.

In a bid to bypass and evade this impasse, they assert that the
administrative ordinances, judicial and penal laws mentioned in the
traditions and Qur’anic verses have been related to the early period of
Islam to meet the needs of the time. Islam had to get involved in
administrative issues and introduce relevant laws only during the early
period of Islam and the time of the Holy Prophet (*s*) because the
people at that time did not have sufficient knowledge and capability to
codify the laws they needed, and Islam had to address their needs.

Hence, laws and ordinances about the government, politics and judgment
applicable only to that period have been mentioned in the Qur’an and
traditions. Today, mankind has sufficient knowledge and capability to
administer society and codify the laws they need, so those laws and
ordinances are of no use anymore and must be discarded!

This is a contention of many of those feigning Islam. Sometimes, they
categorically say: “The laws of Islam—including its social laws—have
been confined to the early period of Islam. They are not applicable to
our period and have not been revealed for this period at all.” At times,
they make the abovementioned claim implicitly. Since they cannot dare to
explicitly question all the social laws of Islam, they raise objection
to some penal laws of Islam such as the amputation of the hand of a
thief.

They say: “The law of amputation of the hand of a thief is meant to
prevent theft which is a violation of the property of others and to
maintain the financial security of society. If we have a better law and
method of maintaining security in society, we have to apply them and not
amputate the hand of a thief in every period or age. The purpose or goal
of every law promulgated in Islam is the maintenance of order in
society, and during that time there was no way of maintaining order in
society but to amputate the hand of a thief. But nowadays we have better
ways and methods of achieving this goal that are devoid of violence and
do not trample upon human dignity.

Apart from being violent and harsh, amputating the hand of a thief is
repugnant to human dignity and must be discarded. We live at a time when
the phenomenon called “modernity” has emerged and social conditions have
changed. Since modern life and society have new conditions totally
different from the social conditions at the time of the Prophet (*s*)
and the Imams (*‘a*), there is no more room for the implementation of
Islamic laws.

Initially, they argued that Islam had not specified the form of
government but delegated it to people.

Then, assuming that the determination of the form of government has been
delegated to people, they concluded that in cases where Islam does not
have a specific law, codification of law has been delegated to people.
Thereafter, they went even further and said, “Even in cases where Islam
has a pertinent law, it can be abrogated and changed!” Undoubtedly, in
this case one must bid farewell to Islam.

Refutation of the above and the connection between Islam’s immutable and alterable laws
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

We have stated concisely that apart from immutable laws, Islam also has
alterable laws because the laws of Islam are generally consistent with
real good and evil and the life of man in the world depends on changing
circumstances. The government also has secondary and alterable laws. To
determine their form and framework in every period, to codify
administrative laws and identify their suitability to the exigencies of
time has been delegated to the *wali* *al-faqih,* who acts upon his duty
within the framework and general principles of Islam.

It must be noted that to know the immutable and alterable laws of Islam
and distinguish them from one another can only be done by a religious
scholar who is technically called *faqih* or *mujtahid*. Since he is
familiar with the spirit and sources of Islam, viz. the Book, *Sunnah*
and conduct of the Prophet (*s*) and the infallible Imams (*‘a*), he can
distinguish the immutable laws from the alterable laws and identify the
characteristic features of each.

The mere fact that there are alterable laws in Islam does not
necessarily mean that one can claim that all laws of Islam are
alterable. If all the laws, ordinances and decrees of Islam were
alterable, nothing specified in Islam would have remained. If all laws
and decrees of Islam were mutable and Islam did not have any inalterable
law at all, why did we stage a revolution, demand the implementation of
Islamic laws and offer hundreds of thousands of martyrs along this way?

During the time of the Shah, by launching a reform and some changes the
demands of the people could have been addressed and the ground for
people’s enactment of laws be opened. If that is Islam and its changing
laws are enacted according to the views and opinions of people, then we
had no point in staging a revolution. We should have followed the
nationalists and secured the interests of society according to their
views. In that case, we would not have incurred all these losses! By
following the nationalists liberal democracy, we could have conducted
peaceful and fair elections. Through general suffrage, we could have
sent our deputies to the *taghuti* Majlis and they could have changed
unpopular laws according to the demand of people and their constituents!
This is the gist of contentions inspired by alien ideas expressed today
in some of those periodicals which are funded by our public treasury!

Some use allegory to influence the youth who do not have sufficient
knowledge. For example, they say: “The Islamic government is a mere
claim and has no objective reality because Islam deals with neither
republicanism nor the separation of powers. Since Islam does not say
anything about them, it is clear that Islam has no political program at
all and everything is delegated to the people.”

Here we are dealing with those who believe in Islam, God, revelation,
and the Qur’an, and not to those who play with the Islamic government,
regarding it as an illusion. Addressing those who believe that there is
God who has sent the Prophet (*s*) and revealed the Qur’an for our
guidance, we would like to say that the Qur’an has explicitly mentioned
laws, ordinances and decrees that are fixed, inalterable and immutable.
Moreover, Islam and the Qur’an have repeatedly emphasized that they must
not be changed and modified. Among them are the judicial laws of Islam.

Some issues are necessary and obligatory but they are mentioned in the
Qur’an and traditions in plain and simple manner. Other issues, however,
including judgment according to the laws and decrees of Islam, are
emphasized and mentioned in such a manner that would make a person
tremble should he intend to disobey or violate them. Somewhere in the
Qur’an, God commands the Prophet (*s*) to judge according to the divine
decree:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّا أَنزَلْنَا إِلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ بِالْحَقِّ لِتَحْكُمَ بَيْنَ
النَّاسِ بِمَا أَرَاكَ اللّهُ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Indeed We have sent down to you the Book with the truth, so that you
may judge between the people by what Allah has shown you...” [^4]

Elsewhere, He mentions the duty of Muslims vis-à-vis the decree and
verdict of the Messenger of Allah (*s*) and the need to obey him,
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَلاَ وَرَبِّكَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ حَتَّىَ يُحَكِّمُوكَ فِيمَا شَجَرَ
بَيْنَهُمْ ثُمَّ لاَ يَجِدُوا فِي أَنفُسِهِمْ حَرَجًا مِّمَّا قَضَيْتَ
وَيُسَلِّمُوا تَسْلِيمًا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“But no, by your Lord! They will not believe until they make you a judge
in their disputes, then do not find within their hearts any dissent to
your verdict and submit in full submission.”[^5]

As you can observe, God the Exalted, by using the phrase “but no, by
your Lord” [fala wa rabbuka] which is an oath, considers as faithful
[mu’min] only those who consult no one but the Prophet (s) in their
disputes, differences and conflicts. But if they do not refer to the
Prophet (s) to resolve their disputes and conflicts nor ask him to judge
over them, or, if the Prophet (s) issues a fair judgment concerning
their conflict, they regret asking him and are not pleased with his
verdict, they are not faithful.

So, the faithful have to choose the Prophet (s) to judge and adjudicate
and if he issues a decree against their interests they should not have
an iota of displeasure in their hearts. They are supposed to totally
submit to the Messenger of Allah (s). Those who acknowledge Muhammad (s)
as a messenger of Allah but do not accept his decree and judgment,
according to the statement of God, have no faith in the laws of God and
the apostleship of the Prophet (s). They are indeed liars and
hypocrites. How can a person believe in the apostleship of the Prophet
(s) without accepting his decree and judgment?

Elsewhere in the Qur’an, in consecutive verses God introduces a person
who judges contrary to the divine decree as transgressor, unbeliever and
wrongdoer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿...وَ مَنْ لَمْ يَحْكُمْ بِما أَنْزَلَ اللّهُ فَأُولئِكَ هُمُ
الْكافِرُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Those who do not judge by what Allah has sent down—it is they who are
the faithless.”[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿...وَ مَنْ لَمْ يَحْكُمْ بِما أَنْزَلَ اللّهُ فَأُولئِكَ هُمُ
الظّالِمُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Those who do not judge by what Allah has sent down—it is they who are
the wrongdoers.”[^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿...وَ مَنْ لَمْ يَحْكُمْ بِما أَنْزَلَ اللّهُ فَأُولئِكَ هُمُ
الْفاسِقُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Those who do not judge by what Allah has sent down—it is they who are
the transgressors.”[^8]

Will anyone who reads these verses of the Qur’an with such a tone ever
think that the judicial laws of Islam are only related to the time of
the Prophet (*s*) and a maximum of twenty years thereafter, and after
the expansion of Muslim territories and the annexation of Iran, Egypt
and other countries, those laws were no longer applicable and were
entrusted to the people? Will anyone who reads these and other verses of
the Qur’an arrive at this conclusion? Or, will he conclude that those
verses mean that under no circumstances of time and place should the
divine decree be trampled upon?

By noticing the tone of the verses any rational and fair-minded person
who has faith in God and believes in those verses as truly God’s words
will definitely realize that it must be acted upon till the Day of
Resurrection and that the laws of God must be the focus of attention and
action and not be violated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿...وَمَن يَتَعَدَّ حُدُودَ اللّهِ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ هُمُ الظَّالِمُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And whoever transgresses the bounds of Allah—it is they who are the
wrongdoers**.”*[^9]

Moreover, if some verses are ambiguous, it is the task of the religious
scholar to determine whether their purport is confined to a particular
time or meant for all times; whether it is limited to a particular
community like the Arabs of the Arab Peninsula or encompasses all
communities.

With the purpose of avoiding submission to the laws and decrees of
Islam, satisfy their carnal desires and satanic demands and misguide the
young generation, the transgressors allege that the sociopolitical laws
of Islam are related to the early period of Islam and thereafter they
are no longer applicable. It is true that we have chosen the label
“*Islamic* Republic” but the *Islam* in it is only ceremonial. It is the
people who choose and abide by what law they like, unless it is
absolutely against divine decree! Unfortunately, some people have also
unexpectedly expressed the same notion in their articles and speeches.

Divine laws’ jurisdiction encompasses all spheres of human activities
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Thus, it is clear that the non-specification of the exact form of
government in Islam does not mean that government, laws and ordinances
are generally related to the judicial, legislative and executive powers
and that other powers, to be possibly discussed in political philosophy
theories in future, are all delegated to the people and God has no view
about them. Rather, in all spheres of personal and social actions,
including the realm of politics and governance, God has laws and
ordinances.

We cannot find a case about which Islam does not have a general decree.
To elucidate, some of the laws we know of are obligatory or mandatory,
that must be acted upon. On the contrary, there are laws, prohibiting
certain actions and items we know of, that must be abandoned. The rest
are permissible, and laws pertaining to them are not mandatory. These
non-mandatory laws are recommendatory [*mustahabb*], abominable
[*makruh*] and permissible [*mubah*]. So, explicit actions and items are
considered obligatory [*wajib*], prohibited [*haram*], *mustahabb*,
*makruh*, or *mubah*. In any case, all of them are parts of the decree
of God.

Therefore, if an action is neither mandatory nor forbidden, neither
recommended nor abominable, the action of man is free. In the parlance
of traditions it is absolute and free. In the jargon of the *fuqaha*, it
is *mubah*, and *mubah* is also part of religious laws and divine
decree. So, in the individual and social issues one cannot find a case
which is excluded from the decree of God for every action or thing
belongs to one of the five laws (*wajib*, *haram*, *mustahabb*,
*makruh*, and *mubah*). Of course, in the legal and political usage,
*mustahabb* and *makruh* have moral dimension and are not tackled as
legal issues which are either *wajib* that must be observed, or *haram*
that must be avoided, or *mubah*.

A concluding question: If we accept that Islam has a view about the
essence of government, for example, stating the specific qualifications
of the person heading the Islamic government, has Islam delegated to the
people those affairs and issues about which it has no opinion, and that
the decision about them is not related to the sacred religion, and the
general understanding and perception of the people concerning them must
be upheld?

At this juncture, even those who are acquainted with the juristic
subjects of Islam to some extent sometimes use dubious expressions that
can be exploited by others. For example, they say: “We learn from
religion some of the issues in our lives and concerning them we refer to
the Book, traditions and even the conduct of the Holy Prophet (*s*) and
pure Imams (*‘a*). But regarding other issues we use our reason. In
reality, we have two reference sources in knowing the proper way of
living, viz. revelation and reason.” This nonchalant interpretation is
sometimes adopted by those who are authorities and really religious
people. Since it is not devoid of problems and causes others to err, I
deem it fitting to assess it.

It is necessary to note that we have two terms for religious or divine
decree:

1.The first term, religious decree—or devotional and divine
decree—refers to the decree inferred from the Book and the Sunnah and is
mentioned in the Qur’an and traditions as binding. According to this
term, any decree deduced through another way, say, by means of reason,
is not referred to as “religious decree” but it is called “dictate of
reason” [hukm-e ‘aql]. If reason directly discerns a decree or ruling
[hukm] and is convinced of it, and at the same time, religion says
something about it, this religious view is an instructive [irshadi]
statement and does not entail a religious or devotional decree. To
elaborate, without external help our reason directly discerns certain
things. For example, every person can understand and perceive that
justice is good and injustice is bad. No one doubts this dictate of
reason. Then, once justice is enjoined in a Qur’anic verse, according to
the fuqaha this verse is considered “instructive” in nature. That is, it
only guides and directs us to a decree which our reason can understand
and discern.

The fuqaha’s use of this term for religious decree misguides others and
makes them think that we are not in need of a religious decree for all
the aspects and issues of our lives. In some issues the discernment and
dictate of reason is sufficient. They think that if God does not say
anything about a thing, He has not exercised His authority over it and
delegated it to reason [to discern]. So, the domain of our lives is
divided into two: The first section is where God exercises His authority
and the second section is where our reason is the authority. This
implies that God does not exercise authority in all places, and in
everyplace we should not be concerned with what God has decreed. In
fact, wherever God does not say anything, it is up to us to know His
decree by using our reason.

As can be observed, some have exploited and misinterpreted the first
term for religious decree and the nonchalant expression of the fuqaha on
the basis of which religious decree is regarded as any devotional decree
mentioned in the Book and Sunnah in contradistinction to the definite
dictate of reason about which religion does not say anything, and in
determining its ruling our reason is not dependent on religion which
only offers an instructive decree. They have assumed that some aspects
of our lives are beyond the authority of God and the reference authority
in codifying pertinent laws is human reason.

2. The second term ‘instructive’ concerns the legislative will of God;
that is, whatever God wants from us is in the obligatory or permissible
form. So, whatever God definitely wants us to do is a decree of God.
Sometimes, it is expressed in the Book, the Sunnah and other religious
sources. At times, it is realized through reason. Accordingly, reason
itself is one of the means of knowing and discovering the decree of God.

As such, we submit and follow the dictate of reason. By means of
reason’s discovery of the divine legislative will, we realize that this
decree is the very thing that God wants from us. If it is mentioned in
fiqh that apart from the Book and Sunnah, we have another means of
knowing religious decrees, i.e. reason, it is absolutely true that
reason is also a means of discerning the decree of God.

In view of this interpretation and term for religious decree, all the
actions and activities of man in individual, social, legal, judicial,
internal and external, and international domains are included in the
decree of God. Sometimes, the decree of God is established by the Book
and Sunnah, and at times, through reason. Of course, the proof of reason
must be so clear and definite that we can be certain that whatever is
established by reason is the decree and legislative will of God.

[^1]: It refers to the Constitutional Movement, Constitutional
Revolution or simply Constitutionalism (1905-11) in Iran during the
twilight of the Qajar dynasty. [Trans.]

[^2]: Contrary to the alterable laws of Islam are the inalterable laws
that are fixed for all times and applicable everywhere.

[^3]: A mutawatir hadith is one which has been reported by so many
different chains of transmission and such a number of narrators in every
generation normally could not agree to fabricate a tradition without the
fact of its fabrication becoming known. [Trans.]

[^4]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:105.

[^5]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:65.

[^6]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:44.

[^7]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:45.

[^8]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:47.

[^9]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:229.


