Session 34: The Position of Islamic Laws and Our System’s Superiority over Other Systems
========================================================================================

Connection of the immutable laws of Islam with government structure and alterable laws
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As said earlier, people argue that laws and ordinances needed by our
society must be enacted and ratified in the legislative assembly. If we
only rely on those mentioned in Islamic texts such as the Book and
*Sunnah*, the needs of society can never be met. Considering that in the
Islamic republican system laws are ratified by the Majlis deputies—based
on the system observed in other democratic countries—why do we insist on
calling our system “Islamic government” and introducing the laws
ratified in the Majlis as “Islamic laws”?

There is no doubt that in every country the people’s representatives act
according to the culture dominant there and respect the values of
society while ratifying laws. As a matter of course, in our country
whose people are Muslims and dominated by a particular culture and
values, the Majlis deputies more or less observe the religious culture
and values. But in any case, the process of legislation in our country
is the process observed in democratic countries. Therefore, what is the
need of saying that our government is Islamic and that Islamic laws are
implemented in our country?

As we have said, the reply to this objection is that laws of Islam are
divided into two: (1) immutable laws and (2) alterable laws that also
change according to the circumstances of time and place. With changes
and transformation in human societies and the emergence of diverse
conditions in time and place, there is no change in the immutable laws
of Islam. Their form and substance remains immutable and fixed. They
must be acted upon under all circumstances at all times. Now, if in
ratifying the current laws of the country the inalterable laws of Islam
are not observed and the ratified laws are against the laws and decrees
of Islam, those laws are not Islamic even if they are unanimously
ratified by people’s deputies.

Any law that is against Islam has no legitimacy and legal standing. In
fact, it cannot be regarded as a law at all. As stipulated in Article 4
of the constitution of our country, all laws and ordinances of the
Islamic country must be consistent with Islamic laws and standards. If a
ratified bill is against religious principles, it shall have no legal
value.

Therefore, the immutable laws of Islam that have been mentioned in the
Qur’an, and *mutawatir*, authentic traditions, must be observed and no
sort of change or abrogation can affect them. Meanwhile, we have a set
of alterable laws that are determined by the competent authority
according to the needs and conditions of time and place.

In today’s culture the alterable laws are known as statutory laws that
are enacted and ratified in legislative organs, but in Islamic culture
and juristic parlance alterable laws are the same administrative laws
whose enactment and ratification are within the discretion of the *wali
al-faqih* who may enact and implement special ordinances consistent with
the changing needs of society. At least, the ratified ordinances to be
implemented must be endorsed and approved by him.

Of course, sometimes the *wali al-faqih* directly enacts laws and
ordinances and at times these laws are ratified by different experts in
the advisory body of the wali al-amr al-muslimin after sufficient study
and deliberation. In any case, according to Islam, the credibility of
statutory laws and ordinances lies in the permission and approval of the
wali al-amr al-muslimin; otherwise, they are not binding at all.

The *wali al-amr al-muslimin* or any other legislative authority has no
right to enact statutory laws and ordinances according to their personal
whims by neglecting the general principles, standards and values of
Islam. In other words, statutory laws and alterable ordinances must be
codified and ratified within the framework of general immutable laws and
decrees of Islam by the *faqih* or expert in religious and juristic
questions who has the ability to apply them to particular cases.

Since it is a difficult task, it is stipulated in the Constitution of
the Islamic Republic of Iran that the bills ratified by the Islamic
Consultative Assembly must finally be approved by the Council of
Guardians which is composed of outstanding jurists and legal experts to
see to it that those laws and ordinances ratified by the Majlis are not
against Islamic standards.

Primary and secondary laws and the secondary laws’ alleged conflict with Islam
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Some people imagine that temporary administrative decrees and laws
enacted according to certain circumstances of time and place are in some
cases against the laws of Islam. It is because people always tend to
consider only primary laws as the divine laws of Islam, without knowing
that the secondary laws enacted for special conditions are also treated
as religious laws. Islam also has a set of other laws that are called
“secondary laws” and related to emergency cases and special conditions.
Some of these secondary laws are also mentioned in the Book and *Sunnah*
while others are mentioned in other religious sources. To enact them is
under the discretion of the *wali* *al-amr al-muslimin*.

For example, it is obligatory upon us to perform ablution [*wudhu*]
before saying our prayers. If bathing [*ghusl*] is *wajib* for us before
prayer, then we have to perform *ghusl*. The obligatory nature of
*wudhu* and *ghusl* is part of the primary laws for common situations
when our bodies are physically sound and water is not harmful for us and
there is available water. But under exceptional situations when, because
of ailment, we cannot perform ablution as water is harmful to our
health, or we have no access to water, to perform dry ablution
[*tayammum*] shall become *wajib* in lieu of *wudhu* and *ghusl* as a
secondary law. For this reason, it is said that if you have no access to
water or if water is harmful to your health, *tayammum* is regarded as
the emergency substitute of *wudhu* and *ghusl*.

Once the primary laws and also the secondary laws which are likewise
called “emergency laws” are mentioned in the Qur’an and traditions, we
cannot observe any difference between them because in practice, the
subject of the primary law, like *wudhu* and *ghusl,* is one who has
access to water and to whose health water is not harmful, while the
subject of the secondary law, like *tayammum,* is one who has no access
to water and to whose health water is harmful. As such, some people are
commanded to perform ablution and others are commanded to perform dry
ablution.

In some cases, however, opposite to the primary laws are special laws
that are suitable to exceptional and emergency situations and not
particularly mentioned by religion. Here, it is said that primary laws
must be implemented unless they cause hardship and embarrassment because
Islam does not want the servants of God to undergo intolerable hardship
and embarrassment in discharging their obligations:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿...وَ مَا جَعَلَ اللهُ عَلَيكُم فِي ٱلدِّينِ مِنْ حَرَجٍ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“and has not placed for you any obstacle in the religion.”[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿...يُرِيدُ اللّهُ بِكُمُ الْيُسْرَ وَلاَ يُرِيدُ بِكُمُ الْعُسْرَ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allah desires ease for you, and He does not desire hardship for
you.”[^2]

The noteworthy point is that in some cases emergency laws and their
substitution of primary laws are mentioned in religion and in other
cases other emergency or secondary laws are not mentioned. But it is at
the discretion of the *wali* *al-amr al-muslimin* to determine the
obligation of the people if certain primary laws cannot be implemented
and their implementation brings about unbearable hardship and
embarrassment. So, what the *wali* *al-faqih* announces according to
Islamic standards are secondary laws of Islam, because Islam has
enjoined him to determine the obligation and duty of people in case of
hardship and embarrassment because of which the implementation of
certain primary laws can be suspended.

Thus, since they are only acquainted with the primary laws of Islam,
when the *wali* *al-amr al-muslimin* or the legislature of the Islamic
government approves a law contrary to primary laws, some people claim
that such a law is against Islam. The fact is that the said law is
neither against Islam nor religious laws. It is rather contrary to
primary laws of Islam as it is part of the secondary laws. Indisputably,
the secondary laws are also considered part of Islamic laws.

As stipulated by Islam, a traveler is not supposed to fast but a
resident or non-traveler must fast. No one regards the non-fasting of a
traveler as against the commandment of Islam because Islam itself has
explicitly ordained that a traveler or sick person must not fast.
Similarly, regarding social, civil, judicial, and commercial laws, if
acting upon pertinent primary laws brings about unbearable hardship and
embarrassment for the people, the implementation of those laws shall be
suspended. According to special rules and regulations, the *wali*
*al-amr al-muslimin* will enact a new law or decree consistent with the
demands of time and place. Definitely, the said secondary law is not
against Islam. It can be contrary to primary laws of Islam but Islam
includes both primary and secondary laws.

In view of new needs that consistently emerge in Islamic society as a
result of changing social conditions—such as the expansion of roads, or
the need to administer a city and keep its cleanliness and
beautification, or the need for a water and sewage system, electric
supply and others which did not exist before—and because of the
complexity of social conditions, population explosion and other
socio-environmental factors, those needs can no longer be met by the
people alone as they are not like the needs of past societies which
could be met by people themselves. So, special ordinances must be
enacted by the concerned authorities.

Our point is that these ordinances are not without basis and they are
not formulated purposelessly according to personal whims. In fact, these
secondary laws and ordinances must be within the framework of the
general laws of Islam. It makes no difference whether these secondary
laws indicate preference of what is more important over what is
important, or their enactment depends on the demands of time and place.
In our system this part of secondary laws is usually ratified in the
Islamic Consultative Assembly with the endorsement and approval of the
*wali* *al-faqih*. Hence, such laws are not outside Islamic laws because
either they are ratified through a decree of the *wali* *al-amr
al-muslimin* or they are codified according to special rules and
regulations like “hardship and embarrassment” [*‘usr wa* *haraj*], “no
harm” and other tenets [*qawa’id*] in jurisprudence.

As such, on the mere pretext that in the Islamic government some
temporary ordinances and alterable laws are not mentioned in the Book
and *Sunnah*, one cannot discard the Book and *Sunnah* and enact laws
according to the will and dictates of the people. The immutable laws of
Islam must definitely be implemented and alterable laws should also be
enacted by the *wali al-faqih* or those who are granted authority by him
within the framework of primary laws and general decrees.

Shortcomings of the democratic systems
--------------------------------------

As we have said before, the government structure is like a pyramid with
three sloping sides, viz. (1) legislative power, (2) executive power (3)
and judicial power. This pyramid-like of the government gained currency
since the time of Montesquieu who raised the theory of separation of
powers.

Up to the present, government has three branches but it does not
necessarily mean that the same arrangement has to continue in future.
Due to new advancements or the emergence of new social conditions, there
may be a change in the structure of government. For example, additional
branches of government might be created that will in turn make the
government structure quadruple or perhaps pentagonal. Yet, it must be
noted that the basic rule and principle in our system is that all powers
that constitute government structure meet on top of the pyramid.

That is, once we liken the government structure which is composed of
different powers and chains of command to a pyramid, the more we go down
in each of its sides, the more we will find the powers decentralized and
dispersed. At the base of the pyramid we will observe considerably huge,
vast and multiple government departments. But as we gradually go up, the
powers and structures of government become more centralized and
integrated until finally all these powers meet on top of the pyramid and
these dispersed and multiple powers attain unity and clarity.

In the pyramid of power, the three sides of powers gradually meet at the
top, and that point is the spot of conjunction and union of all powers.
So to speak, the discretion of the powers and branches of government
join together and it is from there that they are divided and scattered
on different sides—executive, legislative and judiciary—and each power
has its own hierarchy of power or chain of command.

Exigency of the powers’ coordinating agency
-------------------------------------------

It is true that a government system is composed of the three
powers—executive, legislative and judicial—but they must be linked to
each other. Since all of them constitute a single government apparatus,
there must be a coordinating agency or unifying factor among them.
Because of the absence of this unifying factor in many democratic
systems in the world, the lack of coordination can be noticed which
sometimes even leads to a national crisis. With the aim of avoiding such
crises, certain measures have been conceived in some systems. One of
these measures is the granting of veto power to the president.

For example, the legislature has the right to enact and ratify laws, and
according to its function, the members of the congress ratify a bill
after extensive debate and deliberation. Then, the said bill is approved
by the members of the senate. However, as the president has the right to
veto and suspend bills ratified by parliament, he may veto a ratified
bill and suspend its implementation even if it be for a limited time. If
legislation were the right of the legislative and the executive had no
right to interfere in the affairs of the legislative, how would the
executive veto a bill ratified by the legislative and suspend its
implementation? So, a total separation of powers is not practical. There
is always a sort of overlapping of functions between the legislative and
executive.

Similarly, because of the absence of the coordinating agency and
unifying factor, in some countries there are sometimes tensions among
the three powers as an outcome of political differences among parties.
It sometimes leads to a point where the country is deprived of any
government or cabinet and thus practically paralyzed. For example, a
government or cabinet is formed and granted authority but after a while
it is dissolved by the parliament and thus collapses.

It is also possible that for a certain period, a new government or
cabinet cannot be formed because the one who aspires to become the prime
minister and form the government cannot garner the majority vote in
parliament. In the parliamentary systems, the ruling party that can form
a government is that which has absolute majority of seats in the
parliament or can garner the majority vote through an alliance with
other parties.

Recently one of our neighboring countries had no government or cabinet
for sometime because the one nominated for premiership could not garner
the majority vote of the MPs. The MP’s also attend to the current
affairs of the country but whenever the prime minister and his deputies
are temporarily appointed, the natural tendency is that they do not take
their work seriously. A country whose officials are tardy and careless
for a period of six months, for instance, will obviously incur great
losses.

In some political systems, the president has the right to temporarily
dissolve the parliament in special circumstances. Thus, executive power
openly interferes and even dissolves the legislature. No doubt, such
interferences lead to tension, discord and even intense crises. The
reason behind it is that either the preeminent and influential factor to
prevent such crises has not been premeditated in the laws of those
systems, or the premeditated factor is not that effective. For example,
in some systems the presidency is regarded as a mere ceremonial position
and has not the executive power. At times, when the country is facing a
crisis, it is he who gives stability by resolving the crisis. Actually,
he demonstrates his role and function only during a crisis.

The coordination of powers in the wilayah al-faqih system
---------------------------------------------------------

In current systems in the world measures have been taken to save the
country from a crisis as a result of interference in one another’s
affairs, but none of these measures or solutions is sufficient, and the
problem or difficulty remains as before. However, in the *wilayah
al-faqih* system—which is unfortunately presented as reactionary by some
biased writers—such situations have been taken into account. Whenever
the country faces a crisis, he guides the nation, solves the crisis with
prudence and astuteness, and does not allow the country to plunge into
perdition.

Like other countries, we also have executive power headed by the
president and judicial and legislative powers which are separate from
each other. But they are powers of the same system and join together on
top of the political pyramid. All these powers converge at one point.
The central and main point of the system at the top of the pyramid is
the *wali* *al-faqih* who unifies all the powers and brings them
together.

In contrast to other systems which either do not have the coordinating
agency or unifying factor, or if there is any it is very weak and
feeble, in the *wilayah al-faqih* system the three powers are under the
leadership and supervision of the focal point of the system, viz. the
*wali* *al-faqih*. He is also the protector of the Constitution. He sees
to it that Islamic laws, values, objectives and ideals of the Revolution
are not violated. He also serves as the coordinating agency between the
three powers, inviting all to camaraderie, unity, amity, and
understanding. If the country happens to face any serious tensions, he
eases them and saves the country from the brink of disaster.

In the course of more than twenty years after the victory of the Islamic
Revolution,[^3] whether during the time of the eminent Imam (q) or that
of the Supreme Leader (may Allah prolong his sublime presence), in
numerous cases the country experienced intense crises caused by
particular disputes and tensions that willy-nilly happened in society.
If it were not because of the sagacious management of the Leader, our
country would have succumbed to crises that countries like Turkey,
Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Afghanistan are experiencing today.
Fortunately, by the grace of the presence of this holy personality and
position, and the love and affectionate relationship between him and the
people, such crises were undermined.

The wilayah al-faqih system’s superiority over other systems
------------------------------------------------------------

By comparing the Islamic system of our country to the democratic systems
in the world that are presently known as the most advanced government
systems, it is worth enumerating the distinctions of the Islamic
systems:

### 1. Internal cohesion

The first distinction of our system is its internal cohesion. We have
shown a sample of the internal contradictions of those systems, saying
that no power is supposed to interfere in another’s affairs but in
actuality we do not know of any system in which the three powers are
totally independent and do not interfere in one another’s affairs, and
in which the law has not sanctioned a certain extent of interference in
one another’s affairs, not to mention the illegal interferences,
violations and pressures exerted by one power over another.

We can actually observe one branch of the government enjoying authority
and exerting pressure on others. Once the military and disciplinary
forces, economic and financial means, and the budget of a nation are at
the disposal of the executive, in practice all instruments of pressure
are at its disposal, and whenever the chief executive wants, he can
abuse his power.

So, a sort of internal contradiction can be observed in the democratic
systems in the world. In our system, however, that contradiction does
not exist in spite of the fact that the three powers are separate from
one another and each of them has independent discretions. It is because
in our system there is the coordinating and unifying element called the
*wali* *al-faqih* who, by virtue of his authority over the three
branches of government, coordinates and brings them together.

As the pivot of the system, he prevents the emergence of any crisis. We
have even witnessed how in many instances the Supreme Leader has
prevented the emergence of tension among officials of the three powers.
Whenever there was a crisis, the chief executive officially asked him to
solve it by exercising the power vested in him, which he did. The *wali*
*al-faqih* is directly not the head of any of the three powers but he
designates the head of each of these powers and in the expression of the
constitution, he confirms [*tanfidh*] the vote of the people. By virtue
of his confirmation or designation, the position and function of each of
the heads of the three powers acquire legitimacy and official status.

### 2. Internal and external executive guarantee

The second distinction of our system is the internal and external
executive guarantee that exists in the people. This internal executive
guarantee arises from the sense of religious responsibility in observing
laws and ordinances of this Islamic state. Such an internal guarantee or
control does not exist in other systems. In almost all other systems
laws are imposed upon the people by force and violence. Whenever people
sense more freedom and less control over them, they avoid being
subjected to the laws.

It can be heard frequently that some people talk about the observance of
law and order in European countries. They claim, for instance, that in
Western or European countries the people spontaneously and instinctively
act upon laws and ordinances and pay taxes. This outward discipline and
order is due to an advanced system of control which compels people to
observe laws and pay taxes. Because of it, only a few can violate laws.

The system of tax collection there, because of many centuries of
experience especially in the last half century has a complex, yet
accurate, mechanism. On this basis, taxes are collected from people in
different ways and the masses willingly pay their taxes. However, by
collaborating with national officials and establishing connection with
power-holders, giant companies are trying to evade paying taxes.

At this point, I deem it necessary to tell those who are infatuated with
the West that their talk about order, discipline and high-level culture
is nothing but empty rhetoric and far from the truth. For example, it is
claimed that in Western countries drivers observe traffic rules
faithfully and maintain exemplary order and discipline. This claim is
not true. I will mention an instance that refutes this claim.

I was invited to deliver a speech at the University of Philadelphia in
the United States. In order to see the cities and towns along the way, I
took a car from New York to Philadelphia. Along the way, I noticed that
the car driver used to place a devise in front and remove it after a
while. He repeated it many times. This incited my sense of curiosity and
I asked him about the utility of the devise.

He said that in America the speed limit was 90 miles per hour. In order
to detect any violation the police had installed radar along the
highways. Since the traffic and speed of vehicles is monitored by radar
the devise in question is used to undermine it. This devise can easily
be sold and bought in the market. Knowing this, policemen are stationed
along the highways to stop and fine drivers who, by using the devise
undermine the police radar, and drive beyond the speed limit. As such,
by installing the said devise they can drive at whatever speed they
like. Whenever they approach a policeman, they hide it, and install it
again afterwards!

You can see that in order to circumvent the rules and render futile the
law-enforcers’ monitoring devise, they invented a counter-devise which
was sold abundantly in the open market. Yet, we imagine that the
Americans have such a progressive culture that they willingly and
cheerfully obey ordinances and maintain order and discipline. Criminal
cases reportedly happening there everyday have a long story. An
acquaintance who returned to Iran after many years of residence in
America said that there was no high school in America without armed
policemen. Yet, every now and then we witness killing in those schools.
For example, an armed student recently shot his classmates and teacher,
killing them! This is an example of order and discipline in that
country!

The main factor that prompts people in the West to abide by law is an
external factor—fear of fine, imprisonment or physical punishment. If
they were not only afraid of this deterrence and could render
ineffective the monitoring devise of law-enforcers, most of them would
not hesitate to violate laws. In the Islamic system, however, apart from
this external deterring factor which exists, there is a more important
factor which if cultivated among people has great potential to solve
social problems. It is the internal deterrence which makes people obey
ordinances and laws.

This factor stems from faith in the necessity of abiding by laws and
ordinances of the Islamic state. In reality, people regard obedience to
laws as part of their religious duties. If the Islamic system or state
had not established and the Imam as leader and source of emulation
[marja‘ at-taqlid] had not declare obedience to laws of the Islamic
state as religiously obligatory, people would have obeyed the laws only
in order to be immune from physical punishment or fine.

Nowadays, in obedience to the *wali* *al-amr al-muslimin* the religious
and revolutionary people of Iran act upon the laws and ordinances of the
state although, in certain cases, they know that those laws are not in
their favor. This internal executive guarantee which stems from the
faith of people and is a very important and valuable factor in
persuading people to abide by the laws exists in our society and we do
not fully comprehend its value.

This factor makes people consider laws of the Islamic state as laws of
God and obeying them as pleasing to Him, and thus, having a sense of
religious and divine responsibility they follow them and regard their
violation a sin. Of course, we do not deny that there are also cases of
law violation in our system but compared to the cases of obedience to
laws these violations are insignificant. If the percentage of violations
was greater than that of obedience, there could no longer be progress
and the system would disintegrate.

### 3. The Leader possessing the highest degree of piety and merit

The third distinction of our system in comparison to other systems is
that the Supreme Leader must possess the highest level of piety, moral
integrity, and personal standing because he is the deputy of the Prophet
(s) and the Imam of the Time (‘a). The people recognize him as the
manifestation and embodiment of the personality of the Imam of the Time
(‘a). As such, they also extend to him their love and affection for the
Prophet (s) and the Imam of the Time (may Allah, the Exalted, expedite
his glorious advent).

If the Supreme Leader, who holds the highest post and exercises all
political powers, commits a violation or sin that leads to debauchery
and injustice, he shall be automatically dismissed from the station of
wilayah over the Muslims, and there will be no need for a court hearing
or trial to prove the offense, just dismissal. The fact that he commits
an offense, God forbid, makes him lose his justice and stand dismissed.
The only function of the Assembly of Experts is to declare his
incompetence because his dismissal results from his losing his sense of
justice!

*There is no political system in the world in which the high-ranking
officials have the moral integrity that the Leader in our system has.*
In fact, the leaders of some countries are openly involved in moral
corruption and sin. For instance, in the U.S. of America, one of the
so-called greatest, civilized and progressive countries of the world,
the president was accused of moral and sexual corruption.[^4] Certain
witnesses bore testimony to his debauchery and offense and he himself
made a confession. However, when the issue of his impeachment was
brought up in Congress and then moved to the Senate, a majority of
Senators acquitted him of the charge.

Thus, he remained in power as president until the end of his term and no
problem emerged thereafter.[^5] All people of the world knew that he
committed adultery and perjury but due to the political collaboration of
some Senators the required number of votes to impeach the president was
not reached, and that embodiment of moral corruption remained in his
position! There are many similar cases about senior officials who openly
violated their own laws and were even convicted in a court, but remained
in their posts thanks to their political connections. They have also
been elected for another term sometimes.

According to Islam if the Leader lacks even a single qualification and
commits an offense, he is dismissed from his post because by committing
a major sin he falls from justice and becomes a transgressor. Hence, he
is not competent to lead the Muslims. There is no more need for any
trial or the vote of the Assembly of Experts to prove his offense. No
system in the world has shown such severity with respect to national
officials, especially the highest official, i.e. the Leader.

### 4. Observance of the spiritual and real interests of human beings

Finally, one of the most important distinctions of our system is the
observance of the real interests of human beings. As Muslims we believe
that God knows best the interests of human beings, and we want those
interests to be realized in society. This important pursuit cannot
succeed except by acting upon religious laws and decrees. On this earth,
it is only the Islamic Republic of Iran whose constitution (Article 4)
has stipulated that all current laws and ordinances of the country
should be ratified and implemented on the basis of Islamic standards. If
a law or ratified bill is against the general principles of religion, it
is of no legal value. Therefore, the only country whose laws guarantee
the real interests of human beings is our country.

Everybody knows that this system achieved and accomplished its goals
because of the sacrifices of our people and the blood of martyrs
especially that of the Tir 7 martyrs.[^6] By sacrificing their lives and
offering their valuable blood to the Revolution, they gave us honor,
nobility and lofty values. We must be vigilant not to ungratefully lose
those values. Today, hands are at work to besmirch the essence of Islam,
*wilayah al-faqih,* the system, and the Islamic principles because these
values are like thorns in their flesh. They have been trying their best
to destroy them, and render them a blow, using all their ability, skill
and artfulness.

Sometimes, they question the essence of Islam and Islamic laws in their
speeches and newspapers with wide circulation, saying: “Today, it is no
longer the time for us to talk about *wajib* and *haram*. We have to set
the people free to decide for themselves and elect what they like!” They
also dare to insult *wilayah al-faqih*. Had the high cultural officials
not been highly tolerant, they would be legally prosecuted and punished.
But these officials are not taking necessary action.

It is here that as revolutionary Muslims and followers of the Imam and
the Supreme Leader, we have the duty to identify these impudent and
insolent elements and not allow the sacred religion of Islam, Shi‘ism
and values that are the means of our felicity in this world and the next
to be sold at a meager and miserable price in the trade fair of
deceitful politicians and identity-less culture effacers, and this would
bring nothing to us but ignominy, disgrace and the curse of God, the
Apostle (*s*), the angels and the future generations. Let it not be.

[^1]: Surah al-Hajj 22:78.

[^2]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:185.

[^3]: Now, it is almost 30 years after victory of the Islamic
Revolution. [Trans.]

[^4]: It alludes to the sexual scandal involving ex-US president William
Jefferson “Bill” Clinton and Monica Lewinsky, a former White House
intern. The US House of Representatives approved two articles of
impeachment against Bill Clinton on December 19, 1998, making him only
the second president in US history to be impeached. Article I accuses
him of perjury in his grand jury testimony about his relationship with
Lewinsky while Article III accuses him of obstruction of justice and
witness tampering. The US Senate began an impeachment trial against him
on the two articles approved by the House of Representatives, but on
February 12, 1999, the Senate acquitted him of the charges against him.
The Associated Press, December 19, 1998. [Trans.]

[^5]: It is worthy of note that throughout the controversy, polls showed
that a large majority of Americans thought the president was doing a
good job and that he should not be impeached or removed from office.
[Trans.]

[^6]: It refers to the bomb explosion at the Islamic Republican Party
Headquarters perpetrated by the hypocrites on Tir 7, 1360 AHS (June 28,
1981) where the first Judiciary Chief Dr. Ayatullah Sayyid Muhammad
Husayn Beheshti and 71 other members of the judiciary, thinkers,
writers, and revolutionary figures were. [Trans.]


