Session 35: The Connection between Freedom, State and Laws
==========================================================

The alleged incompatibility of an appointed ruler with freedom and democracy
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the previous discussions we have said that just as the law must be
enacted either by God Himself or by His leave and permission, the
implementer of law must be determined either by God Himself or by His
leave and permission. In any case, the government system—constituted by
the executive, legislative and judicial powers—must be anchored in
divine permission otherwise it will not be legitimate from the religious
point of view.

Elsewhere in the previous discussions, whether in the field of
legislation or execution of laws, we refuted certain skeptical
objections. One of them is that if we believe that the implementer of
laws must be determined either by God Himself or by His permission, we
actually deprive the people of what God has ordered and determined,
i.e., their legal right of electing a ruler from among themselves. This
is inconsistent with the spirit of democracy and populism.

At the outset, I shall deal with freedom and then embark on explaining
the manner of establishing the Islamic government and implementing
Islamic laws.

Examining intrinsic freedom and negating the theory of predetermination
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

While discussing freedom we come across the term “intrinsic freedom”
[*al-huriyyah al-takwiniyyah*] in contradistinction to predetermination
[*jabr*]. Since time immemorial, thinkers in the world have a difference
of opinion on whether man is autonomous or compelled. A group argues
that man is under compulsion and has no free will in this life and to
imagine that he performs an action using his own discretion is nothing
but an illusion. In reality, he is compelled and the actions he
apparently does are out of compulsion and pressure; otherwise, he
himself would never perform such actions.

The theory of predetermination has exponents throughout history. Some
Muslim scholars incline towards this theory. Among the Islamic schools
of thought, Asha‘irah (Ash‘arism), which is among the scholastic schools
of the Ahl as-Sunnah, upholds the theory of predetermination.[^1]
However, it is not as extreme and passionate. According to our view and
that of the majority of Muslims, this belief is rejected in the domain
of (personal) opinion and outlook as well as in the domain of action and
deed. If mere predetermination rules over man, there is no point in
having moral and educational systems or the Day of Ressurection.

In the domain of ethics and education, if man is compelled to do a good
or bad action, he must not be praised, lauded and rewarded for the good
deed nor punished and reprimanded for an evil deed. If the child is
compelled to act in a certain way, there is no point in training an
already programmed robot, and all educational systems must be abandoned.
Only if man is autonomous to perform or abandon a certain action is it
worthwhile to admonish him to perform or abandon a certain act.

This freedom and freewill in which we do believe is creational or
ontological [*takwini*], opposed by predetermination [*jabr*]. It is
endowed by God to man, is among the peculiarities of man and the
criterion of his superiority over all creatures. Among the creatures
that we know, it is only man that has the power to choose and select,
notwithstanding his diverse, and at times, contradictory inclinations.
In responding to the call of his desires—whether they are bestial
desires, or divine and sublime aspirations—he is totally free and
autonomous.

Undoubtedly, God the Exalted, has bestowed this divine blessing on man
so that he can select the right path or the wrong path freely. All the
advantages that man has over other creatures including the angels are
under the auspices of having the power to choose and select. If he makes
use of this power correctly and chooses divine wishes instead of bestial
desires, he will reach an exalted station where the angels will feel
humble before him.

Man’s possession of this freedom is creational. Nowadays, nobody denies
it nor regards himself as totally under compulsion, having no freewill
of his own. The Qur’an emphasizes this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَقُلِ الْحَقُّ مِن رَّبَكُمْ فَمَن شَاءَ فَلْيُؤْمِن وَمَن شَاء
فَلْيَكْفُرْ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And say, ‘[This is] the truth from your Lord: let anyone who wishes
believe it, and let anyone who wishes disbelieve it’...”[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّا هَدَيْنَاهُ السَّبِيلَ إِمَّا شَاكِرًا وَإِمَّا كَفُورًا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed We have guided him to the way, be he grateful or
ungrateful.**”*[^3]

Hundreds of verses, nay it can be said, the entire Qur’an highlights the
autonomy of man because the Qur’an is meant for the guidance of man. If
man was under compulsion, and his being guided or misguided was
predestined, there would be no place for guidance by choice and the
Qur’an would become useless and futile. Our subject of discussion is not
intrinsic freedom. No one has any doubt about it and the proper place to
discuss it is in philosophy and scholastic theology [*kalam*], not law
and politics.

No contradiction between the internally value-oriented system and freedom
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

A subject that must be tackled here is that every man has an inner power
that determines the limit and conditions of his behavior and actions.
Technically, every man has a set of values. As such, every rational man
believes in certain do’s and don’ts in his life, believing that he must
do certain actions and refrain from doing others. We do not know of any
person in the world who has no set of do’s and don’ts and who does not
consider actions as good or bad.

The power that comprehends the do’s and don’ts and has rational and
moral admonitions is called the practical intellect [*‘aql-e ‘amali*] or
conscience [*wijdan*]—possessed by all human beings since creation and
has a set of seemingly uniform do’s and don’ts or admonitions for all
human beings. The practical intellect or conscience of every person
understands that justice, trust and honesty are good and advises him to
observe them. The intellect or conscience of every person regards
injustice and oppression as bad and obscene and orders him not to
oppress anyone, especially a weak person who is not capable of defending
himself. The intellect or conscience of every person considers lying and
treachery as evil and urges him to shun them.

Thus, every person has an internal power that lays the foundation of a
set of values on the basis of which all human beings consider a group of
actions as good and another group as bad. Undoubtedly, in presenting
this set of values and identifying this sort of do’s and don’ts, the
intellect or inner power of human beings is independent and is in no
need of any external factor. It is this discernment that issues
recommendations and orders.

The fact that our intellect discerns what actions are good or bad points
us to a set of obligations which restrict our intrinsic freedom. That
is, the intellect or conscience commands us not to enjoy our liberty or
freedom thoughtlessly. We may oppress others but the intellect tells us,
“Don’t oppress; be kind.” We may tell a lie but the intellect commands
us to be honest and not to lie. The intellect tells us: “It is true that
ontologically or intrinsically you can betray a trust but do not do so.”
Thus, the practical intellect or conscience is a human feature and an
inner factor that limits man’s liberty. One who does not have such a
force to filter his actions, do’s and don’ts, has no sound intellect and
is called “insane”.

Since the do’s and don’ts, or moral obligations and restrictions issued
by the conscience or practical intellect are rooted in man and his
intellect or conscience, it can be regarded as being contrary to
freedom. Nobody has ever said that by imposing limitations with these
do’s and don’ts, the intellect or conscience has deprived man of
freedom. In reality, by following the dictates of his intellect, which
is an inner force and not imposed on him from outside, man restricts his
own liberty.

These limits on liberty laid down by the dictates of the conscience or
practical intellect are like the prescription of a doctor to his
patient, saying: “Don’t eat so-and-so food because it will harm you and
take so-and-so medicine to recover.” Instead of being annoyed, the
patient gladly regards the doctor’s prescription as an instruction or
guideline for actions that lead to his recovery. In fact, even here we
exercise our freedom and freewill, and our intrinsic freedom is not
repressed. According to some moral schools of thought, the intellect
only shows the way to us and guides and leads us to an action which has
a wholesome outcome, but does not compel.

Even if we believe that our intellect or conscience compels and issues a
command or decree which if disregarded will cause agony. The expressions
“conscience pricks” or “guilty conscience” are common in our literature.
When a person follows the dictates of his conscience, it is not said
that he has been deprived of freedom. This is because the intellect or
conscience is possessed by man himself. As an inner factor or force, it
supervises and judges his actions, commanding him to perform certain
actions and prohibiting him from others. So, when an internal factor
commands us, our freedom is not curtailed, and if we act upon the
dictates of our intellect or conscience, it means that we follow our
desire and freewill. Our freedom is curtailed only when an external
factor bids or forbids us.

The connection between religious, obligations and freedom
---------------------------------------------------------

The next question that arises here is: Do religious ordinances—do’s and
don’ts—ordained by God curtail the freedom of man? For example, one does
not want to wake up early in the morning and pray, but God commands him
to rise up and pray. Similarly, other ordinances mentioned in the sacred
religion either command the performance of an action—like fasting,
paying *zakat* and *khums* and other obligations—or forbid unlawful acts
like the drinking of alcohol.

The reply is that these commandments—dos and don’ts—are like
commandments and prohibitions of the intellect or conscience, and do not
curtail the freedom of man if they have no executive backing. For
example, religion commands me to pray but if I refuse to pray, it shall
not do anything to me. It shall not punish or penalize me. Similarly,
for my refusal to obey the commandment of God, society will not show any
hostile reaction or reproach me.

So long as religious commandments and prohibitions are “recommendatory”
in nature, my freedom is not curtailed because these enjoinments do not
have any external executive guarantee, and no external element
pressurizes me to do or not do a thing. However, just as we have the
conscience or “attached” [*muttasil*] intellect that enjoins us the do’s
and forbids the don’ts but has no external force exacting obedience,
there is also a “detached” [*munfasil*] intellect outside of us that
bids and forbids, namely, God, who like a Universal Intellect issues
commandments and prohibitions. They are only recommendatory and
instructive in nature.

The truth of the matter is that the religious commandments and
prohibitions also exact obedience and are not contented with mere
admonition. In fact, when God commands us to pray, He warns us of
chastisement in hell if we do not pray. He has even set punishments in
this world for certain abominable acts. In fact, God has even sent down
heavenly chastisement on communities of some previous prophets (*‘a*).
Each apostle is sent to frighten his own people of divine chastisement
by saying: “If you disobey the commandments of God, divine wrath may
possibly descend upon you in this very world.”

The Qur’an repeatedly reminds Muslims of the fate of past communities
[*aqwam*] who, on account of their disobedience and indulgence in sins,
experienced God’s wrath, and warns the Muslims of the same wrath that
they may incur in this world or in the hereafter. The apostles were so
persistent and unrelenting in warning and frightening the people of
divine wrath that one of the well-known titles of all apostles is
“warner” [*nadhir* or *mundhir*]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّا أَرْسَلْنَاكَ بِالْحَقِّ بَشِيرًا وَنَذِيرًا وَإِن مِنْ
أُمَّةٍ إِلاَّ خَلاَ فِيهَا نَذِيرٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Indeed We have sent you with the truth as a bearer of good news and as
a warner; and there is not a nation but a warner has passed in it.”[^4]

Religious commandments and prohibitions that have been issued with
warnings, creating fear of divine wrath in this world and the hereafter,
are different from the moral and rational commandments and prohibitions
issued by the practical intellect or conscience. The former limits the
freedom of man and puts him under pressure.

Now, if we accept that human beings are absolutely free, and according
to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948)—which to some
intellectuals is like a revealed and holy scripture—no one has the right
to limit man’s liberty, has God also no right to limit our liberty?, Can
God instruct and admonish man to perform his obligations, i.e. admonish
him for refusing to pray, i.e. exercise his freedom?! If yes, why does
God exert pressure on us, saying, “If you do evil you shall be thrown
into hell in the hereafter”, and frequently frighten us of His wrath
just as one of the duties and missions of the apostles (*‘a*) was to
frighten and scare the people of divine wrath?

There is no dispute among Muslims and they wholeheartedly accept that
God may issue orders and commandments and set an executive guarantee for
them and that the mission of the apostles (*‘a*) was to convey the
commandments and prohibitions of God and warn of divine wrath. They
abide by the commandments of God although they know that those
commandments set limits upon them, deprive them of some of their
liberty, and exert a sort of pressure on them, because when God commands
us to perform an act and make disobedience punishable, we are actually
subject to pressure. For Muslims there is no doubt that God can order us
to do or shun an act.

But the reason and wisdom behind His issuance of commandments and
prohibitions and expecting us to abide by them, must be sought in
scholastic theology [*‘ilm al-kalam*], for we shall deal with them only
briefly.

Out of His infinite grace, mercy and favor, God wants human beings to
attain felicity and show to them the way to salvation. Along this line,
He has set certain duties and commandments so that we can identify the
true path of salvation by consciously following them. Naturally, these
warnings and threats prompt us to pay serious attention lest we deviate
from the way leading to felicity. Were it not because of compulsion, we
would have lagged behind because of our improper conduct and indulgence
in sins and wrongdoings. So, out of His grace, God wants us to keep away
from abominations and indecencies by fulfilling our religious duties,
and attain His infinite and eternal mercy.

Therefore, the fact is that the religion sets limits on man’s liberty.
The apostles (*‘a*) were also obliged to warn people and frighten them
of divine wrath and chastisement for disobeying religious ordinances.
Thus, both psychological and physical pressures were exerted upon the
people. Physical pressure is exerted upon a person by punishing him for
committing certain crimes and offenses. Psychological pressure is
exerted upon those who witness the punishment meted out to offenders and
criminals and are thus afraid of those punishments. It is also exerted
upon those who are frightened of divine chastisement in the hereafter.

Now, let us ask those who support absolute freedom: Do you condemn these
physical and psychological pressures, threats and punishments? In other
words, do you say that God should not limit and pressurize the people
and that He should not have sent apostles to frighten people of
punishments in this world and the hereafter? Is condemning this not
tantamount to the denial of Islam and all religions with divine origins?
Whether we have the right to deny religion and its essentials is another
subject.

Are the pressures and limitations set by God on His servants—for
example, His threat of throwing them into hellfire for their sins or His
order to punish some offenders right here in this world—condemnable
according to him who says that man is absolutely free and that no limit
or pressure should be set upon him? In this case, he has actually denied
religion, the mission of the apostles (*‘a*) and the divine laws, and at
this moment, we are not dealing with such people. Our present concern is
with those who accept the essence of religion, regarding Islam as the
religion of truth, and believe that out of His mercy and grace God has
sent the Apostle (*s*) for our guidance, and thus they are grateful to
Him.

The connection of hudud and ta‘zirat with freedom
-------------------------------------------------

God has the right but He warns and threatens us of the chastisement in
the hellfire to make us tread the right and straight path and keep away
from abominations out of His benevolence, grace, favor, and mercy.
However, it is necessary to ask this question: Why has God the Exalted,
ordered divine punishments to be implemented with respect to some
criminals in this world and essentially, why has He ordained *hudud* and
*ta‘zirat*? We accept that God has to warn us of the chastisement in
hellfire because this warning or threat of the otherworldly punishment
is for our benefit and prompts us to take a step along the path of
salvation and bliss because of fear.

This warning is a sort of enlightenment and God informs us of a
chastisement which is not conventional and superficial but the outcome
and manifestation of our evil deeds in this world. But why has He
ordered one who commits a specific offense like adultery [*zina*] to be
punished and embarrassed in front of people?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ٱلزَّانِيَةُ وَالزَّانِي فَاجْلِدُوا كُلَّ وَاحِدٍ مِنْهُمَا مِئَةَ
جَلْدَةٍ وَلاَ تَأْخُذْكُم بِهِمَا رَأْفَةٌ فِي دِينِ اللَّهِ إِن
كُنتُمْ تُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ وَلْيَشْهَدْ
عَذَابَهُمَا طَائِفَةٌ مِّنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“As for the fornicatress and the fornicator, strike each of them a
hundred lashes, and let not pity for them overcome you in Allah’s law,
if you believe in Allah and the Last Day, and let their punishment be
witnessed by a group of the faithful.”[^5]

This question is concerned not only with religious but also with penal
laws. All states and political systems in the world have legal and penal
laws. Legal laws are concerned with those who violate the rights of
others, for example, those who take away someone else’s property,
physically harm or kill someone. In this case, if there is a personal
plaintiff he files a case against the violator or criminal who is fined
or penalized.

If the convicted has usurped the right of a person it shall be taken
from him, if he has committed a crime he shall be executed or punished
accordingly. But regarding all penal laws, a personal plaintiff is not
necessary for the conviction and punishment of the criminal. The
prosecutor or attorney-general can file a case against one who acted
against the laws and interests of the country and he shall be punished
if found guilty.

As far as I know, there is no political system that does not have legal
and penal laws and in which the criminals are not fined or punished. In
fact, the criminal is fined, imprisoned or punished in the form he
deserves. Islam is not an exception to this rule. It has legal and penal
laws and has heavy punishments for certain crimes.

So, the answer to the question on whether sociopolitical systems have
the right to determine punishments for some violations or not, whether
this policy is consistent with the freedom of man or not, is that in
practice, all people give the right to social systems and states to have
legal and penal laws and enact and exact certain punishments for
criminals. We do not know of any nation that does not have legal and
penal laws, fines, prisons, and punishments for criminals, nor does
anyone protest against these measures. Of course, in theoretical debates
this question can be asked: Can a person be punished in this world and
be deprived of his liberty?

The existence of state and laws negates absolute freedom
--------------------------------------------------------

If those who say that no state has the right to set penalties and impose
limitations on people throw all legal systems in the world into question
and must be answered. If their objection or question is concerned with
Islam only, then they must be answered in a different manner.
Nevertheless, since at the outset the question is generally addressed to
all legal and penal systems, all political systems including Islam, I
shall offer a general and comprehensive reply.

The abovementioned objection is anchored in the principle of absolute
freedom. Some people imagine that in this world man must be totally free
and no limit and pressure should be imposed upon him. No one should
compel or prevent him to do a certain action. This principle is
illogical, wrong and unacceptable. No man has absolute, limitless and
unrestricted freedom to do whatever he likes and no law restrain him.
(Here, what we mean by law is not the moral and rationally independent
laws, which have no guarantor of their execution. Rather, it refers to
the legal laws in their general sense, whose execution is guaranteed and
backed up by the government.)

There must be laws and regulations, and the people must be urged to
observe them. If a person violates them, he must be dealt with
accordingly. If a person usurps the rights of people, he must be urged
to grant them their rights. There must be traffic and driving rules, and
the violators who sometimes are responsible for the deaths of many
people, must be penalized and fined.

The existence of laws and regulations and their acceptance by all people
everywhere throughout history bears witness to the fact that absolute
freedom—no right to exert pressure on others, impose limits on them and
deny some of their freedom—is unacceptable and wrong. Acceptance of the
principle of absolute freedom means denial of civility and acceptance of
savagery and law of the jungle. If man is really a civil creature, he
must have a social system. Individuals must respect the rights of
others. There must be laws and regulations. Penal laws must be taken
into consideration for violators. The government must guarantee the
execution of laws.

In reality, the notion of absolute freedom and the claim that no one is
supposed to exert pressure on people to do or not to do a certain act,
is a denial of the necessity of the existence of government. The
government, ruling system and executive power should cease to exist
because they originate in the context of social laws and regulations and
their duty is to guarantee and implement them. Such an idea and thinking
is inconsistent with civil society, civilization, and the need to
observe laws. The foundation of human civilization is the acceptance of
responsibility and the acknowledgment of a power whose concern is to
implement laws in society, and along its performance of responsibility,
the government will certainly exert pressure on the people.

The government’s duty is that in case of necessity it has to urge the
lawbreakers to abide by regulations and, by exerting pressure and force,
penalize the violators. If mere reminders and admonitions suffice, then
it is enough for the government to act as teacher and instructor, and
not a ruling authority. The duty of the preachers, teachers and trainers
is only to admonish and remind the people to observe social morality and
human etiquette. They have no executive leverage for following their
admonitions and reminders, and it is essentially not their duty to force
people to observe human dignity.

But it is the government’s duty to impose law on the people even by
force and threat and deal with the violators accordingly. It has to fine
violators, and in case they try to escape from the ambit of law, pursue
and apprehend them. Therefore, the existence of government and executive
power is because man does not possess absolute freedom. Absolute freedom
disagrees with civilization, humanity and social life. It makes no
difference whether the government is the executor of civil laws, based
on the demands of people, or the government is the executor of divine
laws.

The exigency of linking sovereignty with Allah
----------------------------------------------

The people are servants and subjects of God and to exercise authority
over them is the sole right of God. In accordance with His legislative
Lordship [*rububiyyat-e tashri‘i*] and divine sovereignty, without His
permission and approval no one has the right to exert pressure upon His
subjects and exercise authority over them. In order for the government
to be able to exert pressure upon people, it must have the permission of
their Master.

But those who believe in popular democracy consider civil laws as
sufficient to administer society and government as the implementing
agent of the said laws saying there is no need for the law enforcer to
have the permission of God. The fact that people voted for him gives him
the right to implement laws and in case of necessity, also use brute
force and exert pressure upon the people.

The pressure or compulsion thus exerted upon people in the enforcement
of laws is not inconsistent with freedom because the people themselves
have accepted the said system and its laws. This is in keeping with the
dictates of their consciences to do something which we agree is not
inconsistent with the freedom of man and does not deprive him of it
because the said order or dictate stems from an inner force and
themselves. It belongs to them and it has not been imposed on them.

Of course, there are many objections to the structure of democratic
systems, their functions and prerogatives, and the justification for
their legitimacy and rightfulness that have been mentioned in books on
political and legal philosophy. One of the objections worth mentioning
is this: we do not know of any country in the world in which the people
have unanimously accepted a law or unanimously elected a person or
government to implement the laws. Even here, in the Islamic Republic,
which is undoubtedly a unique country in the world, 98.2% of the people
voted for the Islamic republican system and 1.8% did not vote for the
Islamic Republic, which is equivalent to more than one million people.

Based on the populist and democratic systems prevailing in the world,
when one million people do not vote for the political system, what right
does the government have to force them to abide by laws and ordinances?
When some individuals explicitly say that they do not accept the
political system, how can the government or political system, merely on
account of a majority vote, have the right and legitimacy to implement,
act upon and impose the laws even upon those who oppose the political
system?

The populist systems in the world and the proponents of the theory of
democracy have replied to such questions. They have argued, for
instance, that in a system founded on majority will, the minority who
have not voted for the system have rights which must be respected. In
the domain of their private actions they may act and behave as they
like. We argue that this explanation is not enough. On what basis should
public laws and social ordinances related to the entire system be
imposed upon them? On what basis should they have to pay taxes, custom
fees and others? Some of them reason out that at any rate, society must
be administered in a certain way, and for this purpose we do not know of
any system better than democracy or a populist government.

According to Islam, however, the reply to the abovementioned question is
that the right of legislation belongs to God. Accordingly, those who are
designated by Him can enact law within the framework of laws and
ordinances set by Him. Similarly, one who has the right to implement
laws and rule over the people is he who is directly or indirectly
designated by God. In this case, as vicegerent of God and one who has
been chosen by the Lord of the universe to rule over people, he has the
right to enforce laws even, if needed, by using brute force. He can urge
the minority opposing the system to observe the ordinances and impose
the laws upon them.

This theory is logical and acceptable to anyone who believes in God and
His religion and is immune from rational problems that populist systems
have. Of course, one who does not believe in God and His religion
rejects divine sovereignty and in no way accepts it. But for people who
are Muslims and believers of God, divine sovereignty is the ideal,
harmonious with the conscience and intellect. As such, the paradox or
inconsistency in the theory of democracy or populist systems, that
renders them false, does not exist in the theory of Islamic government
which has perfect internal coherence.

If we compare the Islamic system with the prevalent democratic and
populist systems which are based solely on the people’s vote, we will
find out that the Islamic system, which is rooted in the permission of
God, has divine origin and the support of the people, has multifaceted
credibility because we do not deny the will of the people. Many
institutions and offices in the Islamic Republic of Iran are formed by
the vote of the people, for example, the elections for the president,
Majlis deputies, members of the Assembly of Experts, and members of the
Islamic councils of cities and towns.

For this reason, we contend that our system is more firm and formidable
compared to the democratic and populist systems that are solely based on
the will of the people as it stems from the approval of God and is
supported by the people. We can confront the theoreticians of the
populist system and tell them that we also uphold and respect the vote
and will of people. Moreover, from the logical and rational point of
view, the theory of Islamic government is superior to the theory of the
populist system. As we have said, the democratic system does not possess
internal cohesion as well as a logical and rationally correct
justification, and it is marred by contradictions. The theory of
*wilayah al-faqih*, on the other hand, is logical and rationally firm
and tenable. No contradiction exists in it.

Some pseudo-intellectuals ask why God, by means of commissioning the
apostles, revealing the Book and other holy scriptures, and enacting
penal laws like *hudud* and *ta‘zirat*, amputation of hand, fine and
other penalties, deprives people of freedom, prohibiting them from doing
whatever they like by exerting pressure on them, whereas the essence of
humanity demands that man must be totally free, freedom being one of the
key features of mankind. We reply that absolute freedom is inconsistent
with the essence of humanity and man’s civility and sociability. As man
is supposed to lead a social life, social life demands that, binding
laws and ordinances be enacted in order to regulate the actions of
people and an institution called “state” present to guarantee the
implementation of laws.

To conclude, this justification has been accepted by all political
systems in the world, including Islam. Throughout history, all people
have believed in it and been bound by it. No protest has ever been made
against it. Yet, as we have said, the democratic and populist systems do
not have sufficient logical justification for the exigency of
government, the implementation of laws and ordinances, and *sometimes*
the exertion of pressure on people. Their theory on government does not
have internal coherence and is marred by contradictions.

The Islamic system, meanwhile, has a convincing justification because we
also follow the principles of populist systems believing in the
important role of the will of people and many of our government
institutions are formed based on the vote of the people. Moreover, the
Islamic system has a rational and logical justification based on
demonstrative principles; for example, sovereignty belongs to God. Since
the people are servants and subjects of God, essentially, He has the
right to exercise authority and sovereignty over His servants and
subjects.

The sovereignty of others is proper and rightful only when it is
anchored in God’s will and permission. That is, individuals can rule
over His servants only by His leave and approval. The governments that
do not emanate from God and are not based on the authority of the Lord
of the universe are illegitimate and contrary to truth and rational
principles.

[^1]: For information on Asha‘irah and other scholastic schools in
Islam, see Murtada Mutahhari, “An Introduction to ‘Ilm al-Kalam,” trans.
‘Ali Quli Qara’i, At-Tawhid Journal vol. 2, no. 2 (Rabi‘ ath-Thani 1405
AH-January 1985), available online at
http://www.al-islam.org/at-tawhid/kalam.htm. [Trans.]

[^2]: Surah al-Kahf 18:29.

[^3]: Surah al-Insan (or, ad-Dahr) 76:3.

[^4]: Surah Fatir (or al-Mala’ikah) 35:24.

[^5]: Surah an-Nur 24:2.


