Session 36: Need for Decisiveness in Implementing Islamic Ordinances
====================================================================

The intellect or conscience of man presents a set of do’s and don’ts,
and issues orders and commandments which impose limitations on him. But
since these limitations emanate from an inner force within one’s self,
they do not deprive him of freedom. No one has ever claimed that
dictates and admonitions of the conscience deprive man of liberties.
Similar to these inner admonitions and commandments of the intellect or
conscience (for those who believe in God and His religion) are the
commandments and orders coming from external sources, i.e. what God or
the Apostle (*s*) have issued. Just as the intellect or conscience wants
us to do a certain thing, God has assigned certain duties to us which
are based on real interests.

Because of His infinite knowledge, God is fully aware of them but the
same are beyond our understanding and comprehension. In this regard, it
is as if apart from the conscience or inner “attached” intellect, God,
like the totally infinite “detached” intellect of man, is cognizant of
the interests, benefit and harm, on the basis of which He wants us *to
do* a certain thing because *it is beneficial* to us, and *not to do*
another thing because *it is harmful* to us.

This kind of limitation on the freedom of man stems from his personal or
private relationship with God and His religion and is not related to the
subjects of political and legal philosophy. Politically, all those who
believe, acknowledge that they have to do certain things and refrain
from doing other things, and that this obligation is not related to
society. It rather originates from man’s personal relationship with God
just like the relationship with his intellect or conscience.

Social impact of human action and the necessity of government
-------------------------------------------------------------

The dispute revolves around the fact that certain actions are not only
related to the concerned person and his life in this world and the
hereafter, but also affect others. This is why most thinkers in the
world believe that there must be an institution that prevents any action
which is harmful to society and punishes the guilty. So, the philosophy
and exigency of the government apparatus emanates from this. On this
basis, with the exception of the anarchists, all people particularly the
political and legal experts consider the existence of government as
necessary. But morals, or the good and bad discerned by the intellect or
conscience of man in relation to his personal life have nothing to do
with the domain of politics and government.

Another point raised in this connection is that apart from the personal
or private spiritual issues, the intellect limits man’s liberty. Can the
government apparatus limit liberty? The reply is that in connection with
social life, the government is meant to limit liberty. The government
enacts laws and ordinances, permits certain actions, prohibits others,
and fines, imprisons or penalizes a violator. In some government systems
including the Islamic system, even physical punishments including
execution have been considered.

So, we have to accept the presumption that government is basically meant
to limit social actions, and social liberty. Taking into account what we
have said, it is clear that the notion that “Freedom is above the
government and law” is a fallacy. The government must restrict liberty.
To say that no institution can limit the sociopolitical liberty of
people is like saying that government is not necessary, and the existing
government is futile, illegitimate, illegal, and an imposition.

The legitimate source of government and the enigmas of democracy
----------------------------------------------------------------

After we accept that society must have a legal or legitimate government
that limits sociopolitical liberty, we face two fundamental questions:
(1) From whom has the government acquired legitimacy and on the basis of
which right does the government restrict liberty? (2) To what extent can
the government restrict liberty?

According to our belief, except under the aegis of the Islamic political
theory, the legitimacy of a democratic government does not have a lucid,
acceptable and convincing justification. If we say that through the
government the people limit their own liberty, apart from the fact that
whenever a person wants he can limit his liberty and control his actions
without any need for a government to do so for him, this view is
paradoxical and self-contradictory because anyone who wants to be free
might not limit his action and movement.

The latest and best theory advanced in the world today on the legitimacy
of government and accepted by the majority of people is that the people
delegate a part of their rights to the government. That is, man who is
the master over his destiny and can make laws and ordinances for his
actions and limit his liberty, grants the right to the government to
enact and execute laws and ordinances for the administration of his
social life. This delegating of right to rule to a government is known
as democracy.

There are many objections to the theory of democracy in its modern
sense. We shall point out only three of them.

### 1. First objection

Does man have the right to exercise authority, set limits and exert
pressure over himself? Does he have the right to punish himself?
Indisputably, all governments prevalent in the world have set different
forms of punishments for violators of law. Now, does man have the right
to commit suicide or can he delegate to another the right to kill him?
If man really has the right to commit suicide, it follows that he may
allow others to enact a law on the basis of which they can sentence him
to death if he commits certain crimes.

But we have no doubt that no one has the right to commit suicide because
he has no such authority over his life that he can put an end to it
whenever he wants. The life of man belongs to God and no one else has
the right to bring any harm to it. According to our religious or
juristic outlook, man has no right even to harm or injure his body. No
one is supposed to injure his body; for example, to amputate his hand or
finger. It is because the body of man belongs to God, and man has no
authority and discretion over it. As such, how can man grant the right
to a government to enact and approve judicial and penal laws and
authorize it to penalize violators and criminals, amputate the hand of a
thief and execute others?

### 2. Second objection

Let us assume that we accept the notion that man has the right to
exercise authority over his life and body and can harm or injure his
body and put an end to his life. He grants this right to the government.
In reality, those who have voted for the government have set the
legislative body as their agent or proxy to ratify laws and ordinances
including civil and criminal laws in connection with their social lives.
Similarly, they have chosen the executive body as their deputy to
implement laws. In this regard, however, man can only grant the
government the right to exercise authority over himself. He has no right
to grant power to the government to exercise authority over others and
deprive them of certain rights and liberty.

The current term for democracy is that people authorize the government
to act as their representative to enact and implement laws. As practiced
in democratic systems in the world, if a government is formed by
majority vote, i.e. fifty percent plus one or more, it can enact and
implement laws and ordinances for the administration of society
including those who have not voted in favor of the government. In
reality, once more than half of the people—not all of them—vote for the
government, the said government and its ordinances shall become official
and legal, and all members of society will have to abide by the
ordinances.

The serious question is that less than half of the people have not voted
for the government and recognized it as their proxy to decide on their
behalf. How can the government have any right to enact laws and
ordinances in relation to the domain of their social lives, and what
right has it to rule over them and punish any violator among them? Thus,
there is no rationally acceptable reason for the government to rule by
force over those who oppose it and have not voted for it, and compel
them to obey.

### 3. Third objection

The client has the right to remove his agent or dismiss and nullify his
decision and choice. So, if a person elected his representative in the
parliament and thereafter revoked his decision to elect him, he is
supposed to have the right to remove his representative from his office.
Moreover, the representative has the right to choose only what his
client wants and desires. He has no right to have a choice contrary to
the opinion of his client. Now, when all people or half of them are
against the ratification of a law, what right does the government have
to implement it?

Hence, there is no convincing criterion for the legitimacy of a
democratic system. The only thing theoreticians of the democratic system
assert is that democracy or the rule of the elected representatives of
the majority of people is the best method and way that can be chosen for
the administration of a country or society. If the government is formed
in accordance with the vote of a minority and their demands are
implemented, the right of the majority will be violated. As a result,
they will rise up against the few, and undoubtedly, it will be hard to
undermine their uprising. As such, as per necessity, the government must
be formed according to the vote of the majority and it must function
based on their will. It is not that the government has a convincing
basis of legitimacy.

The government’s legitimacy in Islam
------------------------------------

From the Islamic point of view, the same intellect that tells man that
an action is good and another is bad and that his parents, teacher and
the people have rights over him and he must give them their rights,
tells him that the rights of God, who created the world, him and all
human beings, are greater and more profound than that of others, and
that he must admit that. Now, if God—who is our Master and has created
us, and by whose will everything comes into being and will cease to
exist if He wills—designates a person to implement His laws and decrees,
his position is legitimate regardless of the acceptance or
non-acceptance of people.

When God who has the greatest rights over human beings—nay, all rights
belong to Him—grants the right to rule or guardianship [*wilayah*] over
the people to the Apostle (*s*), an infallible Imam or the deputy of an
infallible Imam, he has the right to implement the divine laws in
society because he has been designated by the One to whom belongs all
creation.

Therefore, the Islamic political theory on the basis of which the
Islamic ruler has the right on behalf of God to implement divine laws
and decrees and punish violators and criminals does not have
inconsistency of any sort, and this theory is harmonious with rational
principles. Of course, it is acceptable to those who believe in God.
Those who do not believe in God will certainly not accept this theory.
At the outset, we will have to prove to them the existence of God and
the essence of monotheism [*tawhid*].

Should they accept God and embrace Islam, then we should sit together
and discuss Islamic political theory. Thus, for those who believe in
God, the Apostle (*s*) and the religion of Islam, the most rational
legitimacy of government that could ever be conceived is that the Lord
of the universe delegates the right to rule over people to one of His
servants and designates him as ruler.

By knowing Islam and understanding its political theory, we will find
out that above the rights that human beings have over one another, there
is another right and that is the right of God over people.

Accordingly, if God commands His servant to do something—even if it is
harmful to him—he must do so because he is a subject of God and belongs
to Him, and being the Master, God can exercise authority over any of His
servants. Of course, out of His infinite grace, benevolence and mercy,
God does not bid or forbid anything detrimental to His creatures. He
does not desire to harm anyone. His commandments and prohibitions are
for the benefit, welfare and interests of human beings both in this
world and the hereafter. In case they suffer by acting upon His
commandments—for example, they are deprived of certain material
enjoyments and blessings for a couple of days—God shall compensate them
in the hereafter and recompense them a thousand times or more.

The prophets and their way of guiding people
--------------------------------------------

God sends His apostles (*‘a*) to invite the people towards what is good
and blissful in this world and the hereafter. At the beginning, the
apostle or prophet of God guides and invites them to the truth and reads
to them passages from a revealed scripture. By informing them and
elevating the level of their understanding and knowledge, he paves the
ground for their acceptance of the truth and divine duties. In reality,
at this stage the apostle plays the role of “detached or external
intellect” [*‘aql-e munfasil*]. Without exerting pressure and compelling
the people and depriving them of liberty, he enhances their level of
understanding in order to guide them towards their free choice and
decision to willingly accept Islam and its lofty decrees.

An apostle is commissioned by God to inform the people of truth and
falsehood and let them freely choose one of the two ways—truth or
falsehood. For this reason, he cannot invite the people to his call by
force and impart his teachings to them by pressure as this is against
divine will. God wants people to choose whichever they like after
knowing the truth and falsehood. So, at the beginning of his mission,
the messenger of God has to establish contact with people, interact and
talk with them, convey to them his message by means of rational proof
and divine signs and miracles, and inform them of the truth.

In inviting the people to God and His signs and establishing divine
order, the apostles of God do not employ any sort of compulsion or
imposition on the people. As a policy, they pay special attention to
human freedom and their conscious choice. In fact, they respect the
liberty of people more than what is observed in other ideological
systems. They make sure that in dealing with the invitation and system
offered, the people have an absolutely free choice. It is because the
purpose of God in creating man is for him to be a free and choosing
creature, to accept truth freely and be guided by it. The use of
compulsion and force by the apostles of God in the establishment of
divine order is repugnant to divine purpose.

If man is supposed to choose a way by compulsion and force, chances are
he would not know the truthfulness of the way and he may even possibly
think that the way is not the correct one. In order to discern the
correctness and truthfulness of the way, man must be informed and made
aware at the outset, and the way must be paved for his free choice.

Again, since divine purpose is to allow man to freely, consciously and
knowingly accept the path of truth and divine signs, God does not impose
the path of truth on people by showing miracles. He does not desire to
deprive the people of a conscious choice even by means of showing
miracles and interfering in their free choice so that they accept the
truth involuntarily and not resist it. As such, God said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لَعَلَّكَ بَاخِعٌ نَّفْسَكَ أَلَّا يَكُونُوا مُؤْمِنِينَ ٭ إِنْ
نَشَأْ نُنَزِّلْ عَلَيْهِم مِن السَّمَاء آيَةً فَظَلَّتْ أَعْنَاقُهُمْ
لَهَا خَاضِعِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“You might kill yourself [out of distress] that they will not have
faith. If We wish We will send down to them a sign from the sky before
which their heads will remain bowed in humility.”[^1]

The need to remove obstacles along the way of guidance
------------------------------------------------------

God wished to guide the people by means of His messengers and separate
the path of truth from that of falsehood for them to choose the correct
path with knowledge, understanding and free choice. The arrogant
profiteers, who had accumulated excessive wealth by exploiting the
ignorance of people considered the invitation of the apostles (*‘a*) as
a great obstacle along their satanic objectives and interests. They rose
up against the Messenger of Allah (*s*) and did not allow him to talk to
the people and recite verses of truth to guide them.

By employing excessive torture, persecution, harassment and unbearable
problems, they hindered the guidance of people. In the Holy Qur’an, God
called this group “the leaders of unfaith” [*a’immat al-kufr*] and the
chiefs of corruption and vice, and ordered the Apostle (*s*) and his
companions to fight them and get rid of them because their presence and
satanic activities hindered the realization of the divine purpose. God
wants all human beings to be guided and be able to distinguish the path
of truth from falsehood, but they obstruct His divine purpose:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿...فَقَاتِلُوا أَئِمَّةَ الْكُفْرِ إِنَّهُمْ لاَ أَيْمَانَ لَهُمْ
لَعَلَّهُمْ يَنتَهُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Then fight the leaders of unfaith—indeed they have no [commitment
to] pledges—maybe they will relinquish.**”*[^2]

If a person driving along a road is obstructed by a rock or big stone,
he has no option but to remove it to continue driving. As such, he will
try his best and do everything in order to get rid of the said
obstruction. Basically, every rational person removes any hindrance
along his way. Similarly, for the realization of His purpose, He
commands the Apostle (s), his companions, and all Muslims throughout
history to fight and eliminate the obstructions to guidance, i.e. the
oppressors in the world, monarchs, tyrants, money-worshippers, and all
satanic powers that hinder the path of guidance.

God does not enjoin you to smile at them and cheerfully request them to
allow the people to be guided! If they were listening to requests and
had desisted from their wicked acts, they would not have been arrogant.
They are essentially arrogant, wicked and corrupt. They want others to
become their servants and subjects and exploit them to the fullest and
not allow their own interests to be threatened.

As such, they do not allow people to be guided to the path of truth and
become followers of the Messenger of Allah (*s*). Certainly, for the
faithful and people of guidance there is no other way but to confront
them violently. For this reason, in the Qur’an God commands the Holy
Apostle (*s*) to fight them and deal with them violently, severely and
sternly—the same Apostle (*s*) who is described by God in the Qur’an in
this manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَبِمَا رَحْمَةٍ مِنَ اللّهِ لِنْتَ لَهُمْ وَلَوْ كُنْتَ فَظًّا
غَلِيظَ الْقَلْبِ لاَنفَضُّوا مِنْ حَوْلِكَ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“It is by Allah’s mercy that you are gentle to them; and had you been
harsh and hardhearted, surely they would have scattered from around
you...”[^3]

Elsewhere in the Qur’an, God commands him to fight and be severe with
the faithless:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ جَاهِدِ الْكُفَّارَ وَالْمُنَافِقِينَ
وَاغْلُظْ عَلَيْهِمْ وَمَأْوَاهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ وَبِئْسَ الْمَصِيرُ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Prophet! Wage jihad against the faithless and the hypocrites, and be
severe with them. Their refuge shall be hell, and it is an evil
destination.”[^4]

In yet another verse of the Qur’an, God orders the Apostle (*s*) to
retaliate in kind against those who have threatened the lives and
properties of Muslims and fight them with utmost severity:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَقَاتِلُواْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ الَّذِينَ يُقَاتِلُونَكُمْ... ٭
وَاقْتُلُوهُمْ حَيْثُ ثَقِفْتُمُوهُمْ وَأَخْرِجُوهُم مِنْ حَيْثُ
أَخْرَجُوكُمْ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Fight in the way of Allah those who fight you… And kill them wherever
you confront them and expel them from where they expelled you...”[^5]

The necessity of preserving divine values and negating Western values
---------------------------------------------------------------------

It is the duty of every Muslim to struggle and wage *jihad* against the
enemies of God. Courage, religious zeal and fervor, commitment,
self-sacrifice, and devotion are some of the greatest and loftiest
Islamic values that help maintain its identity, vitality, independence
and freedom. By introducing a set of futile, self-coined and
self-desired values like absolute negation of violence, the arrogant
Western culture attempts to rob us of those Islamic values. For this
reason, they always say that violence is totally condemnable and
reproachable when used by Muslims, not them!

How can they expect us just to sit idly and smile at them while they
uproot our religious values and attack religious sanctities which are
dearer to us than our lives and for whom we are willing to sacrifice
everything? For what purpose has He endowed us with anger and wrath? Are
we not supposed to confront a bunch of violent traitors and mercenaries
with violence? Should we not react violently when they threaten our
religion? Should we remain seated and smile?! What does this verse
command, *“And kill them wherever you confront them”*? Why does He say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿محمدٌ رسولُ اللهِ و الذينَ معهُ اشدّاءُ عَلَی الکفّارِ رحماءُ
بينهم... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Muhammad, the Apostle of Allah, and those who are with him are hard
against the faithless and merciful among themselves”*****?**[^6]

They say that Islam is against violence. You have to ask them, “Islam is
against which kind of violence?” They present a set of ambiguous
concepts as absolute values in order to conceal the truth, rob people of
the spirit of martyrdom, sacrifice and bravery, religious zeal and
national ardor, and instill insensitivity, indulgence and negligence in
its place. They consistently talk about indulgence and negligence.
Should we also practice indulgence and negligence with respect to
someone who wants to rob us of our religion which is dearer to us than
our lives and honor?

Therefore, while establishing an Islamic government one must engage in
enlightening and guiding the people and showing the way to them. At this
stage one should not use violence or brute force. At this stage,
deception, false promises and exploiting any factor that hinders the
true guidance of people are wrong. At this stage, one must talk
rationally or logically to the people with utmost composure,
forbearance, patience, fortitude, clarity, and sincerity so as to show
them the truth and save them from the quagmire of negligence and
ignorance.

Of course, obstacles must be removed along the way and those who hinder
the guidance of people must be confronted so as to pave the ground for
the people’s inclination to truth. When a group of people embrace the
truth, the cultural activities of guiding and enlightening the people
must be pursued as before with utmost patience and tolerance in order to
numerically strengthen the followers of truth and extend Islamic
society. In the Qur’an, God calls on the Apostle (*s*) to show patience
and tolerance while conveying His message, observe fortitude and
forbearance in facing difficulties, verbal abuses, insults, harsh
treatment, and persecution so that people be guided to the truth:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَاصْبِرْ كَمَا صَبَرَ أُوْلُوا الْعَزْمِ مِنَ الرُّسُلِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“So be patient just as the resolute among the apostles were
patient.”[^7]

Decisiveness in implementing laws and struggling against enemies of the system
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Once an Islamic government is established according to Divine will,
Islamic laws and ordinances must be implemented in society. As in other
governments, brute force must be employed sometimes. The government must
have the necessary means to deal with opponents. Prisons, fines and
penalties must be contemplated for criminals and violators. It must
employ military and disciplinary forces to confront external enemies and
suppress internal disturbances. The government cannot rely only on moral
admonitions. A ruler who has no instrument of brute force and relies
only on admonitions and reminders is not a ruler but an ethicist!

So, as the Islamic government is established with the general acceptance
and allegiance of the people and is engaged in implementing Islamic laws
and ordinances and attending to affairs of the country and people, those
who revolt and create disturbance must be dealt with. As stated in
Islamic jurisprudence, it is obligatory [*wajib*] to wage *jihad*
against sedition-mongers who are technically “people of sedition” [*ahl
al-baghy*]. For example, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) campaigned against and dealt
with sedition-mongers.

After the passing away of the Apostle (*s*) when the government fell
into the hands of others, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) was engaged in enlightening
and guiding people. For the period of 25 years he discharged this
responsibility and kept his distance from the government. But when a
mammoth assembly of people from different Muslim lands like Egypt and
Iraq as well as Medina urged him to rule as their Imam and leader, the
Imam (*‘a*) clearly witnessed the proof [*hujjah*] and accepted the
responsibility of ruling the people.

Given the existence of such a huge assembly of people and their
allegiance which was unprecedented in the history of Islam, there was no
more reason to keep away from the government. He was forced to take
control of government although he had no personal interest in ruling
over the people. Only the sense of responsibility in view of the
people’s allegiance prompted him to accept the headship of government.
As Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَا وَالَّذِي فَلَقَ الْحَبَّةَ، وَبَرَأَ النَّسَمَةَ، لَوْلاَ
حُضُورُ الْحَاضِرِ، وَقِيَامُ الْحُجَّةِ بِوُجُودِ النَّاصِرِ، وَمَا
أَخَذَ اللهُ عَلَى العُلَمَاءِ أَنْ لَا يُقَارُّوا عَلَى كِظَّةِ
ظَالِمٍ، وَلا سَغَبِ مَظْلُومٍ، لاََلقَيْتُ حَبْلَهَا عَلَى
غَارِبِهَا، وَلَسَقَيْتُ آخِرَهَا بِكَأْسِ أَوَّلِها، وَلاََلفَيْتُمْ
دُنْيَاكُمْ هذِهِ أَزْهَدَ عِنْدِي مِنْ عَفْطَة عَنْزٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Behold, by Him who split the grain (to grow) and created living beings,
if people had not come to me, and supporters had not exhausted the
argument, and if there had been no pledge of Allah with the learned to
the effect that they should not acquiesce in the gluttony of the
oppressor and the hunger of the oppressed, I would have cast the rope of
Caliphate on its own shoulders, and would have given the last one the
same treatment as the first one. Then you would have seen that in my
view this world of yours is no better than the sneezing of a goat!*[^8]

After a few days of Imam ‘Ali’s (‘a) rule, those who worshipped Ma’mun;
those who advocated discrimination and injustice and considered
themselves superior to others could not bear the justice of ‘Ali (‘a);
those whose satanic desires and usurped or illegitimate rule were in
danger during the rule of ‘Ali (‘a); and, those who were apparently
ascetic and devoted worshippers yet devoid of correct insight and clear
understanding of the teachings of Islam, whose superficial understanding
and intransigence prevented them from grasping the sound logic of ‘Ali
(‘a), revolted and created disturbances one after the other, and imposed
the Battles of Jamal, Siffin and Nahrawan on the Imam (‘a).

At that point, what was the duty of the Imam (‘a) as the Islamic ruler
who perceived that the divine government and laws were in danger? Was
the Imam (‘a) supposed to relax and watch the unfolding of events and
not stand in the way of the seditionists on the excuse that violence is
condemnable and reproachable?

To preserve the Islamic government and Muslim lands, the Imam (*‘a*)
brandished his sword and fought with the rebels and mutineers. During
the Battle of Jamal, some companions of the Apostle (*s*) including
Ṭalhah and Zubayr who fought on the side of the Apostle (*s*) for many
years were killed. Although Zubayr was a cousin of the Imam (*‘a*) and
inspite of his sacrifices and acts of bravery along with the Apostle
(*s*), the Imam (*‘a*) did not spare him. Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) did not say:
“O Zubayr, you are my cousin. Come and let us be friends. I will
compromise with you and grant your demands.”

Instead, the Imam (*‘a*) firmly believed that his government was
righteous and those who revolted and staged an uprising against it would
have to be suppressed. Thus, when they started revolting and staging a
mutiny, he admonished and advised them. When they refused to submit, he
dealt with them with the sword and killed some of them. The reason was
that the Imam (*‘a*) considered the right of God and the Muslims as more
important than the personal desires of individuals. In order to preserve
the Islamic system, he believed that the use of violence and severity of
action was obligatory.

Warning people against conspirators and mercenaries
---------------------------------------------------

Before the Islamic Revolution, Imam Khomeini (*q*) also delivered
speeches and issued statements for the enlightenment and guidance of
people and kept on advising the regime. But when the people paid
allegiance to the Imam and expressed their readiness to sacrifice
themselves for the sake of Islam, sever the hands of the enemies of God
and establish Islamic rule in this land, the Imam accepted the political
responsibility, saying: “By virtue of the responsibility and
guardianship [*wilayah*] God has vested in me and relying on your
assistance and help, I shall render a blow to this regime and install a
government.”

That is, as the *wali* *al-faqih*, the Imam had the right of governance
and his *wilayah* had divine legitimacy, but when the people had not yet
come to the scene and paid allegiance to him, this *wilayah* had no
actual manifestation. With the allegiance of the people and their
remarkable presence in the scenes of Revolution, the expression of
readiness to sacrifice or offer their lives for the sake of Islam and
their leader, the said *wilayah* had acquired actual manifestation and
the Islamic government was established.

Indisputably, this Islamic government, which was established by the
blood of hundreds of thousands of martyrs and has survived by the
glorious presence of forces loyal and devoted to the Revolution who
defend the borders of the country and safeguard the lofty values of the
Revolution. These devoted people will not allow a bunch of mercenaries
and paid agents to put in danger the interests of Islam and the
properties, lives and honor of the people.

When a gang of rioters, mercenaries and foreign agents poured into the
streets, staged riots, burned and looted public property, harassed
people, and even set mosques on fire [in the days of disturbances in
Tehran after July 9, 1999 (Tir 18, 1378 AHS)], those saying that rioters
should not be dealt with violently as Islam does not allow resorting to
violence have either not understood Islam, or they want to undo Islam
and the Muslims!

One cannot stop rioters with a smile. One must deal with them using
brute force. We must not allow these bitter events to happen again in
our country. Our people will not be deceived by these words nor listen
to those who say that violence is absolutely forbidden at all times. If
they have observed sobriety and forbearance, it is on account of their
obedience to the order of the Supreme Leader. Whenever our devoted
people feel that the Supreme Leader is truly pleased with something,
they will offer their lives in order to realize it.

When the Supreme Leader called for silence and calm, they observed
sobriety and fortitude, and did not pour into the street and stage a
demonstration without his order. But at the time when they had to
express their devotion to the Revolution and show the enemies that they
were always ready to defend Islam and the Revolution, they staged
magnificent demonstrations throughout the country that astonished the
enemies and the people of the world.

[^1]: Surah ash-Shu‘ara’ 26:3-4.

[^2]: Surah at-Tawbah (or, Bara’ah) 9:12.

[^3]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:159.

[^4]: Surah at-Tawbah (or, Bara’ah) 9:73.

[^5]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:190-191.

[^6]: Surah al-Fath 48:29.

[^7]: Surah al-Ahqaf 46:35.

[^8]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 3.


