Session 37: A Scrutiny of the Issue of Violence
===============================================

We have stated that just as Islam has decrees based upon magnanimity,
mercy and benevolence, promoting brotherhood, love and friendship, it
has also decrees associated with severity, harshness and violence in
special or exceptional circumstances, calling for struggle and
resistance against the criminals and seditionists.

Of course, since this discussion is of secondary importance and beyond
the scope of our main concerns, we shall only touch on it briefly. The
propaganda in newspapers and articles on this issue, however, show that
there is need to elaborate comprehensively upon the station of love and
violence in Islam. For this reason, we shall examine the subject to the
extent suitable in this session.

The enemies’ sinister propaganda and activities against Islam
-------------------------------------------------------------

Since the beginning, the enemies of Islam have presented it as a
religion of violence that was propagated at the point of the sword on
the ground that the obligation to struggle and wage *jihad* against
enemies is upheld in Islam; the Qur’an contains many verses about
*jihad*; and, *jihad* has been considered as one of the obligatory acts
and branches of religion [*furu‘ ad-din*]. They have instilled the fact
that Islam is a religion of violence in the minds of people, saying that
it was forced down the throats of people during the initial decades of
the Caliphate.

Meanwhile, some people try to defend Islam by claiming that there is no
violence in Islam for it has always enjoined mercy and compassion; the
injunctions of *jihad* and the harsh and violent expressions about
*jihad* in Islam are related to a particular time and circumstances;
today, those injunctions are no longer applicable and must not be
discussed; at this time, one must only talk about flexibility,
accommodation, indulgence, and negligence!

Our nation is aware of the motives of the enemy’s propaganda campaign
against Islam and will not be influenced by it. It must be noted,
however, that the issue is beyond that and does not end here. By
employing various forms and diverse methods of propaganda and by using
various literary and artistic means, they cast doubts upon Islamic
teachings that can have a profound and dangerous impact upon our culture
and weaken some people’s faith in the religious fundamentals.

This is something that has been affirmed by psychological theories and
actual experience. We can evidently see for ourselves how a generation
is influenced by the enemy’s unrelenting scientific and literarily
embellished propaganda. The new generation can possibly forget its
religious-national identity and primordial self and assume a different
cultural outlook as a result of the enemy’s sinister propaganda.

Among Western concepts and values that have been introduced in our
culture are the concepts of freedom and democracy that are presented as
absolute values in our literature. They have promoted these concepts to
such an extent that they have turned out to be like idols which no one
dare say something against or mention their shortcomings and
deficiencies. Western thinkers themselves have written many books
criticizing and rejecting democracy.

Even today, some political philosophers and sociologists criticize
democracy on various occasions, writing books rejecting it. Some of
these books have been translated into various languages of the world
including Persian and are accessible to our people. Yet, they have so
sanctified these concepts that in the Third World countries no one will
dare criticize them. If we dare to say something against Western freedom
and democracy, we will be accused of being reactionaries,
traditionalists and despots.

The West and its pretentious defense of human rights
----------------------------------------------------

Undoubtedly, the Westerners have certain long-term plans in their
propaganda. In order to secure their interests and control all
revolutionary countries, they persistently talk about democracy, freedom
and human rights. Whoever opposes them is accused of being hostile to
democracy and human rights. Yet, we see that they do not criticize some
of the most despotic and unpopular regimes in the world simply because
they are their satellites and secure their interests.

The falsity and insincerity of their claims can be exposed when an
election is held in a country based on democratic principles and the
election result is in favor of Muslims or Islamists. Truly beyond
expectation, the election result will be declared null and void. After a
bloody coup, a group of the armed forces will control the government.
Everyday, they will kill tens of innocent people and imprison
freedom-loving Muslims. Not only that, these false champions of human
rights will not accuse the said regime of violating human rights or not
respecting freedom, but they will immediately recognize its legitimacy,
affirm its acts and offer extensive assistance to it.

When the Zionist occupiers occupied the land of Palestine, drove the
people out of their homes, killed thousands, made millions refugees in
other countries, none of these self-claimed champions of human rights
said that the Zionists actions were violations of human rights. Instead,
the superpowers granted political recognition to the usurper and
occupier regime. Throughout the period of its illegitimate rule, the
regime has subjected the original owners of the land to torture,
persecution, murder, and plunder and destroyed their homes. Yet, those
who talk about human rights have not raised even a finger of protest.

From time to time, the United Nations issues useless and futile
statements or resolutions in line with its policies and propaganda. In
practice, it gives the ‘go’ signal to the regime—“If you do not abide by
the resolutions, nothing will happen to you.” As we all know, tens of
resolutions and statements against the Quds-occupier regime have been
approved, yet the regime has rejected them all. Meanwhile, apart from
not being reproached or punished, it is gratuitously granted billions of
dollars, ultramodern weapons, nuclear submarines, and nuclear
technology. Is there any of the so-called champions of human rights
countries that says that the regime which has violated the most
fundamental human rights and rejects or opposes international treaties,
agreements and resolutions is against democracy and human rights?

Resorting to violence and plotting to topple down the Islamic system
--------------------------------------------------------------------

After the victory of the Islamic Revolution, an extensive propaganda
against violence was launched in our country. Initially, they said that
the people’s revolution or uprising against the “legitimate” Pahlavi
regime was a form of violence. After the victory of the Revolution,
groups of hypocrites that failed to win the support of people for their
un-Islamic objectives clashed with the Revolution and the masses,
assassinated a number of religious and political figures and did not
spare even innocent people until, finally, the people decided to
struggle against them and expelled them from the country. Since then up
to now, however, the Westerners have been campaigning against our people
and government, saying that our policy toward the hypocrites is based on
un-Islamic violence!

They intentionally gloss over the devastation caused by the hypocrites
to this country and the Revolution. All treacherous assassinations are
not condemned either. But when a nation rises up to defend its religion
and country, suppress the terrorists, imprison some and expel the rest
from the country, they raise a hue and cry saying: “They (the
revolutionary people) are acting against human rights!”

Similarly, when during the disturbances in Tehran after July 9, 1999
(Tir 18, 1378 AHS) a bunch of rioters and rogues set public utilities,
banks, public and private vehicles, and even mosques on fire and
tarnished the honor of people by removing the headscarves of women, no
one said that they were acting against human rights. Instead, they
presented these rioters as reformists and proponents of freedom and
democracy! But when the government of the Islamic Republic of Iran and
the devoted and selfless volunteer mobilizing [basij] forces stood up
and came to the rescue of their religion, honor and ideal system and
drove the rioters and foreign mercenaries from the country, they yelled
hysterically “There is no freedom in Iran and the Iran political system
is a dictatorship!”

The Westerners are aware of the falsity of their claims. They have
adopted these means of propaganda especially after the Revolution with
the aim of defeating the Islamic system. We are unaware and uninformed
of the depth of their conspiracies and plots, but given the many
centuries of experience they have acquired they know well that for them
to be able one day—even if it be fifty years from now as they
erroneously imagine it—to topple down a popular system which is rooted
in the people’s religious culture, they have to engage in extensive,
complex, psychological and cultural activities.

Their objective is that after the passing away of one or two generations
of the Revolution, the youth who have not experienced the Revolution,
not witnessed the corruption and crimes of the Pahlavi regime, not
understood the achievements of the Revolution and not been trained by
the Imam and his companions would be influenced by their propaganda and
help bring about the downfall of the Islamic government and install
their so-called democratic satellite government.

Paving the ground for the absence of people from the scene
----------------------------------------------------------

In a bid to attain their wicked goals, they make well-calculated
programs, conduct fundamental cultural activities, and utilize effective
means. Among those used particularly in the past two or three years[^1]
is the promotion of concepts such as indulgence, negligence and
moderation and condemnation of decisiveness and violence. They realize
that the perpetuity of the Islamic system depends on the love and
affection of the youth and basijis, in particular, for Islam and the
Islamic leadership for which they are willing to risk their lives.

Through propaganda and the use of cultural means, they strive to take
away bravery, sacrifice, moral heroism, and the spiritual power of
religious zeal and enthusiasm from the people. They force people to see
the negative, inhuman and unjust forms of violence with dire and painful
consequences committed around the world, so that they consider violence
absolutely condemnable and reproachable. That is, if a person talks
harshly, chants the slogan “Death to America” or deals firmly with
rioters, his action is violent and, therefore, condemnable and
reproachable.

By campaigning against violence and labeling the defense forces of the
Revolution as violent, they want our people not to take a step against
the conspiracies and plots of the foreigners and the destructive
activities of their paid agents and leave the scene of action so that
they can stage a coup like that of August 19, 1953 (Mordad 28, 1332
AHS).[^2] As they orchestrated the foreign-backed coup on August 19 of
that year, they also considered the days after the 18th of Tir this year
(1378 AHS) as an opportune moment to stage another coup in this country.

By conducting extensive studies and research, spending huge amounts and
deceiving the simple-minded, they had already carried out the prelude to
this event. For example, the interviews and confessions of their
mercenaries who openly confessed that they had received intellectual and
monetary assistance from America bespeak of this reality. When they
found conditions suitable, they brought to the scene rogues, rascals and
mercenaries so that they could actualize the coup by harassing people,
setting public and private properties on fire, and creating chaos and
disorder under extensive foreign and domestic print and broadcast media
and other forms of assistance.

By condemning violence, they wanted to crush the resistance of the
people and weaken their defense of the Revolution so that when they
witnessed inhuman and anti-revolutionary actions, the destruction of
people’s property, the attack on public utilities, and the disturbances
staged by a bunch of mercenaries, they would keep silent and not stop
the rioters. Even if they took action, they would not take practical,
physical and violent action.

They would call the rioters to sobriety and dialogue and listen to their
demands. They would tell the rioters: “You have the right to protest and
be upset. Send your spokesman so that we can sit together and grant some
of your demands and compromise. Drop some of your demands and in turn,
we will also withdraw from some of our stances.

Their demands will be nothing but the removal of Islamic laws and
ordinances, Islamic slogans and mottos, and the defense of Islam. By
meeting these demands, a sort of bloodless coup will be staged in the
country. As a result, Islamic values will be totally obliterated and if
external military support and assistance will be needed, (as they had
contemplated long before), they will attack the eastern and western
borders of the country, render the final blow and install a satellite
regime.

The exigency of confronting cultural conspiracies and misgivings about religious sanctities
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This extensive and well-calculated propaganda is remarkably launched in
the broadcast media, periodicals and magazines that even some prominent
figures have been deceived and fallen prey to the enemy’s cultural
plots, which are meant to rob the Muslims of their religious zeal and
enthusiasm so that they do not stand up to defend Islam and the
Revolution at the time of necessity. A manifestation of it was the
incident that recently took place. Many of its facts are yet to be
exposed. They shall be revealed gradually.

It was on account of that, based on my personal discernment, that I
sensed a serious cultural threat as a prelude to a military coup to
topple the Islamic system. I entered the scene and decided to refute the
enemies’ objections and propagated notions, thwart their cultural
designs, warn the people, and awaken the happy-go-lucky and those who
are in deep slumber because of their propaganda. At least, by creating
doubt and uncertainty in the false beliefs and ideas of Western cultural
propaganda, I could inform them of the menacing threat to their religion
and culture, and by infusing enthusiasm in society and raising
questions, I could contribute in making the people less vulnerable to
their vicious propaganda.

In line with the fulfillment of my duty, I decided to break the idol of
the absolute negation of violence and refute the notion that every form
of violence is bad while every form of flexibility is desirable. We all
know that, each of them is desirable under certain conditions. The same
is true about freedom. I reject absolute freedom. Freedom within the
framework of Islamic values is desirable. At that time, some colleagues
got angry because they thought I was saying something against freedom.

However, when they saw the conspiracies behind the curtains, became
aware of the far-reaching exploitation of freedom, and found out that
under the pretext of freedom some elements were busy trying to uproot
the lofty religious sanctities and values of our nation, so much so,
that a distinguished political figure said in one of his speeches, “Our
people are free even to demonstrate against God,” these colleagues
explicitly said, “The desirable freedom we are concerned with is freedom
within the framework of Islamic values.” Had I not pointed out this
issue and infused enthusiasm in society, perhaps the officials would
have not deemed it necessary to defend “the theory of freedom within the
framework of Islamic values” and reject absolute freedom.

Today, some elements condemn and consider as violent and undesirable any
action done in line with the defense of Islam and Islamic values. This
is a reality and not only an imagination that pops up in my mind for
some people to claim that my issue is an isolated one and that I am
talking in a vacuum. Incidentally, *I do not claim without evidence*.

As we have no time to deal with each case, I will mention some of them.
Some individuals bring the principle of jihad into question and describe
it as violent. One of them said in his speech at Tehran University
during a commemoration ceremony of ‘Ashura, thus: “The murder of the
Doyen of the Martyrs (‘a) was a repercussion of the violence done by the
Holy Apostle (s) during the Battle of Badr!”

This person condemns Islamic jihad, the battles and military expeditions
of the Holy Apostle (s), saying that when the Apostle (s) killed the
polytheists, their children also came forward and killed his (s)
children. Had the Apostle (s) not killed them, their children would not
have killed the children of the Apostle (s)! In reality, he praised the
forces of Yazid and condemned Islam and the Apostle (s).

At that time no one said that his speech was an affront to the Holy
Apostle (s), a distortion of the personality of Imam al-Husayn (‘a) and
the event of Karbala’, and a denial of the essentials of religion, and
some newspapers published and highlighted the whole text of the speech
with an impressive headline! Unfortunately, the officials did not show
sensitivity to these infamies. In the country where a revolution was
staged in the name of Imam al-Husayn (‘a) and has survived in the name
of Imam al-Husayn (‘a), the uprising of Imam al-Husayn (‘a) was
blemished and it was concluded that if we do not want such incidents to
happen and the Husayns of our time to be killed, we must not have a
violent attitude!

I am now addressing the writer who has written in a newspaper with mass
circulation that as I am allegedly talking in a vacuum and dealing with
out-of-topic points, I have to reconsider continuing my series of talks.
Am I talking in a vacuum or in the midst of the social atmosphere of my
time? Is what I said not the hottest issue in our country?

Do my talks not reflect the daily reality in this country? Should I
reconsider my decision or should you, who was once a member of the
international Islamic party and proud of supporting *Fada’iyan-e Islam*
[the devotees of Islam]?[^3]

At this juncture, I deem it necessary to quote a part of the late Imam’s
(*s*) eloquent and problem-solving words to warn us of the cultural
threats and conspiracies under the guise of freedom:

*My advice to the Islamic Consultative Assembly, Presidents,
Guardianship Council, Supreme Judicial Council and governments, now and
in future, is to maintain the news agencies, the press, and the
magazines in the service of Islam and interests of the country. We must
all know that Western style freedom degenerates the youth, and it is
condemned by Islam and the intellect.*

Propaganda literature, written articles, speeches, books, and magazines
that oppose Islam, public morality and interests of the country are
haram [taboo or interdicted by religion] and it is incumbent on all
Muslims to prevent their printing and distribution. Harmful liberty must
be checked. If all that is haram, against the path of truth and the
Islamic state,and contrary to the prestige of the Islamic Republic, is
not decisively controlled, then all are to be held responsible. If any
one, including a hizbullah [lit, the party of God] youth meet with a
violation of these rules, he must report it to the appropriate
authorities and if they fail to act then the people themselves must take
preventive measure.[^4]

Islam’s description of God’s mercy and wrath
--------------------------------------------

One of the Westerners’ misgivings on Islam is that the God described in
the Qur’an is wrathful, harsh, furious and revengeful but the God of the
Bible is forgiving, compassionate, benevolent, extremely tolerant, and
so kind and affectionate that—God forbid—He sent His only son to be
killed to save mankind and his blood to become the ransom for the sins
of sinners! Is the God described in the Qur’an really harsh and
wrathful, or merciful and compassionate?

The reply to the abovementioned misgiving is that God has the Attributes
of both mercy and wrath. He is both “the Most Merciful of all the
merciful” [*arham ar-rahimin*] and “the most severe of punishers”
[*ashadd al-mu‘aqibin*]. Out of 114 *surah*s [chapters] of the Qur’an,
113 *surah*s begin with “In the Name of Allah, the All-beneficent, the
All-merciful” [*bismillah ’ir-rahman ’ir-rahim*] and in both
descriptions of Allah His Attribute of mercy is mentioned, i.e.
“All-beneficent” [*ar-rahman*] and “All-merciful” [*ar-rahim*].

Only one *surah* of the Qur’an (*Surah at-Tawbah* or *Bara’ah* 9) does
not begin with “In the Name of Allah, the All-beneficent, the
All-merciful” but in *Surah an-Naml* (27) “In the Name of Allah, the
All-beneficent, the All-merciful” is repeated twice. Apart from at the
beginning of the *surah*, it is also mentioned in the middle, when
Bilqis, the Queen of Sheba, reads the letter of Hadhrat Sulayman
(Prophet Solomon) (*‘a*) which begins with “In the Name of Allah, the
All-beneficent, the All-merciful” to her.[^5] In any case, “In the Name
of Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful” which contains two
attributes of divine mercy is repeated 114 times in the Qur’an. But
alongside the description of boundless divine mercy, some verses also
reveals God’s attribute of wrath and anger. Take for example the
following passages:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿...وَاللّهُ عَزِيزٌ ذُو انتِقَامٍ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…And Allah is all-mighty, avenger.”[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّا مِنَ الْمُجْرِمِينَ مُنتَقِمُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…Indeed We shall wreak vengeance upon the guilty.”[^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿...فَبَآؤُوا بِغَضَبٍ عَلَى غَضَبٍ وَلِلْكَافِرِينَ عَذَابٌ مُهِينٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…Thus they earned wrath upon wrath, and there is a humiliating
punishment for the faithless.”[^8]

If the Europeans describe their God as kind and merciful only and say
that “Our God has no wrath and anger”, then they have not correctly
described God as described in Islam and the Qur’an. Our belief is that
God’s mercy supersedes and prevails over His wrath and anger. Thus, God
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿...كَتَبَ عَلىٰ نَفسِهِ ٱلرَّحْمَة...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…He has made mercy incumbent upon Himself...**”*[^9]

This concept is mentioned in many *mutawatir* traditions reported by
both Sunnis and Shi‘ahs. It is mentioned in our supplications, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا مَنْ سَبَقَتْ رَحْمَتُهُ غَضَبَهُ!
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“O He whose mercy supersedes His wrath!”**

That is, God’s mercy does not negate but rather prevails over His wrath.
As long as divine wisdom, grace and favor demand it, His servants shall
savor His grace and mercy and His wrath and anger shall not surface
except when it is necessary for some people to incur His wrath and
anger. As such, we can observe that God sent His wrath on the
communities of ‘Ad,[^10] Thamud[^11] and Lut (Lot)[^12] annihilating
them, also mentioning why in the Qur’an.

It was because apostles of Allah repeatedly invited them to the path of
guidance and, miracles and divine signs were also shown to them. Yet,
they chose rebellion and corruption, and did not give up their wicked
and abominable acts. They further indulged in sins and defied the
commands of God and His apostle and incurred the wrath and anger of God
to serve as a moral lesson for the corrupt and obstinate.

Islam is based upon mercy and compassion, not harshness and violence,
and its guiding principle is mercy. However, in certain cases the
Creator needs to use strictness, severity of action and violence in
order to correct the totally misguided. Logically, a God should possess
the attribute of mercy as well as that of wrath, anger and vengeance.

The necessity of confronting enemies and hypocrites, and eliminating impediments to guidance
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Islam initially calls for the guidance and enlightenment of people. At
the same time, the Qur’an enjoins struggle against those who hinder the
spread of the message of the apostles, the Prophet of Islam in
particular. As such, during the time of the Apostle (*s*) and the
Infallibles (*‘a*), *jihad* was initially ordained to remove the
impediments to the guidance of people. On this basis, when the Prophet
of Islam (*s*) began his prophetic mission, the issue was not whether he
could interfere in the affairs of the Byzantium or Persian empires.

The truth of the matter is that the Apostle (*s*) was sent for the
guidance of all mankind. So, if someone, be it the Shah of Persia or the
king of Byzantine, opposed the invitation of the Apostle (*s*), it was
incumbent upon him to wage war against him. For this reason, he sent
letters to the different leaders of the world at that time, inviting
them to Islam and asking them to make way for him and his envoys to
guide the people in their respective countries.

Thus, *jihad* is one of the indisputable principles of Islam and all
Muslim sects—Sunnis and Shi‘ahs—unanimously agree on it without having
any dissenting opinion, and the reason behind the waging of war and
*jihad* against the leaders of unfaith was that they hindered the
guidance and enlightenment of their people and the message of the
Apostle (*s*). As such, in order to remove these obstacles, the
Messenger of Allah (*s*) was duty-bound to wage war against them. Given
these facts, how can one say that Islam does not permit and deem
necessary to wage war and *jihad*? Can we dismiss and conceal the
Qur’anic verses about *jihad* and the struggle against the faithless,
the hypocrites and enemies of Islam?

Yes, war and resistance against the enemies of God is one of the
indisputable principles of Islam. It is true that in the decrees on
*jihad* Islam has enjoined the observance of the highest humanitarian
principles, but at the same time, it emphasizes that we have to fight
the obstinate and those who consciously oppose the truth, the religion
of God, and, violate treaties:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَقَاتِلُواْ أَئِمَّةَ الْكُفْرِ إِنَّهُمْ لاَ أَيْمَانَ لَهُمْ
لَعَلَّهُمْ يَنتَهُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then fight the leaders of unfaith—indeed they have no [commitment
to] pledges—maybe they will relinquish.”***[^13]

Similarly, in *Surah at-Tahrim*, verse 9, and *Surah at-Tawbah*, verse
73, God commands the Apostle (*s*) and the Muslims to fight the
faithless and the hypocrites, and deal with them sternly and violently:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّمَا يَنْهَاكُمُ اللَّهُ عَنِ الَّذِينَ قَاتَلُوكُمْ فِي الدِّينِ
وَأَخْرَجُوكُم مِن دِيَارِكُمْ وَظَاهَرُوا عَلَى إِخْرَاجِكُمْ أَن
تَوَلَّوْهُمْ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allah forbids you only in regard to those who made war against you on
account of religion and expelled you from your homes and supported
[others] in your expulsion, that you make friends with them.”[^14]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ جَاهِدِ الْكُفَّارَ وَالْمُنَافِقِينَ
وَاغْلُظْ عَلَيْهِمْ وَمَأْوَاهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ وَبِئْسَ الْمَصِيرُ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Prophet! Wage jihad against the faithless and the hypocrites, and be
severe with them. Their refuge shall be hell, and it is an evil
destination.”[^15]

(The said writer has written that the verses on *jihad* pertain to the
faithless and did not notice that in the abovementioned verse God had
ordered *jihad* against the hypocrites from within the community in
addition to the faithless.)

Elsewhere, God also says thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا قَاتِلُوا الَّذِينَ يَلُونَكُم مِّنَ
الْكُفَّارِ وَلِيَجِدُوا فِيكُمْ غِلْظَةً وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللّهَ
مَعَ الْمُتَّقِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O, you who have faith! Fight the faithless who are in your vicinity,
and let them find severity in you, and know that Allah is with the
God-wary.”[^16]

In the above mentioned verse, God commands the Muslims to fight the
faithless who are living in their vicinity, not to be heedless of them,
and express their wrath, severity and firmness to their faithless
neighbors so that they are afraid and do not commit treachery and hatch
any plot. God also says in another verse, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَأَعِدُّوا لَهُم مَا اسْتَطَعْتُم مِن قُوَّةٍ وَمِن رِبَاطِ
الْخَيْلِ تُرْهِبُونَ بِهِ عَدُوَّ اللّهِ وَعَدُوَّكُمْ وَآخَرِينَ مِن
دُونِهِمْ لاَ تَعْلَمُونَهُمُ اللّهُ يَعْلَمُهُمْ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Prepare against them whatever you can of [military] power and
war-horses, and create awe thereby in the enemy of Allah, and your
enemy, and others besides them, whom you do not know, but Allah knows
them...”[^17]

(I advise those who are familiar with Arabic literature to see for
themselves the equivalent of the word *irhab* in other languages. If I
would mention it myself, newspapers will place headlines saying
so-and-so supports terrorism.)

In any case, the Qur’an has enjoined severe and harsh treatment of those
who cannot be dealt with logically, who impudently obstruct the path of
guidance, enlightenment and invitation of the Apostle (*s*), and
consciously wage war against Islam out of animosity and contumacy. The
Muslims are further instructed to strike dread and fear in them so that
they do not entertain the idea of attacking, betraying and rendering a
blow to the Muslims. It cannot be said to them: “Your religion is for
you, and our religion is for us. Let us live together peacefully under
the bond of brotherhood and friendship.”

Opposition to the penal and criminal laws of Islam
--------------------------------------------------

Some writers express their protest to us, arguing that Islam has issued
orders in relation to the faithless that one should deal with them
strictly and harshly, and not with the Islamic state’s own citizens.
They forget that Islam has set in its penal code severe punishments or
penalties for certain crimes, violations and offenses when committed by
Muslim citizens. Regarding a thief, for instance, Islam has commanded
that his hand be amputated. Regarding adultery or fornication [*zina*]
and other indecent acts, it has commanded that the guilty be punished.

For example, the fornicator must receive a hundred lashes. In some
cases, it has set the penalty of execution for some acts of indecency.
In reality, the penalties set by Islam for these types of crimes are
very harsh and unbearable. It must not be lost sight of that Islam has
set difficult conditions to prove some crimes against chastity, like
*zina*. On account of these difficult conditions, these crimes can
rarely be proven and the punishments implemented.

The existence of religious punishments and ordinances prompts the
enemies of Islam to use them as a tool and weapon against Islam,
claiming that Islam violates human rights, acts violently in
implementing its penal laws, and disregards human dignity. Yes, the
enemies and pretentious human rights activists assert that the
amputation of the hand of a Muslim who has committed theft is an inhuman
and violent act and is repugnant to human dignity because the person
whose hand is amputated is deprived of an important body limb for the
rest of his life and is known in society as a thief.

On the contrary, in their alleged defense of Islam some people say that
those penal laws are related to a specific time in the past, and today
there are better ways to maintain security and prevent theft and other
crimes, and there is no need for a thief’s hand to be amputated. If
there were really better ways of maintaining security and preventing
crimes, a crime should not be committed every 15 minutes in America, as
it actually does, and there should be no need for a number of policemen
to be stationed in high schools.

Those who say with utmost impudence that the Islamic penal laws are
abrogated, because they are violent and related to 1,400 years ago and
accepted by no one, seem to have forgotten that the Imam branded as
apostates [*murtaddin*] those who called the bill on retaliation
[*qisas*] inhuman and demonstrated against it, saying that their spouses
were *haram* for them, their blood permissible to be shed, and their
properties transferrable to their Muslim legatees?

Yes, the American human rights activists condemn and present as inhuman
and harsh the penal laws of Islam. We would like to tell them that we
acknowledge that in some cases the penal laws of Islam are severe. At
the same time, we defend the severe laws of Islam and are willing to
face the well-planned conspiracies against them. We do not accept these
laws to have been abrogated for we firmly believe that “Whatever
Muhammad (*s*) declared *halal* shall be *halal* till the Day of
Resurrection and whatever Muhammad (*s*) declared *haram* shall be
*haram* till the Day of Resurrection.”

We staged a revolution in order to implement the laws and ordinances of
Islam. In fact, the Shah also used to say: “What I am saying is in
accordance with the spirit of Islam and the clerics are reactionary and
in error!” The laws and decrees mentioned in the Qur’an or promulgated
by Islam must be implemented—the same Islam for whose sovereignty its
beloved children offered their blood in the past, and are ready to
sacrifice their lives for its sake today; the same Islam presented by
the Supreme Leader, saying: “Pristine Islam is the very Book and
*Sunnah*.

The divine laws and decrees must be inferred from these two magnificent
sacred sources by using the appropriate method and way of *ijtihad*.
Those who do not accept this Islam have basically not accepted Islam
because we have no Islam other than this one.”

Violent measures not confined to the domain of penal and criminal laws
----------------------------------------------------------------------

One of the writers had written in his article published in a newspaper
that the cases of *hudud* and *ta‘zirat* and the violent actions
permitted in Islam are related to penal laws. We also accept that the
laws Islam has set for criminals, violators and offenders are more or
less severe. But the violence under discussion which we condemn is not
related to the penal laws of Islam.

Essentially, the penal laws of Islam have not been the subject of
discussion on violence. He has asserted that I am discussing matters not
related to my topic. Some newspapers have headlines saying that I am
speaking outside the scope of my topic! Let me say that the subject of
my discussion is the cultural deviations in our society. It is written
in the same newspapers that the murder of the Doyen of the Martyrs
(*‘a*) was the repercussion of his grandfather’s harshness in the Battle
of Badr! O judge and lawyer who writes in the newspaper about me, tell
me: What does the one who has expressed such an opinion about the
martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) mean by violence and what type of
violence does he negate? I am talking about the same cases, instances
and topics discussed in society.

I am talking about the instances of exploitation of concepts like
violence, freedom and moderation. For example, they have said: “The
Battle of Badr was an instance of violence; hence, Islam is a religion
of violence!” Do you still say I have gone off the topic?

One can easily argue: “We deny those insinuations and exploitations. We
do not regard Islam as a religion of violence. Our question is: Can the
people also act violently, enter the scenes of action and resort to
physical measures beyond the framework of official police function? “Do
you regard the Islamic Revolution as violent or not? Those who can
remember the event that happened in Tehran on September 8, 1978
(Shahrivar 17, 1357 AHS) know what our dear youth and heroic people did
against the Pahlavi regime.[^18]

Were the demonstrations and actions of people against the Pahlavi regime
violent or not? Were they appropriate or not? Did Islam allow those
actions and movements or not? If Islam did not allow them, then the
revolution becomes illegal because Islam is devoid of violence and it
does not permit violent actions! Similarly, were the sacred blows
rendered by the late Nawwab Safawi[^19] and other members of the
*Fada’iyan-e Islam* to the Pahlavi regime appropriate and proper, or
inappropriate and improper? It was on the basis of their valuable
revolutionary actions that their names are immortalized in our country
and held in high esteem and regard, and nowadays, some streets in Tehran
and other cities are named after them. The same question also applies to
the dear brothers of the Coalition of Islamic Societies [*Hay’at-ha-ye
I’tilaf-e Islami*], viz. Martyr Muhammad Bukhara’i and his dear
colleagues who sent to hell the henchman premier of the Shah.[^20]

One can say that they should not have acted violently. They should have
peacefully formed an official party and sat on the negotiating table
with the Shah’s regime and presented their demands and stances. But
would anyone have listened to them. If the regime had really listened to
them, they would not have been forced to resort to violent actions. When
they saw that nobody was listening to their legitimate demands, they had
no option but to resort to violence.

That judge might say: “I condemn those violent actions. They should have
behaved with utmost sobriety, patience, fortitude, and composure, and
pursued solving their problems and securing their demands!” Let me ask:
“Did you silence and stop those violent groups who poured into the
streets after Tir 18, 1378 AHS, staged riots, set mosques on fire,
destroyed public and private property, removed headscarves of women, and
chanted anti-Islamic slogans with smiles, flattery and embrace? Or, was
it not our own beloved basijis who came to the scene, risked their
lives, faced dangers, and stopped the rioters? It is indeed regrettable
that no one ever recognized and appreciated what they did. They came to
the scene for the sake of God, to defend Islam and the Revolution, and
God will abundantly recompense them*.*

That gentleman might still say: “We condemn the actions of the *basiji*s
in suppressing and dispersing the seditionists, rioters and foreign
mercenaries. No confrontation with them should have taken place. They
were free to express their views and stage a protest.” According to the
Americans, those who staged the uprising, poured into the streets, and
burned mosques were freedom-lovers. So, they had the right to say that
they wanted freedom and not religion! Exactly what that gentleman said
in his speech, ‘people have the right to demonstrate even against God!’

If he says, “When they sensed that the government would not listen to
them if they openly said that they did not want Islam or religion, they
were forced to vandalize public and private property, set mosques on
fire and chant anti-Islamic slogans in order to be heard; so, their
action was justifiable but not that of those who stopped them,” we will
tell him, “So, finally, you also permit violence, because you have to
endorse one of the two actions: either you have to say that the action
of those who poured into the streets, burned mosques, and chanted
slogans against Islam and the system was justifiable, though violent or,
you have to say that the action of the basijis, the masses and the
disciplinary forces in stopping the rioters was appropriate and
justifiable, though violent. Now, which violence do you deem
permissible?

*We do not support or encourage opportunists who change their stances
and principles.* For us the criterion is the architect of the
revolution, His Eminence Imam Khomeini (*q*). We learned from him the
sublime laws and government of Islam. He said: “If the *hizbullahi*
youth and people witness propaganda, articles, books, and magazines
repugnant to Islam, public decency and national interest, they must
report them to the appropriate authorities that are duty-bound to attend
to such things.

But if the concerned authorities fail to act and check these deviations
and sinister propaganda by legal means, then there is no other option
but for the religious people and youth themselves to take preventive
measures, and, incumbent upon every Muslim to take action.

When the apostate Salman Rushdie wrote *The Satanic Verses* in which he
insulted the Holy Apostle (*s*) and ascribed many abominable and
unscrupulous things to the Qur’an and the Apostle (*s*), Imam Khomeini
issued the death sentence for him and declared it incumbent upon every
Muslim to kill him whenever he had access to Rushdie. Indisputably, the
said religious edict [*fatwa*] and decree [*hukm*] was not confined to
the Imam only as other *fuqaha* also issued the same edict and Muslim
countries endorsed it.

Now, the question is: Was the edict of the Imam not violent? It is clear
that the Imam also regarded permissible and even exigent a violent
action against a person who presumptuously insults the essentials of
religion and indisputable principles of Islam, who intends to plot and
render a blow to Islam and cast aspersion against Islamic sanctities,
and the Imam described such person as an apostate who, the Quran says,
must be executed.

Islam and the need to answer all academic objections under all circumstances
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Of course, if a person has no intention of hatching a plot and rendering
a blow, but a question regarding the essence of religion and the
essentials and laws of Islam, he may raise it and one must listen to him
with utmost respect and answer him logically and rationally. It is
because Islam is the religion of logic and based on argument and proof.
It wants the Muslims, the ‘ulama’ in particular, to answer questions and
objections under all circumstances with utmost composure, forbearance
and openness, by the use of sound logic and rational and textual proofs
to prove the truthfulness of Islam.

As such, the Qur’an even says that if at the time of battle one of the
enemy’s army raises a white flag and comes to the Muslims to search the
truthfulness of Islam and ask a question, the Muslims are duty-bound to
provide him with escorts and guards for his protection, to listen to him
with utmost kindness and benevolence, and convey the truth to him by
presenting reasons, proof and evidence. Thereafter, while providing him
with escorts and guards he should be sent to his original place even if
it is in the midst of the enemy’s army:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَإِنْ أَحَدٌ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ اسْتَجَارَكَ فَأَجِرْهُ حَتَّى
يَسْمَعَ كَلاَمَ اللّهِ ثُمَّ أَبْلِغْهُ مَأْمَنَهُ ذَلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ
قَوْمٌ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“If any of the polytheists seeks asylum from you, grant him asylum until
he hears the Word of Allah. Then convey him to his place of
safety.”[^21]

The Qur’an says that even if the person who came to research and ask
questions did not accept Islam and become a Muslim, he must still be
provided escorts to return to his place of safety. No one should hinder
him because he has come in the first place to ask questions. His safety
must be guaranteed and his questions answered. Where in the world and in
which school of thought is such sublime humane treatment enjoined?

However, if out of contumacy and plot to topple the Islamic system, a
person raises objections casts doubt upon the beliefs, principles and
values to which the Muslims are strongly attached, he must be dealt
with. He is different from one who has questions and doubts and
sincerely wants to pose his question and get an answer.

Confronting the conspiracies and reaction of foreigners
-------------------------------------------------------

One must not sit idly vis-à-vis the extensive cultural and propaganda
activities of the enemies of Islam and their mercenary agents from
within that target the religious principles, values and beliefs of the
people. They have certainly hatched an extensive plot through activities
carried out under the garb of cultural exchange, but their agents write
in newspapers that there is no conspiracy in the offing, and claiming
that it exists is nothing but an illusion. However, the unfolding of
recent disturbances and trends in line with the same activities and
cultural policies of the enemy revealed to the people the truth behind
the existence of a conspiracy.

Those actions and demonstrations against the Islamic system, attack on
government establishments, and riots and disturbances indicated that
there was a serious conspiracy behind the event against the Islamic
system, already confirmed by the Supreme Leader. It was on account of
this reality that when the devoted children of this heroic nation put a
stop to the rioters, rascals and rogues and extinguished the fire of
sedition, a wave of support for them and condemnation of the Islamic
system swept across the West. Many members of the American legislative
body even demanded the official condemnation of the Islamic Republic of
Iran and enactment of a law against it because the Islamic state
confronted foreign mercenaries and agents and did not allow the rioters
to do what they wanted!

In different parts of the world strikes and skirmishes take place
everyday and some people get killed or wounded. On a daily basis, we
witness the Zionist regime firing on Muslims who are clamoring for their
rights, killing some of them. Even in some regimes supported by America,
hundreds of people are killed by their respective regimes. Yet, no one
condemns them and says that the crackdown on them is against freedom.
Instead, those regimes are fully supported and it is claimed that those
killed people revolted against legitimate governments who had the right
to defend themselves.

But when a hue and cry was raised in Iran and someone was suspiciously
killed in a university and the killer could not be identified—as
expected, he might be one of the enemy’s infiltrating agents and the
rioters themselves—or another person was incidentally killed on the
scene, and also, when a number of rioters and rogues poured into the
streets, burned mosques and violated the chastity of people and were
confronted by the revolutionary forces, a great reaction was seen in the
Western countries, America in particular, and our government was
condemned for its alleged opposition to freedom and democracy. It was
claimed that the demonstrators were in pursuit of freedom and the grant
of their rights but Iran had suppressed them. As a result, apart from
condemning the Iranian state, they attempted to enact a law to campaign
against the Islamic state of Iran!

The Qur’an and the need to repudiate and be inimical to its enemies
-------------------------------------------------------------------

We can conclude that firstly, Islam describes God as having the
attributes of both mercy and wrath. His mercy being greater prevails
over His wrath but it does not mean that His mercy negates His wrath. In
fact, on account of their persistence in sins some communities earn the
anger of God and they incur His wrath and punishment.

Secondly, Islam has severe and harsh decrees against the enemies and
opponents of Islam, and it enjoins Muslims to openly express abhorrence
for the enemies of God. It is appropriate for friends to study *Surah
al-Mumtahanah* in which Muslim behavior toward the polytheists and
faithless has been described and those who plan to befriend the enemies
of God are rebuked, and God warns us of secretly reconciling with the
enemies of Islam and establishing friendship with them.

In the said *surah*, God commands the Muslims to learn a lesson from
Ibrahim (Abraham) (*‘a*) and his companions and make his attitude toward
the polytheists and enemies of God as the model, and not smile at the
enemies, hypocrites, and the enemy’s open and secret agents who are
determined to annihilate Islam and the Muslims!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَّخِذُوا عَدُوِّي وَعَدُوَّكُمْ
أَوْلِيَاء تُلْقُونَ إِلَيْهِم بِالْمَوَدَّةِ وَقَدْ كَفَرُوا بِمَا
جَاءَكُم مٍنَ الْحَقِّ يُخْرِجُونَ الرَّسُولَ وَإِيَّاكُمْ أَن
تُؤْمِنُوا بِاللَّهِ رَبِّكُمْ إِن كُنتُمْ خَرَجْتُمْ جِهَادًا فِي
سَبِيلِي وَابْتِغَاءَ مَرْضَاتِي تُسِرُّونَ إِلَيْهِم بِالْمَوَدَّةِ
وَأَنَا أَعْلَمُ بِمَا أَخْفَيْتُمْ وَمَا أَعْلَنتُمْ وَمَن يَفْعَلْهُ
مِنكُمْ فَقَدْ ضَلَّ سَوَاءَ السَّبِيلِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O you who have faith! Do not take My enemy and your enemy for friends,
[secretly] offering them affection (for they have certainly defied
whatever has come to you of the truth, expelling the Apostle and you,
because you have faith in Allah, your Lord) if you have set out for
jihad in My way and to seek My pleasure. You secretly nourish affection
for them, while I know well whatever you hide and whatever you disclose,
and whoever among you does that has certainly strayed from the right
way.”[^22]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قَدْ كَانَتْ لَكُمْ أُسْوَةٌ حَسَنَةٌ فِي إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَالَّذِينَ
مَعَهُ إِذْ قَالُوا لِقَوْمِهِمْ إِنَّا بُرَاء مِنكُمْ وَمِمَّا
تَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ كَفَرْنَا بِكُمْ وَبَدَا بَيْنَنَا
وَبَيْنَكُمُ الْعَدَاوَةُ وَالْبَغْضَاءُ أَبَدًا حَتَّى تُؤْمِنُوا
بِاللَّهِ وَحْدَهُ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There is certainly a good exemplar for you in Abraham and those who are
with him, when they said to their people, ‘Indeed we repudiate you and
whatever you worship besides Allah. We disavow you, and between you and
us there has appeared enmity and hate for ever, unless you come to have
faith in Allah alone...”[^23]

They tell us, “Talk about life and do not chant the slogan, ‘Death to
America’ anymore.” Never! The slogan “Death to America” must be chanted
and moreover, like Ibrahim (‘a), we have to tell them, “So long as *you
do not* submit humbly to the truth, bow down meekly to God, desist from
hegemony and arrogance, stop from treading your way, end up plundering
the resources of people around the world, and discontinue your crackdown
on free nations, there is enmity between us and you.

While they have plundered wealth and resources of our country and other
countries, brought enormous losses to us, rendered a blow to our honor
and dignity, and killed a number of our beloved ones, how can we
befriend and express affection for them? Are the hundreds of experiences
in the world not enough for us to realize that they do not think of
anything but dominance and their interests, and that we should not be
deceived again by them?

Thus, Islam and the Qur’an command us to openly disavow and repudiate
the enemy. If we follow this Islam or Qur’an, how can we dare to say
that one must smile at everyone and be kind to all?

[^1]: That is, from 1997 to 1998 or 1999. [Trans.]

[^2]: Mordad 28, 1332 AHS coup: the US and British-orchestrated coup
d’état that toppled down the nationalist government of Dr. Muhammad
Musaddiq (1882-1962/1261-1346 AHS) and reinstalled Shah Muhammad Ridha
Pahlavi to power. [Trans.]

[^3]: Fada’iyan-e Islam organization was established in 1323 AHS (circa
1944) by Martyr Sayyid Mujtaba Nawwab Ṣafawi and one of the religious
parties and organizations in Iran at the time with a long record of
sound faith in Islam and in the role of the ‘ulama’ in leading the
people. The assassination of ‘Abd al-Husayn Hajir and General Razmara
(the Shah’s Prime Ministers) was one of this group’s militant
undertakings. Nawwab Ṣafawi and other members of the group were arrested
by the Shah’s agents in 1344 AHS (circa 1965) and were expeditiously
tried and executed. [Trans.]

[^4]: Imam Khomeini, Wasiyyatnameh-ye Siyasi-Ilahi [Political-Religious
Testament], Article 2.

[^5]: “It is from Solomon, and it begins in the name of Allah the
All-beneficent, the All-merciful” (Surah an-Naml 27:30). [Trans.]

[^6]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:4.

[^7]: Surah as-Sajdah 32:22.

[^8]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:90.

[^9]: Surah al-An‘am 6:12.

[^10]: See Qur’an 7:71-72; 23:40-41; 26:139; 29:38; 41:16; 46:25-26;
51:41-42; 54:18-21. [Trans.]

[^11]: See Qur’an 7:73, 78; 11:66-67; 26:158; 27:51; 51:44-45. [Trans.]

[^12]: See Qur’an 7:84; 11:81-83; 15:66, 73-74, 79; 26:172-173; 27:58;
29:34; 51:32-37; 53:53; 54:34, 37-38; 69:9-10. [Trans.]

[^13]: Surah at-Tawbah (or, Bara’ah) 9:12.

[^14]: Surah al-Mumtahanah 60:9.

[^15]: Surah at-Tawbah (or, Bara’ah) 9:73.

[^16]: Surah at-Tawbah (or, Bara’ah) 9:123.

[^17]: Surah al-Anfal 8:60.

[^18]: Shahrivar 17, 1357 AHS (September 8, 1978), later named as the
“Black Friday”, is one of the most eventful days of the Islamic
Revolution in Iran. In pursuit of the splendid and grand demonstrations
held in Tehran on Shahrivar 13 (September 4) and the ‘Īd al-Fitr
congregational prayers, similar demonstrations were also held in Tehran
on Shahrivar 16 (September 7) and arrangements were made for other
demonstrations for the next day (Friday) to be held in the Zhaleh Square
of the capital. Early on Friday, the people streamed into the Zhaleh
Square such that by 6 in the morning some one hundred thousand people
were gathered there. The Square was surrounded by the Shah’s military
units on all sides with machinegun barrels aimed at the people from
every side. At this hour, the radio unexpectedly announced that martial
law is declared for Tehran and ten other cities. Immediately after the
announcement, machinegun volleys strafed the crowd. On this occasion
more than 4,000 people were killed and several hundred were wounded. The
Shah’s regime placed the figures at 58 killed and 25 wounded! [Trans.]

[^19]: Martyr Sayyid Mujtaba Nawwab Ṣafawi was the founder of
Fada’iyan-e Islam. [Trans.]

[^20]: Prominent figures of the Coalition of Islamic Societies were
responsible for the assassination of Prime Minister Hasan-‘Ali Mansur
who was responsible for the passage of the capitulation bill in 1963
under which all of the US political agents, diplomats, advisors, and
military advisors as well as their immediate family members were granted
political and legal immunity in Iran. [Trans.]

[^21]: Surah at-Tawbah (or, Bara’ah) 9:6.

[^22]: Surah al-Mumtahanah 60:1.

[^23]: Surah al-Mumtahanah 60:4.


