Session 38: Confrontation of Western Ideas and Beliefs’ with Islamic Laws
=========================================================================

The Constitutional Movement and propagation of Western values
-------------------------------------------------------------

In the sketched discussions on Islamic political theory we mentioned
some of the influences of Western atheistic culture in our society and
dwelt on the contributory factors for their emergence so that our
people, especially the dear youth, future builders and inheritors of
this revolution, would not succumb to them. Some of the influences that
we examined in the past session were freedom and democracy.

Since the beginning of the Constitutional Movement, the freemasons and
xenomaniacs borrowed multifaceted and many-sided concepts, such as
freedom and democracy prevalent in the West, and promoted them in our
Islamic society. Since our people were suffering from the oppression and
tyranny perpetrated by the willful and despotic courtiers, they easily
responded to the clarion call of freedom. The people welcomed with open
arms those who chanted the slogan of liberty.

Consequently, the said slogan was transformed into a populist and
universal slogan, and the inclination towards freedom and freedom-loving
became generally accepted. Of course, what the people were aspiring for
was freedom from the yoke of willful and despotic regimes inimical to
Islamic values. However, what the xenomanics and darlings of the West
were pursuing was the other dimension of the concept, i.e. freedom from
the grip of Islam*.* By chanting the slogan and promoting the concept of
freedom, they were trying to keep the people away from Islam so that
they would no longer be attached to Islamic laws, ordinances and values.

Similarly, the people who suffered at the hands of the oppressive
regime, khans and feudal lords, hailed the slogan of democracy through
which they demanded mastery over their own destiny, and did not want
oppressive rulers, capitalists and landlords to chart it for them. This
was the acceptable dimension for our society. But those who used to
promote this concept in its general sense and invite others to do the
same had a different motive in chanting the slogan of democracy, i.e. to
remove religion from the political arena of society, and replace Islamic
or religious values with the people’s will and demand.

Those who were unaware of this objective of the xenomaniacs and
freemasons accepted this slogan completely. But those who were
farsighted strongly reacted and putting their lives in danger took on
the responsibility of informing and enlightening the people of the
conspiracy by showing that absolute freedom and democracy that
contradicts Islam and its decrees are condemned and rejected by Islam
and its sacred laws.

The “crime” of Martyr Shaykh Fadhlullah Nuri was his opposition to
Western democracy and constitutionalism that were heedless of religious
or divine values, and his advancement of “religiously legitimate
constitutionalism” [mashruteh-ye mashru‘eh] vis-à-vis “absolute
constitutionalism” [mashruteh-ye mutlaqeh]. He used to say: “We do not
accept constitutionalism as absolute. We accept constitutionalism which
is consistent with Islamic laws, ordinances and decrees, but others talk
about absolute constitutionalism and it is not important for them
whether it is consistent with religion or not.” To advance their
disdainful objective, they sent that distinguished religious scholar to
the gallows and made him attain martyrdom on the charge of supporting
despotism and opposing constitutionalism. This dispute or clash between
the fundamentalists and Islamists, on one hand, and the hypocrites and
xenomaniacs, on the other, continues up to now.

Some writers’ displeasure at the presentation of ideal freedom in Islam
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

On one occasion last year, I discussed freedom and democracy and I said
that absolute freedom is unacceptable in our Islamic culture and
Constitution, and what is acceptable is conditional freedom. As provided
in Article 4 of the Constitution, the constitutional provisions,
statutory laws, ratified bills, and ordinances issued by concerned
authorities are binding provided that they are not inconsistent with and
repugnant to the fundamental principles of Islam.

So, even if only one provision of the Constitution is against the
general acceptance of Qur’anic verses and traditions, it is not binding
as a whole! Our people approved this constitution. As such, it is
impossible for the people who have staged a revolution for the revival
of Islam and also expressed their desire to protect the position and
station of Islamic laws and decrees in the constitution and not to yield
to non-Islamic values. These people accepts freedom within the framework
of Islamic laws and values.

After making this discourse, many newspapers launched a campaign against
me, publishing numerous articles accusing me of opposing freedom and
democracy and supporting dictatorship and despotic rule. They even said
that so-and-so (alluding to me) wants Iran to go back to the period of
intransigence prior to the Constitutional Movement! Nevertheless,
fair-minded Muslim writers supported my views, arguing that what is
acceptable to our society and should be defended is legitimate freedom
within the framework of Islamic laws and decrees. Officials of the
system also stipulated this point time and again.

Islamic decree on enemy combatants and agents of corruption on earth
--------------------------------------------------------------------

We have said that those who talk about freedom as absolute, without
limit and boundary, and consider violence as something absolutely wrong,
say that one should not resort to violence even against those who rise
up against the system and resort to violence. They must be treated with
kindness, benevolence and divine mercy. Undoubtedly, their outlook is
wrong. If the criminals and violators are not dealt with seriously and
decisively, and in case of necessity, brute force or violence is not
used, the path will be open for a repetition of riots and crimes. Islam
commands that enemy combatants and agents of corruption on earth must be
dealt with decisively.

In general, violation of government decrees or resorting to violence is
sometimes individual in nature and at times collective in nature. It has
a social or collective dimension when an organized group engages in an
armed struggle against the government. This group is described in
jurisprudence [*fiqh*] as “seditionists” [*bughah* or *ahl al-baghy*].
One of the classifications of *jihad* discussed in Islam is the *jihad*
against this group, i.e. war against seditionists. Members of organized
groups that stage an armed struggle against the Islamic government must
be confronted and made to surrender to the Islamic government, and one
must not compromise with them.

There is also a time when resorting to violence against the government
or revolt against the Islamic ordinances is not done by an organized
group. It is rather an individual movement with one or two persons
disrupting order in society, violating public property and honor, or
striking fear and terror by the use of hard or soft power. This kind of
individual is known as “enemy combatant” [*muharib*]. In dealing with
the *muharib*, there is no need for a military expedition. Instead,
these individuals will be convicted by the Islamic court and the Islamic
state will execute the decree of the Islamic judge.

Depending on the decision of the judge, one of the four decrees
determined by Islam for the *muharib* and “agent of corruption on earth”
[*mufsid fi’l-ardh*] shall be executed. (1) He shall be sent to the
gallows; (2) he will be put to the sword or executed by a firing squad;
(3) His right hand and left foot, or left hand and right foot shall be
amputated; or (4) he shall be banished from the Islamic land:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّمَا جَزَاء الَّذِينَ يُحَارِبُونَ اللّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ
وَيَسْعَوْنَ فِي الأَرْضِ فَسَادًا أَن يُقَتَّلُوا أَوْ يُصَلَّبُوا
أَوْ تُقَطَّعَ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَأَرْجُلُهُم مِّنْ خِلافٍ أَوْ يُنفَوْا
مِنَ الأَرْضِ ذَلِكَ لَهُمْ خِزْيٌ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَلَهُمْ فِي
الآخِرَةِ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Indeed the requital of those who wage war against Allah and His
Apostle, and to try to cause corruption on the earth, is that they shall
be slain or crucified, or have their hands and feet cut off from
opposite sides or be banished from the land. That is a disgrace for them
in this world, and in the Hereafter there is a great punishment for
them.”[^1]

Hence, those who stage riots and insurrection against the Islamic
government or system are enemy combatants and agents of corruption on
earth, and Islamic punishments shall be meted out to them. Islamic
punishments or penal laws have never been abrogated. Those who oppose
Islamic culture say that Islamic penal laws or punishments are violent,
and generally, any violent action is condemnable. In our discussion
related to violence, we have said that just as absolute freedom is not
laudable, all violence is not condemnable and reproachable.

In fact, some forms of violence are necessary and permissible. One must
deal violently with those who resort to violence, for if they are
treated kindly and compassionately, it is actually a green light for
them to stage a riot again.

The consequences of the lack of decisive step against conspirators
------------------------------------------------------------------

1378 AHS, there were limited riots in some parts of our country. For
certain reasons, military officials preferred to show tolerance to the
rioters and did not deal with them decisively. It was this appeasing and
flexible treatment of theirs that prompted the rioters to create another
disturbance whose scope and extent of damages and losses were
far-reaching and unbearable.

If these rioters and agents of corruption on earth are not confronted
and the Islamic penalty not implemented on them, there will be no
guarantee that they will not riot again under a certain pretext and
exploit the university atmosphere. Our dear Muslim students are very
vigilant and wary and had no hand in the riots and disturbances. But
there are those who exploit the honest feelings of the students and
prepare the ground for another riot.

So, if rioters are not dealt with decisively, and in the words of the
gentlemen, no violent action undertaken, what is the guarantee that
these riots will not be repeated? It must be borne in mind that Islam
has set severe penal laws against thieves and other criminals,
especially the *muharib,* so that no one dare commit treachery and
create disturbance, and be afraid of the penalty they will incur. In
fact, the issue of frightening the enemy and criminal contains great
wisdom as mentioned in the Qur’an, which the Muslims must pay attention
to:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَأَعِدُّواْ لَهُم مَا اسْتَطَعْتُم مِن قُوَّةٍ وَمِنْ رِبَاطِ
الْخَيْلِ تُرْهِبُونَ بِهِ عَدْوَّ اللّهِ وَعَدُوَّكُمْ وَآخَرِينَ مِن
دُونِهِمْ لاَ تَعْلَمُونَهُمُ اللّهُ يَعْلَمُهُمْ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Prepare against them whatever you can of [military] power and
war-horses, create awe thereby in the enemy of Allah, and your enemy,
and others besides them, whom you do not know, but Allah knows
them...”[^2]

Among the cases in which violence even on the part of the people is
permitted is where the Islamic country is in danger and a conspiracy
against the Islamic system has been hatched and the Islamic state alone
is incapable of defending the Islamic system. When the Islamic state
senses that there is a conspiracy at work against the system, it is
duty-bound to take steps. If steps taken by the state are not
sufficient, people are bound to rush to the assistance of the Islamic
state and defend it.

As witnessed by everybody, after the riots and disturbances staged by
rogues, rascals and foreign mercenaries in the month of Tir this year,
the system was in great danger and the government forces alone were
incapable of deterring and stopping the rioters. Seeing this, the people
and the beloved *basiji*s rushed to their assistance and promptly put an
end to the sedition of foreign agents. Some high-ranking officials of
the system also admitted that the disturbance came to an end due to the
efforts of the beloved *basiji*s.

Thus, if there is a conspiracy at work against the Islamic system and
there are solid proofs and decisive evidence substantiating it and there
is no option but to resort to violence in order to thwart it, violence
becomes indispensable and obligatory. As the Imam said, “Here, taqiyyah
[dissimulation] is haram and one must rise up otherwise we will fail to
convey the message. When Islam itself is in danger, there is no room for
taqiyyah on account of either precaution or fear. One must stand up, to
defend the essence of Islam even if thousands of people have to be
killed. Therefore, in case some elements have the intention of
overthrowing the system it is obligatory upon those who have proof to
act by themselves, even if others are unaware of the impending danger or
they do not deem it expedient to take any steps. The act of violence
here, is also permissible.

I do not mean that in all cases one must resort to violence. I am not a
theoretician on violence. Rather, I believe that mercy and kindness are
the guiding principle and only in case of necessity and emergency one
must resort to violence. My point is that when the Islamic state is
established, the Islamic state must act according to the decree of the
court or concerned authorities. But if the situation is beyond the
control of the Islamic state and in order to protect Islam and the
system, the people have no option but to stage a violent uprising,
violence is obligatory.

Irresponsible stances against the issue of violence
---------------------------------------------------

Following the subjects I discussed about violence, Westernized
periodicals called for public mobilization against my words and many
articles were published in newspapers. Of course, I personally thank all
those who talked or wrote an article in favor or against my words. I
believe that not only the examination and criticism of these subjects
and discussions in periodicals are not harmful, but they contribute
towards the enlightenment and awareness of the people, strengthening
their beliefs and making them understand their duties, provided the
periodicals do not judge unjustly and publish the complete arguments of
both parties.

But unfortunately defective reports are submitted to some officials in
which my statements are quoted out of context. As a result, these
officials are upset and immediately start opposing me.

I do not expect others to conform to my statements. Neither am I afraid
of their opposition. I am performing my divine religious duty. If
someone likes my speeches, so be it. If another person dislikes my
speeches, I entrust my work to God and am not afraid of the threats and
insults. However, I expect those who are proponents of tolerance and
acceptance of the ideas of others and exponents of plural and
multi-voiced societies to magnanimously listen to my speech with an open
mind. In many cases, after listening to all my speeches, they will
conform to all my points and if ever they have any reservations, they
will react to my points with logic and proof, and not disagree with me
by using expressions devoid of courtesy and elegance.

Regrettably, I cannot reply in writing to all those who expressed
affection in speeches, newspapers and periodicals and presented a
subject in my favor or against me, and in the past two weeks wrote
hundreds of articles. At this moment, I cannot also verbally reply to
each of them. As such, I shall avoid answering them with the hope that
they have taken stances with the intention of seeking the pleasure of,
and proximity to, God. We know that it is our duty to discuss subjects
needed and favorable to Islam by using logic and proof. I expect those
who dislike them to respond to me logically and fairly.

An examination of the synonym of the word “violence” in the Qur’an
------------------------------------------------------------------

At this moment, I deem it necessary to summarize the subjects about
violence and its subtopics. Essentially, the word *khushunat* is Arabic
and it is also used in the Persian language and literature to mean
roughness [*zibri*] or coarseness [*doroshti*] while its antonym is
*layn* which means “soft”. In the Qur’an the word *khushunat* is not
used as the opposite of *layn* but rather the word *ghalzah* [severity].

Actually, these two words are synonyms. Just as we have many synonymous
words in Persian, there are also many synonymous words in Arabic. In the
Qur’an, sometimes only one term is used, and at other times, both
synonymous terms are used. At times, each of the terms implies a
specific meaning. For example, the word *qalb* [heart] means one thing
and the word *fu’ad* [heart] means another. Sometimes, these words are
used interchangeably. In the Qur’an, the word *ghalzah* [severity] is
used as the opposite of *layn* [softness]. For instance, addressing the
Holy Apostle (*s*), God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَبِمَا رَحْمَةٍ مِنَ اللّهِ لِنْتَ لَهُمْ وَلَوْ كُنتَ فَظًّا
غَلِيظَ الْقَلْبِ لاَنفَضُّوا مِنْ حَوْلِكَ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“It is by Allah’s mercy that you are gentle to them; and had you been
harsh and hardhearted, surely they would have scattered from around
you...”[^3]

In Persian, *ghalzah* is not used to mean “coarseness” [*doroshti*].
Instead, in our culture *ghalzah* is generally used in relation to
liquid matters. For example, it is said that so-and-so *shireh* [juice,
syrup or milk] is *ghaliz*. Here *ghaliz* means concentrated. The
equivalent in Persian of the word *ghalzah* which is used in Arabic as
the antonym of *layn* is *khushunat* [harshness or violence] which we
discussed. We said that contrary to what some people say, violence is
not absolutely condemnable is all circumstances. In fact, in some cases
it is even obligatory.

The Western and Islamic concept of tolerance
--------------------------------------------

Regarding freedom, we said that the concept of freedom used in our
political culture and literature was initially the translation of the
word “liberalism” prevalent in the West. Similarly, the word *tahammul*
which is used as the antonym of *khushunat* is used as the equivalent of
the word “tolerance” in English or French. This concept or term is
prevalent in Western literature.

There is no objection to use and include in our literature an
unambiguous and clear concept or term used in a foreign language, or its
equivalent. But the point that must not be neglected is that sometimes
these imported concepts have certain conditions, semantic loads and
specific values. These concepts are laden with values suitable to their
culture. That is, once a word is used in a culture, it is laden with a
positive or negative value, but once this word is adopted in another
culture which is foreign to the original culture, it will lose its
embedded value. On the contrary, it will acquire a new value in the
second language. Let us elaborate:

Since “freedom” was adopted in our literature from Western culture and
this term has a broad meaning in the West and is even used to mean
sexual freedom which is rejected in our society, we have no such concept
in our culture, so we are forced to add certain qualifications to
freedom while keeping in view our Islamic and national values, to aspire
for legitimate freedom within the framework of Islamic values, and to
categorically declare that we do not accept absolute freedom. In the
same tone, the concept of “violence” in its new sense was adopted in our
culture from Western culture.

In contrast to the West which regarded it as absolutely condemnable and
reproachable according to the exigency of its culture, we do not
consider it as anti-value in its absolute sense just as we do not accept
freedom as an absolute value. Instead, we regard violence which is
devoid of underlying logic, unjustifiable and against human ethics. We
believe that in some cases violence is acceptable, consistent with the
dictates of reason, ensuring the interests of society, thereby not
reproachable*.*

So, before adopting “tolerance” from Western culture and presenting it
as absolutely desirable in our literature, we must pay attention to its
source, investigate its root and see what it means in Western
literature; which value—positive or negative—it is laden with, and for
what motive it has prevailed in Western culture, and for which motive it
is introduced in our political culture and literature. We also have to
check whether its meaning has changed or not after its introduction.

The concept of “tolerance” is among the blessings of modern Western
culture that gradually evolved after the Renaissance and gained
universal acceptance. Today, it is known as one of the distinctive
features of Western atheistic culture. (We have already stated that
whenever we talk about Western culture, we do not mean the culture of
all people in the West because there are also many monotheistic and
religious people there. Instead, we mean the atheistic culture dominant
in the West which is also opposed by many.)

In finding the root of the concept of tolerance, firstly, in the
dominant culture of the West, all values—including moral, social, and
political-legal values—are conventional affairs and have no rational and
real root. In other words, values depend on the demands and preferences
of people. It cannot be said that a thing, belief or conviction is
valuable forever and for all. Rather, according to the Westerners, so
long as a thing is accepted by society, it is valuable, and if one day
the people’s preferences change, the same value turns into anti-value.
Secondly, religious beliefs and convictions are also considered as
conventional values and a person is deemed free in choosing or rejecting
them. They are reduced into a matter of preference only.

People choose the colors of their clothes according to their
preferences. For example, a person likes to wear dark-blue clothes,
another, black and, a third, brown. A person cannot be reproached for
choosing brown or grey because everyone is free to choose whatever he
prefers. Similarly, people choose religious values and accounts
according to their preferences and demands. One cannot be condemned why
he professes a certain religion or why he has no belief in it, or why he
slights, rejects or negates a certain religious belief.

Beyond this, if a person sets aside his religious beliefs and chooses
new religious values, one cannot condemn him because his change of faith
is exactly like a change of preference in choosing the color of his
attire!

According to Islam and the Islamic culture, however, religious
sanctities and values are much dearer than one’s life, property, honor,
and relatives. Does Islam allow us to defend religious sanctities? It is
true that a certain gentleman who is currently a member of the Tehran
City Council permits people to demonstrate even against God, but
according to the religious edicts [*fatawa*] of all sources of emulation
[*maraji‘ at-taqlid*] and the consensus of opinion of Sunni and Shi‘ah
*fuqaha* which is accepted by all Muslims, if a person treats God, the
Apostle (*s*) and the religious sanctities and essentials of Islam with
insolence, even in a desert or private place, away from the sight of the
authorities and there is no opportunity to turn him over to the police
or Islamic court, it is incumbent upon every Muslim to execute him for
the crime of insulting the sanctities of Islam.

It was on the basis of this Islamic perspective that the late Imam
(*‘a*) issued the death sentence to the apostate Salman Rushdie which
was also affirmed by other Sunni and Shi‘ah *fuqaha*. This is our point
of departure from Western culture—something which Islam accepts but is
rejected by the West.

Religious duty and zeal do not allow us to witness any act of insolence
to Islamic sanctities and keep silent. Islam has permitted violence in
defending religious sanctity. Since Islam and its sanctity is dearer to
us than our lives, wealth and children, we can even risk our lives in
defending them. As such, if somebody slights religious sanctity, one can
punish him even if he is most probably arrested, convicted for killing
someone and having no “right” to do so and fails to prove the heinous
crime of the killed person, and thus be condemned to death under the law
of retaliation [qisas]. As his religious duty, he can still punish that
wicked and impudent insulter, provided his action does not lead to
further corruption.

[^1]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:33.

[^2]: Surah al-Anfal 8:60.

[^3]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:159.


