Session 39: An Investigation of the Relativity of Values and Religious Narratives
=================================================================================

Religion as absolute or relative
--------------------------------

The questions we are facing now are: Are the points we have tried to
prove in our series of discussions credible and plausible for all? Do
these points have absolute credibility, or relative credibility, for
example, do they only express the views of the speaker or do others have
different views in this regard which are consistent with his views? In
other words, must every Muslim, especially a Shi‘ah who follows the
school of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*), accept my arguments in view of the
existing evidence and treat them as absolute? Or, can he not accept them
on the ground that they only represent a specific viewpoint and on the
contrary, there are other viewpoints that might have equal or greater
credibility?

Some assert in their speeches and periodicals that these subjects and
interpretations are not supposed to be expressed as absolute. They must
not even be attributed to Islam. They must only be considered as the
viewpoint of the speaker. That is, a speaker must say, *“This is my
understanding of Islam,” and not present his understanding as* *the
Islamic theory. In similar cases, especially during the past decade some
individuals have insisted that one should not consider his understanding
as absolute, for there are those who have different interpretations
which are in themselves valuable and credible*.

Three approaches to the relativity of knowledge
-----------------------------------------------

Some serious questions are posed here. What do “absolute” and “relative”
essentially mean? What does the statement “So-and-so subject does not
have absolute credibility” mean? Does it mean that no knowledge
[*ma‘rifah*] has absolute credibility, or some knowledge has absolute
credibility while another does not? In such a case, what is the
difference between absolute and relative knowledge? Is relativity of
knowledge or relativity of credibility of knowledge confined only to the
domain of religious matters? Or, is credibility of subjects discussed in
every field of science relative?


