Introduction
============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**In the Name of Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ للهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِيْنَ وَ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلىٰ سَيِّدِنَا
وَ نَبِيِّنَا مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِهِ الطَّاهِرِيْنَ وَ لَعْنَةُ اللهِ
عَلىٰ أَعْدَائِهِمْ أَجْمَعِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds, and may the
blessings of Allah be upon our Master and Prophet Muhammad, and his pure
progeny, and may the curse of Allah be upon all their enemies.*

One of the most fundamental and essential questions in political
philosophy is the question of exigency of government and state. The
existence of an established government has been considered to be among
the initial stages of departure of human life from its primitive and
nomadic form, formation of human societies, and structural
transformation in human life. Only a small group in the past and in the
19th century—such as Claude Henri de Rouvroy Saint-Simon (1760-1825) and
Pierre Joseph Proudhon (1809-65)—believed in the abolition of government
from society.

According to Saint-Simon, the human mind and intellect has the
capability to relieve society from peril and organize it. In the opinion
of the anarchists and those who oppose government, man has a pure nature
that urges him to accept good desires and pleasant demands. This group
also believed that a government is not in harmony with human freedom,
and the preservation of human dignity and freedom requires the uprooting
of government from man’s life.

Sociological studies show that man has always, and under all
circumstances, regarded the formation of state and government as
indispensable and based on his natural disposition [*fitrah*] and
intellect [*‘aql*], because of man’s basic need of company and an innate
inclination toward collective living. It is only under the aegis of
social life and a cohesive organization, in which the rights of all are
respected, that man can subsist. Otherwise, humanity will plunge into
chaos, barbarity, savagery, injustice, jungle-like inequality, and
lawlessness.

The forms of government and the existence of fundamental differences in
the structure and approach of grand administrative systems of societies
are based on different epistemological systems, various worldviews and
their concept of human beings. If a human being is considered as a mere
physical body, the ultimate aspirations for him would be to be well
provided materially and his welfare, comfort and happiness be ensured.
From this perspective, all efforts would be directed toward animal needs
and pleasure. However, if we treat man as superior to materiality, and
lay the foundation of a political system based on the multi-faceted
material and spiritual dimensions of human existence, a government would
pursue man’s material welfare and spiritual ascension. It is through
this criterion and outlook on man and the choice of ideals that we shall
examine the political thoughts as well as the performance of
governments; because the origin of political thoughts is the very
insight and ideal and without them political thoughts have no essence.

Nowadays, in the realm of political discussions, only a few pay
attention to the fundamental perspective on man and his sublime
aspirations. The sociological approach focuses mainly on the material
benefits totally sidetracking human aspiration and insight. Yet, it must
be noted that in the school [*maktab*] of the prophets (*‘a*),[^1] who
were the true custodians of the establishment of exalted humane systems,
optimism and idealism have been the foundation of movement and
transformation. It is for this reason that through a comprehensive
perspective consistent with the Qur’an, we realize that the creation of
man, life and death, the sending down of the prophets (*‘a*), and
socio-religious systems are all based on a purpose, and the axis of all
activities and programs, including the setting up of government, is
guidance [*hidayah*] toward that basic purpose.

As such, governments must be set up not only for the physical
administration of societies but for their spiritual growth as well.
One-dimensional governments strive only for the material welfare and
comfort of people. If, however, they are in pursuit of man’s material
comfort and spiritual ascension, they will also engage in guiding him.
Man possesses God’s spirit, and the essence of his existence consists of
spiritual and celestial dimensions beyond the base material ones. To
confine him to physical administration without spiritual guidance is
tantamount to belittling him.

If the ultimate goal of government is the good and of man (in this
world) and attainment of divine proximity [*qurb-e ilahi*] and the axis
of government is revolved around the guidance of mankind, undoubtedly
the one most worthy to govern people is he who is the most aware of the
real concerns and interests of man and perfectly cognizant of the
dimensions and aspects of his existence, and that is nobody but God. The
corollary of rational proof [*burhan-e ‘aqli*] which is also confirmed
by verses of the Qur’an is that the perfection of man lies in obedience
to the One who is fully aware and omniscient of the truth behind him,
this world and the hereafter, and the mutual link between him, this
world and the hereafter, is nobody but God. So, worship and guardianship
inevitably belong to Allah alone.

That is, the Sole Master of man is God, and sovereignty of other than
God, only if it is anchored in His will and permission, will be
legitimate. As such, the theory of the guardianship of the jurist
[*wilayah al-faqih*], which is the axis of the Islamic government, needs
to be established during the period of occultation [*ghaybah*] of the
infallible Imam (*‘a*). It is a theory which in recent centuries has
drawn the close attention of Islamic scholars and jurists [*fuqaha*],
and has reached its apex during recent decades. In comparison to the
negation of religious authority, it turned out to be a useful, dynamic
and socially transforming theory in the scene of the world of politics.

The Muslim world, during this contemporary era, has witnessed two truly
momentous phenomena. One is the negative view on politics and religious
authority. This perennial view, which permeates all religions
particularly Islam and leads to the political isolation of religious
thought and the decrease of religious movement, is a meta-religious
onslaught that requires the scholars and intellectuals in the Muslim
world to engage in elucidating and fortifying the pristine religious
beliefs through profound and serious studies in order to be equipped
with rational defense against it.

The second phenomenon is the presence of political thought based on
*wilayah al-faqih*. Though, theoretically, this phenomenon has many
precedents and different variations, its actual and concrete practice is
traceable to the victory of the Islamic Revolution.

The Islamic Revolution of Iran—after a long and persistent
struggle—attained victory under the wise and ingenious leadership of
Imam Khomeini (*q*)[^2], and through the overwhelming vote (98.22 %) of
the Muslim people of Iran, the Islamic Republic was established. After
the victory of the Islamic Revolution, a constitution based on Qur’anic
verses and luminous laws of Islam was codified by a group of
*mujtahid*s,[^3] Islamic scholars and experts of the nation which, as
acknowledged by legal authorities and experts, is regarded as one of the
most advanced constitutions in the world.

Up to this stage, the legal standing of the Islamic Republic was
specified and fixed, and *wilayah al-faqih* stipulated in the
constitution as the symbol of Islam, the truthfulness of the system, the
guarantor of its survival and immunity from possible danger, and, the
main pillar of the Islamic Republic. However, the events after the
Revolution, the entanglement of the intellectual revolutionary forces
with current problems, and the emotional, exaggerated and superficial
presentation of *wilayah al-faqih* resulted in an improper scientific
study, examination and elucidation of this issue.

Nevertheless, the Islamic system successfully handled the problems and
society moved toward peace and stability. Due to the critical inquiries
of theoretical rivals, more attention was paid to it and its various
angles were elucidated by intelligent and wary scholars who were well
aware of the conditions of the time.

In view of the exigency to explain: (i) the Islamic political theory and
present its position in political systems; (ii) to deal with the
existence of doubts, concerns and intellectual challenges behind this
theory; and, (iii) to confront the pervasive efforts of the external and
internal enemies in opposing this *wilayah al-faqih* system; the wise,
vigilant scholar struggling to defend and guard the sanctity of religion
and revealed teachings, His Eminence Ayatullah Muhammad Taqi Misbah
Yazdi (may Allah prolong his sublime presence), presented a series of
discussions on Islamic political theory before sermons [kutbahs] of the
Friday congregational Prayer of Tehran.

The present volume is the transcript of the said discussions compiled
and edited by Mr. Karim Subhani and presented to you, dear readers, in
two volumes (legislation and statecraft). It is hoped that this book is
accepted by the concerned authorities and approved by *Hadhrat Wali*
*al-‘Asr* [His Holiness, the Master of the Age] (may Allah the Exalted,
expedite his glorious advent).

**Imam Khomeini Educational and Research Institute**

***Tir 26, 1378 AHS (July 17, 1999)***

[^1]: The abbreviation, “‘a” stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
‘alayhi’s-salam, ‘alayhim’us-salam, or ‘alayha’s-salam [may peace be
upon him/them/her], which is used after the names of the prophets,
angels, Imams from the Prophet’s progeny, and saints (‘a). [Trans.]

[^2]: The abbreviation, “q” stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
quddisa sirruh [may his soul be sanctified], which is used after the
names of pious people. [Trans.]

[^3]: Mujtahid: an authority on the divine law who practices ijtihad,
i.e. “the search for a correct opinion in the deduction of the specific
provisions of the law from its principles and ordinances.” [Trans.]


