3. Third approach to the relativity of knowledge (relativity of religious knowledge)
====================================================================================

One of the types of relativism is the relativity of religious knowledge.
Some people say: “We also acknowledge that religion is immutable and
absolute and that religious values are also consistent with the real,
essential and permanent interests and corruptions, and we regard the
reality of religion as absolute and fixed. However, we have no access to
the real and absolute religion and we cannot establish connection with
it. What is accessible to us and at our disposal is our knowledge or
understanding of religion. What we present to others as religion is
actually our understanding or perception of religion, and others may
possibly have their own understanding or perception of religion. We
recognize the essence of religion as fixed and absolute but we consider
our understanding or knowledge of religion as alterable and relative,
believing that one must not treat as absolute his knowledge or
understanding of religion and impose his ideas upon others.”

At this point, this question is raised: Is it possible for some of our
religious understandings to be absolute yet accepted or not by
everybody, and that there is no absolute understanding in the realm of
religious knowledge, and any knowledge of every religious subject is
relative or subjective? As a result, it is possible that there is
contradiction between two religious understandings and these two are in
total opposition to each other. That is, a person totally believes in a
religious narrative while another person totally rejects it, whereas the
understanding and perception of religion of both is acceptable and
credible!

This third approach on relativism which has been known as relativity of
religious knowledge and understanding and whose exponents have labeled
it as “the contraction and expansion of the path” has been advanced and
promoted in our country for approximately the past two decades.
Everyday, it is intensively and extensively discussed more in newspapers
and magazines on the basis of which, it is shown that all people do not
have equal understanding of religion. One may possibly say according to
his belief, “*Subh* [dawn] prayer has two *rak‘ah*s [cycles or units],”
and another person would say based on his belief and understanding of
religion, “*Subh* prayer has three *rak‘ah*s,” while both of them are
credible and acceptable!

According to this view, once we believe that *subh* prayer has two
*rak‘ah*s, we have no right to ask others to perform it in two
*rak‘ah*s. According to our understanding and interpretation of
religion, *subh* prayer has two *rak‘ah*s. There might be another
understanding of religion according to which *subh* prayer consists of
three *rak‘ah*s. The latter is also an understanding or interpretation
of religion. There is no difference between the two interpretations in
terms of value. The interpretation of every person is worthy of respect
for himself. No one has the right to treat his interpretation of
religion as absolute and ask others to understand and interpret religion
the way he understands and interprets it!

My understanding or interpretation of religion is that which is pleasing
and the truth for me. The same is true for another person. This is in
spite of the contradiction between the two interpretations because
knowledge and understanding has contractions and extensions such that
one of the interpretations or understanding may possibly be on one side
of a spectrum while another interpretation on the other side. It is
possible that today a person proves a religious narrative and tomorrow
another person negates it. The reason behind these differences is that
real religion is inaccessible to us and what is at our disposal is our
knowledge of religion. This knowledge and interpretation is also
alterable and not the same for all persons.

The distinction between the domain of relative interpretations and the domain of absolute interpretations
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

At the outset, let us pose these questions: Do the proponents of the
theory of “the contraction and expansion of the path” believe that every
case in religion can have many interpretations, understandings and
readings? Do only some religious cases have different interpretations
and readings? Most of the reasons they cite prove only the difference of
interpretations and understandings of some religious narratives.

But they generalize this specific reason and apply it to the entire
domain of religion and all religious narratives. Then, they conclude
that all religious narratives are subject to different interpretations
and understandings. One of these reasons is the difference in the
religious edicts [*fatawa*] of *mujtahid*s and *fuqaha*.

Their claim is that in the realm of Islam, its jurisprudence in
particular, the *fatawa* of *mujtahid*s are different from each other.
One *mujtahid* opines that the Friday congregational prayer is *wajib*
(even during this period of major occultation [*ghaybah al-kubra*])
while another says that it is not *wajib*. One decrees that playing
chess is *haram* while another considers it *halal* [permissible or
lawful]. One declares a certain form of music as *haram* while another
says that it is *halal*.

Thus, the *fatawa* and understandings of the *fuqaha* and *mujtahid*s
are subjective, alterable and variable such that even a single
*mujtahid* can possibly have two different religious edicts on an issue.
For example, some *fuaqaha* give a *fatwa* at a given time and after
sometime, they recant the said edict and issue another. So, this
difference of *fatawa* and understanding is a proof that our knowledge
or interpretation of religion is subjective and changeable, and that it
is impossible for the knowledge or understanding of religion to be fixed
and absolute.

We argue that everybody including an illiterate person living in a
far-flung village knows that the *fatawa* of *mujtahid*s are not
identical in the sphere of the branches of religion [*furu‘ad-din*] and
some religious obligations. But this difference of *fatawa* does not
warrant you to claim that even the Apostle’s (*s*) knowledge of
revelation [*wahy*] revealed to him is not absolute on the ground that
the knowledge of the Apostle (*s*) also belongs to the realm of human
knowledge and subject to be mistaken! That is, when God says in the
Qur’an,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قُلْ هُوَ اللَّهُ أَحَدٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say, ‘He is Allah, the One’**”*[^1] or

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَإِلَـهُكُمْ إِلَهٌ وَاحِدٌ لا إِلَهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ الرَّحْمَنُ
الرَّحِيمُ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Your god is the One God; there is no god except Him, the
All-beneficent, the All-merciful,**”*[^2]

Can it be said that we do not know if the revelation is from God? It is
through the claim of the Apostle (*s*) that we have been informed of
divine revelation. But we have no information of divine revelation. What
the Apostle (*s*) has introduced to us is not the essence of divine
revelation, rather a product of his knowledge and understanding of it,
and since he is but human and thus fallible, it is probable that he
might have erred in receiving and understanding it. God might have
wanted to say something and he might have erroneously understood it
otherwise and perceived his knowledge as divine revelation. The outcome
of such a view is that none of the understanding of any of the Qur’anic
verses is credible, and in all of them there is the possibility of
mistake and error!

Is this a new interpretation of religion? Has the scope of
interpretations extended to such magnitude and depth? We acknowledge
that there is difference in the *fatawa*, but is the existence of God
also doubtful, and can it be accepted that a person will prove the
existence of God in the name of Islam and the essence of revelation
while another person will negate it, and both claims will be credible as
religious knowledge?! Contrary to what the Sunni and Shi‘ah *‘ulama’* of
different schools of thought have declared and stated, can we claim that
they have erred and misunderstood it and what they have expressed is
their own interpretation, and that we also have our own interpretation?

It is possible to have different interpretations in the domain of issues
pertaining to the branches of religion and not in the domain of issues
pertaining to any of the roots of religion [usul ad-din]. Moreover, in
the realm of secondary and hypothetical issues of religion, only the
opinions of religious experts and authorities are credible and not that
of any neophyte or amateur.

What are credible are the opinions of those who have studied for more
than 50 years under the teachers like the late Ayatullah Burujirdi,[^3]
Imam Khomeini and ‘Allamah Ṭabataba’i[^4] (may Allah be pleased with
them) and have undergone hardships and tribulations, have piety in
action, understanding, research, and deduction, and are not under the
influence of whims and caprice. In the realm of religion, the opinion of
any sensual xenomaniac neophyte who studies Islam for only a short
period yet introduces himself as a religious expert is not credible.

In sum, the difference of opinion or the existence of various
interpretations is acceptable only in the hypothetical and metaphorical
[mutashabihat] issues of religion. In its indisputable, definitive
[muhkamat], essential, and self-evident issues, Islam has only one
interpretation and that is the interpretation of God and His Apostle
(s). In that domain, there is no room for difference of opinion,
skepticism and presentation of various interpretations. As such, no
difference in it has emerged for the past fourteen hundred years since
the birth of Islam.

We witnessed that when the eminent Imam issued the death sentence to the
apostate Salman Rushdie, all the true ‘ulama’ of Islam affirmed it
without any dissenting opinion. They said in unison that what the Imam
issued was the decree of Islam. Of course, some xenomaniacs who are
ignorant of Islam condemned the decree, saying: “Such is not our
interpretation of Islam.” Yet, it is clear that the intelligent people
in the world consider as credible and valuable only the opinion of those
who are authorities in the pertinent field, conducting research and
expressing views by using correct methods of research appropriate to the
given field.

[^1]: Surah al-Ikhlas (or at-Tawhid) 112:1.

[^2]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:163.

[^3]: It refers to Ayatullah al-‘Uẓma Sayyid ‘Abd al-Husayn Burujirdi
(1292-1380 AH). [Trans.]

[^4]: It refers to ‘Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Ṭabataba’i, the
renowned author of Al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an. [Trans.]


