Session 26: Special Functions of State and Islamic Perspective on Public Participation
======================================================================================

Exclusive functions of state
----------------------------

Apart from the necessity of guaranteeing implementation of laws, there
are also other reasons behind the exigency of government or executive
power. It is by means of considering the aggregate of these reasons that
it becomes possible to logically explain and justify the government’s
set of obligations and prerogatives. If the duty of government were only
implementation of laws and ensuring their implementation, such purpose
would be met by organizing the armed forces. Yet, governments, including
the Islamic government, have other obligations, such as providing for
public needs of society, which are beyond the limited domain of
individual action.

Sometimes, we study the life of man and examine his needs as an
individual. Naturally, the person concerned must meet these needs
through hard work by acting within the framework of rules and
regulations. However, some needs are related not only to the family or a
certain person but to the whole society or a wide section of it. For
example, internal and external security is a public need. Designing the
necessary means to combat domestic violence, law violation and
insecurities and organizing a potent defense force to resist external
enemies that threaten the Islamic country are not related to a specific
section of society. They are related to all members of society. Since a
certain person or a few people are unable to meet such needs, they must
be met by the whole society. No doubt, by introducing rules and taking
necessary steps, the government on behalf of society can meet such
needs.

An organized movement and effective and appropriate military force is
needed once there is a threat along the borders. In reality, the all-out
participation in a defensive war must be based on law. Here, personal
and subjective operations and activities based on personal preference
cannot bring any good result and cannot stop the enemies’ satanic forces
and their organized and well-planned military manoeuvres. Through
efficient programs and schemes designed by an organization which is
comprised of military experts, who are familiar with the dangers posed
by the enemy and their level of facilities and capabilities, military
forces must be organized for war operations. Such need can be met only
by an organ which enjoys full authority over all members of that
society.

By designing special programs and rules, it is the government which can
mobilize people to participate in the war to thwart the danger to their
country. In addition, to be prepared to confront external and internal
threats, necessary defensive armaments and facilities must be acquired
and efficient military training of individuals must be taken into
account so that the country can have sufficient guards for external
threats, as well as for internal security. This important task can only
be shouldered by the government whose orders are obeyed and regarded as
binding by the people.

The examples mentioned in relation to the second reason behind the need
for government, i.e. meeting the public needs of society, give
importance to defense issues of the country and confronting external
enemies. In our country, the armed forces, comprising of the army and
the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), are discharging this
crucial and vital duty. Also, the examples we mentioned in relation to
the first reason, i.e. guaranteeing the implementation of law, pertain
to the maintenance of internal security and practical ways of compelling
offenders to obey the law. This important duty has been placed upon the
disciplinary forces.

Among public needs which cannot be met by individuals and must be
addressed by the state are the medical needs of society. Society has
always been on the verge of succumbing to contagious diseases some of
which pose serious threats, and if not prevented can cause heavy human
loss. In the past, human societies had been afflicted with contagious
and infectious diseases such as cholera, plague, and small pox which
caused heavy human losses because of the lack of advanced knowledge in
medicine and hygiene and overall programs. Through interstate programs
and the use of obtained knowledge and facilities in medicine today,
prevention and elimination of those diseases became possible.

For instance, infantile paralysis (poliomyelitis or polio) caused heavy
human loss to us, but through planning, grand medical activities and
initiation of vaccination programs, our country has obtained valuable
results. Undoubtedly, without state planning and public participation,
such programs could not have materialized. A power superior to that of
individuals, i.e. the government, by planning, providing facilities,
issuing required orders, and codifying special rules and regulations
must take a step in the scene of action and people must follow
government orders so that society’s health need can be met and the root
of diseases that threaten society be eliminated.

Similar to the above is the war against the smuggling, distribution and
use of narcotic drugs, for this ruinous catastrophe seriously threatens
the physical, psychological and emotional wellbeing of society. Without
interference of the state, serious steps and well planned programs, it
will not be uprooted, nor the limited measures of individuals make
considerable difference. As such, because of the multiplicity of those
needs and the difference among them, a ministry has been considered for
meeting each of them

Of course, individuals can meet many needs of society, but the motive to
meet them does not exist in everybody nor is it equally strong. Left to
individuals, they cannot be met satisfactorily and sufficiently. Some
sections of society will still be deprived of those facilities and
needed things. Therefore, meeting those needs has also been delegated to
the government so as to avoid any shortcoming. For example, people can
be entrusted with the construction of schools, learning centers,
academic curricula and provision of the budget needed by those centers
throughout the country as done before.

Today, in some advanced countries, the administration and maintenance of
many of these centers has been entrusted to the people but,
unfortunately, all individuals do not have a strong motive to construct
or provide the budget for those educational institutions where children
can pursue their studies on different levels. Of course, we do not deny
that there have always been philanthropists who shoulder heavy expenses
of construction of schools, but their activities are limited and do not
cover all levels of society. If the government delegates this need to
volunteers, the interests of society will not be ensured.

Therefore, the government must have a pertinent program and policy in
order to serve the interests of society. The budget for these needs must
be allocated by the people. That is, by levying taxes and other custom
duties and considering necessary ways, the government must make people
pay the expenses for those needs, or itself provide the budget through
national resources. Whatever means are employed, education must be at
the disposal of all members of society for its welfare. If circumstances
change and some volunteers shoulder the expenses of building and
administering academic centers, a heavy burden will be removed from the
government’s lot.

Dual structure of functions of state
------------------------------------

Certain responsibilities may be delegated to the people. But the
government cannot delegate some important duties to the people; for
example, the portfolio of defense and war with the enemy cannot be
handled by unorganized individuals and groups. Policymaking, planning,
budget allocation, and meeting the needs of this vital and fundamental
issue must be entrusted to government alone. Of course, after assuming
the responsibility of war and defense, planning, policymaking and
facilitating ways, the government can permit people to voluntarily take
part in the war as popular mobilizing [*basij*] forces, and defend the
Islamic country and government.

Therefore, there is no need for the government to assume all social
responsibilities. In fact, people themselves can shoulder many
responsibilities and voluntarily provide the pertinent budget. It is
true that the government must play a pivotal role in order to have
cohesion and avoid any discordance, make room for public participation
and assumption of responsibilities, design overall and long-term
programs. The main role of some ministries is policymaking and the rest
of the work is done by the people.

For example, the main function of the Ministry of Trade is not to engage
in trade, as, in principle, domestic and foreign trade must be carried
out by people. Because of abuses committed by those affiliated with the
monarchy during the previous regime, in high-level commercial
transactions whose benefits the masses were deprived of, it is
stipulated in the Constitution that trade and high-level commercial
transactions will be carried out by the government.

In principle, business and commercial activities must be carried out by
the people and not the government. It is known that the government is
not a suitable trading agent. Once it directly engages in commercial
activities, it fails because in trade and industry, and in economic
affairs in general, personal motivation and group competition play a
very important role, and when properly guided, such motivation brings
about progress, development and dynamism in trade and industry. Once
trade becomes a state affair, motivation no longer exists. As a result,
no progress is made.

In totalitarian governments and centralized states such as the socialist
and communist regimes in China, Cuba, the erstwhile Soviet Union, and
countries of the former Eastern Bloc, the state directly assumes all
activities, policymaking and planning, and in all economic, commercial,
industrial, and agricultural activities people do not play any role as
the state’s executive agents. All affairs are entrusted to the state,
and the people, i.e farmers and factory workers, work as public workers
and wage-earners. Contrary to this, the Islamic government believes in
principle that functions that can benefit by being entrusted to the
people should be handed over to them and their ownership and autonomy
respected.

Need for organizations dealing with low-income strata of society
----------------------------------------------------------------

As indicated, public centers must be established in society so that the
low-income strata that cannot meet some of their needs can benefit from
the facilities and services of those centers. For example, there is a
need for special medical centers with free medication to serve those who
cannot afford their medication expenses. As such, hospitals have been
built for this purpose within the framework of social insurance law. In
advanced countries such centers render extensive services to the people
by exempting them from paying medical fees, and the state is obliged to
provide medical expenses for people through taxes or national resources.

Once the taxation system is formulated for the procurement of a part of
the state budget, including social and medical insurance, the people are
obliged to pay their taxes according to the low. In advanced countries
complex methods are used through which no one can evade taxes. The
tax-payers also enjoy the benefits and utilities of taxes, but the
low-income and vulnerable strata benefit from the free services of
social and medical insurance. But the question is: Is it better to
entrust public welfare activities and building medical centers to the
people so that patients can benefit from their services, or the state
should compel people to pay taxes and itself engage in constructing
medical centers so that the low-income strata can benefit from their
services?

Indisputably, the first option is better and more desirable. This option
is preferred in the philosophy of Islamic laws. In Islam the people have
been recommended to spend some of their earnings on public welfare works
and let others benefit from them, for in this way, the value of charity
will be preserved and the doers will attain self-perfection and
otherworldly rewards, while the needs of society will be met. But if
people are compelled to give a portion of their earnings, the value of
volunteerism will be lost and they will not earn any spiritual reward
nor acquire perfection.

The institution of pious endowments is an example of the voluntary work
of charity by our benevolent Muslim people throughout history which has
brought enormous benefits to our society. It can be said that there is
no village in this country which has no pious endowment benefiting
people. However, in recent years, unfortunately, this endowment has
diminished and fewer people establish pious endowments, notwithstanding
the value, nobility and sanctity of this pleasing-to-God work. In
addition, we have many pious endowments which are either forgotten or
not properly managed.

No doubt, if a pious endowment were revived and its status recognized
again, many of the needs of the state would be met, and if many pious
endowments were reestablished, a heavy burden would be removed from the
state, and thereby, the people would also receive more spiritual
rewards. Once the people engage in charity work out of their own
freewill and volition with more freedom and autonomy of action, the more
rewards they will receive.

However, if people do not take any action and social needs are not
sufficiently addressed, the state becomes duty-bound to compel people to
pay their taxes through the enactment and implementation of compulsory
laws, and satisfy social needs.

The Islamic paving of ground for public participation
-----------------------------------------------------

Entrusting affairs to people and paving the ground for public
participation in various social arenas, like meeting extensive social
needs, is recognized as among the characteristics of civil society. Of
course, “civil society” and many other terms that originated in the West
have different meanings and are sometimes exploited. However, we
consider those terms in accordance with concepts acceptable to us. For
instance, different, and at times contradictory, conceptions and
interpretations of “civil society” have been presented.

One of the meanings of “civil society” is that as much as possible,
social works must be taken from the state and entrusted to the people
themselves. As much as possible, the people should voluntarily be ready
to engage in social activities and only in times of necessity should the
state interfere. Of course, in all countries overall policymaking in
social affairs is undertaken by the state and practical programs and
various phases of implementation are undertaken by the people.

Undoubtedly, the above conception of civil society is a fundamental
Islamic principle in which Islamic society, and the City of the Prophet
(*s*) [*madinat ’un-nabi*] has been anchored since the beginning.
Initially, the Islamic government or state was not undertaking all
social activities. It was the people who were undertaking most of the
social activities but gradually, with the progress of society and the
emergence of new needs, the state of affairs became such that common
people could no longer meet their needs and an organized institution
like the government had to meet those needs.

For example, the need to illuminate a city before could be met by
placing torches in the alleys and streets, and by doing so, the people
could pass by at night. Naturally, the said need at such level could be
met by people themselves. Nowadays, however, by using electricity to
illuminate a city and its residential areas, the people alone cannot
meet this need satisfactorily. So, the state has to provide the
necessary means to meet that need.

Factors undermining public participation
----------------------------------------

Generally, two factors undermining public participation in meeting
public needs can be mentioned. The first factor is the daily increase of
needs and the complexity and specialization of the process of meeting
those needs. This condition practically deprives people of meeting those
social needs and makes it the government’s responsibility to fill the
existing vacuum.

The second factor is the weakening of moral and religious values and the
prevalence of profit-oriented Western culture among people which urges
them to help themselves rather than others. Western culture is based
upon profiteering, individualism and freedom from responsibility, which
prevailed in the West after the Renaissance and gradually permeated
Muslim countries and weakened the spiritual and moral motives of
Muslims.

It dissuaded man from thinking for others and helping the needy and
activated the sense of indifference towards fellowmen. This culture
persuades a person to avoid accepting social responsibilities and only
pursue his interests. This culture is diametrically opposed to Islamic
culture which has been prevalent for centuries among our people, urging
them to think about the interests of society and serve the needy.

Heedlessness to Islamic traditions and values and penetration of Western
culture in recent years has hindered the thriving of the noble tradition
of pious endowment [*waqf*] and the number of endowed buildings and
lands has tremendously decreased compared to the past. Also, other
voluntary public welfare works have diminished and the spirit of
civility which existed in Islamic society has weakened. As a result, the
government’s obligation has multiplied and its burden has become
heavier. If by the blessing of the Islamic Revolution, Islamic and human
values are revived and people pay heed to their spiritual, moral and
religious responsibilities by engaging in charitable work, the
government’s burden of responsibility will decrease and it could entrust
some of its responsibilities to the people. This state of affairs, in a
sense, will be a return to Islamic civil society.

Status of civil society in Islam
--------------------------------

I would like to emphasize that civil society in this sense is rooted in
Islam and the apostolic invitation of the Prophets (*‘a*), but having
drifted away from Islam, we have drifted away from it. Now, with the
blessing of Islam, we need to return to it. The West is not supposed to
guide and direct us towards the establishment of civil society. It is
actually we who are supposed to hold them under obligation, for during
the apex of Islamic civilization most of the Western societies were
quasi-barbarians. Islamic culture and civilization gradually civilized
them and they acquired the civil society from Islam. Today they claim to
be exporting the salient features of Western culture to our country and
civilizing us!

Thus, the ideal civil society is rooted in Islam and Islamic
civilization, and by returning to Islam this civil society will
materialize. Yet, “civil society” has also other meanings which are
unacceptable to us. Nowadays, in the West “civil society” is used in
opposition to “religious society” and it refers to a society in which
religion does not rule and has no role whatsoever in social
organizations and activities. In such an irreligious civil society—which
is extensively promoted today—all members of society have equal
opportunity to occupy all government and public posts.

If they say that Iranian society must be transformed into a civil
society, it implies that a Jew could also become the president of Iran
because all human beings are equal in humanity and we have no first or
second class human beings. Under the rubric of “civil society” they are
striving for the official recognition of an atheistic and deviant sect
affiliated with Zionism. Under the pretext that all human beings are
equal, they want members of notorious groups inclined towards America
and Zionism to also have the chance to occupy important positions, such
as the presidency.

If we claim that to some extent distinction among citizens is present
and accepted, this is because in occupying certain political posts, some
qualifications have been laid down in the Constitution, and God also
says, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلَن يَجْعَلَ اللّهُ لِلْكَافِرِينَ عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ سَبِيلاً﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Allah will never provide the faithless any way [to prevail] over
the faithful.**”*[^1]

Such a view is not inconsistent with civil society. According to Islam,
“civil society” in which disbelievers and Muslims have equal rights and
opportunities to occupy political posts is not acceptable. We openly
announce that Islam does not allow disbelievers to prevail over Muslims
in Islamic society. Neither does it allow a Zionist-affiliated atheistic
sect and party to obtain official recognition. It makes no difference
whether they label this difference in rights and qualifications as
“discrimination in citizenship” or any other.

New ways of opposing Islamic criteria for selection
---------------------------------------------------

Today, those who are associated with the Global Arrogance inside the
country are striving to promote Western liberalism and democracy by
raising the slogan of equality among men and citizens. They want to
inculcate the belief that there is no difference between human beings as
they enjoy equal rights, and their views must receive equal attention
while codifying laws of the country. Of course, human beings do not
belong to different classes according to Islam. In this regard, God
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُم مِن ذَكَرٍ وَأُنثَى
وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ
عِندَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O mankind! Indeed We created you from a male and a female, and made
you nations and tribes that you may identify with one another. Indeed
the noblest of you in the sight of Allah is the most God-wary among
you...”***[^2]

In the above verse, human beings have been declared equal in their
intrinsic and essential qualities, and thus, difference or
classification among them is inconceivable. However, the latter part of
the verse points to the contingent [‘aradhi] differences.

That is, some valuably acquired characteristics and attributes make some
of them superior to others. As such, the God-wary people have a sublime
station in the sight of God, and it cannot be said that all human beings
are equal before God. Similarly, in view of differences between
individuals due to possession of merits and qualifications, they differ
in capability and cannot hold any post that requires specific
qualifications. For example, in all parts of the world an illiterate
person can not be President. Can it be said that considering the
condition of literacy for the assumption of the presidential post is
contrary to the equality of men? Does it mean that human beings have two
classes the literate and illiterate?

In all parts of the world special conditions are taken into account for
key positions such as the Presidency. The Islamic nature of our
political system has also laid down certain conditions. The President
must have sufficient literacy and education, be a devoted supporter of
Islam and not be associated with an enemy of Islam. These are in
accordance with Islamic principles. So, if the condition of being Muslim
is stipulated for becoming a Majlis deputy or occupying other posts,
this does not mean discrimination of human beings according to classes.
In Islamic society, commensurate to the rights and obligations that
Muslims have in lieu of the *khums* and *zakat* they pay, distinct
rights and obligations are considered for followers of other religions.
This does not signify a discrimination of human beings according to
classes, though it can be said that those differences are related to
classes of citizenship.

To claim that the position of the Supreme Leader, Presidency or other
key and strategic posts can be held by those opposed to Islam and the
Islamic system and who do not accept the Constitution, is equivalent to
entrusting Islam to its enemies! Such a thing is neither rational nor
possible, and if, God forbid, some would like to do so, Islam will not
allow them because God has not given the faithless dominion over the
Muslims and does not accept such domination over Muslims. This is our
belief and we do not care if they accuse us of classifying citizens.

Need to preserve Islamic values and principles and counter enemy plots
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Equality in humanity does not necessarily mean equality in rights. It is
true that human beings are all equal in humanity but they are not so in
human virtues. In Islamic society, therefore, many posts and positions
must be entrusted to people who have the necessary merits and
qualifications. As such, the Leader must be a *faqih* so that he can
supervise the implementation of Islamic laws, for he can not
successfully supervise if he is not familiar with Islam. Also, the
President must be a Muslim. A Jew or a Christian cannot rule over a
population of 90% Muslims.

We should not worry if newspapers and pens in the hands of those who are
affiliated with the Global Arrogance accuse us of believing in second
class citizens. Nothing more than this can be expected from them; they
even deny the essentials of Islam. Through the Islamic system, we must
strive to present Islam as it is to the world and not as its enemies
project it.

If we say or write something which pleases the American hegemonic power
newspapers and mass media and makes them applaud us, we should not be
glad. In fact, we should be anxious and worried. It is known that when
it was said to Aristotle, “So-and-so applauded you,” he started crying.
When he was asked why he was crying, he said: “I do not know what
foolish act I have done that has pleased that ignorant person!” If we do
something for the benefit of our enemies and present Islam in a manner
that is pleasant to them, we have served the enemies and not Islam! We
have to defend the Islam which has been introduced by the Prophet (*s*)
and the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) to us, and not the “Islam” which the
enemies dictate to us.

We cannot consider Muslims and non-Muslims as equal in holding key
national posts. How can Islam allow us to officially recognize a
religion which is affiliated with International Zionism, for the sake of
“civil society”?

[^1]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:141.

[^2]: Surah al-Hujurat 49:13.


