Session 27: A Perspective on the Distinctive Structure of the Islamic State
===========================================================================

Fundamental difference between government in Islamic and secular systems
------------------------------------------------------------------------

The special function and duty of government is to meet the needs of
society and implement laws.

On legislation, we said that in terms of function and extent, laws in
Islamic society are different from secular societies. In secular
societies laws are ratified and implemented with the purpose of meeting
only the material and worldly needs of people. It is even stipulated in
some political systems that the government must not support any religion
and no sign of advocacy and profession of religion be seen in government
institutions or public activities.

In the Islamic system, however, law is meant to ensure not only material
interests but spiritual interests—nay, it gives priority to spiritual
interests. This point is also raised in relation to executive power. In
the Islamic system, the government must ensure implementation of laws
which are related to people’s lives as well as to their spiritual and
otherworldly affairs.

For this reason, in the discussion about legislation we said that it is
necessary for Islamic laws to ensure spiritual interests; rather, to
give priority to them. It is the duty of the Islamic state to also
engage in implementing laws related to spiritual interests, divine
rights and Islamic rites, and prevent violations and affront to Islamic
sanctities. This issue is among the most important duties of the Islamic
state.

Presentation of a secular state model by those enamored by Western culture
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is often observed in some periodicals and speeches that apart from
meeting the material needs of people, maintaining the country’s security
and preventing chaos and disorder, the state has no other duty, and
addressing spiritual interests and religious affairs is within the realm
of responsibilities of the *‘ulama’* and Islamic seminaries! This
outlook is a reflection of the influence of Western culture and secular
thought. As stated earlier, among the prominent manifestations of
Western culture is secularism, which separates religion from politics.

In laic and non-religious governments worldly activities and affairs are
related to politics and statesmen, and spiritual affairs intentionally
not related to the state. If certain people want to engage in spiritual
and religious affairs, they have to spend their own personal time and
facilities for that purpose, and government facilities can not be used
because the state has no obligation with respect to the religious needs
of people. On the contrary, in Islamic culture the most important duty
of the Islamic state is to protect Islam, promote Islamic rites in
society, avoid their being forgotten, and prevent insolence and affront,
God forbid, to Islamic sanctities and rites.

Advancing the notion that “The state should not interfere in religious
affairs” by those who do not accept Islamic culture and follow Western
culture is not unexpected. Our difference with them is a fundamental
one, the bone of contention being whether Islam is the truth or not.
This statement is not that of a Muslim who believes in Islamic
fundamentals, but someone who does not understand Islamic culture
properly.

State’s mission to preserve and promote Islamic mottos
------------------------------------------------------

In addition to responsibilities commonly assumed by secular and
religious states, the Islamic state is duty-bound to implement Islamic
rites. Of course, people can voluntarily engage in some Islamic rites
such as observance of congregational prayers, holding of celebrations
and mourning ceremonies, administering religious schools, and building
national religious centers in charge of holding Islamic rites. Among
these centers the Islamic seminaries, as among the most important
religious institutions, engage in the preservation, protection and
promotion of Islamic rites and culture by spending religious funds paid
by the people and without receiving any budget from the state.

But people’s involvement does not mean robbing the state of its
obligation, and it is not true that the state does not have any
responsibility in these matters. In fact, if the voluntary acts of
people are not enough, the state must take necessary steps. For example,
*Hajj* /pilgrimage is a devotional act and must be performed as an
obligation by any physically, mentally and financially capable Muslim
[*mustati‘*].

The *fuqaha,* by citing traditions [*ahadith*], in their books on
jurisprudence, have written that if the situation is such that in a
Muslim society and country *Hajj* does not become obligatory on anyone
because no one can afford the traveling expenses; or those who are
physically, mentally and financially capable, on whom *Hajj* is
obligatory, do not voluntarily go to perform it and the House of Allah
is devoid of any pilgrim, it becomes obligatory upon the Muslim states
to dispatch a group of pilgrims by spending from the public treasury, so
that the performance of Islamic rites which preserve the interests of
all Muslims should not be suspended.

Thus, it is true that *Hajj* is a devotional affair and cannot be
directly considered a political and mundane affair and people are
obliged to perform it and spend their personal money on it, but if
people refuse to perform it or cannot afford to do so, the Islamic state
is obliged to provide facilities and grounds for the performance of this
divine obligation with the aim of preserving Islamic rites and ensuring
implementation of laws.

Therefore, the fundamental and basic difference between the Islamic and
secular states is that the Islamic state, before anything else, must be
concerned with the performance of religious rites and implementation of
social laws and ordinances, and give priority to them. Of course, in
practice there is usually no contradiction between spiritual and
material affairs, but should there be any contradiction, spiritual
affairs must be given priority.

Thus, the Islamic state’s foremost obligations are the performance of
Islamic rites, preservation of Islamic laws and culture, prevention of
any action that weakens Islamic culture and propagates atheistic rites
in society.

Methods employed by the state to fulfill its responsibilities
-------------------------------------------------------------

As said earlier, the state must take charge of meeting the needs of
society related to war and defense. The burden of planning, policymaking
and implementation of such matters is shouldered by the state. But in
addition to duties which must be performed only by the state, the
Islamic state has to play a role also in meeting some needs of society,
and this is done in two ways:

(1) the state takes charge of *only* planning, policymaking and
supervision of implementation, and does not intervene in the
implementation directly

(2) in addition to planning, policymaking and supervision, it *also*
engages in implementation.

To elaborate further, let me say that in order to implement and
materialize a social project, first of all, the purpose of the project
must be explained and thus general policies and basic courses of action
be drawn accordingly. Then, for implementation of those policies
detailed and minute planning must be done. A project must have a
specific timetable, its beginning and completion must be specified and
its budget provided. Next, the group that is supposed to implement the
project must be organized. It must be specified how a given project is
to be completed, the hierarchy of implementers and workers provided and
their statuses and functions determined.

Consider for example the Imam Khomeini (*r*) International Airport
Project. Initially, there was a debate about the necessity or otherwise
of implementing the said project, related to the overall planning and
development in the country. After accepting the necessity of the
project, its implementation was planned and its scope, facilities,
amenities, plan and design was specified. Then, the qualifications of
the contractor and implementer of the project, its timetable and budget
was determined, and finally, tenders were called for so that it could be
awarded to the lowest bidding contractor.

In such cases, the government, after policymaking and planning, also
takes charge of implementing the project and commissions a government
ministry to implement it and allocates a budget, utilizes facilities,
manpower and government services; or after expressing commitment to
implement the project it allocates a budget for it and employs a company
to implement it. In both cases, the government has committed to
implement the project. Yet, it is possible that after policymaking and
planning, the government will only supervise the implementation of the
project. That is, the government will send inspectors to supervise the
process so as to prevent violation of laws and rules, improper
implementation of design and misappropriation of public funds to ensure
that the project is implemented according to the original policy and
within the framework of national interests.

Model of totalitarian and liberal states
----------------------------------------

With respect to social issues, duties and needs such as those pertaining
to war, training and education, health, medical treatment, hygiene and
cleanliness of the environment, which in principle are duties of the
government, a question is raised: Is policymaking and maximum
supervision the only duty of the government? Or, apart from policymaking
and supervision, must the government also take charge of implementation?
Which one is correct according to the Islamic perspective? Should
administration and budget allocation of elementary and secondary schools
and universities be delegated to the government?

Or, is it that some of them should be delegated to the government and
others to the people? For example, in many countries including ours,
elementary education is compulsory and the expenses for it are
shouldered by the government, but the tertiary level of education is not
shouldered by the government and it is not duty-bound to admit a student
without receiving a fee. As such, in some countries higher education
services are not offered in gratis to the people.

In some political regimes and administrative systems, social activities
are undertaken by the state to prevent the oppressive actions of
capitalists and those who endanger the interests of society to advance
individual interests and personal goals. The emergence of this
collectivist thought and the formation of socialist and communist
countries was a reaction to the cruelty committed in capitalist
countries against the masses.

In Western counties the capitalists committed oppression and tyranny
against the deprived and downtrodden to such an extent that this
extremist tendency emerged, propounding that all activities must be
entrusted to the state which would distribute public benefits and
earnings equally among people so that all of them could equally enjoy
them. Eradication of oppression of people was the bedrock of socialist
thought in the realm of social, political and economic issues which
considerably flourished in past decades. in powerful countries like the
former Soviet Union, China and their satellites states. Since then, they
have been recognized as the archrivals of the capitalist bloc.

This reaction and its slogans gained currency in our country as well and
supporters rallied behind it. As a result, in past decades socialist and
communist parties were formed in our country but collapsed with the rise
of the Islamic Revolution. Historical experience showed that the state’s
absolute takeover in economic, political and social domains was an
incorrect and ineffective way and led to the disintegration and collapse
of the communist countries, especially our great northern neighbor (the
former Soviet Union). We all witnessed how communist thought destroyed
the economic, social and political foundations of a powerful country
like the ex-Soviet Union and led to the dismemberment and downfall of
that great empire.

At the opposite end of the communist-socialist thought is
liberal-capitalist thought which maintains that all affairs are
delegated to the people and they are free to do whatever they like. The
state interferes in the realms of social life only to the extent
necessary and that is to prevent chaos and maintain security. Naturally,
in the liberal system in which individuals enjoy much freedom in social,
political and economic spheres, those who have more resources, means and
capabilities acquire more capital and gain in all spheres.

In the economic sphere in particular, they are ahead of others in the
so-called competitive market. As a result, with the expansion of
profitable economic activities, they gain enormous capital. The deprived
and weak members of society become poorer and more deprived day by day.
This wide economic-class gap, taking possession of national and public
capital by a small class in society and the spread of poverty and
deprivation in other strata of society, led to mounting public protests,
revolt and insurrection against politicians, their expulsion from the
political scene and the formation of the communist system—a scenario
which seemed to have more advantages for the deprived class. In order to
avoid and prevent revolution and public uprising in liberal countries,
amenities were provided to the poor and low-income earners.

In many European countries which are adopting the liberal system,
socialist parties are active and even some governments are controlled by
socialist or social democratic parties. For example, the Labor Party
which sometimes succeeds in garnering the majority vote in forming the
cabinet in Britain has socialist inclinations. This inclination,
preference and provision of facilities for the deprived classes of
society are meant to dissuade them from rising up against politicians,
because once there is relative welfare for all strata of society, the
deprived classes have no more reason to revolt. Among the amenities
considered for the general public are insurance for the unemployed and
retired, health insurance and construction of many small houses of low
rental value intended for the deprived classes by the city mayor’s
office.

Thus, in political philosophy there are two dominant and diametrically
opposed theories about state. The first theory is socialism which pays
more attention to society and gives preference to collective interests
over individual interests. By putting this theory into practice, the
state’s interference and control increases in the realms of social life
to prevent misappropriation of public funds and oppression against the
deprived and downtrodden. Opposing socialism is liberalism. Based on
their reasons, the proponents of this theory believe that the state
should have minimum interference in the affairs of society. The maximum
or minimal extent of interference by the state related to the
abovementioned theories can be observed in speeches, articles,
newspapers, and books.

Western and European governments are liberal governments. They have
delegated government institutions to private companies. For example, the
Post and Telegraph Department is not government controlled but rather
privately undertaken by companies who control the selling, transport and
transfer of telephone lines, and provide different services in various
cities. The role of the state is confined to planning and supervising
private companies. Similarly, providing water and electricity and other
public needs of citizens has been entrusted to the private sector. In
our country most of the above are undertaken by the government.

Islam’s idealistic and realistic perspective on state
-----------------------------------------------------

The question that one may ask is: Which of the two ways is considered
more appropriate in the Islamic system? Which is better, to maximize the
state’s interference and assumption of control, or to minimize the
state’s interference and delegate affairs to the people? As we have said
in the previous session, in reality the promotion of massive public
participation in various arenas is one of the meanings of civil society
according to which social activities must be delegated as much as
possible to the people.

Islam has a moderate perspective on the state which is an amalgamation
of idealism and realism. Many of the theories and views presented in
class sessions, both at the university and seminary are fascinating, but
in spite of being ideal and desirable cannot be translated into action
in the practical world. For example, one supposition is that if the
moral growth of people reaches a level where all of them observe laws
there would be no need for controlling and deterring agents. It is a
very attractive supposition but that level will never be reached.

On the other hand, because there will always be transgression in
society, it is not justifiable to say that maximum harshness is
desirable so that no one dares to violate laws. In Marxist and fascist
countries under martial law, government orders are strictly implemented
and the police and disciplinary agents are so harsh in dealing with
violators that no one dares to violate laws. An example of those
countries was our western neighbor (Iraq under the Ba‘athist regime)
which imposed an unsolicited war on us for eight years. A powerful
police force which deals harshly with any violation and protest is
ruling. A person who commits a minor violation is gunned down or
executed without any trial or investigation.

When the deprived and poor members of society see that bribery and
overcharging are rampant and subject them to unendurable pressure and
difficulty, they wish that these profiteers are dealt with severely and
some of them executed so that no one would dare to practice bribery and
overcharging anymore! In socialist countries, more or less, such wishes
are realized, but it must be seen what Islam says about severity to
violators and criminals.

Based on what we can infer from the Qur’anic verses and traditions,
Islam has considered a moderate and balanced approach for the Islamic
state.

In the penal laws of Islam, severe punishments have been considered for
some crimes, violations and licentious acts. On the other hand, however,
it has also set certain conditions and limitations for proving and
establishing these crimes so that in practice only a few cases can be
proved. Consequently, those laws and heavy punishments can be
implemented only in very rare cases—for example, one or two cases every
year. For instance, the Qur’an thus says regarding the punishment for
theft:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَالسَّارِقُ وَالسَّارِقَةُ فَاقْطَعُواْ أَيْدِيَهُمَا جَزَاءً بِمَا
كَسَبَا...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“As for the thief, man and woman, cut off their hands as a requital for
what they have earned.”[^1]

And regarding the punishments for those who committed licentious acts,
it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ٱلزَّانِيَةُ وَالزَّانِي فَاجْلِدُوا كُلَّ وَاحِدٍ مِنْهُمَا مِئَةَ
جَلْدَةٍ وَلاَ تَأْخُذْكُم بِهِمَا رَأْفَةٌ فِي دِينِ اللَّهِ إِن
كُنتُمْ تُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ وَلْيَشْهَدْ
عَذَابَهُمَا طَائِفَةٌ مِّنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“As for the fornicatress and the fornicator, strike each of them a
hundred lashes, and let not pity for them overcome you in Allah’s law,
if you believe in Allah and the Last Day, and let their punishment be
witnessed by a group of the faithful.”[^2]

Yet, on the other hand, Islam has set very difficult conditions to prove
and establish the crime of fornication [*zina*], stipulating that such a
decree shall be executed provided that four just witnesses who
personally witnessed the act of fornication give testimony in a court of
law. In case less than four witnesses be present in court, not only will
the crime not be proved but the complainant will be lashed for calumny.

Islam neither obliges the state to meet all needs of society including
unnecessary luxuries nor totally forbids it from interfering in social
activities. Instead, the magnitude of the state’s interference is in
accordance with the changing circumstances which necessitate
interference by the state.

Sometimes the situation is such that civil society must be formed based
upon the first Muslim community established by the Prophet (*s*) in
Medina in which the guiding principle was that whatever can be done or
assumed by the people must be delegated to them. They must assume the
responsibility of meeting the primary needs such as training and
education, electricity, water and the sewage system, and not allow
certain profiteers and opportunists to take advantage and encroach upon
the rights of the underprivileged and deprive them of their basic needs.
In such a case, the state must enter the realm of social activities to
counter the devious plans of profiteering capitalists. For example, if a
private telecommunications company offers expensive services to people,
the state has to offer cheaper services or delegate to itself all
telecommunications services.

Defects of a state’s centralized system
---------------------------------------

A state’s centralized system or delegation of the main social activities
to the state is improper and inefficient for many reasons. For example,
if a state wants to meet all the needs of society, it must create
government organizations having a considerable percentage of its
employees—say, 20 percent—coming from the people. This approach has
three fundamental defects. The first defect is that the expansion of the
government sector will entail a huge budget which will cause further
problems for society.

The second and more serious defect is that once an organization of such
magnitude is created, irregularities within it are greater and ample
grounds for violation and abuse within it are provided. For instance, if
the state wants to prevent fleecing, it has to assign elite inspectors
to report fleecing *cases* by conducting surprised inspection of shops.
Now, if the government assigns an inspector for every shop, you can
imagine how large a work force will be required.

Besides, some of these inspectors will violate the law by getting bribes
from some shopkeepers so as not to report their fleecing. As a result, a
separate department to investigate the performance of inspectors will
have to be created. For whatever reason, experience has shown that such
schemes are not practically successful as they do not bring any good
result. In fact, they cause further violations and bribes.

The third defect of a centralized system which is notably serious
according to Islam is, compelling human beings to mold themselves and do
good deeds not through coercion and pressure. Man’s action is valuable
only if it stems from his own free choice and will, but once compulsion
and force prompt man to act, the spiritual and sublime effect considered
by Islam ceases to penetrate the soul of man and the ultimate goal is
lost.

[^1]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:38.

[^2]: Surah an-Nur 24:2.


