Session 28: Observance of Values and Legitimate Freedom in an Islamic State
===========================================================================

A glance at the state’s raison d’être
-------------------------------------

We discussed the need of executive power in order to find out its
characteristics, duties, and conditions to be met while discharging its
duties. As we have said, one of the elements of the state or executive
power’s raison d’être is to guarantee implementation of laws. In the
Islamic system laws are directly taken from the sacred code [*shari‘ah*]
or enacted by those who have been authorized by the Sacred Lawgiver.
These laws must also be implemented. In the first degree, people
themselves have to directly implement the laws, preserve each other’s
rights and perform their respective duties. In the collective scene,
family sphere and realm of international relations, they have to behave
within the framework of Islamic laws.

The performance of duties and observance of social regulations requires
strong motivation. Common people primarily think about their personal
interests and pay less attention to social interests especially if they
cause a loss to them. Only those who acquire profound and noble training
and education give priority to public interests over personal interests.
As such, the reason behind most of the violations taking place in the
realm of social responsibilities is a lack of motivation for social
responsibilities. So, an individual or group of individuals needs to
take charge of ensuring implementation of laws by persuading people to
observe the law and punish them in case of any violation.

So, the existence of executive power which implements law by using force
is necessary. Initially laws are made for the administration of its
affairs. For example, punishments for aggression and encroachment upon
the properties of others are determined. Then, if someone violates the
law by encroaching upon another’s property, the executive power punishes
him.

In some cases, an ambiguity creates tension between two groups or
individuals and a dispute arises between them. It is even possible that
none of the parties intends to violate the law but because of their
ignorance of what is right, they do not know their own duty and status.
In such cases, the judiciary expounds the cases according to the law and
determines the rights of both parties and announces its verdict. If the
conflicting parties are not satisfied and do not want to abide by the
verdict, it is forcefully implemented by the executive. A legal official
will also be necessarily involved and be part and parcel of executive
power. According to the categorization of many political philosophies,
however, judicial power is a separate branch of government distinct from
executive and legislative powers.

Under this categorization, the special function of legislative power or
legislature, is the ratification of laws, determining rights of
individuals and specifying the type of punishment for every violation.
For example, according to a certain law ratified by the same legislative
power, it is clear whether a certain transaction is valid or not. If
there is doubt whether a certain transaction is according to the
relevant statutory law or not; whether it is valid or not; or there is a
dispute between two parties; it has to be referred to a court of law
because, as an integral part of judicial power, the court’s function is
to examine the conformity of statutory laws to actual cases.

If the announcement of the judge’s decision says that Mr. “A” has to
give a certain amount of money to Mr. “B” and the two parties accept the
judge’s verdict and abide by the law peacefully and willfully, the case
will be closed; otherwise, the executive power interferes and uses the
police force under its command to get the required amount and give it to
its rightful owner.

Although one of the main functions of executive power is to guarantee
implementation of laws and social decrees, it must be borne in mind that
the implementation of laws is not a monopoly of executive power. Others
are also expected to implement laws. Similarly, the function of
executive power is not only to implement laws, but also engage in making
laws in some cases. It is impossible to separate legislation from
execution of laws, and their interrelation is more or less accepted by
all forms of government.

It is true that the main function of the government or executive power
is implementation of laws but in some cases it also engages in making
laws and formulating rules and regulations. On the other hand,
legislative power also engages in executive work and certain executive
works have to be ratified by parliament; for example, signing of
contracts with other states and foreign companies on the exploitation of
natural resources such as oil and others. It is true that signing a
contract is an executive function but without the ratification of
parliament, it will never become binding.

So, it is not true that there is a redline separating the three powers
from one another and one can not interfere in the others’ business, i.e.
neither the government issue any executive order nor parliament
interfere in executive affairs. Still, each of the three powers has its
own special function.

However, the Islamic system is different from others with respect to the
issue of legislation. In the laic systems, the basis and pivot of law is
material collective interests of people and in addition to their
ratification, the execution of laws is also based on those interests. In
Islam, however, the material and worldly interests of people must be
taken into account in legislation but not at the expense of neglecting
their spiritual and otherworldly interests. In fact, in the codification
of laws spiritual interests take precedence over material interests.

This is the essential and fundamental point that distinguishes the
Islamic system from the materialistic, laic and secular systems.
Naturally, in such a system, the burden of responsibility of the
executive is heavier than that of other systems. That is, apart from
urging the people to observe social rights and not oppress each other
and prevent chaos and disorder, the executive must also observe Islamic
values and implement them.

First principle of human conduct
--------------------------------

An important feature of man is the power of will and choice that makes
him distinct from animals and angels. Animals are motivated by their
instincts and there is no room for choice and selection in them. The
level of choice that sometimes exists in them stems from their instincts
and they have no rational choice that emanates from intelligence and
thinking. An animal which is trained to behave in a certain way and
perform a certain action by the order of its trainer does so because
there is a certain amount of choice within the limits of instinctive
actions.

Angels, however, have celestial and heavenly attributes and they have no
inclination or desire to do evil and deviate from truth. They are among
the most holy and nearest ones to God and have exalted, pure and
spotless stations, but they have no choice. In reality, their nature is
based upon unconditional worship, obedience and submission to God.
Man—this vicegerent of God [*khalifatullah*] and carrier of the divine
trust—is a being that possesses the power of choice. There are always
two ways in front of him and he has two masters and two sources of
attraction, one leads toward God and the other toward Satan. He must
have the power to choose and select one of these two ways. Once he is
deprived of the power to choose and is coercively drawn to a certain
way, it means that he is deprived of his humanity.

Therefore, the guiding principle with respect to man’s training—whether
in individual and family issues or social and international issues—is to
pave the ground for choice and selection so that he selects the right
path by his own choice and freewill, and not by imposition. Sometimes,
however, social interests require that pressure must be exerted on man.
In reality, the existence of executive power and naked force is based
upon secondary, and not primary, interests.

To say that there must be executive power to implement laws and even
compel violators to abide by them, in some cases, is contrary to the
primary principle. The primary principle is that law must be at the
disposal of people who act upon it willfully and volitionally, and no
one violates it. No one cheats another, receives bribery, steals, and
violates the lives and properties of people. Yet, violation of law is
also committed in society and the existence of brute force to prevent
any violation of law becomes necessary; otherwise, corruption will
engulf the world and there will be no chance of improvement for those
who want to choose the right path.

In order to keep the door of correct choice open for the majority of
people in society, violators of law must be checked and punished
whenever necessary, and thus, give others a chance to improve and
evolve. If this is not done, some bullies will threaten the interests of
entire society by using physical strength, intellectual power, or
satanic ruses, and this will negatively affect the divine purpose in the
creation of man.

It is true that in an atmosphere of freedom and liberty, man himself has
to choose the right way, but this freedom is not unlimited. Individuals
should not be given so much freedom that others’ freedom of choice is
closed—in the words of the Qur’an, to hinder others from treading the
way of God.[^1]

Thus, violators must be dealt with so as to remove the hindrances along
the way of God. It must be borne in mind, however, that the prevention
of violations and use of brute force in implementing law have certain
conditions and limitations and must be carried out with precision. In
the same cases in which Islam resorts to the use of force in order to
secure social interests, it exerts utmost meticulousness and tries to
keep the door of return (repentance) open for violators, except in so
heavy a crime or offense that it is necessary to put an end to the life
of the criminal so as to preserve collective interests and prevent the
spread of corruption.

Islam’s instructive approach in enacting penal and criminal laws
----------------------------------------------------------------

Islam has enacted capital punishments for certain crimes, but in order
to establish and prove them, it has also laid down difficult conditions,
thus making it very problematic to prove those crimes. In dealing with
the philosophy of divine laws, the considered wisdom behind punishments
and penalties is the lesson taken from it which acts as a deterrent and
thus prevents the spread of crimes and offenses. In order to reach this
goal, there must be penalty commensurate to the crime and for heinous
crimes capital punishment must be taken into account.

For example, if a light punishment—an insignificant fine or short-period
detention—is taken into account for a criminal act like robbery, robbery
in society will not stop and the hidden wisdom behind divine punishments
and penalties will not be realized.

On the other hand, if it is easy to prove a crime and individuals can
easily be punished, execution of punishments and penalties will spread
in society because many deserve punishments, and thus the honor and
reputation of many families will be tarnished. It is for this reason
that Islam has made it difficult to prove a crime. For example, in case
of the abominable act of fornication, Islam has considered heavy
punishment and even ordered that the fornicators, man and woman, must be
punished in public, and social considerations and human feelings must
not cast a shadow on the implementation of the divine punishment.

In order to prevent moral corruption in society and family the
punishment for fornication must be given in public and one must not
shirk executing the punishment under the pretext of a Muslim’s
reputation. On the other hand, however, Islam has set difficult
conditions for proving such a crime. As a result, very few cases of the
crime are actually proven and only a few among the fornicators are
punished.

In proving that crime Islamic law has stipulated that four just
witnesses must testify that they have personally seen the performance of
the immoral act. If only three will testify, even if they are the most
just and famous of people in society, not only will the crime not be
proven and the accused be exonerated, but the judge will order the
punishment of the three and penalty for calumny and false accusation
against others will be exerted on them.

The existence of such meticulousness and strictness in the
implementation of all laws of Islam, the penal codes in particular,
shows that Islam pursues the realization of its lofty goals and
aspirations, observes sublime values, but insists on ground realities
and is not contented with mere idealism. In fact, the method of Islam in
administering society is between idealism and realism and contains
elements of both. Islam considers it necessary to observe lofty values
and does not allow them to be tarnished in society just as done in
non-religious and non-Islamic societies that have brought about
widespread corruption and ample ignominy.

With the aim of keeping Islamic society free from this corruption and
pollution, Islam has stipulated capital punishment for corruptors. On
the other hand, however, Islam is realistic and accepts the fact that
some people engage in corruption and violation of law for more than one
reason. As such, it has laid down difficult conditions for proving a
crime.

The purpose is the implementation of law by its guarantor using force
and compulsion in case of violation, while observing that the action of
man is conscious and done out of freewill and choice. On the other hand,
the collective interests must be observed and one should not allow
individuals to threaten the interests of society by misusing unlimited
and unrestrained freedom.

The state’s fixed and alterable duties
--------------------------------------

Once we take a look at the laws we will find that some pertain to people
who are obliged to abide by them, and the role of state in this context
is to monitor their activities and present practical policies that
invite them to respect law and confront violators. Others pertain to the
state which is bound to implement them. These are related to needs of
citizens, important economic activities, investment, and services which
cannot be rendered by people and even if they are capable, there will be
few volunteers to do so, and without them public interests will not be
served. Thus, there is need for an organized, cohesive and systematic
organization called “government” to render services such as defending
the territorial integrity of a country against foreign invasions;
administering war and procuring necessary military equipment and
armaments; undertaking vaccination programs against contagious and
epidemic diseases like polio, which can only be undertaken nationwide
and at its opportune time with the government’s management and
facilities; maintaining public health and providing medical services and
facilities for all citizens; and effectively campaigning against the
trafficking, distribution and use of ominous narcotics and drugs and
punishing the merchants of death (drug traders).

It is true that by enjoining what is good, forbidding what is bad, not
consuming narcotics, and preventing its distribution, people can play a
role to a certain extent, but it is beyond their capability to launch an
extensive and grand campaign against the ominous phenomenon and their
limited facilities are insufficient for this campaign. The same is true
in the case of moral corruption which has become rampant. Only the state
or government is capable of combating them.

Some laws are concerned with needs that can be met by both government
and people, but changing circumstances of time and space as well as
social development create different ways of meeting them. Some social
activities can be undertaken by people themselves in a simple form and
to a limited extent at a given period of time, but with the emergence of
new conditions and social development, they become complex and people
can no longer undertake them. It is at this juncture that the state has
to interfere and undertake the social activities that become complex.
For example, rearing, training and educating children is the duty of all
parents or citizens who must strive hard in this connection, but today
the situation is such that if there was no strong “Ministry of Training
and Education” in the country and laws related to compulsory education
were not implemented, the percentage of literacy in our country would
fall.

Similarly, in the light of new developments and conditions, issues such
as public hygiene of cities and their lighting facilities are assigned
to the government. In the past, they were not part of government duties.
Some of them like radio and television were never an issue to be
assigned to the government. With the emergence of social transformations
new duties are assigned to the government—duties which if the government
will not discharge will damage social advancement, and as a result,
Islamic society will lag behind in the fields of science, technology and
industry. Once training and education is weakened, the spiritual
dimension of people will also be weakened because spiritual perfection
is possible through knowledge and learning, and a society deprived of
knowledge is also deprived of spirituality.

In view of what we have said, one can reexamine the status, fixed
structure and elements of state. The elements and constituents of state
in the absence of which the state will cease to exist are the following:

1. Guaranteeing the implementation of civil and legal laws in society
such that in case of violation, they are imposed upon the people by use
of force and violators are punished.

2. Securing permanent interests of society under all circumstances which
remain unchanged by change in social conditions, and can be secured only
by the state. For example, establishment of peace and order in society
is the responsibility of government. Whether small or big, the
government of a country must assume this important responsibility.

But the alterable interests and duties which are not assumed by the
government in all situations, and which the people can also assume, and
which are assumed by the government with the emergence of new
conditions, cannot be considered part of the constitutive elements of
state.

Difference in manner of implementing laws between Islamic and other states
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

After stating the station of the state and its responsibilities, it is
appropriate to mention briefly the difference between the Islamic state
and other states. In general, the Islamic state is different from
secular states in the realm of laws. The realm of laws is broader in the
Islamic state than in other political systems for they also ensure
spiritual interests. They also differ with one another in the manner of
implementing laws. In playing their roles and discharging their duties,
all states are in need of financial resources which are partly procured
through taxes collected from the people.

With the permission of *wali* *al-faqih*, the Islamic state may also
approve and implement a law authorizing collection of taxes from people.
The difference between the Islamic state and other states in the
implementation of laws that ask for a certain amount of money from the
people is that in implementing these laws Islam has taken into account
the philosophy behind the creation of man.

In other words, Islam maintains that the actions of man must be done out
of his own freewill to contribute to his spiritual growth and
advancement. In tax collection the state may possibly resort to the use
of force and collect taxes from the people. Of course, in order to
minimize the pressure of imposed taxation upon people and avoid their
protest, diverse approaches have been adopted in advanced countries of
the world through which the people’s sensitivities and complaints are
mitigated. One of these approaches is that taxes are to be levied for
public needs and primary goods which the people buy on a daily basis. In
addition to the original cost of an item which must be given to the
seller, a certain amount of tax must also be paid to add to the
government’s budget.

Naturally, by paying taxes in the manner mentioned above, no one gets
any profit or gain, but even here Islam wants the people to grow
spiritually. For this reason, in some cases Islam has not compelled the
people to pay taxes and does not dispatch any collector to collect
*khums*[^2] which is one of the Islamic taxes.[^3] Even in case of
*zakat* which is obligatory upon the Islamic state to collect, the
liberty of people in paying it must be observed. As such, when
collectors of *zakat* refer to people, they neither assess the assets
liable for *zakat* nor determine the amount of *zakat*.

Rather, the person concerned voluntarily mentions the extent of his
yields and the *zakat* for them is calculated and received. Here
pressure, compulsion or investigation is not used to know the
truth—whether he is telling the truth or not—except in cases where
violations (*zakat* evasions) are so evident and obvious that the
Islamic state would incur heavy losses, or where certain individuals
formally declare their defiance in paying *zakat*. In such cases the
Islamic state has to pursue its collection of taxes by all means.

Thus, one of the distinctions of the Islamic political system in
comparison to other systems is that even in the manner of implementing
laws it has taken Islamic values into account. It is appropriate for
advocates of freedom, personal choice and human values, to note that in
Islam the utmost rational freedom has been considered for individuals
and they are expected to discharge their duties freely to attain
nobility, growth, and advancement.

If ever in some cases Islam acts decisively, and in the words of the
gentlemen, it acts violently, it is meant to protect the freedom and
spiritual perfection of the rest of humanity and keep the way of God
open. As a result, society might better be able to tread the path of
truth and perfection. In any case, individual liberty is not absolute in
Islam. Once this liberty arbitrarily affects material and spiritual
interests of society, they shall be restricted. Individuals may receive
lashes; a bodily limb of a person may be amputated; or while observing
special conditions in very rare situations, a heinous criminal may be
executed. These punishments and severe measures must be regarded as a
warning to violators of law.

Naturally, once Islam orders the hand of a thief to be amputated, others
will see the result of committing theft and the number of robberies will
decrease and fewer opportunities for such a disgraceful act will remain.
But if lighter punishments for them are stipulated, like imprisonment or
monetary fine, the number of thieves will increase. There are even cases
where prisoners who are not thieves learn how to steal on account of
their interaction and mingling with thieves!

We are not afraid of telling the truth and we declare that in Islam
there is severe measure and punishment, and in the words of our
opponents, “violence”. There is also harshness vis-à-vis criminals and
evildoers as well as the faithless and enemies of Islam. As God says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿محمدٌ رسولُ اللهِ و الذينَ معهُ اشدّاءُ عَلَی الکفّارِ رحماءُ
بينهم... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Muhammad, the Apostle of Allah, and those who are with him are hard
against the faithless, and merciful among themselves...”[^4]

In some cases, Islam also regards the humiliation of a criminal as
necessary for the people to learn a lesson:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿…وَلْيَشْهَدْ عَذَابَهُمَا طَائِفَةٌ مِّنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And let their punishment be witnessed by a group of the
faithful**.”*[^5]

We can see that in some cases Islam and the Qur’an explicitly regard
violent actions and even humiliation of a criminal as necessary, and we
cannot omit these verses from the Qur’an. Now, if some people consider
such actions as repugnant to human dignity, we would like to say that in
some cases, acting against the dignity of evildoers and even humiliating
them is necessary for the protection of collective interests. In
reality, these kinds of severe punishments are not actually violent,
rather an arrangement and creation of opportunity for people’s enjoyment
of rational social liberty.

[^1]: “Those who are [themselves] faithless and bar [others] from the
way of Allah—He has made their works go awry” (Surah Muhammad 47:1). ﴿
الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَصَدُّوا عَن سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ أَضَلَّ أَعْمَالَهُمْ ﴾

[^2]: Khums: literally means one-fifth. According to the Shi‘ah school
of jurisprudence [fiqh], this one-fifth tax is obligatorily levied on
every adult Muslim who is financially secure and has surplus in his
income out of annual savings, net commercial profits, and all movable
and immovable properties which are not commensurable with the needs and
social standing of the person. Khums is divided into two equal parts:
the Share of the Imam [sahm al-Imam] and the Share of the Sayyids/Sadat
(descendants of the Prophet) [sahm as-Sadat]. Accordingly, the Share of
the Imam is to be paid to the living Imam, and in the period of
occultation [asr al-ghaybah], to the most learned living mujtahid who is
the giver’s marja‘ at-taqlid [source of emulation]. The other half of
the khums, the Share of the Sayyids/Sadat, is to be given to needy pious
Sayyids who lack the resources for one’s year respectable living in
consonance with their various statuses. For more information, see Sayyid
Muhammad Rizvi, Khums: An Islamic Tax (Toronto: Islamic Education and
Information Center, 1992),
http://www.al-islam.org/beliefs/practices/khums.html. [Trans.]

[^3]: As stated in Shi‘i jurisprudence, the Islamic state is not
supposed to forcibly collect khums from the people, particularly khums
of legitimate wealth mixed with illegitimate wealth [arbah makasib]. In
such cases, khums is obligatory but individuals have to voluntarily and
willfully assess their own annual financial accounts and pay the
required khums.

[^4]: Surah al-Fath 48:29.

[^5]: Surah an-Nur 24:2.


