Session 29: The Political Hierarchy in the Islamic State
========================================================

Specific duties of an Islamic government
----------------------------------------

It would be convenient for our reader to take a quick look at the
specific duties of an Islamic government before glancing at its
political hierarchy.

1. *To guarantee the implementation of laws which directly concern
citizens.*

2. *To implement penal and criminal laws which directly pertain to the
state.* That is, if certain persons do not act upon or violate basic
laws, the state is obliged to punish or penalize them on the basis of
law.

3. *To meet the needs of society which only the state can meet and are
beyond the capability of individuals and groups.* An illustrious example
of these needs is the issue of defense against foreign enemies.

4. *To meet those needs which initially did not pertain to the state as
common citizens used to meet them, but which cannot be performed by them
anymore*.

5. *One of the important and crucial responsibilities of the state is
the exploitation of national wealth and resources which in the Islamic
culture is called “anfal”;* for example, forests, seas, mines, oil and
gas, gold mines, and other public wealth which have no specific owners
and no one has the right to personally exploit them. There is a need for
the “state” to properly exploit these resources in favor of society.

6. Last and most important, *the distinctive feature of the Islamic
state is that apart from meeting the material needs and discharging the
duties which all states have, the spiritual needs of society must also
be addressed*. *Along this line, preservation of Islamic rites, offering
public religious education, providing opportunities for the propagation
of Islam, and the realization of Islamic objectives are among the
exclusive duties of the Islamic state.*

Qualifications of Islamic state officials
-----------------------------------------

In view of the crucial duties of the Islamic state, the qualifications
of officials and workers of the Islamic state in all echelons become
clear because the qualifications of officials is commensurate with their
duties. Undoubtedly, the heavier and more sensitive the
responsibilities, the more qualified the officials must be. The
responsibilities of the state in the Islamic political system being
heavier compared to other states, the officials of the Islamic state
also need to better their qualifications. In every system laws must be
implemented but compared to the secular systems, the legal code is
broader in the Islamic state.

The objective of law in non-religious systems is to meet material needs
of society, maintain social security and prevent chaos and disorder.
Such an objective can be realized under easier conditions. Once we add
to this objective the protection of spiritual interests and religious
values, as stipulated in the [Iranian] Constitution and its
implementation entrusted to the Islamic state, the qualifications
required for officials in the Islamic political system are more
difficult than those of other political systems.

With this introduction, it is now time to state that every implementer
of law in all political systems must possess three general
qualifications. In addition to religious textual proof for the officials
of the Islamic government, the triple qualifications and principles also
have a solid rational basis.

### 1. Knowledge of law

He who wants to implement law must have a thorough knowledge of it and
be familiar with the conditions and manner of implementing it. One who
is ignorant of the law tends to transgress and fail to implement it, and
go beyond the limits of his assumed responsibility. Moreover, in view of
the fact that laws of the Islamic system are compatible with the
fundamentals of Islam, every employee, official or head must be familiar
with the religious laws and statutory laws related to his occupation and
responsibility because he is duty-bound to act within the framework of
these laws.

For one who assumes a responsibility, acquiring correct knowledge,
information and insight of his responsibility is of utmost importance.
This knowledge of the type and scope of the responsibility a person
assumes is not identical. Sometimes, a person has a small responsibility
in a limited and specific unit whose pertinent rules and regulations are
not many. In this case, the required knowledge to accept that
responsibility is very limited. At times, the scope of responsibility of
a person is broader; for example, to be the mayor of a city. In this
case, the concerned person must know properly all laws related to
administering different sections of the city and the manner of
implementing and supervising their implementation.

Similarly, there are more conditions for assuming more responsibilities,
such as ministerial posts and above them the presidential post which is
the highest executive position. The person occupying the presidential
post must have outstanding knowledge and familiarity with law, and the
ideal and best person assuming such a responsibility will be the one
with the utmost knowledge of law.

### 2. Moral excellence

In addition to knowledge of law, the implementer as well as all
officials and administrators must also possess distinctive moral
excellence so that they do not misuse the posts and facilities at their
disposal, with personal and factional motives prompting them to
transgress the bounds of their responsibilities. A person may be
well-versed in law but once its implementation is inconsistent with his
interests, he might be ready to violate it just for the sake of
protecting his interests.

There are many examples of such violations by executives and politicians
of different countries. It is often read in newspapers around the world
that the president of a given country is condemned to some years of
imprisonment for financial corruption, or a certain minister or head is
convicted by court. The reason is that they do not have enough piety and
moral excellence to prefer public interests to their own. Hence, they
violate the law.

So, the second qualification of the implementer of law is possession of
moral excellence, which is likewise known as a level of God-wariness
[*taqwa*], so that he can resist caprice, desire and personal or
factional interests and steadfastly support the truth.

### 3. Managerial skill and experience

A person may be well-versed in law, pious and of good morality, but not
have sufficient skill and the necessary acumen to implement the law, and
in practice does not know the actual application of law and manner of
implementing it. For this reason, those who are in charge of affairs are
religiously forbidden to entrust responsibilities to those who do not
have the required skill, experience and efficiency in discharging their
duty. So, for an administrator to give a satisfactory and desirable
performance, this qualification must be considered in selecting him.

In Islam, as in all political systems these three qualifications are
emphasized while choosing administrators and executives, but the second
qualification, i.e. God-wariness and moral excellence is particularly
emphasized. In other political systems in the world the stress is more
on the other two conditions and less on the administrators’ piety and
sense of justice. Yes, sometimes this condition is expressed in the form
of an absence of criminal records of those who occupy government
positions.

Necessity of determining origin of statesmen’s qualifications
-------------------------------------------------------------

A point worth pondering and given attention to in various schools of
philosophy is that each of these qualifications has different levels
which in turn have different values. For example, God-wariness has
various levels and degrees. One of its levels, which is actually the
lowest, is the performance of what is obligatory and avoidance of any
sin. Another level is that which is possessed by the holy saints
[*awliya’*] and great leaders of religion like Imam Khomeini (*r*) and
those whose stations are near those of the Infallibles. By having this
lofty station, they keep their mind or thinking away from insincerities
and ungodly thoughts.

Now, which level should be considered as the source and basis of
qualifications of those occupying administrative posts? If we consider
the highest level of *taqwa* as the basis, we will face a problem
because such people (who have very high level of *taqwa*) are very few
and perhaps only enough to fill in the highest posts in the country but
none for low-rank positions. If we regard the lowest level of *taqwa* as
sufficient, we usually find such people violating laws and defeating the
purpose of their posts.

This problem has posed as a challenge to those who present practical
methods in different realms and domains of human behavior. Concerning
the possession of different levels of moral merits, some believe in the
principle of “either all or none”. That is, either a person should have
the highest level of moral excellence or the necessity of having moral
merit should be neglected. In the different fields of social sciences
including moral philosophy, there is a particular group which holds such
an idea.

Rejecting the value-laden approach of Kant in the realm of behavior
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Those who are familiar with the epistemological aspect of moral
philosophy know that one of the most popular schools of moral philosophy
is that of the famous German philosopher, Emmanuel Kant.[^1] He believed
that any action has a moral value once it is done in the best form
without any emotional or social secondary intention or motive. That is,
if a person wants to do something good and meritorious, he must do so
solely because it is good and meritorious, and not for the sake of its
perceived beneficial outcome or for emotional satisfaction.

Therefore, Kant does not give any value to the action of a mother who
wakes up at midnight by hearing the cry of her baby and feeds it
although according to common people she has done something valuable.
According to him, she feeds her baby due to the instinctive emotional
relationship between the two. If she does not feed her baby, she will be
annoyed, and in reality, by feeding her baby, she satisfies her
emotional and psychological needs.

Similarly, if a person does something beneficial for society or tells
the truth to gain the confidence of people in social life, his action is
devoid of any moral value. Telling the truth has moral value only if a
person tells the truth because telling the truth is good. Kant has very
high standards of morality. An actual manifestation of his moral
philosophy can hardly be found. With the exception of the actions of
only a very few individuals, the good deeds of people have no moral
value because they are done for emotional contentment, gaining personal,
social, and most importantly, spiritual and otherworldly rewards.

So, an action is morally good that possesses all the required conditions
and if it lacks even one of the conditions, it has no moral value at
all. In other fields including discussions on politics and government,
it is also said that a government is rightful when all its officials
satisfactorily possess the required qualifications. This reminds us
about the establishment of the much awaited government of truth.

Prior to the victory of the Islamic Revolution, some religious yet
intransigent and crooked-minded Muslims in our society also had the same
notion of government, saying: “We have to think of establishing an
Islamic government only when many people like Salman al-Farsi exist in
our society so that each of them can be assigned the duties of the mayor
of every city or town. So long as righteous and meritorious individuals
like Salman are not yet trained, one should not get involved in any
revolution or movement.”

This group of narrow-minded individuals believed that prior to the
advent of Hadhrat Wali al-‘Asr (may Allah expedite his glorious advent),
the right conditions and grounds for an Islamic revolution or movement
were not available, so one should not stage a revolution. Accordingly,
one should wait for the revolution of the Last Imam (*‘a*) with the
assistance of his 113 distinguished and outstanding supporters to
establish the government of justice and equity. They believe that as
long as this number of outstanding personalities in terms of morality
and piety does not exist, any political movement or step is uncalled
for.

Pious and sincere personalities must be available so that all strategic
posts and occupations can be assigned to them and no shortcoming or
loophole of any kind can take place in administering society. The least
objection and criticism that can be raised against this view is that it
can never happen in reality. Besides, if, one does not take any step to
topple the government in power and establish an Islamic government as
long as the number of righteous, outstanding and distinguished
personalities with the highest degree of piety and morality is not
reached, then corruption and wickedness in society will increase and
prevent positive sociopolitical developments.

Islam’s non-judgmental approach in value-giving and assigning duties
--------------------------------------------------------------------

In contrast to the above single level and one-dimensional value system,
in some systems concerning personal and individual actions as well as
sociopolitical changes, various levels and diverse schemes have been
functioning. In the first place, an ideal scheme is presented and then
other schemes with lesser degrees, advantages and conditions, and
finally, emergency schemes. In various cases and situations, there is
also the “case-to-case basis” permission in Islam.

For example, in Islam it is incumbent upon any person who reaches the
age of puberty to perform prayer with utmost concentration and sincerity
including all other conditions. But this ruling is not fixed but
alterable in emergency and exceptional situations. It is applicable only
to the situation when a person is capable of performing prayer with all
its conditions and parts, whereas in exceptional and emergency
situations some of its conditions and parts are no longer required. In a
situation when the person praying must take a bath [*ghusl*] but there
is no water available, or water is harmful for him; or he must perform
ablution [*wudhu*] but cold water (which is the only available) is
harmful for him; or he cannot perform ablution, Islam does not accept
the notion of “either all or none”.

Islam does not say that one should pray only when all conditions can be
fulfilled and do so with utmost concentration and sincerity or not pray.
In such cases, instead, Islam has offered man alternatives commensurate
with the exceptional and emergent situation he may be in. In the
abovementioned example, it has ordained that if a person is incapable of
taking a bath or performing ablution, as the case may be, he still has
to pray after performing dry ablution [*tayammum*]; if he cannot stand
and pray, he should sit and pray; if he cannot pray while sitting, he
should pray lying down. Even in a situation when a person is still
conscious but cannot move his body including his tongue, Islam has not
exempted him from prayer. Even in such a critical and bad situation he
has to pray, but it is commensurate to his condition or situation.

This shows that in the Islamic value system different qualitative and
quantitative degrees have been taken into account for sociopolitical and
religious obligations, each of which has a value commensurate to its
nature. In the first place, the lofty and ideal degree is considered and
below it are the second and third degrees until the lowest degree which
is related to an emergency or an exceptional situation. The obligation
of man in the latter situation is the least that can be expected from
him.

Worship has different degrees of value
--------------------------------------

Another example that can show the fundamental distinction and difference
between the Kantian theory and the Islamic viewpoint is the value of
worship [*‘ibadah*] and its different degrees. The highest form of
worship is that which is done solely because of love and reverence for
God—the same worship the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) described in
one of his litanies [*munajat*]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِلٰهى مَا عَبَدْتُكَ خَوْفاً مِنْ عِقَابِكَ وَ لاَ طَمَعًا فِي
ثَوابِكَ وَلٰكِنْ وَجَدْتُكَ أهْلاً لِلْعِبَادَةِ فَعَبْدتُك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“My Lord, I have not worshipped You out of fear of Your chastisement or
out of greed for Your reward, but I found You worthy of worship so I
worshipped You.”[^2]

In another place, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) divides the worshippers into three
groups:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ قَوْماً عَبَدُوا اللهَ رَغْبَةً فَتِلْكَ عِبَادَةُ التُّجَّارِ،
وَإِنَّ قَوْماً عَبَدُوا اللهَ رَهْبَةً فَتِلْكَ عِبَادَةُ الْعَبِيدِ،
وَإِنَّ قَوْماً عَبَدُوا اللهَ شُكْراً فَتِلْكَ عِبَادَةُ
الاَْحْرَارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A group of people worship Allah out of desire for reward; this is the
worship of traders. Another group worship out of fear; this is the
worship of slaves. Yet another group worship Allah out of gratefulness.
This is the worship of free men.”[^3]

In his statement, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) regards the worship done solely out
of gratitude and reverence to God as the highest and most superior, and
Islam wants that all believers perform that kind of worship. However, it
is clear that not all have the station, capacity and dedication to
perform such worship. Such worship can only be done by the sincere
*awliya’* of Allah whose station is so sublime that they have been
annihilated in the Beauty of the Beloved, and even if they are thrown
into hellfire, they will not desist from worshipping and calling unto
Him. Or, even if they are not admitted to paradise, they will not stop
worshipping Him. No doubt, such individuals can hardly be found in
millions.

Now, once we accept Kant’s notion of “all or none” and believe that an
act is morally good only when it fulfils all necessary conditions and
capabilities without even an iota lacking in it, it means that the only
acceptable worship is that of the highest degree which is done solely
because of gratitude and reverence to God; only the worship of the
sincere *awliya’* of Allah is accepted, and not the worship of those who
desire paradise or are afraid of divine chastisement. Islam does not
accept this myopic and bigoted view.

In order to facilitate the servants of God and remove any hardship or
difficulty along their way, Islam has considered varying degrees as far
as worship and other obligatory acts are concerned—degrees which begin
with the least required capabilities and conditions, i.e. possession of
the minimum valuable quantities, up to the highest degree or level which
has all the required capabilities and conditions and to reach it means
attainment of the highest spiritual station of man.

It is like the worship of personages such as the Commander of the
Faithful (*‘a*) and the students of his school [*maktab*] who have
attained the most exalted station and gnosis and reached the highest
degree of servitude to God. But the worship of those who are below them
and have reached lower stations and worship God out of desire for
spiritual rewards and recompense is also acceptable. So is the worship
of those who are even lower than them and worship God out of fear of His
punishment. Their worship also has some value.

Categorized models of Islamic government
----------------------------------------

The basis of values in Islam is not “all or none” or of a single level.
Values have varying degrees which begin with the lowest degree up to the
highest. The same is true of the Islamic political system. Islam
presents an ideal form of government which can materialize under
particular circumstances by those who have exceptional qualifications,
capabilities and merits that cannot be found in others. In reality, that
form of Islamic government can be run only by those who possess
infallibility [*‘ismah*] and do not have the least defect and blemish in
their thinking, speech or action.

This is the highest form of Islamic government that can be described so
far—the government headed by the one who not only refrains from thinking
of sin but also does not unconsciously make a mistake. He has no blemish
of any sort and completely abides with what is good; he perfectly knows
the code of Islamic laws and implements them exactly. This is exactly
the ideal form of government which was implemented by the prophets
including the Prophet of Islam (*s*) and during the short reign of the
Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*).

Of course, more ideal than this can also be imagined but it is
impossible to implement, and that is the form of government whose chief
executive as well as commanders, governors and mayors are all infallible
[*ma‘sum*].

As we have said, this form of government will never be realized because
in no period of time will the number of infallible personages be such
that all government posts can be occupied by them. The only ideal form
which can materialize is that a *ma‘sum* heads the government hierarchy.
Besides, this ideal form will only materialize at the time of the
presence of a *ma‘sum* after removal of all impediments to his rule.

Therefore, in the Islamic political system various stages and degrees
have been considered for the government. After failing to establish the
highest form of Islamic government headed by a *ma‘sum*, (during this
period of occultation [*ghaybah*]) we should not give up trying to
establish an Islamic government.

In the case of inaccessibility of an infallible Imam we have to entrust
the government to one who in terms of knowledge, God-wariness and
management—whose highest degree can be found in a *ma‘sum* as he has
infallibility in knowledge, motive and action—is nearest to an
infallible Imam. In the absence of such a person, the government must be
entrusted to the one who is lower to him in station, one after the
other, until it reaches the turn of the one who has the least
qualification to run the government. With a degree lower than that, the
government objectives will never materialize. Under no circumstances
should this form of government be chosen.

Rational proof of the wilayah al-faqih system
---------------------------------------------

The ideal and highest form of Islamic government which is the
sought-after according to Islam is the rule of a *ma‘sum*. When its
ideal form cannot be established due to the absence of a *ma‘sum*, the
one chosen to rule should be one who is nearest to the *infallibles* in
both knowledge and action. He can be no other than a duly competent
jurist [*faqih*] who, on account of merits, capabilities and proximity
to the *infallibles* in terms of knowledge, behavior and managerial
skill, is regarded as the successor to the infallible Imam.

So, the justification of the *wilayah al-faqih* system is that when
there is no direct access to the infallible Imam, the duly competent
*faqih* who is superior to the rest in the knowledge of laws, in piety,
even in sociopolitical matters, in the observance of social justice and
enforcement of laws, in possessing political acumen to manage society
and practical skill in ways of implementing laws, in struggling against
evil and carnal desires and preferring the interests of Islam to
personal and factional interests, has to take charge of government
affairs.

In this regard, one may possibly say: Since we do not have direct access
to a *ma‘sum*, the qualifications required for the Islamic ruler are no
longer necessary nor credible—neither the expertise in Islamic
jurisprudence, God-wariness nor managerial skill. Anyone may file his
candidacy to rule over the Muslims, and once the majority of people
accept him, his authority should be credible and binding. In reality,
this hypothesis is anchored in the principle of “all or none”.

That is, if the highest form of qualifications which only a *ma‘sum*
possesses is unavailable, those qualifications in their lower forms are
no longer credible. Once the piety of a *ma‘sum* is not possessed by
anyone, piety is not necessary at all for a ruler. A corrupt person who
commits a cardinal sin can also occupy the highest post in an Islamic
government. One who does not have a rudimentary knowledge of
jurisprudence can also occupy the highest post in an Islamic government.
According to the Islamic political system, this notion has no
justification at all and is rejected. It can only be justified in the
Western democratic theory.

In Muslim countries, some intellectuals who have a superficial and
scanty knowledge of Islam have mixed their understandings of Islam with
the tenets of Western culture and succumbed to eclecticism. In
supporting the democratic model, they show in practice that they have
accepted the notion of “all or none”. These narrow-minded Muslims
believe that in the presence of an infallible Imam, he must rule over
the Islamic society. In his absence the criterion should be the opinion
of the majority, and no condition other than popular acceptability be
binding. Such a view is in no way compatible and concordant with the
Islamic perspective and the dominant spirit of Islamic laws.

Islam has laid down different levels for its laws. In its value system,
it has also considered different degrees of values. With respect to
social issues, we can equally observe that it has taken into account
special or particular conditions for some social matters. In case of
failure to meet all the required conditions, those conditions that can
be met are acceptable. With the aim of elucidating this point, we shall
deal with the issue of pious endowment [*waqf*] which is one of the
social laws of Islam.

It is stated in the rulings on *waqf* that if a pious bequest
[*mawqufah*] is endowed with a particular use, it must be utilized for
only that particular use. Now, if that particular use is practically no
more available and has no external manifestation, the pious bequest must
be utilized in something which is most similar to the intended utility.
For example, our predecessors had endowed many pious bequests to provide
the forages of riding animals of pilgrims to the holy shrine of the
Doyen of the Martyrs (*‘a*). The income of these endowed properties was
spent on the forages of horses and camels mounted by pilgrims to the
mausoleum of Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) in Karbala’.

However, since that utility is no longer applicable now as no one goes
to Karbala’ for pilgrimage riding a horse or camel anymore and traveling
is done by air, rail or road, shall we dispense with those endowed
properties and not consider any utility for them on the basis of the
“all or none” thesis, or as the Islamic perspective or approach demands,
shall we choose the other options which are the most similar to the
previous utility to provide fuel for airplanes and vehicles of pilgrims
to Karbala’?

Similarly, if an endower [*waqif*] wills that after him any one of his
sons who becomes a *mujtahid* will assume the custodianship of his
*waqf*, yet none of his sons is a *mujtahid* though one of them has
almost attained *ijtihad* or is a quasi-*mujtahid*, will the *waqf*
remain without any guardian since none of the potential guardians is
fully qualified? Or, shall we choose the second most qualified in the
absence of the perfectly qualified guardian, i.e. choose the one who has
almost attained *ijtihad* in the absence of a *mujtahid*?

In religious and sociopolitical issues there are many examples that both
reason and religion regard as having an array of degrees. Similarly, in
the Islamic government different degrees have been considered for the
ruler. In the case of unavailability of the highest degree, i.e. an
infallible Imam like in this period of occultation, the government
should be entrusted to the one who is the deputy of the infallible Imam
(*‘a*) and the nearest to him in every respect, and that is no one other
than the duly competent *faqih*.

[^1]: Immanuel Kant (1724-1804): the German philosopher considered by
many as the most influential thinker of modern times. Describing in the
Metaphysics of Ethics (1797) his ethical system which is anchored in a
notion that the reason is the final authority for morality, actions of
any sort, Kant believed, must be undertaken from a sense of duty
dictated by reason, and no action performed for expediency or solely in
obedience to law or custom can be regarded as moral. [Trans.]

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 41, p. 14.

[^3]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Saying 237.


