Session 30: The Connection between the Absolute Guardianship of the Jurist and the Islamic Government Establishment
===================================================================================================================

Balance between prerogatives and duties in the Islamic state
------------------------------------------------------------

Whenever a responsibility is entrusted to a person or a duty is assigned
to him, certain prerogatives must be granted to him so that he can
exercise them in discharging his duty or responsibility. The heavier
responsibilities of the Islamic state in terms of magnitude and scope
demand greater prerogatives and facilities than those of other
governments in order to do justice to them. We shall cite an example in
order to make this point clearer and more empirical.

With incessant technological advancement and transformation in the
recent past, new conditions and situations have emerged in human society
requiring a change in the manner of interaction, way of living and
attitude towards the environment. New vistas like exploration of outer
space have been opened to mankind. When cars were not yet invented,
people had contracted roads and narrow pathways which could give way to
only horses and the like. In some parts of ancient cities such a
condition still exists. Yet, when the number of vehicles multiplied,
people had no option but to commute within the city through vehicles.
They had to expand the narrow roads and construct streets and highways
to make traffic easy and comfortable and prevent any possible dangers
and accidents.

Once the state and its officials want to construct and expand roads and
streets, they have no option but to exercise authority over the lands
and houses of people and demolish them. If the state is expected to make
traveling comfortable, but not authorized to demolish some houses (along
the streets to be expanded or constructed), such a demand is absurd,
illogical and impractical. So, the state must have such authority to be
able to discharge its duty. The state has to compensate for the damage
caused and rehabilitate the affected people somewhere else.

Connection between absolute guardianship (wilayat-e mutlaq) and government prerogatives
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In Shi‘i jurisprudence [*fiqh*], the Islamic government’s possession of
necessary and sufficient prerogatives for the performance of its
responsibilities in line with discharging of responsibilities is
attributed to the absolute guardianship of the *faqih*.

In the Qur’an, traditions and statements of jurists [*fuqaha*], usually
the word “guardianship” [*wilayah*] is used instead of “government”
[*hukumah*]. Apart from that, the word *wilayah* is more appropriate
than the word *hukumah*—just as the Supreme Leader Ayatullah al-‘Uzma
Sayyid ‘Ali Khamene’i pointed out, the connotation of the word *hukumah*
is laden with a sense of dominance and imposition—as the word *wilayah*
is more profound and associated with love and affection. At any rate,
the word *wilayah* can be used in lieu of *hukumah*, as one who regards
“government” as necessary for society also feels the same about
“guardianship” for society in juristic parlance and usage.

Given these introductory remarks, we argue that if this *wilayah* enjoys
all prerogatives through which all responsibilities can be discharged
and all needs of society addressed in accordance with Islamic and
legitimate standards, it can be said that this *wilayah* is absolute.
But if the *wali* *al-amr* [Guardian or Master of the Affair] has
*wilayah* only to the extent necessary, i.e. only in cases where the
lives of some people are in danger that we believe in him to have the
right to exercise authority over the properties of people, and no
authority in city development and beautification as well as construction
of green zones (parks) and squares, it is said that this *wilayah* is
limited and conditional.

People’s skepticism on absolute guardianship
--------------------------------------------

We are explaining these things because some people, in a bid to misguide
the people in general and the youth in particular, are poisoning their
minds by pointing out certain fallacies in the theory of *wilayah
al-faqih*. Initially, they objected to the word *wilayah*, saying that
“guardianship” [*wilayah*] is applicable to children and the mentally
retarded. *Wali* means “guardian” and is needed by those who do not have
the necessary intelligence and capability to administer their daily
lives. So, anyone who advances the theory of *wilayah al-faqih*, in
reality regards the people as having low intelligence quotients (IQs)
and needful of guardians.

This fallacy is very clear and self-evident. Just as the *wilayah* of
the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) does not literally mean their guardianship of
people and the latter’s need for a guardian, *wilayah* here is used to
mean *hukumah*, i.e. administering social affairs and overall management
of society. *Wilayah al-faqih* means that certain individuals are
authorized by God to administer the primary affairs of society, and it
is not that those who are under the rule of *wilayah al-faqih* and
Islamic government are children, the mentally retarded or psychopaths!

They have further committed a fallacy with respect to the word *mutlaq*
[absolute]. They have claimed in some of their writings that “absolute
guardianship” is tantamount to polytheism [*shirk*]. Thus, accordingly,
those who believe in “absolute guardianship” are polytheists and have
associated deities to God because apart from Him who is the Absolute,
they have also recognized the *wali* *al-amr* as “absolute”! Sometimes,
one does not know how to react to these childish and silly claims.

Let me say briefly that firstly, in the Islamic texts, the Qur’an and
traditions in particular, the word *mutlaq* has never been used for God,
and in Arabic lexicon it is not correct to associate the word *mutlaq*
to God. If ever out of carelessness or modification of the meaning of
*mutlaq*, we associate it to God, it implies that God, the Exalted, is
unlimited without any weakness, defect and deficiency.

No one has such a belief about anyone other than God. We believe that
the One and Only God has Absolute Perfection without having any defect
and deficiency and He has all the eternal Attributes. Obviously, this
belief does not necessarily mean that the Islamic state should not have
the necessary prerogatives to perform its duties. Basically, these two
points have no connection with each other.

“Absolute guardianship” means that the ruler, leader and head of the
Islamic *ummah* has the necessary prerogatives to discharge his duties
and do what is good for Islamic society, and the *wali* *al-faqih* may
interfere or exercise authority whenever necessary. In order to make
this point clearer, we shall explain the Islamic government theory
further, though we have already dealt with it earlier.

Investigating the structure of Islamic government
-------------------------------------------------

Once the structure and nature of Islamic government is talked about,
some people refer to political philosophy books and mention the
different types and forms of governments established in human society
since time immemorial such as oligarchy, aristocracy, monarchy, and
democracy. Nowadays, democracy is divided into republicanism and
constitutional monarchy, and republicanism into presidential and
parliamentary.

They ask us whether the Islamic government is one of those mentioned
forms of government or something distinct. If the Islamic government is
republican, it is the same democracy or “government of the people for
the people by the people” and thus Islamic government is in no way
different. If it is said that Islamic government is a monarchy, then why
is the government in Iran called “Islamic Republic”? In any case, has
Islam no idea about its form of government, or does it grant freedom to
the people to choose the type and form of their government, or has it
stipulated a distinct form of government?

In reply to the question on the structure of government according to
Islam, many of them have said that Islam does not endorse a particular
form of government. To some extent this answer is correct, but it is not
devoid of ambiguity. To explain this, I deem it necessary to highlight
two points which must not be neglected.

### 1. The extensiveness and irrevocability of Islamic laws

The first point is that Islam and its laws are not confined to a
particular time and place. The inalterable and constant laws of Islam
have been enacted in such a way that they are applicable to all ages and
societies. Meanwhile, a government may be established in a small and
limited territory or an island with a small population. It may equally
be founded in a country with a population of one million or a country
like India or China with a population of about one billion or more than
a billion. In any case, the government may assume numerous forms. A
small community of one hundred families may have a government of its
own.

A country with a population of one billion may also have a government of
its own. It is even possible that one day a global government will be
established on earth. In view of the diversity of governments, can a
model or laws for a government be proposed that would encompass all
governments? Or, is it that a particular form should not be determined
for the government, and if ever a particular form is presented, it will
not be suitable for some societies and not applicable to other
societies? For example, if we claim that during the advent of Islam its
laws were initially applicable to the small community at Medina, and the
government founded by the Messenger of Allah (*s*) was suitable for the
society at that time whose population probably did not exceed a hundred
thousand.

Is the model and form which Islam wants to present as the Islamic
government the same model and form of the government of the Prophet
(*s*) during the early period of Islam with features and characteristics
suitable for a small population of that time with particular moral and
cultural elements? Or, is it that Islam is not only devoid of a
particular model and form of government but also has not set any
pertinent limits, conditions, requirements and rulings?

The fact of the matter is that the Islamic approach is neither of the
two. In fact, apart from presenting a specific form of government
suitable to its inalterable and constant laws, Islam has introduced a
general or overall framework which can integrate changes, variations and
numerous or diverse forms. Islam has neither given total freedom to the
people to do whatever they want nor presented a limited and narrow form
of government applicable only to a certain age and place. The general
framework introduced by Islam has a broad scope and span, containing all
correct and reasonable forms of government.

We describe this general framework of government as the Islamic
government. This framework emerges at a given time with a particular
structure and form, and with a different structure and form at another
time. Neither of these two forms and structures or any other form or
structure for that matter is incompatible and repugnant to the Islamic
nature of the government in question.

In other words, Islam does not endorse a particular form or type of
government. Its guiding principle is the observance of the general
framework; the structure of government should neither be beyond it nor
inconsistent with it. The inalterable and constant laws of Islam which
have been enacted for all societies up to the Day of Resurrection have a
general structure. In contrast, secondary and alterable laws conducive
to particular times and places are also enacted. Among these alterable
laws are administrative laws which are issued or approved by the wali
al-faqih. To obey and follow these laws in their forms or shapes is
obligatory.

### 2. Presentation of government models derived from Islam

The second point is that the goal of the Islamic government is to reach
and realize a set of ideal and desirable conditions. But since it is not
always possible to achieve them, there is no option but to consider a
substitute of the ultimate choice. That is, if the ideal condition is
not available, the second choice will replace it, and if the second
choice cannot be achieved, the third choice will replace it. This
implies that our value system is neither monolithic nor considers value
as confined only to all that is ideal. Instead, in the Islamic value
system values have a multilayered structure and diverse degrees as well
as the most ideal and supreme value. Below this zenith of value, other
degrees are also valuable in their own rights. It is not correct that if
the ideal value cannot be realized, we should totally give up and not
resort to an equally valuable option below it.

The point is that Islam has set an ideal form of government which can be
established whenever the said government is headed by the Prophet (*s*)
or an infallible Imam. This ideal option has been explicitly emphasized
by God in the Noble Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا
الرَّسُولَ وَأُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنكُمْ ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who have faith! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those
vested with authority among you…”***[^1]

In another verse, He says thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَمَا آتَاكُمُ الرَّسُولُ فَخُذُوهُ وَمَا نَهَاكُمْ عَنْهُ
فَانتَهُوا...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Take whatever the Apostle give you, and relinquish whatever he forbids
you...”[^2]

The foremost view of Islam is that an infallible person must head the
government and hold the reigns of power so that he can manage and
supervise the political apparatus. But a *ma‘sum* is not always present
among the people to directly hold the reigns of government. Even when a
*ma‘sum* is present, it does not follow that he is in a position of
strength to establish a government and exercise power.

In fact, among our Imams, only the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) and
Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba (*‘a*) for a very short period were able to rule.
Since the time of Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) the circumstances were not
suitable for the infallible Imams (*‘a*) to establish an Islamic
government. Either the people or majority of them did not support them
to establish an Islamic government or an influential section of society
prevented them from establishing it. As such, each of the Imams (*‘a*)
was forced to distance himself from the government of the day.

Precedence of the notion of “state within a state” in Islam
-----------------------------------------------------------

In case the government is not under the control of an infallible Imam or
a just ruler but an oppressive and *taghuti* regime is established,
should people leave all affairs to an illegitimate and tyrannical ruler
and totally relinquish government affairs? Are righteous and pious
individuals not supposed to properly attend to government affairs at any
level and guide society to the extent possible? Undoubtedly, the reply
of Islam is in the negative.

In such cases, Islam has set emergency substitutes and maintained that
if an infallible Imam is present but has no support in establishing a
government, or he is not present and the government is outside the
control of his righteous and just successor, the people may, as much as
possible, refer in matters related to government to a person who is most
similar to a *ma‘sum*.

Indisputably, conflicts and disputes always occur in society about
personal, family, social, commercial and matters of inheritance. For
example, two partners may have a dispute over their shares; inheritors
may fight over the inheritance; spouses may have a quarrel. Certainly,
in order to resolve these differences people are in need of government
decisions. They have to refer to a legal authority that will investigate
the differences and discords.

Under the pretext that the government of truth does not exist and an
infallible Imam or a just ruler is not in control of government, people
are not supposed to be contented with the *taghuti* government, do
whatever it commands and reject an alternative. In fact, in particular
and limited cases if there is a chance to refer to a person who issues
and implements the correct Islamic decree, it is expedient to refer to
him. As such, the infallible Imams (*‘a*) have introduced a scheme for
such circumstances and conditions which in modern parlance is described
as establishing a “state within a state”.

If the government is in the hands of tyrants and usurpers and the people
do not have sufficient power and means to rise up and overthrow them and
establish the government of truth, in relation to administrative matters
the people are supposed to refer to the *fuqaha* and those who, though
not infallible, have been trained in the school of the *Ahl al-Bayt*
(*‘a*) and occupy the highest station of piety and knowledge of religion
and who in knowledge and moral conduct are nearest to the infallibles.
In relation to their administrative problems people must refer to the
*faqih* who has the intellectual capability to deduce and apply the
correct Islamic law, has the necessary managerial skill to adjudicate
and issue a verdict, and has the highest decree of piety,
trustworthiness and credibility.

This statement or the notion of a “state within a state” means that
within the vast jurisdiction of an illegitimate state, small and limited
‘states’ that can to some extent become the sanctuary of people in their
administrative problems must be established. In our Islamic culture,
such a government is described as “restricted guardianship” [*wilayat-e
muqayyad*]—a kind of guardianship which *fuqaha* had even during the
time of the infallible Imams (*‘a*). With the permission of the Imams
(*‘a*), *fuqaha* had the authority to adjudicate, bid and forbid.

Even during the period of occultation [*ghaybah*] the *fuqaha*, though
incapable of establishing a government, used to exercise authority in
certain cases of litigations, disputes, quarrels, urgent matters, and
what is described in our jurisprudence as “financial affairs” [*al-umur
al-hasbiyyah*]. In terms of form, substance and extent of prerogatives,
however, “restricted guardianship” was considerably different from the
“absolute guardianship of the jurist” [*wilayat-e mutlaq-e faqih*].

Throughout the history of Shi‘ism, “restricted guardianship” has been
enjoyed by the *fuqaha,* and people, with full satisfaction and
confidence used to refer some of their social problems, disputes and
differences to them and ask for correct solutions. Perhaps, it is
because of this historical precedence that theoreticians are less
skeptical about it, and it does not meet much opposition. On the
contrary, on account of its lack of long historical precedence in the
recent past, and its strictness towards malevolent xenophiles and their
illegitimate interests, the “absolute guardianship of the jurist” has
been a subject of pusillanimous objection and attack.

Imam Khomeini’s presentation of “absolute guardianship of the jurist”
---------------------------------------------------------------------

From the time of occultation of Hadhrat Wali al-‘Asr (may Allah expedite
his glorious advent) up to the occurrence of the Islamic Revolution in
Iran, the possibility that one day a rightful and truthful government
will be established by a duly competent *faqih* was more akin to a dream
and illusion.

Even if the people in our country were told, as late as thirty or forty
years ago, that one day a *faqih* will topple down the *taghuti* regime,
no one would believe it and consider such an idea as nothing but mere
daydreaming. It would be like someone saying that a time will come when
we will fly without the help of instruments and facilities, for it is
believed that such an event will happen only in dreams and never take
place in real life.

At that time, it was funny for people to hear someone claiming that a
cleric in place of the *taghut* will take control of the country. The
people would ask, “Is it possible? How could a person who, could hardly
find his daily bread, was not secure even in his home, whose house could
be raided, and he, banished, imprisoned and tortured, acquire the power
to establish a government?!

It is true that *wilayah al-faqih* was not actually implemented in the
past as it did not seem reasonably probable, but since its assumption
was possible, some prominent *fuqaha* advanced the theory of “absolute
guardianship of the jurist”. They examined the question: If one day
conditions for the *faqih* to rule are provided and he actually takes
charge of government, would his *wilayah* be absolute or limited?

Contrary to those periods of the infallible Imams (‘a), when on the one
hand, they practiced dissimulation [taqiyyah] in a position of weakness,
deprived of their right to interfere in administrative issues, and
people referred some of their problems like disputes and differences to
them only in private and acquired their verdicts; and, on the other
hand, when the fuqaha distanced themselves from the government and were
robbed of the chance to interfere in administrative matters; if a chance
appeared for a faqih to rule and he became politically strong enough to
establish a government, should he exercise wilayah only in “urgent
matters” and interfere only in “financial affairs”? Or, should all
limitations, conditions and “specific restrictions” on the faqih’s
exercise of authority, imposed during the reigns of taghuts and tyrants,
be removed, and, exactly like an infallible Imam who is politically
capable of establishing a government, should the faqih also have all the
prerogatives that an infallible Imam has in the overall administration
of society? This option has been presented as the theory of “absolute
guardianship of the jurist”.

Among our prominent figures, the one who, in addition to expounding the
theory of “absolute guardianship of the jurist” as a juristic
proposition, regarded the same as practically realizable, was His
Eminence Imam Khomeini (*q*). Forty years ago, he used to mention in his
lectures that there is the possibility of a *faqih* establishing a
government in a certain geographical location.[^3] The *faqih* would
have all the prerogatives of a religious ruler and his authority would
not be confined to financial affairs and urgent matters. As far as the
interests of Islamic society were concerned, he could exercise authority
within the framework of religious standards and Islamic precepts.

At that time, when the Imam discussed this theory, his students accepted
it intellectually with good intention, good opinion and affection for
him. Yet, they could not imagine that it would be implemented until
finally, the Islamic movement in Iran gained momentum and gradually the
Revolution triumphed and the Islamic government was established.

So, the “absolute guardianship of the jurist” means that the one who,
according to Islam, is competent to rule, and in terms of knowledge,
piety and managerial skill is most similar to a ma‘sum, and is able to
establish a government will have all the prerogatives of an infallible
Imam in managing the affairs of society. Once the wali al-faqih enjoys
these extensive prerogatives, all laws, executive orders and ordinances
to be passed in the Islamic government under the command of the wali
al-faqih will be deemed legitimate only through his permission and
approval. Without his permission, no one else will have the direct and
independent right to legislate or implement a law.

All administrative affairs shall become official by his permission and
authority. Under his government, individuals shall implement laws
through his designation, or if they are elected according to
predetermined laws and arrangements, their assumption of office shall
become official through his approval and permission. Thus, without the
permission and authority of the wali al-faqih no step shall be deemed
official and legitimate.

The Imam used to say time and again: If a government is formed without
the approval and permission of the wali al-faqih, it is taghuti. It
means that we have no more than two essential types of government: the
government of truth and the government of taghut. The government of
truth is that which is headed by the wali al-faqih who is the supreme
authority in all administrative affairs and issues, and all matters
shall acquire legitimacy through his permission and approval. If it is
not so, then it is the government of falsehood and taghut, and as the
Qur’an states,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿...فَمَاذَا بَعْدَ الْحَقِّ إِلاَّ الضَّلاَلُ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…So what is there without the truth except error?”[^4]

Description of wilayat al-faqih in the maqbulah of ‘Umar ibn Hanzalah’
----------------------------------------------------------------------

In view of what has been said, the prerogatives of the *faqih* are
confined to sacred religious standards and laws and do not go beyond
them, making it clear that belief in the “absolute guardianship of the
jurist” does not mean polytheism or considering someone other than God
as absolute. As a matter of fact, according to some narrations
transmitted from the infallible Imams (*‘a*), anyone who disobeys the
decree and order of the *wali* *al-faqih* is a polytheist [*mushrik*].

As narrated in the *maqbulah* of ‘Umar ibn Hanzalah, concerning two
believers who had a dispute over religious issues or worldly matters
like inheritance, they asked Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) whom they should refer
to for judgment and solving of their conflict. The Imam (*‘a*) dissuaded
them from referring to a *taghut* or tyrant ruler but instead ordered
them to refer to the narrators of *hadith*s, religious scholars and
experts, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...فَإِنّي قَدْ جَعَلْتُهُ عَلَيْكُمْ حَاكِمًا، فَإِذَا حَكَمَ
بِحُكْمِنَا فَلَمْ يَقْبَلْهُ مِنْهُ فَإِنَّمَا إسْتَخَفَّ بِحُكْمِ
اللهِ وَ عَلَيْنَا رَدَّهُ وَالرَّادُّ عَلَيْنَا الرَّادُّ عَلىٰ اللهِ
وَ هُوَ عَلىٰ حَدِّ الشِّرْكِ بِاللهِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…For I appoint him as judge over you. Anyone who rejects his judgment
is as if he belittles the judgment of Allah and rejects us, and anyone
who rejects us is as if he rejects Allah, and rejection of Him is
tantamount to associating partners with Him.”[^5]

According to the abovementioned tradition, if the duly competent *faqih*
establishes a government or takes charge of government affairs, anyone
who opposes him and rejects his orders and words is as if he opposes the
infallible Imams (*‘a*) and opposition to them is tantamount to
polytheism [*shirk*]. This polytheism is not in the ontological Lordship
[*rububiyyat-e takwini*] of God but rather polytheism in the legislative
Lordship [*rububiyyat-e tashri‘i*]. The explanation for this is that
monotheism [*tawhid*] has different classifications and degrees:

(1) monotheism in creation, i.e. belief in the Unity or Oneness of the
Creator of the universe;

(2) monotheism in Divinity [*uluhiyyah*] and servitude [*‘ubudiyyah*],
i.e. belief that no one is worthy of worship but God who is the Absolute
Lord and Legislator; and

(3) Divine Unity [*tawhid-e rububi*] which is divided into two: (a)
ontological Lordship and (b) legislative Lordship.

“Ontological Lordship” means that we have to consider that the designing
and management of the entire universe lies with God and to believe that
the rotation of the sun and moon, the taking place of day and night,
life and death of man and animals, and the protection of the world and
all its inhabitants from destructive collisions and clashes all depend
on God. It is He who protects heaven and earth. All beings that come
into existence in any part of this vast universe, grow and die,
procreate, do anything that manifests their existence are all under the
supervision and control of God. No phenomenon is outside His Lordship.

“Legislative Lordship” is only related to the discretional management of
human beings whose movement, impact and evolution, contrary to that of
other creatures, depends on their own discretion. For example, God
introduces the straight path to man and acquaints him with good and
evil, and enacts and issues laws and ordinances for the individual and
social life of man.

Based on what has been said about monotheism and its different
categories, anyone who denies the legislative Lordship of God, even if
he recognizes the ontological Lordship or the Unity of God in creation
and servitude, is a polytheist. The same kind of polytheism was
committed by Satan who recognized God as the One and Only Creator and
His ontological Lordship. As such, he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قَالَ رَبِّ بِمَا أَغْوَيْتَنِي لأُزَيِّنَنَّ لَهُمْ فِي الأَرْضِ
وَلأُغْوِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He said: My Lord! As You have consigned me to perversity, I will surely
glamorize [evil] for them on earth, and will surely pervert them
all.”[^6]

It can be noticed that Satan believed in God’s ontological Lordship,
regarding Him as his Cherisher and Sustainer. What he denied or rejected
was the legislative Lordship and thus he became a polytheist (nay, the
first polytheist). Since God the Exalted, makes it obligatory to obey
any of the infallible Imams (‘a), anyone who refuses or declines to obey
actually denies the legislative Lordship of God and is tainted with
polytheism in the legislative Lordship.

Similarly, when an infallible Imam (‘a) appointed or designated a person
and made it incumbent upon others to obey him, anyone who did not
recognize him or submit to him was tainted with polytheism in the
legislative Lordship. So, if Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said that opposition to
the wali al-faqih is tantamount to associating partners with Allah, it
was not a hyperbole as he spoke the truth, for it was polytheism in
legislative Lordship, which Satan was also tainted with.

Based on what has been said, according to Islam the structure of the
Islamic government has different degrees. Its ideal degree can be
reached whenever the Prophet (s) or an infallible Imam (‘a) takes
control of government. Its lower degree is when government is entrusted
to the duly competent faqih who in terms of knowledge, piety and
managerial skill is the nearest to the infallible Imams (‘a). One degree
lower than this one is that if there is no duly competent faqih, or the
faqih accessible to people lacks the competence to manage society, the
wilayah and government shall be entrusted to ‘just believers’ because
society cannot be abandoned without any government.

Thus, in the presence of an infallible Imam his government or wilayah is
most ideal and during his absence the faqih who is most akin to the
infallible Imams (‘a) should take control of government. In the absence
of such a faqih, a just believer whose sense of justice and piety are
such that people trust him and are satisfied with his implementation of
laws shall take hold of government though his knowledge and learning is
not equal to that of a faqih.

Of course, we hope that the *‘ulama’* and figures that are capable of
guiding and managing society are always present so that they can
shoulder this responsibility of guiding society. God the Exalted,
favored us by blessing us with the dear Imam who guided our society
remarkably well. After the Imam, He preserved his righteous student and
successor for us, the nearest to the Imam in piety, asceticism,
political insight, consideration for the interests of Muslims,
management and leadership of Islamic society, and other outstanding
characteristics.

Islam’s view on separation of powers
------------------------------------

Another subject which needs to be dealt with at present is the
separation of powers and government responsibilities. According to
Islam, the government does not have a specific form or type suitable to
a society with particular characteristics. According to Islam, the
government may have a structure or form which is suitable to a small
society composed by a limited number of families, or to a country with
one billion-strong population or even a global society. Naturally, all
the responsibilities and special functions of the government that
bespeak of the raison d’être of the state—especially in densely
populated societies—cannot be shouldered by a single or two persons.

Issues related to internal security, defense against foreign enemies,
supervision of economic activities and international affairs, conduct of
international relations, the observance of Islamic rites and the
implementation of Islamic laws are also extremely heavy
responsibilities. So, the option is to have division of labor. This
division of labor can be done in two ways, viz. horizontally and
vertically. That is, both sections of government activities are located
in two separate compartments comprising two triangular shanks which do
not intersect each other at the middle and finally end at the top of the
pyramid.

In plain language, the best and most expressive similitude of government
is a pyramid, hence, the term “pyramid (hierarchy) of power” has been
chosen by political philosophers for government. The hierarchy of power
is like a pyramid which has its own specific features. It consists of a
triangular base and different sloping sides that meet in a point at the
top.

Once we consider the government in its general sense, each side of the
pyramid represents a section of government responsibilities. Based on
the division of power in the political and legal philosophy of
Montesquieu government power is divided into three branches—legislative,
judiciary and executive—the three ‘sides’ or sections of government deal
with legislation, adjudication and implementation. One part of
government activities consists of codifying general and particular laws
and ordinances; another part is related to the resolution of conflicts
and differences according to law; yet another part deals with
implementation of laws and management of society.

Grounds for overlapping of functions
------------------------------------

It is true that division into three is appropriate and proper, but it
must be noted that drawing dividing lines is not an easy job. In
practice we can never totally remove enactment and codification of laws
and ordinances as well as ratification of bylaws from the executive
branch and not allow executive power at any level to engage in the
enactment of executive orders and bylaws. Nowadays, in all democratic
countries that have recognized the separation of powers, there is
willy-nilly a degree of overlapping between legislation and
implementation. The most evident form of overlapping of functions can be
observed in parliamentary systems. Meanwhile, democratic systems are
classified into two: parliamentary and presidential:

1. The parliamentary system of government is formed on the basis of the
fusion of power. That is, all powers are concentrated in parliament.
After the election of members of parliament (MPs) from among electoral
candidates of various parties and the formation of parliament,
high-ranking executive officials, such as the premier and cabinet
ministers are elected from among the MPs. Under this system, parliament
grants authority to ministers to head different ministries and it may
also take back that authority.

2. The presidential system of government is based on the principle of
separation of powers. Under this system, the president or chief
executive is not elected by congress. Ministers are directly appointed
by the president and the legislature cannot remove them. Reciprocally,
the legislature is separate and independent from the executive. Under
this system, the essential and irreconcilable difference between
membership in congress and membership in cabinet is that the president
cannot appoint an MP to a cabinet position unless the said MP resigns
from his post in congress.

In the presidential system the president is directly elected by the
people, and an overlapping of functions is observed. The codification of
some ordinances and bylaws is delegated to the cabinet of ministers.
Nowadays, in our country an executive order is legally sufficient to
undertake some social, economic and other transactions. That is, the
cabinet holds a meeting, and after a series of discussions and
deliberations, issues an order which it also implements. Thus, the
cabinet has been authorized to enact and ratify a set of ordinances in
some cases.

Meanwhile, the function of parliament is legislation and ratification of
bills but it also assumes executive functions in some cases. For
example, signing contracts with foreign states is an executive matter,
and as a rule, the executive has to directly sign them, but because of
the importance and sensitivity of this issue, observance of all
precautions, prevention of any abuse, essential scrutiny of the
conditions of such contracts and necessary investigations and
precautions are observed by the cabinet, then deliberated upon by the
legislative house and implemented only after ratification and approval
by the deputies.

In conclusion, the notion of separation of powers demands that the three
powers—judiciary, legislative, executive—function independently but in
practice there is overlapping of functions experienced by the varying
political systems in the world. Of course, the more the separation of
powers is observed, the more autonomous each power will be, and the
chances of abuse of power and interference in each other’s functions
will automatically decrease.

[^1]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:59.

[^2]: Surah al-Hashr 59:7.

[^3]: See Imam Khomeini, Islamic Government: The Governance of the
Jurist, trans. Hamid Algar (Tehran: The Institute for the Compilation
and Publication of Imam Khomeini’s Works, 2001).
http://www.al-islam.org/islamicgovernment [Trans.]

[^4]: Surah Yunus 10:32.

[^5]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 67; Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 1, chap. 2,
p.34.

[^6]: Surah al-Hijr 15:39.


