The Consultative Committee
==========================

When Umar was hopeless of life and sure of the decreed moment of death,
he thought for a long time and reflected on one who would undertake the
affairs of the government after him. He remembered the leading
personalities of his party, who took part in paving the way to Abu Bakr
and keeping away the Prophet’s Household (from authority). As a result,
severe pain encompassed him, for all of them had died. He showed
impatience and sorry in respect of them, saying: “If Abu Ubayda was
alive, I would appoint him as a caliph, for he was entrusted by this
community! If Salim, Abu Hudhayfa’s retainer, was alive, I would appoint
him as a caliph, for he loved Allah, the Most High, very much!”

Umar was sorry for the death of ‘Abu Ubayda and Salim. If they had been
alive, he would have appointed them as caliphs. Had they the precedence
of jihad in Islam? Did Allah’s Apostle (a.s) preferred them to others,
that they might deserve such an important office?

Umar looked for those worthy of the caliphate in the records of the
dead, but he forgot Imam Ali (a.s) who was the same self of the Prophet
(a.s), the Gate of the City of his Knowledge, Gate of the House of his
Wisdom, the most knowledgeable of his community in giving legal
decisions, father of his two grandsons, and his supporter at all battles
and attitudes! He fully forgot him and did not remember him at all!

Anyhow, Umar thought that he had to appoint a consultative committee
and to command it to elect an Imam from among its members. This
committee was a dangerous plot made against Imam Ali (a.s)! Imam Kashif
al-Ghita’, may Allah have mercy on him, has said: “The Consultative
Committee, in its essence and reality, was a real plot and just formal.
It was an excellent skill to impose Uthman as a caliph over the Muslims
in spite of them. However, (it was carried out) with a skillful
management that brought about to Muslims evil that none could repel!”

Umar summoned the members of the Consultative Committee. When they were
present before him, he said to them: “Are you all crave after the
succession after me?” They fell silent, so he repeated his statement.
Al-Zubayr opposed him, saying: “What make us far from it (the
caliphate)? You have undertaken it, while we are not inferior to you in
(belonging to) Quraysh, precedence, and kinship!” Umar turned to them
and said: “Shall I tell you about yourselves?”

“Say,” they replied, “if we ask you to pardon us, you will not pardon
us.”

Umar began stating his opinion of them and telling them about their
qualities one by one. He has said in respect of al-Zubayr: “As for you,
O Zubayr, you are peevish, double-minded, believing when you are
pleased, and disbelieving when you are angry. One day you are a human
being, and one day you are a Satan. Perhaps, if it (the caliphate)
reaches you, you will continue slapping the people for a mudd (measure)
of barely… Have you considered if it reaches you? I wish I knew who
would take care of the people on the day when you were a Satan, and who
would take care of them when you became angry! Allah will not let you
undertake the affairs of this community while you have such
qualities!”

Umar knew al-Zubayr’s qualities such as his being a Satan one day and a
human being on another day, afflicted with miserliness and stinginess,
slapping for a mudd (measure) of barely. Therefore, why did he nominate
him for the caliphate and make him as one of the members of the
Consultative Committee?

Then he turned to Talha and said to him: “Shall I say or keep silent?”
Talha rebuked him, saying: “You say nothing good!” Umar said: “Most
surely I have come to know you that you have become angry with that
which happened to you since your finger was wounded at the Battle of
Uhud. Allah’s Apostle (a.s) died while he was displeased with you due to
the statement you said when the verse al-hijab was revealed.”

If Allah’s Apostle (a.s) died and was displeased with Talha, then why
did Umar nominated him for the Islamic caliphate, which was the
deputyship of the Prophet? This statement also contradicts his last
statement in respect of the members of the Consultative Committee:
“Allah’s Apostle (a.s) died and was satisfied with them!” Al-Jahidh
says: “If a sayer had said to Umar: ‘You said: ‘Most surely Allah’s
Apostle (a.s) died and was satisfied with the six (persons),’ then why
are you saying to Talha: ‘He (a.s) died and was displeased with you due
to the word you had said? He would have thrown an arrow at him! However
who dared to say a statement less than this to Umar. Just imagine how
much more important this (statement) is!”

Then Umar turned to Sa’d bin Abi Waqqas and said to him: “You are the
owner of one of these groups of horses with which you fight. You hunt
(animals). You have bows and arrows. However, there is a great
difference between you and the caliphate and affairs of the people!”
According to Umar’s insight, Sa’d bin Abi Waqqas was a man of war,
fighting, hunting, (shooting) arrows; therefore, he was not appropriate
for the caliphate. Neither he nor his family were entitled to it, then
why did Umar nominate him for it and regard him as one of the members of
the Consultative Committee, who were qualified to undertake the
government?

Then he turned to Abdurrahman bin Awf and said to him: “As for you
Abdurrahman, if half of the faith of the Muslims was weighed with your
faith, your faith would overbalance, but this authority is not
appropriate for someone who has weakness like that of yours. There is a
great difference between you and this authority!”

Most surely Abdurrahman was a man of belief and piety, according to
Umar’s opinion. Part of his faith the Caliph gave him was that he turned
away from choosing the Prophet’s pure family, and gave the leadership to
the Umayyads, the opponents of Islam and the enemies of the Prophet
(a.s). Then faith itself was not appropriate for nominating its owner
for the caliphate unless one had perfect knowledge of the affairs of
society, and abundant experience of what the community needed in all
fields. As for Abdurrahman, according to Umar’s confession, was a weak
man and was not entitled to the caliphate. So why did he nominate him
for it and regard him as one of the prominent members of the
Consultative Committee?

Then he turned to Imam Ali (a.s) and said to him: “You are the proper
one, were it not for the joking you had! By Allah, if you became a
caliph over them, you would drive them to the clear truth and white
way!”

When did the Commander of the faithful (Imam Ali) have joking and fun?
He knew nothing in his lifetime except diligence in words and actions.
Suppose that he had such a quality, then it was among the manners of the
prophets, and, in particular, of the manners of the Prophet Muhammad
(a.s). It has been mentioned that he (a.s) joked with people to please
them.

Is it an action of taking care of Islam, keeping the unity of the
community, looking after its interests that Umar twisted the rope of the
Consultative Committee and appointed the Commander of the faithful as
one of its members? Did Umar not confess: “If Ali had seized the reins
of government, he would drive the Muslims to the clear truth and the
white way?” Did the daughter of the Prophet (a.s) not say in respect of
Imam Ali: “By Allah, had they all yielded to his leadership, he would
have taken them to the easy path, without harming anyone. He would have
brought them to an overflowing fountain of goodness, advised them in
secrecy and in public, neither filling his belly with their own
sustenance, nor satisfying his thirst nor hunger out of their own toil?”
The Prophet (a.s) says: “If they appoint Ali as ruler, then he is a
guide and rightly-guided.”[^1]

Had Imam Ali (a.s) taken the reins of government, he would have secured
for the Muslims the blessings of life they needed, found for them equal
opportunities, protected the Islamic ideals from deterioration and
decay. Therefore, was it an act of justice that the caliphate was turned
away from him and obtained through the Consultative Committee in a
manner that made the Umayyads seize the government?

Then Umar turned to Uthman and said to him: “Welcome! It is as if that
I see that Quraysh invest you with this authority because of their love
for you. (I see) that you empower the Umayyads and the children of Abu
Ma’eet over the people, that you prefer them (to others) in respect of
al-Fay’, and that a group of some wicked Arabs walk towards you and kill
you on your bed! By Allah, if they did that, you would do that! And if
you did that, they would do that!” Then he put his head on the forepart
of his head and said: “If that happened, then call to mind my
statement.”[^2] Umar had come to know that Uthman would empower the
Umayyads and the children of Abu Ma’eet over the people and prefer them
to others in respect of the Fay’ of the Muslims. Therefore, why did he
nominate him for the caliphate, empower him over the Muslims, and
subject the community to disasters and misfortunes?

After he had stated his speech, he turned to the people and said to
them: “Most surely Allah’s Apostle (a.s) died and was pleased with these
six Qurayshi people. I have decided that the caliphate should be
obtained through the Consultative Committee, that they may elect one
from among them.”

Then he said to the candidates: “Bring with you some Sheikhs of the
Ansar, and they have nothing (to do) in respect of your affair. Bring
with you al-

[^1] Al-Isti‘ab, vol. 3, p. 5.
[^2] Ibn Abi al-Haddeed, Sharh Nahjj al-Balagha, vol. 1, p. 185-186.

Hasan bin Ali and Abdullah bin Abbas, for they have kinship (to the
Prophet). I hope that you will get blessing through their presence. And
they have nothing (to do) in respect of your affair!”

What was the blessing that took place through the presence of Imam
al-Hasan and Abdullah bin Abbas, while they had nothing to do in respect
of the authority? He had prevented them from expressing their viewpoints
(regarding the caliphate); likewise, he did the same toward the Sheikhs
of the Ansar. Then he turned to Abu Talha al-Ansari[^1] and said to him:
“O Abu Talha, most surly Allah has reinforced Islam through you;
therefore, choose fifty men from the Ansar to force this group of people
to quickly carry out the affair (of the Caliphate).”

Then he turned to al-Miqdad bin al-Aswad and commanded him in the same
manner, saying: “If five people agree (on the affair of the caliphate)
and one of them refuses, then cut off his head. If four men (from the
six) agree and two of them refuse, the behead them. If three of them
agree on a man and three of them are satisfied with another man, then be
with those among whom is Abdurrahman bin Awf, and kill the rest if they
turn away from that on which the people have agreed.”

Imam Ali (a.s) went out while he was grieved and sad because of Umar’s
Consultative Committee. He met his uncle al-Abbas and said to him: “O
Uncle, the caliphate has been turned away from us.”
“Who has informed you of that?” “Umar has compared me to Uthman and
said: be with the majority. Then he said: ‘Be with Abdurrahman.’ Sa’d
does not oppose his cousin Abdurrahman, and Abdurrahman is Uthman’s
son-in-law. They do not differ with each other. Therefore, either
Abdurrahman invest Uthman with the caliphate or Uthman will invest him
with it.”[^2]

Imam Ali (a.s) disclosed the plot that the late Caliph had made against
him when he decided the consultation in this manner, that he might turn
the caliphate away from him. This painful manner hurt Imam Ali’s heart,
so he

[^1] Abu Talha al-Ansari is Zayd bin Sahl al-Najjar. He fought alongside
the Prophet (a.s.) at the Battle of Badr. When the Prophet (a.s.) made
his companions associate with each other as brothers, he made him and
Abu ‘Ubayda al-Jarrah associate as brothers. Abu Talha was among the
numbered bow men and among the famous brave people. He killed twenty
people at the Battle of Hunayn. He married Umm Anas bin Malik. He died
in Medina in the year 31 A. H. at the age of seventy. ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan
prayed over him. Usd al-Ghaba, vol. 5, p. 334.
[^2] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 5, p. 35.

said: “When he (Umar) went to his way (died), he placed the affair (of
the caliphate) among a group of people and claimed that I was among
them. Good Heavens! What had I to do with the consultation? When did
have I doubt about the first (Caliph) in order to be compared to these
ones?”

Yes, by Allah, when did he have doubt about Abu Bakr so as to be
compared to Talha, Uthman, and Abdurrahman bin Awf? Was among them
anyone equal to Imam Ali in religion, knowledge, jihad, and precedence
in Islam? Through his speech with Ibn Abbas, Imam Ali explained the
reason why he responded to be among the members of the Consultative
Committee. The summary of that is that Umar had acknowledged that Imam
Ali was entitled to the caliphate. But he had said that the prophethood
and the caliphate had not to come together in one house. So Imam Ali
intended to show that Umar’s words contradicted his actions. For this
firm reason he joined the members of the Consultative Committee.

**A Viewpoint on the Consultative Committee**

Umar’s Consultative Committee faces many criticisms. Those who have
criticized it have mentioned that it was not based on some right ways,
nor was it built on some firm foundations, nor did it anyway seek the
interests of the community, nor did it aim at protecting society from
chaos and disorders. Rather it aimed at turning the caliphate from Imam
Ali (a.s) and depriving the community of enjoying his just government.
Therefore, it was not a real Consultative Committee. Rather it was
formal and accompanied by fanaticism and spites. We mention to the
readers some of the criticisms:

1. Most surely the real consultation means that all the community has
to take part in elections in an atmosphere where the general freedoms of
all electors are available. As for Umar’s Consultative Committee, it was
void of all these elements, for the people were prevented from electing.
Umar granted the right of electing to six persons. It was natural that
they had nothing except their personal viewpoints. They did not
represent the community, nor did they express its will. Umar narrowed
the circle and confined taking a decision to the opinions of the three
persons among whom was Abdurrahman bin Awf. He regarded their votes as
equal to the votes of the rest of the Muslims. Of course this is a kind
of non-opposition used by some governments imposing their will on their
peoples. This consultation clashed with the will of the Muslims, opposed
their freedoms, and was imposed on them.

2. Most surely this Consultative Committee included most of the
opponents of Imam Ali (a.s) and those who harbored malice against him.
It contained Talha al-Taymi, who was from the family of Abu Bakr, who
competed with Imam Ali for the caliphate. There was great enmity and
dispute between (the tribe of) Taym and Imam Ali. It included
Abdurrahman bin Awf, who was Uthman’s son-in-law. Besides, he harbored
hatred against Imam Ali (a.s). He was among those who carried firewood
during paying homage to Abu Bakr to burn Imam Ali’s house. It included
Sa’d bin Abi Waqqas, who harbored malice against the Imam for his
uncles, the Umayyads. His mother was Hamna, daughter of Sufyan bin
Umayya. Imam Ali destroyed their heroes for the sake of Islam.
Accordingly, Sa’d was full of spites and enmity toward the Imam for the
sake of his uncles.. When the Muslims pledged allegiance to the Imam,
Sa’d was among those who did not pay homage to him. The Consultative
Committee included Uthman, who was the Sheikh of the Umayyad family, who
was famous for showing enmity toward the Household of the Prophet (a.s).
Umar provoked all these forces against Imam Ali lest the caliphate
should reach him. After Imam Ali had undertaken the authority, he talked
about the hatred and malice of the members of the Consultative Committee
against him, saying: “But I remained low when they were low and flew
high when they flew high. One of them turned against me because of his
hatred and the other inclined to the other way due to his son-in-law,
this thing, and that thing.”

Umar intentionally moved all the spites and hatred of all Quraysh
against Imam Ali, the brother of Allah’s Apostle (a.s) his testamentary
trustee, and Gate of the City of his Knowledge. He responded to the
spites of Quraysh that the Imam destroyed for the sake of Islam.

3. Umar intentionally sent far all the followers of Imam Ali. He did
not give them any share in the Consultative Committee, nor did he
nominate any of the Ansar, who lodged the Prophet (a.s) and supported
him, for they had wish and inclination toward the Imam (a.s). He also
did not give any share to Ammar bin Yasir, who was among those who
founded Islam. Moreover he isolated Abu Dharr, al-Miqdad, and the like
from among the Muslim eminent men, for they were Ali’s followers. He
confined the Consultative Committee to the forces who deviated from Imam
Ali and showed enmity toward him.

4. Among the strange affairs of the Consultative Committee whose
programs he had designed is that he bore witness that Allah’s Apostle
(a.s) died and was pleased with the members of the Consultative
Committee. But he had ordered their heads to be cut off if they had
delayed from electing one of them. Was that a reason for their deviating
from the religion and reneging from Islam, that shedding their blood
might be regarded as permissible?

5. Among the strange affairs of the Consultative Committee is that Umar
preferred the group that included Abdurrahman if the members differed.
He overlooked the group that included Imam Ali (a.s). He paid no
attention to it. Rather, he forced it to yield to the opinion of
Abdurrahman bin Awf, whom he preferred to Imam Ali (a.s) who had
talents, genius, no equal in knowledge, piety, and fear of Allah.
Therefore, how did he make him equal to others, while Allah, the
Exalted, says: “Are those who know and those who do not know alike?” Ugh
be on you, O time! Woe to you, O time! Is Imam Ali equal to the members
of the Consultative Committee, and Abdurrahman given precedence over
him? However, that took place due to the spites and fanaticism that
occupied their souls and made them forget the criteria and prevent them
from following the just way!

6. Among the criticisms facing the Consultative Committee is that it
created a kind of competition among its members, and they thought that
they were equals to each other. Before that, they had not such an
opinion. Sa’d was a follower of Abdurrahman, Abdurrahman was a follower
of Uthman, al-Zubayr was among the followers of Imam Ali, and it was he
who said during the time of Umar: “By Allah, If Umar died, I would pay
homage to Ali.” However, Abdurrahman blew into him the spirit of
ambition, and he separated himself from Imam Ali (a.s) and mutinied
against him at the Battle of the Camel. The Consultative Committee
created ambitions and inclinations, and they hoped for the caliphate and
sought it though they were not worthy of it. Accordingly, the country
was full of discords and differences; the word of the Muslims became
disordered, and their unity cracked. Mu’awiya bin Abi Sufyan mentioned
this painful situation during his talk with Ibn al-Husayn, whom Ziyad
sent to meet him. He said to him:

-I have heard that you have mind and reason; therefore, tell me about
all
things about which I question you?
-Ask me as you like.
-Tell me: What scattered the affair of the Muslims and their leading
personalities, and made them differ with each other?
-The people who killed Uthman.
-You have done nothing.
-Ali, who walked towards you and fought against you.
-You have done nothing.
-Talha, al-Zubayr, and A’isha, who walked towards Ali and fought
against him.
-You have done nothing.
-I have nothing other than that, O Commander of the Faithful!

-I will tell you that nothing scattered the Muslims and divided their
inclinations except the Consultative Committee that Umar confined to six
people. That is because Allah sent Muhammad with guidance and the
religion of truth, that He might cause it to prevail over all religions,
though the polytheists may be averse. He (Prophet Muhammad) did
according to what Allah commanded him. Then Allah took him unto Him. He
(Umar) advanced Abu Bakr to perform the prayer, and they were satisfied
with him in respect of the affairs of their religion, for Allah’s
Apostle (a.s) was satisfied with him for the affairs of their religion.
So he (Abu Bakr) did according to the Sunna of Allah’s Apostle (a.s) and
he followed his behavior until Allah seized him unto Him. He appointed
Umar as a caliph, and he followed the like of his behavior. Then Umar
confined the Consultative Committee to six persons, and each of them
hoped the caliphate for himself, his people hoped it for him, and his
soul was eager for that. If Umar had appointed someone over them, as Abu
Bakr had done, there would have been no difference over that.[^1]

These are the defects of the Consultative Committee that opened the
door to chaos and dispute among the Muslims, and made al-Tulaqa’ [^2] and
their sons compete with each other for the Islamic caliphate. They went
up on the pulpits of the Muslims, possessed alone al-Fay’, and punished
the good and righteous Muslims. To Allah we belong and to Him is our
return!

**The Election**

Umar met his Lord and went to his final resting-place.[^3] The police
surrounded the members of the Consultative Committee. They forced them
to carry out Umar’s will and to elect for the Muslims a ruler from among
them. The candidates held a meeting in the public treasury, and it was
said that they held the meeting in the house of Masrur bin Muhrima. Imam
al-Hasan and Abdullah bin Abbas supervised the election. Amr bin al-‘Aas
and al-Mughira

[^1] Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih, al-Iqd al-Fareed, vol. 3, pp. 73-74.
[^2] al-Tulaqa’ are those who converted to Islam at the time of the
conquest of Mecca.
[^3] Umar died on Wednesday with four days remaining (in the month) of
Dhi al-Hijja, in the year 23 A. H. His caliphate lasted for ten years,
six months, and four days. He was sixty-three years old. This has been
mentioned by al-Mas‘udi in his book Murujj al-Dhahab, vol. 2, p. 198.
Before Islam, Umar was very poor and miserable. Umar bin al-‘Aas has
said: “By Allah, I have seen Umar and his father. Each of them was
wearing a Qattwani cloak that did exceed the hollow of the knee; and
there was a bundle of firewood on his head.” This has been mentioned by
Ibn Abi al-Haddeed in his book Sharh Nahjj al-Balagha.

bin Shu‘ba approached the place of the election. They sat by the door.
Sa’d bin Abi Waqqas came to know of their purpose. He rebuked and said
to them: “Do you want to say that you have attended the Consultative
Committee and been from among its members?”

The members discussed the one who was the most entitled to the
authority, most appropriate for it, the greatest of them in ability and
power to manage the affairs of the government. As for Imam Ali (a.s) he
warned them against the discords that would have happened in the country
if they had responded to their tendencies and had not preferred the
truth. He (a.s) said: “None before me hastened to the summons of truth
and retaining of kinship, and the profit of generosity. Therefore,
listen to my words and fully understand my speech. After this day you
will see that the swords will be drawn and covenants will be broken for
this authority, to the extent that some of you will be Imams of the men
of misguidance and followers of the men of ignorance.”[^1]

They did not understand the Imam’s speech, nor did they reflect on it;
rather they hurried to their ambitions and their inclinations. Shortly
after that, the time showed them the Imam’s truthful prediction. That
was when they drew the swords and broke their covenants, that they might
reach the scepter of government and authority. Some of them became Imams
of the men of misguidance and followers of the men of ignorance.

Anyway, the discussion about the affair of the caliphate was plentiful.
The meeting was over, and nothing resulted from it. The people were
impatiently waiting for the decisive result of their meeting, but they
found nothing. The meeting was held again, but nothing resulted from it.
The period of time fixed by Umar was about to be over. So, Abu Talha
al-Ansari came to the members and said to them: “By Him in whose hand is
Umar’s soul, I will add nothing to the three days when you have been
commanded (to elect one from among you).”

The third day came and the meeting was held. Talha gave his right to
Uthman. He did that because he had come to know that Uthman deviated
from Imam Ali (a.s). He intended to strengthen his side and undermine
that of the Imam. Al-Zubayr hurried and gave his right to the Imam, for
he came to know that his side became weak. Sa’d hurried and gave his
right to Abdurrahman bin Awf, for he was his cousin. As for Abdurrahman
to whom Umar entrusted the affairs of the Consultative Committee and
whose opinion he regarded as a decisive criterion, he felt weakness in
himself and incapability of managing
[^1] Muhammad Abda, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 2, p. 31.

the affairs of the government, so he decided to nominate someone other
than him. He inclined to Uthman. So he consulted Quraysh, and they made
him refrain from (electing) Imam Ali (a.s), made him love Uthman, and
urged him to choose and elect him. The terrible hour came, and the
course of history changed. That was when Abdurrahman said to his nephew:
“O Masrur, go and summon Ali and Uthman!” “With whom shall I begin?”
asked Masrur. “With whomever you wish,” said Abdurrahman.

Masrur hurried and brought Imam Ali and Uthman. The Muhajireen and the
Ansar attended. The masses overcrowded in the mosque, that they might
take the decisive decision. Abdurrahman rose and said: “Advise me in
respect of these two persons.” He indicated with his hand to Hashim’s
descendant (Imam Ali) and the Sheikh of the Umayyads (Uthman Bin
Affan).

Ammar bin Yasir said to him: “If you want the people not to disagree,
then pay homage to Ali!” He advised him to follow the right opinion that
would protect the community from the disagreement and save it from the
dispute and dissension. Al-Miqdad hurried and confirmed Ammar’s
viewpoint, saying: “Ammar is right. If you pledge allegiance to Ali, we
will listen and obey!” Abdullah bin Abi Sarh-among the eminent men from
among the Umayyads who warred against the Prophet (a.s) and opposed him-
rose and addressed Abdurrahman bin Awf, saying: “If you want Quraysh not
to disagree, then pay homage to Uthman bin Affan!”

Abdullah bin Rabee‘a al-Makhzumi rushed and said: “He is right! If you
pledge allegiance to Uthman, we will listen and obey!” Ammar bin Yasir
opposed Abdullah bin Abi Sarh and said to him: “When are you loyal to
Islam?”

Ammar was truthful. When did Abdullah bin Abi Sarh respect Islam? When
was he loyal to the Muslims? When did he guide them to the right path?
He was the greatest of all the people in showing enmity toward Allah’s
Apostle (a.s). When the Prophet (a.s) conquered Mecca, he ordered
Abdullah bin Abi Sarh to be killed even if he was hanging on to the
curtains of the Kaaba.[^1] Why did such a rogue intervene in the affairs
of the Muslims? However, we belong to Allah and to Him is our return!
[^1] Al-Isti‘ab, vol. 2, p. 375.

The Hashimites and the Umayyads talked, and a warm argument took place
between the two families. Ammar bin Yasir, a loyal Muslim, said: “O
people, most surely Allah has honored you through His Prophet and
strengthened you through His religion; therefore, till when do you turn
the authority away from the Household of your Prophet?”

Ammar said but the saying of Islam that his heart had understood. Allah
strengthened Quraysh and the rest of the Arabs with His religion and
made them happy through His Prophet, who was the source of their
strength, honor, and glory. It was not an act of fairness and justice
that they turned the authority away from his household and family. They
sometimes entrusted Taym with it and sometimes ‘Adi. Now, they spared no
effort to entrust it to another tribe. A man from (the tribe of) Makhzum
interrupted him, saying: “You have overlooked your condition, O son of
Sumayya! What is the relationship between you and the authority over
Quraysh?”

The man’s soul was full of the beliefs of the pre-Islamic era. So he
criticized Ibn Sumayya. He thought that he overlooked his condition and
exceeded his bounds due to the fact that he intervened in the affairs of
Quraysh. Which right did Quraysh have in this affair? That is because
they resisted the Prophet (a.s), battled against him, and opposed his
message. The authority belonged to the Muslims. Ibn Sumayya, whom Allah
made strong through his religion, and the rest of the weak who supported
the Prophet (a.s) and protected his message had the right to take part
in the authority. The opinion and the government belonged to them, and
not to the tyrants of Quraysh.

Anyway, when many disputes took place between the aware Muslim forces
and the devious forces, Sa’d turned to Abdurrahman and said to him: “O
Abdurrahman, finish your affair before the people face discords!”

As a result, Abdurrahman hurried to Imam Ali and asked him: “Shall I
pay homage to you provided that you should govern according to Allah’s
Book, the Sunna of His Prophet, and the deeds of Abu Bakr and Umar?”

Imam Ali looked at him and answered with the speech of faith and of the
free: “Rather, according to Allah’s Book, the Sunna of His Apostle, and
my personal viewpoints.”

Abdurrahman expected nothing from Imam Ali other than that, for the
sources of legislation in Islam are Allah’s Book and the Sunna of His
Prophet. According to them the government is managed, and the problems
of subjects are solved. The actions of Abu Bakr and Umar were not among
the sources of legislation. Through his policy, Abu Bakr followed a
special way on which Umar did not agree with him. Umar thought that Abu
Bakr was far away from the sources of legislation. Abu Bakr had a
special viewpoint in respect of Khalid bin al-Waleed, who killed Malik
bin Nuwayra and fornicated his wife.[^1] However Abu Bakr thought that
Khalid interpreted and made a mistake, so he had not been punished with
the prescribed punishment. As for Umar, he thought that there was no
escape from punishing him and that there was no room for Abu Bakr’s
excuse. Through his fiscal policy, Abu Bakr followed a way more just t
han that of Umar, who followed a way led to caste and preferring some
Muslims to others in giving. Umar made unlawful the two mutt’as[^2],
while he admitted that they were lawful during the time of Allah’s
Apostle (a.s). He had a religious verdict contrary to Islam in respect
of the grandmother’s

[^1] Malik bin Nuwayra bin Hamza al-Tamimi, al-Yarbu‘i was given the
kunya of Abu Hanzala and the nickname of al-Jaful. He was a noble poet
and knight. His people numbered him as among the knights of Banu Yarbu‘
during the pre-Islamic period. He was among the followers of the kings.
The Prophet (a.s.) appointed him as a governor over the endowments of
his people because of his trustworthiness and cleverness. When Malik
heard of the death of the Prophet (a.s.) he refrained from giving alms
and divided it among his people. Perhaps he did that according to the
Sunna that stipulated distributing alms among the poor of the region. If
something of it remained, it had to be carried to the public treasury.
In this respect, Malik says:

I said: “Take your properties.” I was not afraid of nor did I reflect
on that which would come from the following day.

If an undertaker undertook the feared religion, we would obey and say
that the religion was that of Muhammad.

This poetry indicates his faith and his firm clinging to his religion.
Khalid bin al-Waleed crept towards him while he was not commanded to
fight against him. That was during the night. After performing the
evening prayer, he took his army and hurried to take their weapons and
to take them as prisoners of war. Among them was Malik’s wife Layla,
daughter of al-Minhal. She was the most beautiful of all the Arab women.
So Khalid was charmed by her. There was a heated argument between Khalid
and Malik. Khalid said to Malik: “I am going to kill you!” Malik said to
him: “Has your leader (Abu Bakr) commanded you to do that?” Malik
replied: “By Allah, I am going to kill you!” Khalid said. Abdullah bin
Umar and Abu Qattada al-Ansari were standing beside Khalid. They blamed
him for that, but he refused and said: “May Allah not forgive me if I do
not kill him!” Then he commanded Dhirar bin al-Azwar to behead him.
Malik turned to his wife and said to Khalid: “This is the one who has
killed me!” Khalid said to him: “Rather, Allah has killed you due to
your apostatizing from Islam.” Malik refused that, saying: “Most surely
I am (depending) on Islam!” Dhirar rose and killed him. Then Khalid took
Malik’s wife and fornicated her at that night. However Abu Bakr ordered
him not to be punished with the prescribed punishment. He claimed that
Khalid interpreted and made a mistake! For more details about this
painful event, see al-Nass wa al-Ijtihad by Imam Sharaf al-Deen.

[^2] Mutt‘at al-Haj and temporary marriage.

inheritance and the like. Therefore, which method had Ali bin Abi Talib
to follow, while he was the pioneer of the great social justice on
earth? If he had sought the government and authority, he would have
accepted the conditions of Abdurrahman bin Awf, and then he would have
followed his personal viewpoints in respect of government and arrested
his opponents. However, he (a.s) refused to do that, and his strong
faith prevented from accepting anything he thought unlawful.

When Abdurrahman bin Awf was hopeless of Imam Ali, he turned to Uthman
bin Affan and stipulated that. Uthman agreed to carry out the
conditions, and Abdurrahman paid homage to him and said to him: “O
Allah, I have entrusted Uthman with the caliphate!” Accordingly, clamor
and noise of the people became loud, for the head of the Umayyads won
the government, and the affairs of the caliphate reached him. As for
Imam Ali (a.s), he said to Abdurrahman bin Awf: “By Allah, you have done
it (for nothing) except that you have hoped from him what your leader
(Umar) had hoped from his companion (Abu Bakr). May Allah spread among
you the perfume of Minsham!”[^1] Then he turned to the Qurashi people and
addressed them, saying: “This is not the first day when you cooperate
with each other against us, but patience is good and Allah is He Whose
help is sought for against what you describe!”

Abdurrahman bin Awf hurried to threaten Imam Ali, saying: “O Ali, do
not make a way against you!” While the Imam was leaving the mosque, he
said: “The book will reach its fixed term!” Ammar bin Yasir addressed
Abdurrahman bin Awf, saying: “O Abdurrahman, by Allah, you have left him
(Ali), while he is among those who judge with the truth, and thereby did
they do justice!”

Al-Miqdad went out while his legs were overburdened and said: “By
Allah, I have seen nothing like that which has come to the members of
this house after their Prophet! I wonder at Quraysh! They have deserted
the man. I do not say nor do I come to know that there is anyone more
just, knowledgeable, pious than he is!”

[^1] Minsham is a name of a woman. She was a druggist in Mecca. When
Khuza’a and Juhrum (two tribes) intended to fight against each other,
they perfumed themselves with her perfume. When they did that, many dead
were among them. So it was said: “More wicked than Minsham’s perfume!”
This has been mentioned in Sihah al-Jawahiri, vol. 5, p. 2041. Allah
granted Imam Ali’s supplication. That was when there were strong
estrangement and disputes. ‘Abd al-Rahman bin Awf willed that Uthman had
not to pray over him!

Abdurrahman bin Awf interrupted his speech, saying to him: “Fear Allah,
O Miqdad! I fear that you will make a discord!”[^1]

As for Imam al-Hasan, he supervised the election. He was terrified when
he saw the people yielded to their personal purposes and ambitions. He
came to know that the Qurayshi Muhajireen harbored malice and hatred
against his father, that the religion was mere a lick on their tongues,
and that they took care of it as long as they made use of it. Those
views made him displeased and grumbling. They made him know that the
people followed their own interests and ambitions, and that they had no
relationship with the public interests. Here we will say good-bye to
Imam al-Hasan and meet him at the time of the Third Caliph!

[^1] Ibn Abi al-Haddeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 1, p. 194.


