Chapter Vii : At the Time of Uthman
===================================

**Part 1**

We receive al-Hasan at the time of Uthman, while he was in the vigor
and prime of youth. He was over twenty years old. This age allows one to
plunge into the battle of life and give an opinion of the social side.
During this age, Imam al-Hasan entered, as it was said, the field of
jihad, which is one of the doors to the Garden. He joined the Mujahideen
whose standards headed for Africa to conquer it in the year 26 A. H.[^1]
Through al-Hasan, the grandson of Allah’s Apostle (a.s), the Mujahideen
remembered the personality of his grandfather. So they showed extreme
courage and Allah made Africa be conquered at their hands. When the
battle ended, al-Hasan (a.s) headed for the capital of his grandfather
(a.s). He was victorious and happy at the expansion of Islam and spread
of the religion of his grandfather. In the year 30 A. H. the Muslim
armies carried the standards of victory and headed for Tabaristan.

Al-Hasan joined them.[^2] Because of his blessing, Allah made them
conquer it and made the standard of Islam flutter over it. For the
public interest and serving the religion, which are the best of all the
other considerations, Imam al-Hasan (a.s) entered the fields of jihad
and struggle, and paid no attention to displeasure he had hidden in his
soul due to losing his father’s right (of

[^1] Ibn Khaldun, al-‘Ibar, vol. 2, pp. 128-129. It has been mentioned
in it: “Uthman sent an army to conquer Africa in the year 25 A. H. The
commanders of the army were Abdullah bin Nafi‘ and Aqaba bin Nafi‘ bin
‘Abd al-Qays. The army went to Africa. Its number was ten thousand
(fighters). When the army arrived in it, it was unable to conquer it. So
it made peace with its inhabitants provided that they should pay money.
Then Abdullah bin Abi Sarh, Uthman’s foster brother, asked Uthman to
conquer Africa and to supply him with an army. So Uthman consulted the
companions (of the Prophet), and most of them encouraged him to do that.
As a result Uthman supplied him with an army from Medina. Among the army
were Ibn Abbas, Ibn al-Aas, Ibn Ja‘far, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn. They
headed for Africa and conquered it in the year 26 A. H. The author of
al-Futuhat al-Islamiya has not mentioned that al-Hasan and al-Husayn
joined the army.

[^2] Tarikh al-Umam wa al-Muluk, vol. 5, pp. 57-58. Al-‘Ibar, vol. 2, p.
134. Al-Futuhat al-Islamiya, vol. 1, p. 175. In all these books it has
been mentioned: “Sa‘eed bin al-‘Aas conquered Tabaristan in the year 30
A. H. Al-Asbahad made peace with Suwayd bin Miqren provided that he
should give him money during the days of Umar bin al-Khattab. When
Uthman became a caliph, he prepared an army and sent it towards them.
Sa‘eed bin al-‘Aas was the commander of the army. Al-Hasan, al-Husayn,
Abdullah bin Abbas, and the like joined the army. When they arrived in
it, they conquered it.” In his book Muhadharat al-Arba‘a, al-Raghib
al-Asfahani has said: “Al-Asbaheed is the owner of the mountain (sahib
al-jabal); and it is the correctness, not al-Asbahad.”

authority). This is a wonderful lesson the political parties standing
in the country must use to refrain from party fanaticism and to take
care of the interests of the country and society.

Uthman ruled the country for some years, but his policy was very far
from the Sunna of Allah’s Apostle (a.s); likewise, it was very far from
the sunna of the two Sheikhs (Abu Bakr and Umar). Moreover it was very
far away from the essence of that time, for it did not agree with the
religious and social sides; for this reason it failed and was deserted.
The reason for that is that the Caliph Uthman was unable to manage the
affairs of the community and the government. He had a weak willpower in
all his acts. Emerson is truthful when he says: “Most surely, willpower
is the secret of success, and the success is the goal of existence. That
is because willpower has immortalized the names of Napoleon, Krant,
Alexander, and the like from among the men of history. Many men of
history are famous for bravery, experience, and cleverness, but their
desertion resulted from their hesitation and their weak willpower. It is
impossible for us to enter the battle of life and hope for victory
without having a willpower.”[^1]

Willpower has a perfect effect on forming person and his immortality in
life. It is impossible for the weak, helpless person to achieve any goal
for the community or to build its entity. Islam has taken great care of
removing the weak-willed person from leading the community and
preventing him from practicing the government. For such a person
subjects the country to dangers, brings about to it hardships and
misfortunes, takes away the prestige and morale of the government,
encourages those powerful to mutiny against him and to disobey him.

Most surely, Uthman had no willpower to a far extent. He had no power
to face the events, nor had he an ability to overcome them. As a result
he entrusted the affairs of the government to Marwan, and he acted
freely. On the authority of his Sheikhs, Ibn Abi al-Haddeed has narrated
that the real caliph was Marwan, and that Uthman had nothing except the
name of the caliph.

Anyway, it is necessary for us to explain Uthman’s story and to
understand its reality, for there is a close connection between it and
our research. Some historians claim that Imam al-Hasan (a.s) was Uthmani
in inclination, defended him on the day of the house, showed severe
sadness for him after his murder, and criticized his father because he
did not help and protect him.
[^1] Emerson, Willpower.

Dr. Taha Husayn has inclined to this viewpoint and sent it to readers
as an axiomatic without pondering on it. We cannot understand the
reality of this viewpoint unless we come to know Uthman’s policy and
behavior. It, and nothing else, will show us the falsehood of these
affairs and their disagreement with the reality of Imam al-Hasan (a.s)
who carried the guidance of his grandfather, Allah’s Apostle (a.s).

Before we speak about Uthman’s policy, we would like to explain that
we, in many of our researches, do no agree with Dr. Taha Husayn, for he
tried to justify Uthman’s actions and deem him far above the accusations
fastened on him through some ways far and void of scientific research.
In the introduction to his research, he has disowned all kinds of
inclination and tribal fanaticism. He has indicated that he is not a
follower of Uthman, nor is he a follower of Ali; rather, through his
researches he tries to be loyal to reality as far as possible.[^1]
However, he has not conformed to his promise. He has set out to cling to
some weak ways in order to correct the mistakes of Uthman’s policy,
which, throughout its stages, did not keep abreast with Allah’s Book,
the Sunna of His Prophet, and the Sunna of the two Sheikhs. Accordingly,
the good and righteous Muslims bore a grudge against him, and the Muslim
regions revolted against him. The Muslim masses surrounded him. They
demanded him to be moderate in his policy and follow the clear, white
way. However, he did not respond to them, so they killed him. The
community was unhappy during the period of his government and was liable
to a trial after his death.

It is incumbent on us to ponder on these events carefully and honestly
and to explain their results, for there is a close connection between
them and our religious life. We have no right to find an excuse to any
person when his practices oppose the Islamic teachings, principles, and
precepts. We mention to readers some of the criticisms facing Uthman’s
policy:

**His Pardoning Ubaydillah**

Uthman received the caliphate with pardoning Ubaydillah bin Umar, who
took vengeance on those who killed his father. For no reason, he killed
al-Hurmuzan, Jufayna, and the daughter of Abu Lu’lu’a. He intended to
kill all the captives in Medina. However, Sa’d bin Abi Waqqas went to
him, said soft words to him, overcame him, and took the sword from him.
Ubaydillah was thrown into prison until Uthman decided his case. When
Uthman became a caliph, he went up on the pulpit and told the Muslims
about Ubaydillah’s
[^1] Dr. Taha Husayn, al-Fitnatu al-Kubra, vol. 1, 5.

case. He said to them: “It was a decree of Allah that Ubaydillah bin
Umar killed al-Hurmuzan. Al-Hurmuzan is among the Muslims. He has no
inheritor except the Muslims in general. I am your Imam. I have pardoned
him; therefore, will you pardon him?” Some people expressed their
satisfaction and acknowledged the pardon. However Imam Ali (a.s)
criticized Uthman and was dissatisfied with his decision. He said to
him: “Punish the sinner (Ubaydillah bin Umar), for he has committed a
great crime! He has killed a Muslim for no reason!”

The Imam said to Ubaydillah: “O Sinner, if I won a victory over you, I
would kill you for al-Hurmuzan.”[^1] Al-Miqdad bin Umar said to Uthman:
“Most surely al-Hurmuzan is a follower of Allah and His Apostle, so you
have no right to grant that which belongs to Allah and his
Apostle!”[^2]

The honest, righteous Muslims were not satisfied with such a kind of
pardon. They regarded it as a kind of aggression against Islam and a
violation to its bounds. Accordingly, when Ziyad bin Labeed met
Ubaydillah, he said to him: O Ubaydillah, neither escape nor refuge nor
guard will protect you from Ibn Arwa. You have shed blood unlawfully.
The murder of al-Hurmuzan has a danger.

For nothing (you have killed him). However a sayer has said: “Have you
accused al-Hurmuzan (of killing) Umar?” So a fool has said, and the
events are numerous. Yes I accuse him (of that). He has advised and
commanded. The slave’s weapon was inside his house, and the affair is
considered through an affair. Ubaydillah complained to Uthman of Ziyad.
So Uthman summoned Ziyad and prevented him from that. However, he did
not refrain from that; rather, he went on criticizing Uthman, saying:

O Abu Amr, Ubaydillah is hostage to the murder of al-Hurmuzan;
therefore, you must have no doubt (about that). For you have pardoned
him; the reasons for the mistake are two racehorses. You have no right
to pardon. Uthman became angry with Ziyad and rebuked him until he
refrained from criticizing him.[^3] He commanded Ubaydillah to leave
Medina for Kufa. He

[^1] Al-Baladhiri, al-Ansab, vol. 5, p. 24.
[^2] Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 141.
[^3] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 5, p. 41.

gave him a house there. The place was ascribed to Ubaydillah and was
given the name of Kuwayfa bin Umar. Al-Tabari has narrated: “Uthman
consulted the companions (of the Prophet) in respect of the affair of
Ubaydillah, and they advised him to pardon him. They said to him: ‘Umar
was killed yesterday; and his son is killed today?’ Some of them advised
him to kill him. Among them was Imam Ali (a.s). However Amr bin al-Aas
said to him: ‘Most surely, Allah has exempted you from the event that
happens while you have an authority over the Muslims. This event had
taken place when you had no authority.’ As a result, Uthman responded to
his viewpoint. That was when he said: ‘I am a ruler over them. I have
decided that the punishment should be a blood money, and I will pay it
from my own wealth.’”[^1]

This procedure faces the following criticisms:

1. Islam has required rulers to administer the prescribed punishments,
not to show tolerance and leniency in respect of them, that regulations
may be kept, and souls may be protected from aggressions. The ruler has
no right to show tolerance and leniency toward an aggressor irrespective
of his high social position. The Prophet (a.s) declared that and applied
it to real life. He was asked to pardon a female thief due to the
nobility of her family, and he replied: “Those before you perished
because they punished the weak when they stole and left the noble. By
Allah, if Fatima, Muhammad’s daughter, stole, I would cut off her
hand.”[^2]

2. He (a.s) flogged those who told lies (ashab al-ifk). Among them was
Satih bin Athatha, who took part in the Battle of Badr.[^3] This is
required by Islamic justice, which makes no difference between the white
and the black, the weak and the powerful, the head and the subjects.
They are equal before the law. However, Uthman turned away from that. He
opposed what justice required. He did not punish Ubaydillah, for he was
Umar’s son and from Quraysh. He preferred to please al-Khattab’s family
and Quraysh through pardoning him and he sent him far from Kufa and gave
him a house to live in. Through that he opened a door to chaos and
corruption and empowered the influential to punish the weak who had no
authority to resort to.

3. The public interest required killing Ubaydillah bin Umar, and not
pardoning him, for if Uthman had killed him, he would have put an end to
corruption and murder, and no influential would have committed such a

[^1] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 5, p. 41.
[^2] Al-Nizam al-Siyasi fi al-Islam, p. 227, quoted from al-Kharajj, p.
50, by Abu Yousif.
[^3] Usd al-Ghaba.

crime. The Caliph’s son killed al-Hurmuzan; however, Uthman paid no
attention to the public interest and responded to his personal purposes,
which opposed the community’s interest.

4. The Imam’s authority is established when he comes to know that the
killed one has no inheritor. As for al-Hurmuzan, he belonged to Persia.
Therefore, Uthman had to look for his inheritors. When he had come to
know that al-Hurmuzan had no inheritors, his authority would have been
established. However, he did not do that; rather he claimed that he was
his inheritor and ruler.

5. The ruler has no right to pardon someone out of giving blood money;
rather he has the right to make reconciliation for it. Al-Hanafi says:
“Most surely the Imam has the right to make conciliation for blood
money, but he has no right to pardon, for the punishment is the right of
Muslims due to the fact that his (the killed one) inheritance belongs to
them. The Imam represents them in administering the prescribed
punishments. Pardon means canceling their right completely. This is
impossible. For this reason father and grandfather do not have it
(pardon) though they have (the right) to administer a full punishment on
the criminal. The Imam has the right to make conciliation for blood
money.”[^1] According to the Hanafite religious verdict, Uthman had no
right to pardon Ubaydillah bin Umar for blood money. This paradox is
recorded against Uthman according to that some of them narrated that he
pardoned him for blood money. Uthman faces these criticisms because he
pardoned Ubaydillah, and did not kill him.

**Taha Husayn’s Defense**

Dr. Taha Husayn tried to justify Uthman’s actions and did not hold him
responsible for them. His excuse has no scientific nature. We will
mention to readers the places of his defense:

1. Uthman did not want to start his caliphate with killing the Qurashi
boy, who was Umar’s son. He did not want to shed the blood of a Muslim
and two dhimmis (non-Muslim citizen). He preferred wellbeing. From his
own wealth he paid the blood money to the Public Treasury of Muslims and
spared Ubaydillah bin Umar’s blood. His deciding the case in such a way
was a wise policy if the people considered the case through a pure
political consideration.[^2]

[^1] Badayi’ al-Sanayi’, vol. 7, p. 245.
[^2] Al-Fitnatu al-Kubra, vol. 1, p. 66.

Most surely if Uthman had started his caliphate with killing
Ubaydillah, he would have fulfilled his covenant toward the Muslims.
That was when he told them that he would follow Allah’s Book and the
Sunna of His Prophet and apply the Islamic law to the real life. However
he followed the political fields; so, he preferred wellbeing and
neglected the religious precepts. His Eminence Imam Kashif al-Ghita’,
may Allah have mercy on him, has commented on this excuse, saying:
“Firstly, this excuse is among the clear mistakes, for the Islamic law
had decided to shed Ubaydillah’s blood and not to spare it. Secondly,
the murder was intentional, and its precept was administering the
prescribed punishment, and not blood money. The first made a mistake,
and the last came to justify their mistake through another
mistake.”[^1]

2. We return to say that Uthman had an authority over the affairs of
the Muslims; and he, according to this authority, had the right to
pardon. We add to that that when he pardoned Ubaydillah, he did not
cancel any of the punishments prescribed by Allah, nor did he shed the
blood of al-Hurmuzan and of his two friends. Rather he paid the blood
money on behalf on them to the Public Treasury of the Muslims, whom only
he inherited.[^2]

His Eminence, late Kashif al-Ghita’ has commented on it, saying: “This
is also a mistake (which is) more cunning and bitterer, for the duty of
the one who has authority over the affairs of the Muslims is to
administer the punishments prescribed by Allah, and not to cancel them.
As for paying blood money for releasing someone from killing without
pleasing the blood heirs is regarded as arbitrariness in the Islamic
laws and playing with the religion.”

3. The Prophet said that there was no penalty on suspicion criterion.
Perhaps Uthman repelled this prescribed punishment from Ubaydillah out
of the suspicion that resulted from his anger for his father and his
rushing due to his unruly desire. And Allah has made Muslims like pardon
when they are able (to pardon) and rewarded them good for it.

This is among the horrible mistakes, for it is not right to repel the
prescribed punishments out of anger; otherwise, it is incumbent to repel
the prescribed punishments from all killers according to justice, for,
most times, killing results from anger and unruly excitement. The rule
of no penalty on suspicion

[^1] Imam Kashif al-Ghita’s important commentary on al-Fitnatu al-Kubra
is a hand written book available at al-‘Amira Library. Taha Husayn’s
defense and Kashif al-Ghita’s commentary are based on al-Tabari’s
narration, which says that Uthman paid the blood money from his own
wealth and did not pardon ‘Ubayd Allah.

[^2] Al-Fitnatu al-Kubra, vol. 1, p. 67.

criterion is not applied to the case we have discussed, for it has
special sources, and this source is not of its proofs. If anger was a
reason for canceling killing, then Uthman would use it as an excuse and
defend himself through it when Imam Ali (a.s) and the like of him,
criticized him. Therefore, is Dr. Taha Husayn more knowledgeable than
Uthman in the meanings of the sunna?

Most surely Dr. Taha Husayn’s defense is void of inquiry and has not
legislative quality. Such a defense cannot justify Uthman’s procedure
and send far the responsibility from him. Anyway Uthman pardoned
Ubaydillah in order that he might please the hearts of al-Khattab’s
family and Quraysh, and not to take the community’s interest into
consideration.

**His Fiscal Policy**

Islam has taken severe precautions in respect of the state’s wealth. It
has made it obligatory on rulers and governors to spend it on public
interests, reforming life, combating poverty, helping the weak, spending
on the helpless such as widows and orphans. The rulers and the governors
have no right to save anything of the public wealth for themselves, nor
have they the right to choose anything of it for their children. That is
because it is not their own, nor it is their property, that they may
spend it wherever they wish. Imam Ali (a.s) said to Abdullah bin Zam‘a
when he asked him for money during his caliphate: “This wealth does not
belong to me and you; rather it is the Fay’ of Muslims and earning of
their swords. If you shared them at a battle, then you would have the
like of their share; otherwise, the earning of their hands will be for
nothing other than their mouths.”[^1]

Imam Ali (a.s) wrote to Qatham bin al-Abbas, his governor over Mecca:
“Reflect on the wealth of Allah you have gathered. Spend it on those who
have families, and suffer from hunger, hitting with it the places of
poverty and lacks. If something of that remains, then send it to us,
that we may divide it among those we accept.”[^2]

Allah’s Apostle (a.s) says: “The men who spend Allah’s wealth without
any right shall have the fire on the Resurrection Day.”[^3]

[^1] Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 1, p. 461.
[^2] Ibid., vol. 2, p. 17.
[^3] Saheeh al-Bukhari, vol. 5, p. 17.

This is an outline on the viewpoint of Islam in respect of money, for
Islam makes it incumbent on the responsible ones to spend the state’s
money on refreshing the subjects, and saving them from misery and
neediness. The responsible have no right at all to employ it to buy
consciences and to gift those who are not needy. However, Uthman did not
apply that to all circumstances. He controlled the Central Budget and
generously gave money to the Umayyads and Abu Ma’eet’s family, that he
might strengthen their influence and their position in the country. So
they exploited the Muslims, played with their fates, and controlled
their destination. He also gave plentiful money to the prominent persons
and the heads of whose side he was afraid and of whose power he was
careful because of their political influence in the country. This policy
led to inflating wealth and accumulating properties with a group of
people who were perplexed in spending them. Of course such a policy led
to spreading neediness, poverty, and misery among the people; and this
affair opposes Islam, which takes great care of making society happy,
spreading welfare and ease among people. We will mention some examples
as proofs for what we have mentioned:

**His Gifts to the Umayyads**

Uthman gave the properties of the Muslims to his family and relatives,
who denied and opposed Islam and battled against it. He gifted them and
was kind to them. He empowered them over the Muslims. He gave them
plentiful wealth to enjoy and to go too far in spending. We mention to
readers some of those upon whom he spent lavishly:

**Abu Sufyan**

Uthman gave Abu Sufyan a hundred thousand (dirhams) from the Public
Treasury.[^1] He gave him this gift while he (Abu Sufyan) was the head of
the polytheists at the Battle of Uhud and the Battle of al-Ahzab. He was
on top of those who harbored malice against Islam. The religion did not
enter his heart, nor did it remove from him the beliefs of pre-Islamic
era. It was he who went to the grave of Hamza and kicked it and said: “O
Abu Imara, the affairs for which we engaged in a sword fight is now at
the hands of our boys; they are playing with it.” Then he happily came
in to Uthman after he had become blind. He said to him: “O Allah, let
the authority be similar to that was before Islam, the kingdom be ruled
by the usurpers, and the projections of the earth be owned by the
Umayyads.”[^2]

[^1] Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 1, p. 67.
[^2] Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarikh, vol. 6, p. 407.

Therefore, is it an act of justice and fairness that the Muslims’
properties were given to such a hypocrite whose soul was full of enmity
and hatred against Islam? Dose the Islamic law permit giving such wealth
to such a person who did not believe in Allah at all?

**Al-Harith bin al-Hakam**

Uthman gave generously to al-Harith bin al-Hakam, his son-in-law on the
side of his daughter A’isha. He gave him three hundred thousand
dirhams.[^1] He gave him the camels of charity when they came to
Medina.[^2] He gave him a market in Yathrib (Medina) named Tahruz, while
the Prophet (a.s) had given the market to the Muslims as charity.[^3] Why
was al-Harith worthy of such enormous properties? Did he render a
service to Islam or perform a deed through which he benefited Islam,
that he might be worthy of giving such wealth? It is worth mentioning
that the camels of alms had to be spent on the poor and the needy.
Moreover how did Uthman single out al-Harith with the alms of Allah’s
Apostle (a.s) while they belonged to all the Muslims? Therefore, Uthman
had no justification for giving such funds through which he disobeyed
Allah and turned away from the community’s interest.

**Abdullah bin Sa’d**

Uthman gave his foster brother, Abdullah bin Sa’d bin Abi Sarh, all
that which Allah had given to the Muslims who conquered al-Maghrib
(Morocco) in Africa, which was from Tripoli to Tangier. He made none of
the Muslims share him in such wealth.[^4] It is worth mentioning that
al-Harith was among the prominent polytheists and one of those who
denied Islam and its values. We will mention his biography in the
chapters that follow to prove that. Therefore, how was it possible for
Uthman to give him such enormous funds and such plentiful wealth?

**Al-Hakam bin Abi al-Aas**

Before we mention Uthman’s gifts to al-Hakam, we have to know his
reality and some of his affairs. It may be clear that he was worthy of
estrangement, be sent away and that there was at all no justification to
give him the Muslims’ funds. We will mention that to readers as
follows:

[^1] Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 5, p. 52.
[^2] Al-Ansab, p. 28.
[^3] Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 1, p. 67.
[^4] Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 1, p. 67.

**His Fighting against Islam**

Al-Hakam resisted propagating Islam. He urged the people to go on
worshipping the idols and prevented them from embracing Islam. Marwan
(bin al-Hakam) met with Huwaytib and asked him about his age, and he
told him about that. However Marwan said to him: “Your Islam is late, O
Sheikh, to the extent that the boys preceded you (in embracing it)!”

Huwaytib said to him: “By Allah, I intended to be a Muslim more than
one time, but your father prevented me and said: ‘Do you want to leave
your honor, abandon your fathers’ religions for a new religion, and be a
follower?”[^1] Most surely al-Hakam and the rest of the Umayyad family
resisted Islam and spared no effort to repel propagating it. But Allah
repelled their scheme, supported Islam and strengthened His religion.

**His Disparaging the Prophet**

Al-Hakam was the bitterest enemy to Allah’s Apostle (a.s). He harbored
malice against him. He went too far in hurting, disparaging, and making
light of his high position. He walked behind him, slandered him, sneered
at him, and moved his mouth and nose.[^2] The Prophet turned and saw him
do that. He said to him: “May you be so!” Accordingly, al-Hakam was
trembling and shaking until he died. Abdurrahman bin Thabit rebuked him
for that. He satirized Abdurrahman bin al-Hakam, saying:

Most surely your father is cursed; therefore, throw away his bones. If
you throw away, you will throw away someone who is trembling and crazy.
He enters into evening small-bellied and remains big-bellied due to
(his) evil deeds.[^3]

**The Prophet curses him**

This evil, cunning person (al-Hakam) asked the Prophet (a.s) for
permission to enter his house, and he (a.s) said: “Shall I permit him?
May Allah’s curse be on him and on those who will come out of his back
(offspring) except the believers who will be very few; they are the
possessor of cunning and deception. The world will be given to them, but
they shall have no portion of the hereafter!”[^4] The Prophet (a.s)
ordered Imam Ali to bring al-Hakam as a ewe was brought. He fetched him.
He took him by the ear and made him stop before Allah’s Apostle (a.s).
The Prophet cursed al-Hakam three times, and

[^1] Ibn Kuthayr, Tarikh, vol. 8, p. 70.
[^2] Al-Ansab, vol. 5, p. 27.
[^3] Al-Isti‘ab, vol. 1, p. 118.
[^4] Al-Sirah al-Halabiya.

then he said to Imam Ali: “Make him stay at a place! A group of the
Muhajireen and the Ansar went to him, and he summoned him again, cursed
him, and said: “Most surely, this (person) will oppose Allah’s Book and
the Sunna of His Prophet. Future troubles will come out of his back
(offspring). Their smoke will reach the heaven.” Some people said to
him: “He (al-Hakam) is too low to do that!” “Yes,” he (a.s) said, “some
of you will be his followers.”[^1]

**The Prophet banishes him to al-Ta’if**

This dirty, wicked person (al-Hakam) distorted the traditions of
Allah’s Apostle (a.s). He went too far in hurting him. So the Prophet
banished him to al-Ta’if and said: “Let him not live with me in one
place!”[^2] Al-Hakam and his children lived in their place of exile
throughout the caliphate of the two Sheikhs (Abu Bakr and Umar).
However, Uthman interceded with them for him, and they did not respond
to him. Accordingly, al-Hakam and his children remained there.

**His Return to Yathrib (Medina)**

When Uthman became caliph, he released al-Hakam. Accordingly, al-Hakam
returned to Yethrib wearing a worn out garment. He was driving a goat,
and the people were looking at his worn out garments and his bad state.
He came in Uthman’s house, and then he went out wearing a silk jubbah
and pallium.[^3] Moreover, Uthman gave him a hundred thousand
(dirhams).[^4]

**His Undertaking the Endowments**

Uthman appointed him over the endowments of Quda’a, which amounted
three hundred thousand dirhams.[^5] He gave him this sum of money. This
policy made the people displeased with him and criticize him for his
lodging the one banished by Allah’s Apostle (a.s) and gave him the
endowments Allah had appointed for the poor, the deprived, and the
needy. Therefore, how was it permissible for Uthman to give them to such
a person cursed by Allah’s Apostle (a.s)? The decision on this problem
is up to readers.

[^1] Kanz al-Ummal, vol. 6, p. 39.
[^2] Al-Ansab, vol. 5, p. 27.
[^3] Al-Ya’qubi, Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 41.
[^4] Al-Ma’arif, p. 84.
[^5] Al-Ansab, vol. 5, p. 28.

**Sa’eed Bin al-Aas**

Uthman gave Sa’eed bin al-Aas a hundred thousand Dirhams.[^1] It is
worth mentioning that Sa’eed bin al-‘Aas was among the Umayyad sinners
and dissolute. His father was among the prominent polytheists. Imam Ali
killed him at the Battle of Badr.[^2] This gift moved people’s
displeasure against Uthman. Trustworthy, righteous Muslims criticized
him for it.

**Al-Waleed Bin Aqaba**

Al-Waleed bin Aqaba was Uthman’s foster brother. He was a dissolute
sinner. He did not respect Allah, just as we will explain that when we
talk about the governors appointed by Uthman. He went to Kufa and asked
Abdullah bin Mas‘ud for a loan of enormous money from the Public
Treasury, and he lend it to him. Abdullah bin Mas‘ud asked him to return
the money, but he wrote a letter to Uthman about that. Uthman wrote
Abdullah bin Mas‘ud a letter in which he said: “You are our treasurer;
therefore, do not ask al-Waleed to return the money he had taken!” As a
result Abdullah bin Mas‘ud put the keys before Uthman and said: “I
thought that I was the treasurer of the Muslims. If I am your treasurer,
then I am in no need of that!” He resigned and lived in Kufa.[^3] How was
it possible for Uthman to disperse the Muslims’ money and to give it to
the enemies of Allah and the opponents of Islam? The decision on this
problem is up to readers.

**Marwan Bin al-Hakam**

Allah’s Apostle (a.s) cursed Marwan bin al-Hakam when he was in his
father’s back. This tradition was narrated by Imam al-Hasan (a.s).[^4]
When Marwan was born, he was brought to Allah’s Apostle (a.s). The
Prophet said: “He is a cowardly, unsuccessful one, son of a cowardly,
unsuccessful one. He is a cursed one, son of a cursed one!”[^5] Imam Ali
(a.s) looked at him and said: “Woe unto you! And woe unto Muhammad’s
community because of you and your household when your temples become
white!”[^6]

Marwan bin al-Hakam was among the hypocrite heads and one of the
prominent men of misguidance and falsehood. He was given the nickname of
Khayt Batil (the thread of falsehood). Concerning him the poet has
said:

[^1] Al-Ansab, vol. 5, p. 28.
[^2] Usd al-Ghaba, vol. 2, 310.
[^3] Al-Ansab, vol. 5, p. 30.
[^4] Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, vol. 10, p. 72.
[^5] Al-Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 4, p. 479.
[^6] Ibn Abi al-Haddeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 2, p. 55.

By your life I do not know how the beaten-backed one does. May Allah
curse the men who have appointed Khayt Batil as a commander over the
people. He gives and prevents whatever he wishes.[^1] He was famous for
treachery, and breaking promise and covenant. Imam Ali (a.s) said when
(the Prophet’s) two grandsons, al-Hasan and al-Husayn, talked with him
about Marwan’s pledge of allegiance to him: “I am in no need of his
paying homage. It is a Jewish hand. If he pledged allegiance with his
hand, he would betray with his own forefinger. He will have an authority
(that lasts as short) as a dog licks its own nose. He is the father of
the four rams. The community will meet a red day because of him and his
sons.”[^2]

Uthman was charitable to this cowardly, unsuccessful, dirty person
(Marwan bin al-Hakam). He empowered him over the Public Treasury, and he
gave and prevented whomever he wished. We will mention to readers the
enormous gifts Uthman gave to Marwan. They are as follows: 1. He gave
him the one fifth of the booties of Africa, which amounted five hundred
thousand dinars. Uthman was criticized for that. Abdurrahman bin Hanbal
satirized him, saying:

I will swear by Allah as far as possible, Allah does not leave an
affair to be in vain.
However you have been created as an affliction for us, that we might be
tried through you, and you tried (through us).
Most surely the two trusted ones have made the road sign on (which)
guidance is.
They did not take any dirham illegally, nor did they place any dirham
in caprice.
You have summoned the cursed one and brought him near contrary to the
Sunna of those passed away.
You have unjustly given Marwan the one fifth (of the money) of the
people.[^3]

2. He gave him a thousand and fifty okes; we do not know whether they
were of gold or silver. It was among the affairs that brought about the
displeasure with him.[^4]

3. He gave him a hundred thousand (dinars) from the Public Treasury,
and so Zayd bin Arqam, the treasurer, brought the keys and put them
before Uthman. He wept, but Uthman scolded him and said to him: “Are you
weeping because I have retained my kinship?”

[^1] Al-Ansab, vol. 4, p. 348.
[^2] Nahj al-Balagha.
[^3] Abu al-Fida’, Tarikh, vol. 1, p. 168.
[^4] Al-Halabi, Sirah, vol. 2, p. 87.

“But I weep because I think that you have taken this money as a
compensation for that which you spent in the way of Allah during the
lifetime of Allah’s Apostle (a.s). If you gave Marwan a hundred dirhams,
it would be much,” retorted Zayd.

Yet Uthman rebuked him and shouted at him, saying: “Put the keys, O son
of Arqam! We will find someone other than you!”[^1] 4. He gave him Fadak
as a gift.[^2] Anyway it was not permissible for him to give Fadak as a
gift, for if it had been given to Fatima, peace be on her, as a gift, as
she said, then it would have belonged to her children. If it was alms,
as Abu Baker claimed, then it belonged to all the Muslims. Therefore,
Uthman had no right to act freely in respect of it in both cases.

Anyway, which service did Marwan render to the community? Which noble
deed or achievement issued from him, that he might deserve such a
plentiful giving and be given such enormous wealth? These are some of
the gifts the Caliph (Uthman) gave to his family and relatives. Without
doubt these gifts do not agree with Allah’s Book and the Sunna of His
Prophet. They required the rulers to treat those near and far equally,
demanded them not to prefer a people to another, and to apply justice to
all fields.


