Uthman Is Criticized
====================

Of course such a policy moved the displeasure of the good, the
righteous, and the religious. Rather it moved the displeasure of the
general populace who had doubt about the Islam of the Umayyads. They
thought that such giving would expand the Umayyads, strengthen their
influence, and spread their authority. Abdurrahman bin Awf, who elected
Uthman and appointed him as a ruler over the Muslims, harbored malice
against him and said: “Anticipate him before he goes too far in his
governing.” He said to Imam Ali: “Take your sword, and I take my sword,
for he (Uthman) has broken the promise he gave to me.” When he was about
to die, he recommended not to (let him) pray over him.[^3]

Grumbling spread among the Muslims because of this crooked policy. The
special associates and the general populace criticized Uthman when he
alone possessed the jewels in the Public Treasury. He took some of them
to adorn some of his family, and then he went up on the pulpit and said:
“We will take our need from this Fay’ in spite of the people.”

[^1] Ibn Abi al-Haddeed, vol. 1, p. 67.
[^2] Abu al-Fida’, Tarikh, vol. 1, p. 168. Al-Ma‘arif, p. 84.
[^3] Al-Balathiri, al-Ansab.

This speech moved the people’s displeasure. Imam Ali (a.s) opposed him,
saying: “You shall be prevented from that, and we will come between you
and that.” The Prophet’s great companion, Ammar bin Yasir confirmed the
Imam’s statement and expressed his displeasure with Uthman, saying: “I
bear witness that I am the first unwilling one.” When Uthman gave a
hundred thousand dirham to Sa’eed bin al-Aas, Imam Ali (a.s) and a group
of the leading companions of the Prophet blamed and criticized him for
that. But he said to them: “He is my relative.” They refused his
justification, saying: “Did Abu Bakr and Umar have no relatives?” He
answered them: “Abu Bakr and Umar thought of depriving their relatives
(of giving), and I think of giving my relatives.”[^1] The Muslims
harbored malice against Uthman, and their good ones were displeased with
him, for he alone possessed the Fay’, gave the Muslims’ properties to
the Umayyads, and did not establish through his policy the social
justice that Islam brought.

**Uthman apologizes**

Uthman apologized to those who criticized his policy for his gifting
his relatives and being kind to them, for he thought that he had
committed no sin, nor had he broken the Islamic law. It is necessary for
us to pause before this apology, that we may come to know its reality
and rightness. If we carefully consider it, we will conclude that such a
speech is incorrect, does not agree with the Islamic law, and does not
serve the community’s interests. The reasons for that are: Firstly, the
properties he gave to his family were not his own, that he might have a
choice in spending them on his relatives. Rather they belonged to the
Muslims; therefore, it was incumbent on him to spend them on them. The
ruler had no right to act freely in respect of them. For example, once,
Aqeel went to Yathrib. He was poor and was in need of his brother Imam
Ali (a.s). He asked him to settle his debts. So the Imam asked him:

- How many dinars?

- Forty thousand (dinars).

- I do not have them. Be patient until I receive my pay, and I will
give it to you.
[^1] Al-Ansab, vol. 5, p. 28.

-The public treasuries are at your hand, while you delay me to your
pay. - Do you order me to give you the Muslims’ wealth, while they have
entrusted me with it?[^1] This is the speech of Islam, this is its
justice, and this is its equality. It makes no distinction between the
near and the far; all people are equal in pay and other than it.

Secondly, the members of his family, to whom he was charitable, were
worthy of boycott and deprivation. They opposed Islam and battled
against it. They are the cursed tree in the Qur’an. Ibn Abi Hatam has
narrated on the authority of Ibn Umar, who said: “The Prophet (a.s)
said: ‘As if I see the sons of al-Hakam bin al-‘Aas on the pulpits. They
look like apes. So Allah revealed: And we did not make the vision which
We showed you but a trial for men and the cursed tree in the Qur’an as
well. He has meant al-Hakam and his sons.”[^2] A’isha said to Marwan: “I
have heard Allah’s Apostle (a.s) say to your father: ‘Abi al-‘Aas bin
Umayya, you are the cursed tree in the Qur’an.”[^3] Allah has prohibited
showing love toward His enemies and made it forbidden to be kind to
them. He, the Most High, has said: You shall not find a people who
believe in Allah and the latter day befriending those who act in
opposition to Allah and His Apostle, even though they are their (own)
fathers, or their sons, or their brothers, or their kinsfolk.[^4]

Uthman loved the Umayyads very much. He would say: “If the keys of the
Garden were at my hands, I would given them to the Umayyads, that they
all might enter it.”[^5] This violent love for his family put an end to
him, moved the Islamic forces to revolt against him, to overthrow his
government, and to kill him.

**His Gifts to the Leading Personalities**

Uthman gave the Muslims’ money to the dignitaries, the leading
personalities, and those who had political influence, for he was afraid
of them. He gave two hundred thousand dinars to Talha.[^6] Talha was in
debt to Uthman for fifty thousand (dinars). Talha said to Uthman: “Your
money is ready that you may receive it.” Uthman gave him the money as a
gift and said to him: “It belongs

[^1] Usd al-Ghaba, vol. 3, p. 423.
[^2] Al-Tabari, Tafseer, vol. 15, p. 77. Al-Qurtubi, vol. 10, p. 283.
[^3] Al-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 4, p. 191.
[^4] Qur’an, 58, 22.
[^5] Ahmed, Musnad, vol. 1, p. 62.
[^6] Ibn Sa ‘d, Tabaqat.

to you, O Abu Muhammad, because of your generosity.”[^1] He gave
al-Zubayr six hundred thousand (dinars). When he received them, he asked
about the best money to exploit it. He was guided to build houses in the
regions and the cities.[^2] Accordingly, he built eleven houses in
Medina, two houses in Basra, a house in Kufa, and a house in Egypt.[^3]
Uthman gave enormous money to Yazid bin Thabit, to the extent that he
was so rich that he left behind him gold and silver which were broken
with an ax, and in addition he left behind him properties and estates
estimated as a hundred thousand dinars.[^4] He gave other properties to
his followers and the supporters of his policy. In his encyclopedia,
al-Amini, the head of researchers, has in detail mentioned Uthman’s
gifts.[^5]

**He alone Possesses properties**

Uthman exhausted the public treasuries. He chose of them what he wished
for himself and his family. He went too far in lavishness and
extravagance. He ordered a house of bricks and lime to be built in
Medina. He ordered its doors to be made of teak and juniper. He had
properties, gardens, and springs in Medina.[^6] He covered his teeth with
gold, and worn king garments. He spent most of the money in the public
treasury on cultivating his country estates and building houses.[^7] When
he was killed, his treasurer had thirty million, five hundred thousand
dirhams, and a hundred thousand dinars. He also left behind him a
thousand camels, endowments in Baradis and Khaybar, and Wadi al-Qura.
They were estimated at two hundred thousand dinars.[^8]

Uthman followed a special way in his fiscal policy. He did not conform
to Allah’s Book and the Sunna of His Prophet. He acted freely in respect
of the Public Treasury. He took from it whatever he wished, granted to
whomever he liked, and gave to his followers. Imam Ali (a.s) has
described this crooked policy, saying: “Till the third man of these
people (Uthman) stood up with heaving breasts between his dung and
fodder. With him the children of his father (the Umayyads) also stood up
swallowing up Allah’s wealth like a camel devouring the foliage of
spring.”

[^1] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 5, p. 139.
[^2] Ibn Sa ‘d, Tabaqat.
[^3] Al-Bukhari, Saheeh, vol. 5, p. 21.
[^4] Al-Mas‘udi, Murujj al-Dhahab, vol. 1, p. 334.
[^5] Al-Ghadir, vol. 8.
[^6] Al-Mas‘udi, Murujj al-Dhahab, vol. 1, p. 433.
[^7] Al-Seerah al-Halabiya, vol. 2, p. 87.
[^8] Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqat, vol. 3, p. 53.

This is the most wonderful speech through which the devious policy is
described when it uses authority as means for obtaining wealth, enjoying
life pleasures, pays no attention to the community, and takes no care of
its interests and objectives. Accordingly, Imam Ali (a.s) issued his
decisive decision when he seized the reins of government. He ordered all
the properties that Uthman had taken or given to his special associates
and relative to be confiscated. This is the text of his decision: “All
lands granted by Uthman, all Allah’s wealth he gave should be returned
to the Public Treasury. Nothing invalidates the old right. If I found
that the women got married through it and scattered in the countries, I
would return it as it was. That is because there is ease in justice.
Whoever is annoyed with right is more annoyed with tyranny.”[^1]

Imam Ali took this procedure according to Islamic justice, which
limited the authorities of the responsible, gave them no free rein to
act freely in respect of the community’s properties and possessing them
alone. The rulers have no right to choose properties for themselves and
their relatives. An example of that is Allah’s Apostle (a.s). His only
daughter, other whom he had no child, came to him and asked him to buy
her a servant to help her turn the hand mill because her hands
ulcerated. However he (a.s) found no way to take some money from the
Public Treasury to buy a servant to help his daughter. He refused her
request and taught her the tasbeeh (glorification) which has been
ascribed to her. Imam Ali (a.s) followed the same policy. His brother
Aqeel came to him asking for charity, ease, and welfare. However the
Imam heated a piece of iron and wanted to burn him with it. This is the
speech of Islam, which has come to make peoples happy, reform them, and
save them from misery, poverty, and deprivation.

**With Dr. Taha Husayn**

Dr. Taha Husayn’s statements have clearly contradicted each other in
respect of Uthman’s fiscal policy. He sometimes claims that Uthman kept
Umar’s fiscal policy, and that he did not oppose him in that, nor did he
deviate from him in all his administrative and war actions, all that
which all the Muslims followed such as enjoying good, forbidding evil,
clinging to the inherited Sunna, refraining from affection and
innovation.[^2] And he sometimes becomes straight in his statements. He
believes that Uthman deviated from Umar’s fiscal policy in maintaining
the Public Treasury, spending nothing of it except

[^1] Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 1, p. 46.
[^2] Al-Fitnatu al-Kubra, vol. 1, p. 72.

the amount of need of spending, criticizing Umar’s strictness,
believing that there was enough (money) in the Public Treasury for
people than that was during the days of Umar. This is an indirect
criticism to Umar’s policy in respect of managing the Public
treasury.[^1] This means that Uthman did not conform to Umar’s way, nor
did he put into practice his policy. This contradicts what he has
mentioned at first, which is that Uthman followed the goals Umar had
followed.

Anyway, at last Dr. Taha Husayn inclined to correct Uthman’s fiscal
policy. That is when he said that Uthman’s fiscal policy did not oppose
the inherited Sunna, was not void of good, and conforming to the public
interests. We will mention the text of his speech as follows: “The
certain thing is that Uthman did not flatter in respect of his religion,
and the certain thing as well is that Uthman did not see in that policy
of his dangerous or not dangerous disagreement with the behavior of the
two Sheikhs (Abu Bakr and Umar), for he did not depend on oppression and
favoritism; rather, he generously gave to the people some of their
properties. He saw riches in the Public Treasury, so he preferred the
people through it and he did not go too far in saving up. Which
prohibition is in gifting the Prophet’s companions with some or much of
this wealth, for they were the Imams of Islam, the ones who built the
state, showed extreme courage during the days of the Prophet, faced many
hardships and much deprivation? Allah was truthful in His promise and He
increased good. Therefore, which of the people was the worthiest of the
Muhajireen in enjoying some of this good?”[^2]

**Reflection**

The Places of Reflection on his Speech are as follows:

1. Dr. Taha Husayn believes that Uthman did not cajole in respect of
his religion, that he did not see in his policy any dangerous or not
dangerous disagreement with the behavior of the two Sheikhs (Abu Bakr
and Umar), and that he did not depend on oppression and favoritism. As
for that Uthman did not flatter in his religion, it is falsified by his
announcing repentance of turning away from justice and deviating from
the straight path. This is the text of his repentance: “O people, by
Allah I do not ignore any of the things for which you have criticized
me. I have come to know them, but my soul have made me desire and it
deceived me, and my reason has gone astray. I have heard Allah’s Apostle
(a.s) say: ‘Whoever slips should turn to Allah in

[^1] Al-Fitnatu al-Kubra, vol. 1, p. 77.
[^2] Al-Fitnatu al-Kubra, vol. 1, p. 77.

repentance, and whoever makes a mistake should turn to Allah in
repentance and should not go too far in destruction. Most surely whoever
goes too far in oppression is farther away from the way; therefore, I am
the first to learn a lesson. I ask Allah’s forgiveness and turn to him
in repentance.”[^1]

This statement is clear in that Uthman followed a way other than the
straight path, that he deviated from the inherited Sunna, that he came
to know of that and did not ignore it, and that the knowledge of it was
not absent from him. Uthman responded to his desires and sentiments when
he did what he did. He opposed the Sunna such as his gifts to the
Umayyads, his gifts to Abu Ma’eet’s family, his punishing the prominent
companions (of the Prophet) because they criticized his policy, and
other than that from among the heavy events. His soul made him desire,
to the extent that his reason went astray, and he lost his mind, as he
said. He admitted that and recorded against himself that he deviated
from the straight path, then how is it said that he did not flatter in
his religion and not intend tyranny and favoritism?

2. As for what he mentioned that Uthman gave generously to the people
some of their properties because he saw wealth in the Public Treasury,
so he preferred the people through it and did not go too far in saving
up,’ it is unacceptable at all. Uthman did not give generously to the
people and not make easy their livelihood. If he did all these things,
why did the people revolt against and kill him? Rather he spent
generously on himself, his special associates, the Umayyads, and the
followers of his policy. He preferred them to others through al-Fay’ and
singled them out with the properties of the state. This matter brought
about grumbling, and the Muslims’ displeasure throughout their countries
and regions, to the extent that they overthrew his government and killed
him. They did not bury him, to the extent that the good Muslims
regretted that they did not burn his corpse.[^2]

3. As for what he has mentioned: “There was no prohibition and sin
against Uthman when he gifted the companions of the Prophet (a.s) with
the properties, for they were the Imams of the Muslims and showed
extreme courage; therefore, which of the people was worthiest of them in
enjoying a thing of this good?” Most surely it is apparently false
because the Public Treasury, as we have mentioned more than one time,
belonged to all the Muslims, and no people had the right to alone
possess it. It had to be spent on their interests and the reforming of
their affairs. No tribe, whatever

[^1] Al-Tabari, Tarikh.
[^2] This was said by ‘Ammar bin Yasir, a great companion of the
Prophet. See al-Ghadir, vol. 9, p. 216.

importance it had, had to be singled out with it, and the overwhelming
majority had not to be deprived of it. Moreover Islam at that time was
in need of spreading the social justice among the peoples who were
thirsty for its just equality, which did not prefer a people to another.
However, Uthman preferred the Umayyads in all things. He preferred them
in properties and offices, and empowered them over the people. This
affair destroyed the equality Islam had brought.

As for that the Muhajireen from among the companions of the Prophet
(a.s) preceded others to believe in Islam, to defend its beliefs, and to
bear hardships and tribulations for it, it is certain, and there is no
room to doubt it. They are thanked for that, and it is Allah who will
reward them for that. However granting them properties and heaping
bounties upon them is not a permissible affair, for it gave life to the
casteism against which Islam had fought and condemned all its aspects.

Dr. Taha Husayn continues justifying Uthman’s policy and the legality
of his gifts he had given to the Prophet’s companions. He says that
Uthman did not oppose the inherited Sunna; rather he followed his
generous nature. However he has not mentioned Uthman’s great gifts to
the Umayyads and Abu Ma’eet’s family. His Excellency, the doctor, has
turned away from that and not mentioned it at all. I think that such
gifts made the people criticize Uthman. However Dr. Taha Husayn has
neglected this side because either he has found no room to apologize for
it or he has seen that no harm resulted from that; likewise, he has seen
that there is no harm on giving such gifts to the Prophet’s companions.
Unfortunately, he has overlooked that and justified what has opposed the
Sunna.

**Uthman’s Governors over the Cities**

Islam makes it incumbent on the caliph of Muslims and their guardian to
do his best to choose men of abilities and talents from among those who
have the necessary qualities such as justice, fear of Allah, honesty,
and loyalty. The caliph should appoint over cities and regions those who
honestly and sincerely take care of their interests and affairs. It is
not permissible for him to appoint anyone, whatever he is close to him,
out of favoritism, and preference, for that is treason to Allah, His
Apostle, and Muslims. That is because governors undertake the
responsibility for government, giving legal decisions to people,
managing their affairs, making peace among them, protecting their blood
and their properties. Therefore, they should be the best of people, the
most religious, the greatest in reflecting on suspicions, the farthest
in refraining from greed and stinginess, and the most patient in
understanding affairs. This is the viewpoint of Islam, and this is its
plan that its immortal regulation has. However, Uthman went far from
that. He intentionally appointed the members of his family and his
relatives who battled against Allah’s Apostle (a.s) and caused mischief
in the earth. He appointed them over the Muslims and entrusted to them
the most important offices. He appointed them as governors over the
cities and the regions. We will mention some of them along with
explaining their biographies. They are as follows:

**Al-Waleed Bin Aqaba**

Sa’d bin Abi Waqqas was a governor over Kufa, but Uthman removed him
from it and appointed over it al-Waleed bin Aqaba bin Abu Ma’eet. He did
not entrust it to the men of qualifications and abilities from among the
Muhajireen and the Ansar, who showed extreme courage in Islam, that they
might undertake the affairs of this city, which was the greatest of the
Muslim cities in importance and boundaries.

Any way, was al-Waleed entitled to it, that Uthman might entrusted to
him this important office taking care of giving legal decisions to
people, leading them in prayer, protecting the Public Treasury, and
other affairs depending on justice, fear of Allah, and clinging to
religion? We will mention an outline on his affairs, that his condition
may be clear. They are as follows:

**His Childhood**

Al-Waleed grew up and was brought up during the pre-Islamic period. No
ray of the light of Islam entered his heart. His father was the enemy of
Allah’s Apostle (a.s). A’isha narrated on the authority of Allah’s
Apostle (a.s) who said: “I was between the wickedest two neighbors;
between Abu Lahab and Aqaba bin Abi Ma’eet. They brought waste materials
and spread them at my door….”[^1] This cursed guy (Aqaba bin Abi Ma’eet)
spat in the face of Allah’s Apostle (a.s) and cursed him. So the Prophet
(a.s) said to him: “If I found you coming out of the mountains of Mecca,
I would strike off your head.” When the Battle of Badr was about to take
place and his (Aqaba) companions to go out, he refrained from going out.
His companions said to him: “Go out with us!” “This man (the Prophet),”
he retorted, “had threatened me that if he found me going out of the
mountains of Mecca, he would behead me.” “You have a quick red camel,”
they said to him, “if there was a defeat, you quickly escape with it.”
He went out with them. When Allah defeated the polytheists, his (Aqaba)
camel carried him to badlands. Allah’s Apostle (a.s) took him as [^1] Ibn
Sa‘d, Tabaqat, vol. 1, p. 186 (Egyptian Edition).

a prisoner of war along with seventy Qurayshi people. Aqaba asked the
Prophet (a.s): “Will you kill me along with these people?” “Yes,” he
replied, “because you had spat in my face.” Then he ordered Ali to
behead him, and he did.[^1] Accordingly, al-Waleed’s soul was full of
spite and hatred against the Prophet (a.s) for he had ordered his father
to be killed. When al-Waleed found no escape from embracing Islam, he
became Muslim, while his heart was full of disbelief and hypocrisy.

**His Transgression**

The Holy Qur’an has mentioned his transgression and disbelief twice.
The first is that a heated argument took place between him and Imam Ali.
Al-Waleed said to the Imam: “Keep silent, for you are a boy, and I am an
old man. By Allah, I am more eloquent than you in tongue, sharper than
you in spearhead, braver than you in heart, and greater than you in
loading.” “Be silent, for you are a sinner!” (Imam) Ali said to him.
Accordingly, Allah, the Exalted, revealed in respect of him His words:
“Is he then who is a believer like him who is a transgressor? They are
not equal.[^2]”[^3] Hassaan bin Thabit has written a poem on that,
saying:

In the Holy Book Allah has revealed a verse in respect of Ali and
al-Waleed.
Al-Waleed has occupied transgression of that, and Ali has occupied
faith.
He who is a believer and has come to know of Allah is not like him who
is a transgressor and traitor.
So Ali will find with Allah exaltedness, and al-Waleed will find
abasement there.
Al-Waleed will be rewarded disgrace and a fire, and Ali will, without
doubt, be rewarded Gardens.[^4]

The second is that he cheated the Prophet and told lies to him. That
was when the Prophet sent him to the Banu al-Mustalaq. However, he
returned to the Prophet and claimed that they refused to give alms.
Accordingly, the Prophet (a.s) went out to battle against them, but he
came to know that al-Waleed had told lies to him. This Verse was
revealed to him in respect of al-Waleed’s transgression: “O you who
believe, if an evil-doer comes to you with a report, look carefully into
it, lest you harm a people in ignorance, then be sorry for what you have
done.”[^5]

[^1] Al-Ghadir, vol. 8, p. 273.
[^2] Qur’an, 32, 18.
[^3] Al-Tabari, Tafseer, vol. 21, p. 62.
[^4] Tadhkirat al-Khawas, p. 115.
[^5] Qur’an, 26, 6. In his book al-Isti‘ab, Ibn ‘Abd al-Bir has said:
“As far as I know the

The Qur’an has announced al-Waleed’s transgression and sin. Therefore,
how was it permissible for Uthman to appoint him as a governor over the
Muslims, and an imam to lead them in prayer, to take care of their
properties, and to spare their blood?

**His Authority over Kufa**

Uthman appointed him as a governor over Kufa after deposing Sa’d.
Al-Waleed ruled Kufa in a manner of playing and dissoluteness. He did
not respect the religion and caused mischief in the land, to the extent
that Kufa was noisy due to his dissoluteness and recklessness, and the
good, righteous people grumbled because of his bad behavior.

**His Drinking Wine**

Al-Waleed committed the most excessive crime and the most horrible sin.
That was when he drank wine and performed four ruk’as in the morning
prayer and said during his ruku‘ and sujud: “Drink and give me wine to
drink!” Then he vomited in the mihrab (prayer niche), said the taslim,
and said: “Shall I do more for you?” Ibn Mas‘ud said to him: “May Allah
not increase you and the one who has sent you in good!” He took a sandal
and hit al-Waleed on the face. The people hit al-Waleed with small
stones until he entered the palace. He was staggering.[^1]

Al-Hutay’a, the poet, satirized al-Waleed for this sin in some of his
poems.

This action shows that al-Waleed was dissolute and he went too far in
committing sins. He did not respect prayer, which was the most important
of all the religious rites and the greatness of them in sacredness with
Allah.

**Dr Taha Husayn’s Viewpoint**

Taha Husayn believes that the story of that al-Waleed led the people in
prayer and increased it while he was drunk was fabricated, had no
portion of correctness, and was made up by al-Waleed’s opponents and
ascribed him. He indicates that if al-Waleed had increased the prayer,
the Muslim group from Kufa would not have followed him. There were some
of the Prophet’s companions, the reciters of the Qur’an, and the
righteous, and the Muslims would not have be satisfied with Uthman
unless he should administer the prescribed punishment on him because of
his drinking wine. Increasing the prayer and playing with it is more
dangerous with Allah than drinking wine.

men of knowledge have not differed over that the verse was revealed in
respect of al-Waleed.”
[^1] Al-Sirah al-Halabiya, vol. 2, p. 314.

He also believes that al-Hutay’a did not satirize al-Waleed through his
poetry; rather he praised him in his poetry to show love for him and to
obtain his good pleasure. He has mentioned some of al-Hutay’a’s poetry
lines praising and lauding al-Waleed.[^1] The things Dr. Taha Husayn has
mentioned could not be accepted for the following reasons: Firstly,
there are numerous authentic texts in respect of that. Many writers from
among those who have written al-Waleed’s biography or dealt with the
events of Uthman have mentioned them. An example of them is Abu Umar. He
has said in his book al-Isti‘ab: “His (al-Waleed) leading them in prayer
while he was drunk and his statement: ‘Shall I increase you (in prayer)
after he had performed four (ruk‘as) in the Morning Prayer is famous
with the reliable traditionists and the historians.” In his book
al-Isaba, Ibn Hajar has said: “The story of his leading the people in
the Morning Prayer while he was drunk is famous.” In his al-Aghani, vol.
14, p. 178, Abu al-Faraj al-Asfahani has narrated on the authority of
Abu ‘Ubayd and al-Asma‘i, who have said: “Most surely, al-Waleed bin
Aqaba was a fornicator and he drank wine very much. He drank wine in
Kufa and rose to lead the people in the Morning Prayer in al-Mesjid
al-Jami‘. He led them in four ruk‘as and then he turned to them and
said: ‘Shall I do more?’ He vomited in al-Mihrab, and then he recited to
them during the prayer: ‘The heart had clung to al-Rababa after she and
it became old!’”

Most surely if someone has doubts about this event and he believes that
it is among the fabricated things, he denies the necessary and has
doubts about the axioms. In the footnote there are some books that has
mentioned this story authentically and without doubt.[^2] Secondly, most
surely, Allah, the Most High, knows His servants’ secrets and
intentions. He has announced al-Waleed’s dissoluteness in two verses of
His Holy Book. Therefore, it is possible for al-Waleed to commit these
serious offences and great sins. Thirdly, the good, righteous Muslims
criticized al-Waleed for his drinking wine, took vengeance on him, and
shouted at him. An example of them is Abdullah bin Mas‘ud, who hit him
with his sandals. The people hit him with small stones, as we have
already mentioned. Some Kufans sought the help of the leading
companions, that they might save them from al-Waleed’s authority and
dissoluteness; we will mention that. Dr. Taha Husayn has

[^1] Al-Fitnatu al-Kubra, vol. 1, p. 96-97.
[^2] Ahmed, Musnad, vol. 1, 144. Al-Bayqahi, Sunan, vol. 8, p. 318. Usd
al-Ghaba, vol. 5, pp. 91-92. Al-Mas‘udi, Murujj al-Dhahab, vol. 2, p.
224. Ibn al-Atheer, al-Kamil, vol. 3, p. 42. Abu al-Fida’, Tarikh, vol.
2, p. 176. Al-Sayuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 104. Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh,
vol. 2, p. 142. Al-Isaba, vol. 3, p. 638. These are some of the sources
that have mentioned the story. On which source has Dr. Taha Husayn
depended when he said that it was made up and incorrect?

mentioned that some Muslim Kufans followed him while some of them were
from among the Prophet’s companions and righteous. Through this
statement of his, he has contradicted the historical realities proving
what we have mentioned. Fourthly, although al-Hutay’a praised al-Waleed
and was sincere to him, he harbored malice against him and satirized him
for his committing this abominable crime through which he has blackened
the face of the Islamic and Arabic history!

Most surely al-Hutay’a is famous for satire and praising. He praised
someone because he hoped for charity and good from him. If such a person
had not given him what he wanted, he would have satirized and dispraised
him. An example of that is that he went to the Banu Dhahl to seek their
help and to ask them for giving. He has praised them, saying:

Most surely, the best people of al-Yamama are the villagers from among
the Banu Dhahl.
If the people mention their own lineage, then their branch is mine and
their origin is mine.

However, the people gave him nothing, so he satirized them, saying:

The wickedest people of al-Yamama are the villagers from among the Banu
Dhahl.
When he was angry with the Banu Abs, he satirized them and said that he
belonged to the Banu Dhahl. When he was angry with the Banu Dhahl, he
satirized them and said that he belonged to the Banu Abs. He was angry
with his mother, so he satirized her, saying:

Step aside and sit down far away from me.
May Allah save the people from you.
Are you a sieve when you are entrusted with a secret and a brazier
toward people?
As far as I know your lifetime is evil, and your death may gladden the
righteous.

One day he sought a person to satirize him. When he found no person, he
composed, saying:

Today my two lips have refused except saying something evil. I do not
know to whom I will say it! He repeated this verse several times.
However he saw nobody. When he reached a well, he looked at it and saw
his face. So he said: I see that I have a face that Allah has deformed;
how ugly the face is, and how ugly its owner is![^1]

[^1] Al-Aghani, vol. 1, Part One, pp. 76-84 (Daar al-Fikr).

This is al-Hutay’a. Is his condition unknown to Dr. Taha Husayn, that
he may regard as unlikely for him to praise and satirize al-Waleed?
Anyway Dr. Taha Husayn tried to justify al-Waleed’s actions and regard
him as far above serious offences and sins. In the meantime he tried to
regard him as among the righteous who did not turn away from justice
during their government. In respect of him, he has said: “During his
authority over Kufa, al-Waleed followed a behavior in which there was
too much riches and good doings. He did not fall short of closing the
fortified borderline cities and going too far in conquering countries.
Rather, he reached a goal of that for which he has become famous and
about which the people talked during his lifetime and after his death.
He ruled Kufa with a policy of determination, resolution, and
strictness. Accordingly, he established security, and punished the
mischief-makers from among the new Muslims, who did not respect
regulations and religion.”[^1]

Can Dr. Taha Husayn prove that to us and guide us to the qualities of
that wise policy that al-Waleed followed and about which the people
talked during his lifetime and after his death? If the affair is as he
has mentioned, Sa’eed bin al-Aas, whom Uthman appointed as a ruler over
Kufa after he had deposed, would have not risen to wash the pulpit to
cleanse it of al-Waleed’s serious offences and sins. Yes the people have
talked about the farces of the Umayyad government, which was built on
favoritism, selfishness, abasing the Muslims, betraying, forcing, and
subjecting the community through appointing al-Waleed and the like of
him from among the dissolute and the reckless as rulers and governors.
Unfortunately, Dr. Taha Husayn has defended such traitors, who were
pages of shame and disgrace in respect of the Arab and Islamic
community.

**Al-Waleed is punished**

Some reformative Kufans hurried to Yathrib to tell Uthman about
al-Waleed’s crime and his violating the sacredness of Islam. They took
with them his ring, which they took from him while he was drunk. When
they arrived in Yathrib, they met Uthman and bore witness before him
that al-Waleed had drunk wine, but he rebuked them and said:

“What has made you know that he had drunk wine?” “It was the wine we
drank during the pre-Islamic period,” they replied. Then they showed him
al-Waleed’s ring. However, Uthman became excited, [^1] Al-Fitnatu
al-Kubra, vol. 1, pp. 94-95.

put his hand on their chests and pushed them backwards, and said to
them the bitterest words. Accordingly, they went to Imam Ali (a.s)[^1]
and told him about the affair. The Imam went to Uthman and said to him:
“You have refuted the witnesses and cancelled the prescribed
punishments.” “What do you think?” asked Uthman.

“I think that you must send for your friend,” said the Imam, “if they
bear witness before him, and he gives no proof, then you must punish
him.” Uthman found no escape from yielding and responding to the Imam’s
words, so he wrote a letter to al-Waleed and commanded him to come to
him. When Uthman’s letter reached al-Waleed, he left Kufa for Yathrib.
Uthman summoned the witnesses, and they bore witness against al-Waleed.
In the meantime al-Waleed gave no proof to defend himself. Those who
attended the meeting refrained from punishing him due to his kinship to
Uthman. Accordingly, Imam Ali (a.s) took the whip and approached
al-Waleed. Al-Waleed abused the Imam, saying: “You are defective and
oppressive!” Aqeel bin Abu Talib hurried to answer al-Waleed, saying to
him: “O Bin Abu Ma’eet (al-Waleed), you are speaking as if that you do
not know who you are! You are an infidel from Saforiya!”[^2]

Al-Waleed dodged the Imam. However, the Imam took him, knocked him
down, and flogged him. Uthman became excited and angry, and said to the
Imam: “You have no right to do that!”

“Yes,” retorted the Imam, “and worse than this if he acts sinfully and
prevents Allah’s right to be taken from him.” Imam Ali punished
al-Waleed. Therefore, Uthman had to send al-Waleed far and not to bring
him near, that al-Waleed and those other than him might refrain from
committing abominable deeds, and corruption. But shortly after

[^1] In his book al-Aghani, vol. 4, p. 179, Abu al-Faraj has mentioned:
“Most surely the people went to Aa’isha and sought protection with her.
When Uthman woke up, he heard from her room rough voice and words. He
said: ‘Have the Iraqi renegades and sinners not found a refugee except
that of ‘Aa’isha?’ When she heard that, she raised the sandals of
Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) and said: ‘The Sunna (practices) of Allah’s
Apostle, the owner of these sandals (a.s.) has been neglected. The
people heard from each other and they came, to the extent that the
mosque was filled with them. Some of them said: ‘Well-done!’ And some of
them said: ‘The women have no right to do that!’ They hit each other
with sandals and small stones. Accordingly, a group of the companions of
Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) visited Uthman and said to him: ‘Fear Allah! Do
not cancel the prescribed punishments! And remove your brother!’”

[^2] Saforiya was a village between Akka and al-Lajoon. It was in Jordan
and belonged to Tabariya. Al-Waleed’s father, Dhakkwan, was a Jew from
there.

that he had mercy on him and appointed him over the endowments of Kalb
and Bulqayn.[^1] How was this dissolute, sinful guy entrusted with the
Muslims’ endowments and properties?

The new and old Muslim cities were inhabited by both Arabs and no-Arabs
who emigrated from their own countries to seek livelihood, and the
prisoners of war who resided with the conquerors. All those people were
new Muslims. They expected that the Caliph and Ruler of the Muslims
would appoint over them some people who had piety, righteousness, and
other good qualities, that they might be models and guides for them.
However, Uthman preferred the Umayyads and Abu Ma’eet’s family to others
in respect of the government, while they represented nothing except
luxury, prostitution, unemployment, leisure time, rushing upon pleasure
and dissoluteness.

Sa’eed Bin al-Aas

When al-Waleed committed that abominable crime, Uthman reluctantly
removed him from the authority over Kufa. It was expercted that he would
entrust the government to one of the leading companions (of the
Prophet), who showed extreme courage in Islam. But he intentionally
appointed Sa’eed bin al-Aas as governor over this great city. The Kufans
received him with hatred and dissatisfaction, for he was luxurious young
man who did not refrain from committing sins and telling lies.[^2] In
respect of breaking the fast at the end of the Month of Ramadan, Ibn
Sa’d has narrated that Sa’eed bin al-Aas had said after he was appointed
as governor over Kufa: “Who has seen the crescent?”

Hashim bin Utba, a great companion, rose for him and said: “I have seen
it.”

However Sa’eed bin al-Aas said to him bitter and severe words: “Have
you seen it with this blind eye of yours?” Hashim became sad and said to
him: “Do you revile me because of my eye, which was gouged out for
Allah’s sake?” It is worth mentioning that his eye was gouged out during
the Battle of al-Yarmuk.

As for Hashim, he broke the fast according to the deed of Allah’s
Apostle (a.s) who said: “Fast when you see it (the moon), and break the
fast when you see it.” The people broke the fast due to his breaking the
fast. Sa’eed bin al-Aas heard of that, and he sent for him, hit him, and
burnt his house. Through this flagrant aggression against a leading
Muslim, he made the people angry with him.

[^1] Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 142.
[^2] Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqat, vol. 5, p. 21. Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarikh, vol. 6, p.
135.
