Chapter Ix : At the Time of Imam Ali
====================================

The Muslim masses received the caliphate of Imam Ali (a.s) with
delight, rejoicing, hopes, and expectations. They were sure that the
Imam would return to them the plundered freedoms, destroy the pillars of
slavery established by the demolished Umayyad government, and return to
them the brilliant time of the Prophethood when mercy, justice, and hope
spread. They thought that they would, without doubt, lead a life of
comfort under his just government, which did not know preference, and
selfishness, and did not make a distinction between one community and
another. They were sure that the Imam would achieve to them the noble
objectives for which they had yearned such as social and political
justice, the principles and regulations that Islam had brought, and
putting an end to all the differences and distinctions that Uthman had
brought. They, from all classes, hurried to the Imam and cheered his
name. They announced their urgent wish that he had to undertake their
affairs, that he might lead them to the clear truth and the straight
path. We will put before dear readers a brief picture of the pledge of
allegiance and the events that accompanied it.

**The Pledge of Allegiance**

The Muhajireen, the Ansar, the revolutionaries, the rest of the masses,
Talha, and al-Zubayr held a meeting. Then they hurried to Imam Ali (a.s)
who isolated himself in his house. They surrounded him from all sides
and said to him: “O Abul Hasan, this man (Uthman) has been killed, and
there is no escape from that the people should have an Imam. Today we
find none worthier of this matter (the caliphate) than you, nor older in
precedence, nor closer in kinship to Allah’s Apostle (than you are).”

However the Imam refrained from responding to them and he said to them:
“I am in no need of your matter. I will be pleased with whomever you
choose.” Yet they all said: “We will choose none other than you!”

The masses very much insisted on the Imam, but he did not respond to
them. So they left him with no use. The military forces held a special
meeting where they discussed the dangerous events that faced the
community if it remained without an Imam (leader) to manage its affairs.
As a result they decided to bring the people of Medina and force them to
elect an Imam over the Muslims. They said to them: “You are the people
of consultation. You appoint the Imam. Your decision is valid among the
community. Therefore, think of a man to appoint him (as an Imam). We
will follow you. We have given you a day to decide. By Allah, if you do
not do, we will kill Ali, Talha, al-Zubayr, and a group of people.”[^1]

After this warning and threatening the people of Medina hurried to Imam
Ali. They all said: “Allegiance! Allegiance! Have you not seen what has
befallen Islam and that with which we have been afflicted by the
villagers?” The Imam calmly answered them: “Leave me and look for
someone else!”

Then he told them why he refrained from undertaking the caliphate,
saying: “O people, we will face an affair having different faces and
colors. The hearts will not undertake it nor will the minds maintain
it!”[^2]

The Imam (a.s) knew the evil that crept into the souls of people, and
the desires that prevailed their leaders, especially as it concerns
Uthman’s governors, his family, and relatives. He came to know that they
would oppose him, come between him and achieving his wide objectives,
and brought about to his government problems and hardships. For this
reason, he insisted on refraining from undertaking the caliphate. The
Imam thought about the affair and said to them: “If I responded to you,
then I would lead you according to my knowledge. If you left me, I would
be as one of you and be the best of you in listening and obeying him
whom you would appoint as a ruler.” However they all said: “We will not
leave you until we pledge allegiance to you!”

The Imam (a.s) has described their coming to him and their strong
insistence on him, saying: “At that moment, nothing took me by surprise,
but the crowd of people rushing to me. They advanced towards me from
every side like the mane of the hyena so much so that al-Hasan and
al-Husayn were crushed and both the ends of my shoulder garment were
torn. They gathered around me like the herd of sheep.” The Imam
postponed them to the following day that he might reflect on the matter.
They separated from him according to that. The night spread over Media
and its houses. The people of Medina restlessly spent the night. When
the morning came, the people gathered in the Great Mosque. The Imam came
and went up the pulpit. He delivered a speech, saying: “O People, none
has the right to undertake this affair of yours except one whom you have
invested

[^1] Ibn al-Atheer, Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 80.
[^2] Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, Muhammad ‘Abda, vol. 1, p. 182.

with authority. Yesterday, we separated (from each other). I hated your
request, but you refused except that I would be an Imam over you.
Therefore, I have no right to take a dirham without you. If you wished,
I would undertake you; otherwise, I would be blamed for none.” The
masses said: “We are insisting on what we had agreed on with you
yesterday!” “O Allah, bear witness,” retorted the Imam. The people
pushed each other like choppy waves. Talha walked towards the Imam and
pledged allegiance to him with that hand through which he quickly broke
the covenant with Allah.[^1] After him al-Zubayr came and pledged
allegiance as his friend had done. The Egyptian and the Iraqi
delegations paid homage to him. The common people pledged allegiance to
him. None of the previous caliphs had won such a general pledge of
allegiance. All the Muslims were happy.

Imam Ali has described the people’s delight, saying: “The people were
so pleased with their allegiance to me that the young were glad with it,
the old shambled to it, the sick forced themselves (to come) to it, and
the heels were bared for it.” The Muslims rejoiced at their pledge of
allegiance to the guardian of Allah’s Apostle. Joys spread all over the
country, for the government of justice and equality towered over the
world of existence. The caliphate was undertaken by the true Imam, who
was the supporter of the oppressed and father of the orphans. He took
part in the hunger and ordeals of the poor and the deprived. He said
during the period of his government: “Shall I be satisfied with my own
soul that it is said (to me) the commander of the faithful and I do not
associate with them in the misfortunes of the time or be an example to
them in the coarse life?”

On that immortal day, the great flags of justice were spread, and the
genuine objectives that Islam wanted were achieved. There were no
selfishness, no deception, no dictatorship, and no yielding to
inclinations and sentiments. All these things were achieved by Ali bin
Abi Talib during the period of his caliphate.

[^1] Talha’s hand was paralyzed, so the Imam saw an evil omen in it and
said: “He is worthy of breaking (his pledge of allegiance).” That
happened as he had predicted. This has been mentioned in the book Al-Iqd
al-Fareed, vol. 3, p. 93.

**The Prophet’s Companions support the Imam**

The great companions of the Prophet and the leading Muslims from among
those, who believed in the right of Imam Ali (a.s) of authority since
the death of the Prophet, were so delighted with this pledge of
allegiance. They fully supported his government, and urged the Muslims
to strengthen it. They are as follows:

1. Thabit Bin Qays

Thabit bin Qays, the orator of the Ansar, rose and addressed Imam Ali,
saying: “By Allah, O commander of the faithful, if they had preceded you
in authority, they had not preceded you in the religion. If they were a
head of you yesterday, you have caught up with them today. They were and
you were. Your place was not hidden and your position was not ignored.
They were in need of you in respect of that which they did not know,
while you were in no need of anyone because of your knowledge.”

2. Khuzayma Bin Thabit

The great companion of the Prophet, Khuzayma bin Thabit, the one of two
testimonies, said: “O commander of the faithful, we are not right in
choosing anyone to this affair of ours except you, and our return was
not to anyone except you. If we believe our souls in respect of you,
then you are the first of people in faith, the most knowledgeable in
Allah, and the most appropriate for Allah’s Apostle (a.s). You have what
they do not have, and they do not have what you have.”

Then he recited some poetry through which he addressed the people,
saying:

If we pledge allegiance to Ali; therefore, enough for the future
troubles we fear is Abul Hasan. We have found him the most appropriate
of people for people; he is the most learned of Quraysh in the Book and
the Suna. And that Quraysh is unequalled to him when he someday runs on
the slender camels. He has what they have from among all the good, and
they do not have what he has of any good.[^1]

[^1] Al-Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 3, p. 115. In his book al-Fusool
al-Mukhtara, Al-Sayyid al-Murtada has mentioned an addition to the
poetry line as follows:

The guardian of Allah’s Apostle with the exception of his family; and
he was his knight in the bygone time. He was the first of all the people
to pray with the exception to the best of women; 3. Sa’sa’a Bin Souhan

Sa’sa’a bin Souhan rose and said to the Imam: “By Allah, O commander of
the faithful, you have adorned the caliphate, while it has not adorned
you. You have raised it, while it has not raised you. It is in need of
you, while you are not in need of it.”[^1]

4. Malik al-Ashtar

The great leader Malik al-Ashtar addressed the Muslims, saying: “O
people, this is the guardian of guardians (Ali). He is the inheritor of
the prophets’ knowledge, the great in bravery, and the good in toil, for
whom Allah’s Book has borne witness in faith, and His Apostle in the
Garden of al-Ridwan. It is he whose merits are perfect. Neither the
first nor the last have doubt about his precedence, knowledge, and
excellence.”

5. Uqba Bin Amr

Uqba bin Amr rose and praised the Imam’s outstanding merits, saying:
“It is he who has a day like the day of al-Aqaba, pledge of allegiance
like that of al-Ridwan, the most rightly-guided Imam, whose injustice is
not feared, and the learned whose ignorance is not feared.”[^2] The
companions successively lauded Abu al-Hasan’s merits, mentioned his
laudable deeds and his achievements, and urged the Muslims to support
his government.

**Quraysh becomes silent with Fear**

Quraysh and the rest of the devious forces received the caliphate of
Imam Ali (a.s) with fear, worry, and disorder. The Imam had warred
against them for Islam and killed many of their leading personalities.
He killed the prominent persons of Umayya such as Utba bin Rabee‘a
(Mu’awiya’s grandfather), al-Waleed bin Utba (his uncle), and Hanzala
(his brother). He killed other than them from among the chiefs and
pillars of the polytheists and the atheists. This kindled rancor in
their hearts and aroused spites toward him. Besides, the and Allah is
the possessor of favors.

He was the escape-goat of the people at every battle where the soul of
the brave was at the chin. That was he through his name the small
fingers were bent; (he) was their Imam until he was made absent in the
shroud.

[^1] In this meaning Ahmed bin Hanbal has said: “Most surely the
caliphate did not adorn Ali, rather Ali adorned it.” This has been
mentioned by Ibn al-Jawzi in (his book) Manaqib Ahmed, p. 163.
[^2] Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 155.

Imam’s policy opposed their interests and advantages. He warred against
preference and selfish use. Under all circumstances Imam Ali (a.s) did
not accept the policy of plundering and favoritism that Uthman had
followed. For this reason, Quraysh mutinied against his government.
Al-Waleed announced all these things when he and the Umayyads were
forced to pay homage to the Imam. He said to him: “You had wronged us.
As for me, you killed my father at the Battle of Badr. As for Sa’eed,
you killed his father at the Battle of Badr, while his father was a
brilliant Qurayshi. As for Marwan, you cursed his father, and you
criticized Uthman when he joined him to him. We pledge allegiance to you
provided that you remove from us what had befallen us, let us have that
which in our hands, and kill those who killed our companion (Uthman).”

The Imam refused his speech. He answered him saying: “As for that which
you have mentioned in respect of my killing your men, it is the truth
that has killed them. As for my removing that which were in your hands,
I have no right to remove Allah’s right. As for my letting you have that
which in your hands, justice encompasses you in respect of that which
belongs to Allah and the Muslims. As for my killing those who killed
Uthman, if it is incumbent upon me to fight against them today, it is
incumbent upon me to fight against them tomorrow. But it belongs to you
that I must incite you to follow Allah’s Book and the Sunna of His
Prophet. Whoever is annoyed with the truth is more annoyed with the
falsehood. And if you wish, you can follow your ancestors.”[^1]

Quraysh intended to bargain with the Imam in respect of the properties
of the community. They wanted him to deviate from his straight plan
seeking the public interests, and guiding the people to the clear truth
and the straight path. However the Imam had promised Allah and the
Muslims to put into practice the Qur’anic precepts, give new life to the
Islamic features, and behave in the light of the Sunna of the Prophet
(a.s). He had promised them not to yield to the events and circumstances
whatever hard and severe they were, to watch all those who wronged the
Muslims and aggressed against them. For this reason, Quraysh harbored
strong malice against his government. They, their allies, and their
children announced mutiny and disobedience. Ibn Abi al-Haddeed has
described their disorder and worry, saying: “Their state was as if that
the caliphate reached him on the death of his cousin. They showed what
was in their souls and their excitement of that which was in their
hearts. They all became disordered even the allies from Quraysh and the
youths who did not

[^1] Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 155.

witness his battles and attacks against their ancestors and
forefathers. They did that of which the ancestors fell short if they
were living.”

The Imam was severely tried by those tyrants whose hearts and feelings
Islam did not penetrate, and whose souls were full of malice against
him. It was because he stood beside the Prophet (a.s) to protect his
message, and protect him from the aggression of the traitors and the
aggressors, and because he cut off the heads of the infidels and the
atheists. He expressed his strong displeasure with them, saying: “There
is a great difference between me and Quraysh. I killed them because they
were infidels, and I will kill them because they are trouble- makers. By
Allah I will split open the falsehood that the truth may appear from its
waist. So say to Quraysh: ‘Let them clamor their clamor!’”

Most surely Quraysh were angry with Imam Ali and came between him and
his right after the death of the Prophet (a.s). They turned the
caliphate away from him. They onetime handed it over to Taym (Abu Bakr),
onetime to Adiy (Umar), and onetime to Umayya (the Umayyads). They were
earnest in making riot and mutiny, that they might put an end to his
government. They showed that during the battles of al-Jamal and
Siffin.

**Al-Qu’aad**

Some persons refrained from paying homage to Imam Ali. Al-Mas’udi has
named them al-Qu’aad.[^1] Abu al-Fida’ has given them the name of
al-Mu;’‘tazila.[^2] Imam Ali was asked about them, and he answered:
“Those are the people who tarried the truth and did not rise for
falsehood!”[^3] They were Sa’d bin Abi Waqqas, Abdullah bin Umar, Hassaan
bin Thabit, Ka‘ab bin Malik, Muslima bin Mukhalad, Abu Sa’eed al-Khidri,
Muhammad bin Muslima, al-Nu‘man bin Basheer, Zayd bin Thabit, Rafi‘ bin
Khudayj, Fudhala bin ‘Ubayd, Ka‘ab bin ‘Ajra, Abdullah bin Salam, Suhayb
bin Sinan, Salama bin Salama, Usama bin Zayd, Qudama bin Madh‘un, and
al-Mughira bin Shu‘ba.[^4] They deviated from the truth and lost the way.
The Muslims agreed unanimously on the pledge of allegiance to the Imam.
They had no excuse for refraining from paying homage to him. Their
refraining violated the Muslim consensus and mutinied against the
community’s will. Through that they opened a door to rebellion and
mutiny against the government of the Imam, and they kindled the fire of
the discord in the country. Sa’d bin Abi

[^1] Murujj al-Dhahab, vol. 6, pp. 78-79.
[^2] Abi al-Fida’, Tarikh, vol. 1, pp. 178-179.
[^3] Al-Isti‘ab, vol. 3, p. 55.
[^4] Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil, vol. 3, p. 74.

Waqqas was one of the ten persons given good news of the Garden, as
they say. However he apologized for isolating himself from the Imam and
the Umayyads during the days of the great discord, saying: “I will not
fight until they bring me a knowing, wise, speaking sword to tell me
this is a Muslim and this is an unbeliever.” This is a silly apology
which neither speech nor proof support. The pledge of allegiance to the
Imam was lawful in the exact meaning of the word. The Imam undertook the
caliphate. The Muslim masses paid homage to him. The pledge of
allegiance to him was not falta (mistake) like that of Abu Bakr, nor was
it according to the declaration of one man like that of Umar, nor was it
based on a certain group of people like that of Uthman.

Therefore, the group of people, who mutinied against him, wrongfully
acted. It was incumbent on the Muslims to fight against it, for Allah
had commanded them to do that, saying: “And if two parties of the
believers quarrel, make peace between them. But if one of them acts
wrongfully toward the other, fight that which acts wrongfully until it
returns to Allah’s command.”[^1] However Sa’d harbored malice against the
Imam. It was he who gave his vote to Abdurrahman bin Awf to weaken the
side of the Imam. We have previously explained that when we talked about
the Consultative Committee. At last he repented of his deed and wished
that he was with the Imam. Likewise Abdullah bin Umar felt remorse for
that. He said when he was about to die: “Most surely I am going to leave
the world. I have no regret in my heart except my refraining from
(paying homage to) Ali.” Allah took vengeance on him. He showed him
abasement and disgrace during the last days of his lifetime.

He made him live to the time of ‘Abd al-Malik. When al-Hajjaj came to
take the pledge of allegiance to ‘Abd al-Malik, Abdullah came at the end
of the people lest someone should recognize him. However al-Hajjaj
recognized him. He disrespected him, made light of him, and said to him:
“Why did you not pay homage to Abu Turab (Imam Ali), while you have come
at the end of the people to pay homage to ‘Abd al-Malik? You are too low
to stretch out my hand to you! My leg is in front of you, so pay
homage!”

He stretched out to him his leg with his sandals, and he paid homage to
it. Most surely those who refrained from pledging allegiance to the Imam
came to know, without doubt, that the truth was with Ali, and that he
was the most appropriate for the authority. He had precedence in Islam,
knowledge, understanding, and clinging to the religion. But the low
desires and vainglory made those people far from their religion, and
they showed enmity toward the family of their Prophet and removed them
from their ranks where Allah had placed them. To Allah we belong and to
Him is our return!

[^1] Qur’an, 49, 9.

**Confiscating the plundered Properties The beginning of the deeds that
Imam Ali (a.s) performed was that he issued his decisive decision in
respect of returning the lands that Uthman had granted, the properties
he had possessed alone, and the properties he had given to his
relatives, for they were unlawfully taken. All Uthman’s possessions were
confiscated even his sword and his breastplate. Concerning that,
al-Waleed has said when he addressed the Hashimites:

O Banu Hashim, return the weapon of your nephew and do not plunder it.
It is not lawful to loot it.
O Banu Hashim, how does leniency take place among us while his
breastplate and his outstanding things are with Ali?
O Banu Hashim, how do you show affection while the clothes and war
tools of Ibn Arwa are with you?
O Banu Hashim, if you do not return (these things), then we regard as
the same those who killed him and those who looted (his possessions).
O Banu Hashim, we and that which issued from you are like the crack of
al-Safa; no reformer will set right the crack.
You killed my brother, that you might replace him, just as his guards
one day betrayed Khosrau.

Abdullah bin Abi Sufyan bin al-Harith refuted him with some poetry
lines of which are the following:

Do not ask us about your sword. Most surely your sword has been lost,
and its owner threw it down out of fear.
You have likened him to Khosrau, and he was like Khosrau in his conduct
and his (collecting) taxes.
These just procedures moved the displeasure of those who plundered the
Muslims’ properties and enjoyed the world. Amr bin al-Aas wrote a letter
to Mu’awiya. He has mentioned in the letter: “Do what you want to do.
(Ali) bin Abi Talib has stripped you of your possessions as a stick is
stripped of the bark.”[^1]
Talha, al-Zubayr, and the like from among those, whom Uthman had
granted lands and given enormous properties, were afraid of that what
was in there hand would be confiscated. Accordingly, they showed
opposition and aggression, and they announced mutiny against the Imam.

[^1] Al-Ghadir, vol. 8, p. 288.

**Deposing the Governors**

Imam Ali went on establishing the procedures of justice in the country.
He ordered Uthman’s governors to be removed from their offices one by
one, for they had displayed tyranny and corruption in the land. He
refused to let them stay in the government even for one moment. Letting
them stay meant accepting oppression and tyranny. So he immediately
removed Mu’awiya from his office. Some loyal persons advised the Imam to
let Mu’awiya go on practicing his work until the conditions went well
with him. However he refused that and refrained from flattering in his
religion. Ziyad bin Handhala came in to him to know his viewpoint about
Mu’awiya, and he said to him:

-Get ready, O Ziyad.
-For what, O Commander of the faithful?
-To invade al-Sham.
-Leniency and patience are better.

So the Imam answered him: When you gather a clever heart, a sword, and
a zealous nose, oppressions will avoid you. As a result he mobilized his
troops to invade al-Sham that he might put an end to the Umayyad
government ruling there. But he was surprised by the mutiny of Talha,
al-Zubayr, and A’isha. He was busy with putting an end to their
rebellion. We will explain that in detail in the following chapters.

**Announcing Equality**

The Pioneer of the great, social justice on the earth (Imam Ali)
announced justice and equality among the Muslims, whether in giving or
any other thing. He was blamed for that, and he said: “Do you ask me to
seek support through oppressing those over whom I have been appointed as
ruler? By Allah, I will not do so as long as the world goes on, and as
long as one star leads another in the sky. Even if it were my property,
I would equally distribute it among them, then why not when the property
is Allah’s? Beware, most surely that giving of wealth without any right
is wastefulness and lavishness. It raises its doer in the world but it
lowers him in the next world. It honors him before the people but it
disgraces him before Allah.”[^1]

The equality that the Imam announced aimed at finding a society where
racism and nationalism would never prevail, there would be neither
miserable [^1] Muhammad ‘Abda, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 2, p. 10.

nor deprived nor out of work people, and there would be neither
oppression, nor tyranny, dictatorship, or selfishness. Certainly the
equality that the Imam applied during his rule was based on the Islamic
constructive concepts aiming at putting into practice political and
social justice, and putting an end to all kinds of oppression, tyranny,
and autocracy. Accordingly, the opportunists opposed them as they
opposed the Prophet’s principles and objectives.

**Spreading of Justice**

Imam Ali (a.s) achieved justice in all its horizons. He realized the
social and political justice, and ruled people with right policy with no
any bit of partiality or crookedness. He tried his best to achieve
justice and deny all selfish pleasures and limited interests. Historians
say that he was the first one in Islam to build a house for complaints
(court) where the oppressed and the wronged offered books in which they
explained the wrong and aggression they received. Imam Ali (a.s) himself
was in charge of this task. He took their rights back to them and
defended them against injustice and aggression.[^1]

It was never mentioned that once he preferred one of his children,
family, or relatives with anything from the treasury of the state. Once,
he entered the treasury to divide the wealth. One of al-Hasan or
al-Husayn’s children came and took something from it. When he saw that,
he follow after the child, opened her hand, and took it from her. His
companions said to him, ‘O Ameerul Mo'minin, she has a right in it (the
treasury).’ Imam Ali (a.s) said, ‘When her father takes (his right) from
it, let him give her whatever he likes…’[^2]

Historians say that Khalid bin Ma’mar ad-Dousi narrated, ‘One day, I
interceded with Ameerul Mo'minin to increase a little the gift of
al-Hasan and al-Husayn that they might somehow improve their difficult
living. He denied, became angry, and refused to do anything.[^3] Al-Hakam
said, ‘Once, I saw that Ali brought some vessels of honey and invited
the orphans to eat, until I wished that I were an orphan.’ He also said,
‘Once, I saw him when some pomegranates were brought to him and he
divided them among people. The share of our mosque was ten
pomegranates.[^4]

[^1] Subh al-A’sha.
[^2] Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 1 p.160.
[^3] Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 10 p.250.
[^4] Ansab al-ashraf, vol. 1 p.161.

Imam Ali (a.s) was utmost pious in his religious and political
behavior. He made his policy submit to his religious and moral values,
and consequently he tired himself too much.

Al-Aswad bin Qays said, ‘Ali offered food to people in Kufa in the yard
(of the mosque). When he finished, he went home to have food there. One
of his companions said, ‘I thought that Ameerul Mo'minin ate at home
food better than what he offered to people. On that day, I did not eat
with people and I went with him (Imam Ali). He asked me: did you have
dinner? I said: no. He said: then come with me! I went with him to his
house. When we were inside the house, he called out, ‘O Fidhdha!’ She
(his servant) came and he said to her, ‘Bring us food!’ She fetched some
pieces of bread and a vessel of yogurt. She poured the yogurt into a
plate and cut the bread into pieces and mixed it with the yogurt. There
was bran in it. I said to him, ‘O Ameerul Mo'minin, you may order the
flour to be sieved for you!’ Imam Ali (a.s) began crying and then said,
‘By Allah, I have not known that there was a sieve in the house of the
Messenger of Allah at all.’[^1]

The books of history and Hadith are full of stories about the justice
of Imam Ali (a.s) that have astonished the minds and confused the
reasons. I do not think that the history of man can find an equal to him
in piety, sensitive conscience, and fear of Allah in all his deeds.

**General Freedoms**

Imam Ali (a.s) granted freedom to all the citizens. He granted them the
freedom of speech, of thought, and criticizing the rule. He granted them
the political freedom in the full sense of the word. He did not force
anyone to pay homage to him. He permitted Talha and az-Zubayr to leave
Yathrib (Medina), and did not impose on them house arrest though he knew
that they would renounce the homage, fight against him, and cause
separation among the Muslims.

He saw that all people were free in their thoughts and beliefs, and
that the government had no right to prevent them on condition that they
would not cause sedition or mischief in the land.

Historians mentioned too many examples on the political freedom that he
had granted to people even to his opponents and enemies. They mentioned
that Abu Khaleefa at-Ta’iy narrated, ‘When we came back from (the battle
of) an-Nahrawan, we met, before reaching al-Mada’in, Abul Ayzar at-Ta’iy
who believed in the Kharijites. He said to Adiy bin Hatim, ‘O Abu
Tareef, are you
[^1] Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 1 p. 168.

(after the battle) safe and successful or sinful oppressive?

Adiy said, ‘But safe and successful.’ The man said, ‘It is up to you.’
Al-Aswad bin Yazid and al-Aswad bin Qays suspected him. They arrested
him and said, ‘You did not say that except out of evil. We know that you
believe in the Kharijites.’ They took him to Imam Ali (a.s) and told him
what happened.

Imam Ali (a.s) asked them ‘What shall I do to him?’ They said, ‘You
kill him,’ The Imam said, ‘Shall I kill one who did not fight me?’ They
said, ‘You imprison him.’ Imam Ali (a.s) said, ‘He has committed no
crime. Set him free!’[^1]

He did not impose anything on anyone. He did not force anyone to obey
him, and he did not oblige people to do what they did not like.

**His Recommendations to his Son al-Hasan**

Imam Ali (a.s) gave his son al-Hasan some educational commandments full
of high values, and noble, humanitarian ideals. The most important of
them was his commandment that he had written at Hadhireen[^2] when he
left Siffin. It is full of valuable lessons and social manners. Indeed
Muslims must write them on the pages of their hearts and regard them as
a constitution for them during their individual and social behavior. We
will mention to gentle readers some of them:

“From the father who is about to die, who acknowledges (the hardships
of) the time, has turned away from life, has submitted himself to the
(calamities of) time, who dispraises (the evils of) the world, who will
live in the abodes of the dead, and who is going to leave it (the world)
tomorrow. To the son who yearns for what is not achieved, follows the
path of those who have died who were the victim of ailments, entangled
in the (worries of the days), a target of hardships, a salve of the
world, a trader of its deception, a debtor of wishes, a prisoner of
mortality, an ally of worries, a neighbor of grief, a victim of
distresses, who has been overpowered by desires, and who is a successor
of the dead.”
[^1] Tareekh Baghdad, vol. 14 p.364-365.
[^2] Hadhireen was a village in Siffin.

In these golden words Imam Ali has announced his submission to the time
and turning away from the world. When he wrote these commandments, he
was over sixty years old. This is the age of one who is about to leave
the world and goes to the next world. The Imam has described all those
who are born in the world as yearning for that which is not achieved
while they follow the way of the perishable, are the victims of
ailments, and allies of worries and sorrows.

After this, the Imam (a.s) has mentioned the reasons why he has written
these commandments:

“Now (you should know that) what I have learnt from the turning away of
this world from me, the disobedience of the time to me, and the
advancing of the next world towards me is enough to prevent me from
remembering anyone except myself and from thinking beyond myself. But
when I confined myself to my own worries leaving the worries of others,
my intelligence saved me and protected me from my desires. It clarified
to me my affairs and led me to seriousness wherein there was no trickery
and truth which was not tarnished by falsehood. Here, I found you a part
of me, rather I found you my whole, so much so that if anything befell
you, it was as if it befell me, and if death came to you, it was as if
it came to me. Consequently, your affairs meant to me what my own
matters meant to me. So I have written this piece of advice (to you) as
a mean of seeking help through it, whether I remain alive for you or
cease to exist.”

After the Imam had mentioned the factors that urged him to write these
commandments, he began explaining the perfect ideals to which his son
had to cleave and follow. He has said:

“I advise you to fear Allah, abide by His commands, fill your heart
with remembering Him, and to cling to hope from Him. No connection is
more reliable than the connection between you and Allah provided that
you should take hold of it. Enliven your heart with preaching. Kill it
by renunciation, strengthen it with firm belief, enlighten it with
wisdom, humiliate it by recalling death, make it believe in mortality,
make it see the misfortunes of this world, and make it fear the assault
of the time and the severity of some changes during the nights and the
days. Place before it the events of the past people, recall to it what
befell those who were before you and walk among their cities and ruins,
then see what they did and from what they have gone away and where they
have gone and stayed. You will find that they departed from their
friends and remained in loneliness. Shortly, you too will be like one of
them. Therefore, plan for your place of stay and do not sell your next
life for this world.

“Give up discussing what you do not know and speaking about what does
not concern you. Keep off the track from which you fear to go astray
because refraining when there is fear of straying is better than
embarking on dangers. Ask others to do good, and you will thus be among
the good doers. Desist evil with your action as well as your speech and
keep away from whoever commits it. Struggle for Allah as is His due, and
the reviling of a reviler should not deter you in matters of Allah. Leap
into dangers for the sake of right wherever it be. Acquire insight into
religious law. Habituate yourself to endure hardships since the best
trait of character is endurance in matters of right. In all your affairs
resign yourself to your Lord, because you will thus be resigning
yourself to a secure shelter and a strong protector. You should ask only
from your Lord because in His hand is all the giving and depriving. Seek
good (from Allah) as much as you can. Understand my advice and do not
turn away from it, because the best saying is that which benefits. Know
that there is no good in that knowledge which does not benefit, and if
knowledge is not useful, then its acquisition is not justified.”

Most surely these wise commandments that this speech has included are
the programs of happiness, and the extract of wisdom, morals, and
education. In his following words, the Imam (a.s) has indicated that he
became an old man, and that he feared that death would surprise him
without saying these wise commandments to his son. He has said:

“O my little son, when I noticed that I was of goodly age and noticed
that I was increasing in weakness, I hastened with my will for you and
wrote down salient points lest death should overcome me before I
divulged to you what I have in my heart. Or lest my wit should be
affected as my body has been affected, or the forces of passions or the
mischief of the world overtake you making you like a stubborn camel.
Certainly, the heart of a young man is like uncultivated land. It
accepts whatever is strewn in it. So I hastened to mould you properly
before your heart hardened up and your mind became occupied, so that you
might be ready to accept through your intelligence the results of the
experience of others and be saved from going through these experiences
yourself. In this way, you would avoid the hardship of seeking them and
the difficulties of experimenting. Thus, you are getting to know what we
had experienced and even those things are becoming clear to you which we
might have missed.”

When the Imam was advanced in years, he wanted to place in his son’s
soul what had settled in his own holy soul from among good manners and
perfection. He wanted to supply him with wise sayings, to teach him the
most important lessons that took place in the world of existence, whose
extract the wise and the men of experience had taken. He wanted to put
before his son all these things that he might come to know all things,
and especially as it concerned the important extract of them. Then the
wise Imam went on saying his commandments:

“O my little son, even though I have not reached the age which those
before me had reached, yet I looked into their behavior and thought over
the events of their lives. I walked among their ruins till I was as one
of them. In fact, by virtue of those of their affairs that have become
known to me it is as though I have lived with them from the first to the
last. I have therefore been able to discern the impure from the clean
and the benefit from the harm.

“I have selected for you the choicest of those matters and collected
for you their good points and have kept away from you their useless
points. Since I feel for you affairs as a living father should feel and
I aim at giving you training. I thought it should be at a time when you
are advancing in age and new on the stage of the world, possessing
upright intention and clean heart and that I should be with the
teachings of Allah’s Book, its interpretation, laws and precepts of
Islam, the lawful and the unlawful. I should not go beyond that for you.
Then I feared lest you should get confused as other people had been
confused on account of their passions and (difficult) views. Therefore,
in spite of my dislike for your being so warned, I thought it was better
for me to make this position strong rather than leaving you in a
position where I do not regard you safe from falling into destruction. I
hoped that Allah would help you in your straight-forwardness and guide
you in your resoluteness. Consequently, I wrote this piece of my will
for you.”

O my master, O cognizant of the conditions of people, knowing of the
clear and unclear affairs, versed in the essence of things, tell us
about the most lovable things to you and the most important of them in
your viewpoint:

“You should know, O my little son, that what I love most for you to
adopt from my will is to fear Allah, to confine yourself to what Allah
has made obligatory on you, and to follow the actions of your
forefathers and the virtuous people of your household, because they did
not fall short in seeing for themselves what you will see for yourself,
and they did about their affairs as you would like to think (about your
affairs). Thereafter, their thinking led them to discharge the
obligations they came to know of and to desist from what they were not
required to do. If your heart does not accept this without acquiring
knowledge as they acquired it, then your search should first be by way
of understanding and learning and not by falling into doubts or getting
entangled in quarrels.

“And before you probe into this, you should begin by seeking your
Allah’s help and turning to Him for competence and keeping aloof from
everything that throws you into doubt or flings you towards misguidance.
When you have made sure that your heart is clean and humble and your
thoughts have come together and you have only one thought which is about
this matter, then you will see what I have explained to you. But if you
have not been able to achieve that piece of observation and thinking
which you would like to have, then know that you are only stamping the
ground like a blind she-camel and falling into darkness while a seeker
of religion should not grope in the dark or create confusion. It is
better to avoid that.”

“Therefore, accept, O my little son, my advice and know that He Who is
the Master of death is also the Master of life, that the Creator causes
death as well, that He Who destroys is also the Restorer of life, and
that He Who inflicts disease is also the Curer. This world continues in
the way that Allah has made it with regard to its pleasures, trials,
rewards on the Day of Judgments, and all that He wishes, and you do not
know. If anything of this advice is not understood by you, then
attribute it to your ignorance of it, because when you were first born
you were born ignorant. Thereafter, you acquired knowledge. There are
many matters of which you are ignorant and which your sight first
wonders and your eye wonders, then after this you see them. Therefore,
cling to Him Who has created you, your eagerness should be towards Him
and your fear should be of Him.”

After this, Imam Ali (a.s) began mentioning the Oneness of Allah and
giving proofs on it. Having finished that, he explained the social, good
manners, saying:

“O my little son, make yourself the measure (for dealings) between you
and others. Thus, you should desire for others what you desire for
yourself, and hate for others what you hate for yourself. Do not oppress
as you do not like to be oppressed. Do good to others as you like good
to be done to you. Regard as bad for yourself whatever you regard as bad
for others. Accept from others that which you like others to accept from
you. Do not talk about what you do not know even though what you know is
very little. Do not say to others what you do not like to be said to
you.

“You should know that self-admiration is contrary to propriety (of
action) and is a calamity for the mind. Therefore, increase your
striving and do not be a treasurer for others (who will inherit you).
When you have been guided in the right path, humble yourself before
Allah as much as you can.”

If man followed these wise sayings, he would be the highest example of
education, highness, and perfection, for they have the fundamentals of
justice, and the basics of virtue and perfection. Some of these
immortal, wise sayings are:

“You should know with certainty that you cannot achieve your desire and
cannot exceed your destined life. You are on the trace of those before
you. Therefore, be humble in seeking and moderate in earning because
often seeking leads to deprivation. Every seeker of livelihood does not
get it, nor is everyone, who is moderate in seeking, deprived. Keep
yourself away from every low thing even though they may take you to your
desired aims, because you will not get any return for your own respect
which you spend. Do not be the slave of others, for Allah had made you
free. There is no good in good which is achieved through evil, and no
good in comfort that is achieved through (disgracing) hardship.

“Beware, lest bearers of greed should carry you and make you descend
down to the springs of destruction. If you can manage that there be no
wealthy person between you and Allah, do so, because in any case you
will find what is for you and get your share. A little from Allah, the
Glorified, is greater than the much from His creatures, although all is
from Allah.”

“It is easier to rectify what you miss by silence than to secure what
you lose by speaking. Whatever is in a pot can be retained by closing
the lid. I should prefer you to retain what is in your hands rather than
to seek what is in others’ hands. Bitterness of disappointment is better
than seeking from people. Manual labor with chastity is better than the
riches of a vicious life. A man is the best guard of his own secrets.
Often a man strives for that which harms him. He who speaks much speaks
nonsense. Whoever ponders perceives. Associate with the people of
virtue, and you will be one of them. Keep aloof from the people of vice,
and you will remain safe from them. The worst food is that which is
unlawful. Oppressing the weak is the worst of oppression.

“Where leniency is unsuitable, harshness is lenience. A cure may be an
illness, and an illness may be a cure. An ill-wisher may give correct
advice while the well-wisher cheats. Do not depend on hopes because they
are the mainstay of fools. It is wise to preserve one’s experience. Your
best experience is that which teaches you a lesson. Make use of leisure
before it changes into grief. Not every seeker achieves what he seeks,
and not every departer returns. To lose provision and earn evil for the
Day of Judgement means ruin. Every matter has a consequence. What is
destined for you will shortly come to you. A trader undertakes a risk.
Perhaps a small quantity is more beneficial than a large quantity. There
is no good in an ignoble helper, nor in a stingy friend. Be lenient with
the time as long as it is in your grip. Do not risk something expecting
more than it. Beware of importunacy lest it makes you go astray.

“Retain kinship with your brother if he cuts it, when he turns away
from you, be kind to him and drew near to him, when he withholds spend
for him, when he goes away, approach him, when he is harsh be lenient to
him, when he commits an error, find an excuse for his error, as if you
are his slave and he has a favor on you. But take care that this should
not be done inappropriately, and that you should not behave so with an
undeserving person. Do not take the enemy of your friend as a friend
because you will thus antagonize your friend. Give true advice to your
brother, be it good or bitter. Control your anger because I did not find
a thing sweeter than it in end and nothing more pleasant in the final
result. Be lenient to one who is harsh to you, for it is likely that he
will shortly become lenient to you. Treat your enemy with favors, for
this is sweeter of the two successes (the success of revenge and that of
doing favor).

“If you intend to cut relations with your friend, leave some scope for
him in your self that he may come back to you some day. If anyone has a
good idea about you, prove it to be true. Do not waste your brother’s
interests depending upon the relation between you and him, for he is not
your brother if you disregard his interests. Your household should not
become the most miserable people through you. Do not lean towards one
who turns away from you. Let your brother not be more in his disregard
of kinship than you in retaining kinship, and you should exceed in doing
good to him than his evil to you. Do not feel too much the oppression of
a person who oppresses you, for he is only busy in harming himself and
benefiting you. The reward of one who pleases you is not that you
displease him.”


**
