Preface
=======

By: Kashif al-Ghita’
The Hashemites and the Umayyads,
Al-Hasan and Mu’awiya

Enmities and grudges between individuals, tribes, and folks are
instincts inside man since the beginning of his creation and existence
on the earth, since the time of Abel and Cain, and they continued in all
generations until this one. The cause and motives of enmity most of
times come out of selfishness, the love of power and authority, seizing
wealth, a position, or rule

And the worst of enmities is that which leads to revenge. But, the
worst enmity in effect and extent and that which cannot be changed or
removed is the enmity of “the spontaneous opposition” and “the essential
difference”, like the enmity of darkness to light, virtue to vice,
ugliness to beauty, evil to good, and the like. This enmity and
difference are impossible to disappear except by the disappearance of
one of the opposites and this cannot be. These opposites neither agree
with each other nor can each of them disappear. Bad entities in their
essence opposite the good ones, and each of these opposites tries the
best to remove the other from existence like light and darkness which
cannot exist together in one place at all. Each of them, in its natures,
opposes and antagonizes the other such as virtue and vice in man, and so
on.

The enmity of the Umayyads towards the Hashemites was from this kind.
It was impossible to disappear because it was like the enmity of
darkness to light, evil to good, and malice to kindness. Each of these
opposites can be known by its fruits and effects. It has been said,
‘From their fruits you can know them’. A tree is known due to its good
or bad fruit, and man’s good or evil is known due to his deeds and
characteristics.

Abd Manaf begot Hashim and Abd Shams. The enmity between these two
brothers began since the first of their growth for nothing except the
difference between their two essences. Then, this enmity grew wider
between the two tribes because of heredity. Each one of these tribes had
an opposite from the other tribe in lineage; Hashim and Abd shams, Abdul
Mutallib and Umayya, Abu Talib and Harb, Muhammad (a.s) and Abu Sufyan.
Since the first moment when the first ray of Islam shone and the Prophet
(a.s) announced monotheism, the feud of polytheism and idolatry revolted
to efface the lights of monotheism. The trinity of idolatry and tyranny;
Abu Jahl, Abu Lahab, and Abu Sufyan held their picks and began tearing
down what the savior of humanity built. The third of the trinity and the
leader of the Umayyad party, Abu Sufyan, was the bitterest of the all in
his enmity and fighting against Islam. They followed every means and
trick to strangle the voice of Islam and put out its light. They spared
no effort at all to resist that mission until a group of the believers
in this mission were forced to emigrate to Abyssinia, while the Prophet
(a.s) and his other companions suffered all kinds of persecution and
pains for more than ten years until he was forced to leave his and his
fathers’ homeland and emigrate to Yathrib.

And there, too, Abu Sufyan chased him even in his emigration. There was
no banner of war raised against Islam, unless the Umayyads and their
leader Abu Sufyan raised it and flamed its (war) fires. They lurked to
put out the light of this mission, and provoked the feuds of the tribes
against it until Allah granted His prophet the great victory and made
him subject the tyrants of Quraysh and make them slaves according to the
rules of war. However, the Prophet (a.s) pardoned and set them free
saying to them, ‘Go! You are free.’ He was satisfied with their apparent
belief and the saying of the shahada by their tongues whereas their
hearts were full of disbelief and grudge against Islam. They still
lurked to efface Islam and pluck out its roots. “They did not become
Muslims but they submitted unwillingly, and when they found supporters
against Islam, they leapt on”. Nothing of Abu Sufyan and the Umayyds’
inners changed at all after their being Muslims, but the way of fight
and struggle changed. Abu Sufyan and Mu’awiya entered Islam just to do
away with and plot against it, for an internal enemy is more able to
plot and act than an external one.

This enmity was spontaneous and eternal; and what is spontaneous and
eternal cannot be removed. It was not a competition for wealth or
authority, but it was the enmity of principles and natural opposition
and dissention. It was the enmity of darkness to light, deviation to
guidance, falseness to the truth, and injustice to justice. Therefore,
the Umayyads remained on their inner disbelief and deceit though they
were considered as Muslims and they received the blessings of Islam, but
Islam had never touched even one hair of theirs nor had it wetted a
feather from their wings. They were like a duck that spends all its life
in water but water does not wet its feathers-as it is said. Yes! They
acknowledged Islam jus to spare their bloods and to wait for a suitable
opportunity in order to tear down the pillars and bases of Islam. And it
was so. When the men of power handed the caliphate over to the first one
of them (Uthaman), they flew up with joy and declared some of what their
hearts hid. Abu Sufyan gathered the Umayyads and said, ‘O bani Umayyah,
snatch it (the caliphate) like snatching a ball. By that which Abu
Sufyan swears by, there is neither Paradise nor Fire.’

Then, they took the rein of the Umayyad caliph (Uthman) with their
hands and began leading him (like a submissive camel) to wherever they
wished. They seized the wealth of Muslims for themselves, and took
people as their slaves. Muslims in all lands revolted against him
(Uthman) and them (the Umayyads), until they blockaded him in his house
and forced him to depose himself from the caliphate and make it (the
caliphate) be decided in consultation among Muslims. In the beginning,
he hesitated and refused, but when the rebels firmed the blockade and
prevented him from even water and food, he submitted and gave up,

and he tried to put out the fire of the sedition by deposing himself as
a response to the revolters.

Then, the Umayyads, whose leadership in Medina was in the hand of
Marwan and in Sham was in the hand of Mu’awiya, felt that if their
friend (Uthman) deposed himself, the rope would slip from their
hands…Muslims had committed a mistake and they would never come to like
it again…for what virtue or nobility the Umayyads had or for what jihad
they had in Islam so that one of them might assume the caliphate of
Muslims?! They were the enemies and opponents of Islam in all its
situations and on every day from its days. Marwan and his party
understood that well, and so they colluded with their leader in Sham
(Mu’awiya) to kill their friend (Uthaman) before he would depose himself
and before the rope of trick would slip from their hands. Yes, they
would kill him and take his murder as an excuse to accuse some group of
Muslims of his blood, and then they would pretend before all Muslims
that he was killed unjustly and they must revenge him on the killers,
and thus this would be the best means to take back the caliphate for
themselves. Without the murder of Uthman and the shirt of Uthman the
caliphate would not come to Mu’awiya, Marwan, and the offspring of
Marwan. It would be impossible for them to dream of it whether in sleep
or wakefulness. However, it came to their first friend (Uthman) with no
cost. It was given to him by the one who was before him (Umar) who
wanted to turn it away from the Hashemites to their bitterest enemies;
the Umayyads. Therefore, he (Umar) twisted the rope of the Shura
(consultation) where he was certain that the caliphate would come to
Uthman. He was not satisfied with that until he inspired ambition into
the evil soul of Mu’awiya who and his father were the bitterest enemies
of Islam. Every year, Umar punished his governors, confiscated their
properties, and treated them severely except Mu’awiya

News often came to him that Mu’awiya spent lavishly the wealth of
Muslims and put on silk and too expensive clothes, but he overlooked and
rather he justified his deeds saying, ‘He is the Khosrau of the Arabs’,
though Mu’awiya was too mean and poor before. He was low before people.
Once, a notable man from the Arabs came to the Prophet (a.s), and when
he wanted to leave, the Prophet (a.s) ordered Mu’awiya to escort him
until the outskirts of Medina. It was too hot. Mu’awiya was barefooted
and the ground was boiling with its sands. Mu’awiya said to the
nobleman, ‘Let me ride behind you!’

The man said, ‘You do not fit to ride behind notables and kings.’
Mu’awiya said, ‘Would you give me your shoes to guard against the heat
of the sun?’
The man said, ‘You are meaner than to wear my shoes.’
Mu’awiya said, ‘My feet are being burnt. What shall I do?’
The man said, ‘Walk in the shadow of my camel! You are not fit for more
than this.’[^1]
Woe unto you O time! This low one had become or had been made “the
Khosrau of the Arabs”!

Yes! It was Mu’awiya and Marwan who had managed the trick of killing
Uthman and paved the way for the revolters to kill him. The case of the
army that Mu’awiya had sent from Sham to Medina and ordered them not to
enter Medina except after the killing of Uthman is a clear proof on
that.

Yes! One of the Prophet’s wives as well helped on killing Uthman. She
often cried out in the meetings: “Kill Na’thal! May Allah kill
Na’thal!”[^2] When they obeyed her and killed Uthman, she rose or was
made to rise to revenge him. And as a result of that, the battle of
al-Jamal took place where twenty thousand Muslims were killed, and it
was the key to other wars between the Muslims themselves. Some poet of
that age recited addressing her:

“You are the disaster and you are the misfortune,
and you are the clouds and you are the rain.
You have ordered to kill the imam (Uthman),
and said to us that he had disbelieved.”

Another poet said:

“She came with the two scoundrels,
driving to Basra her armies.
As if she, in her deed, was a cat
Eating, because of hunger, its children.”
[^1] Usd al-Ghabah, vol. 5 p.81.
[^2] She referred to Uthman with this surname.

These points, which the pen has oozed with here and which are from the
minute secrets of history, have come spontaneously and not
intentionally. It is to say that when Abu Sufyan and Mu’awiya were
astonished by Islam and forced to enter into it, they did apparently
just to spare their lives; they hid inside themselves intrigues and they
remained lurking, and whenever an opportunity came, their inners were
disclosed through their sayings and deeds.

Mu’awiya was wilier than his father who became old and dotard at his
last days. Mo'awiya, during the twenty years of his emirate in Sham,
showed Islam apparently without clashing with any of its rituals or
bases. He did not openly drink, listen to singing, kill an innocent one,
play with cats, or play with the pipe and the lute. He put on silk
garments and gold pallium as so-and-so said that there was no blame on
him for he was “Khosrow of the Arabs”. Mu’awiya did not keep the rituals
of Islam except for something inside him, and that was the calmness
before the storm, and the slowly walking to get the game.

He remained on the apparent faith that was covered with hidden
disbelief throughout the period of his opposition and fight against Imam
Ali (a.s) during the battle of Siffeen, but when Imam Ali (a.s) was
martyred, he became delighted and joyful, and the opportunity made him
able to play on the rope and arrange tricks. However, when Imam al-Hasan
(a.s) was paid homage as the caliph, and the heroes from his father’s
companions, his Shia and followers adhered to him, and wealth and
weapons came to him from everywhere, he (Mo'awiya) found himself in an
abyss narrower and deeper than the first one.

Imam al-Hasan (a.s) was the Prophet’s grandson and the most beloved one
to him. He was beloved by all people for his good heart, benevolence,
and kindness. He had never harmed anyone at all throughout his holy
life. He was full of goodness and blessing. He was not accused of
participating in the killing of Uthman. In fact, it might be said that
he was among the defenders of Uthman. Then, how was Mo'awiya to be
compared with him, and how would people turn away from the son of Fatima
the daughter of the messenger of Allah (a.s) and resort to the son of
Hind the liver eater?! The thinking of these irrefutable points worried
Mo'awiya and deprived him of sleep. But how quickly he arrived through
his wile and cunning at dissolving their knots! He resorted to two
strong factors; the first was the wealth that twisted men’s necks and
made the heroes’ saliva flow down. He sent to the greatest leader in the
army of Imam al-Hasan (a.s), who had promised to die for him (Imam
al-Hasan) and was the nearest in kinship to him, more than fifty
thousand (dinars). He was Ubaydillah bin Abbas, Imam al-Hasan’s cousin
whom the Imam had appointed as the emir even over Qays bin Sa’d bin
Ubada the great chief and the brave hero who had devoted himself to Imam
Hasan and to his father. Yes, Mo'awiya sent him such an amount and
promised him of the same when he would join him. Ubaydillah sneaked away
to Mo'awiya under the wing of darkness, and when morning came, people
found no emir over them, and so Qays led them in offering the prayer,
and made easy to them that calamity which destroyed the determination of
the army and prepared them for defeat before the fighting. May Allah
assist your heart O Abu Muhammad (al-Hasan)! How did you tolerate those
calamities that came to you one after another like darkness of night!

Mo'awiya followed this plan with every prominent personality and hero
from the Shia, and he succeeded in attracting them to him. No one defied
against his wiles and plots except a few men who were not more than ten,
such as Qays bin Sa’d, Hijr bin Adiy, and the like who resisted
oppression and deviation with their firm faith and who had no doubt
inasmuch as a twinkle of an eye that Mo'awiya, his father, and his
children were unbelievers. Qays had sworn by Allah that he would not
meet with Mo'awiya except that the spear and the sword would be between
them.

This was the first step that Mo'awiya followed to defeat Imam al-Hasan
(a.s) and extort the caliphate from him.

The second was the trick whose effect was greater than the first and
that most of people liked and the public opinion was drifted to. It was
Mo'awiya’s invitation for peace with Imam al-Hasan (a.s).[^1] The
invitation for making peace was the worst thing that completely harmed
Imam al-Hasan (a.s), and the worst trick by which Mo'awiya won the
situation and the caliphate then. By money Mo'awiya attracted the best
of the men and the upper class, but as for the public, they got nothing
but they hated the wars that took the lives of the best of them and
ruined their lands. In less than five years there were three fierce
wars; al-Jamal, Siffeen, and an-Nahrawan.

Therefore, the invitation to war was heavy and odious, whereas the
invitation to peace and rest was admired and delicious. Hence, the
situation of Imam al-Hasan (a.s) became too critical. He considered it
very deeply pondering on the consequences that would come after. He put
refusal and acceptance in the scales to see which of them would
outweigh. He found that if he refused the peace and he insisted [^1] It
was like the trick of raising the copies of the Qur’an in the battle of
Siffeen (between Imam Ali (a.s.) and Mo'awiya) which the Iraqi army
admired and then lost the victory that was at hand.

on the war, there would be just two probabilities; either he would be
the victorious and Mo'awiya be defeated, though this was somehow
impossible due to the conditions and circumstances surrounding Imam
al-Hasan (a.s) then, and this would make people incline to the Umayyads
who would appear as wronged and oppressed saying that: yesterday, they
killed Uthman the choice of the Umayyads and Ameerul Mo'minin (as they
said), and today they killed Mo'awiya the choice of the Umayyads and the
uncle of the believers, and so a second shirt would be prepared for the
Umayyads to raise beside the shirt of Uthman, and people were rabble
cawing with every cawer without thinking and reasoning. In this case,
what would be the situation of Imam al-Hasan?

But as for if he was the defeated one, then the first word that would
be said was that al-Hasan had thrown himself into perishment, for
Mo'awiya had invited him to peace that would spare the bloods but he
refused and wronged. Then, what Mo'awiya and Abu Sufyan wanted in
plotting against Islam and taking people back to their first age of
ignorance and idolatry would be realized for them. Besides, that
Mo'awiya would not let alive anyone from the Ahlul Bayt (a.s).

In fact, the thought of Imam al-Hasan (a.s) in accepting the peace was
more accurate than this and that. He wanted to do away with Mo'awiya,
through the peace, and reveal what was concealed in his inners before
thinking of victory or defeat, and without throwing people in a war and
forcing them to do what they hated of the bloodshed.

We have mentioned that Mo'awiya the apparently Muslim and the truly
enemy of Islam deceived people, because there was a competitor to him,
with a very thin membrane under which he committed major sins and vices
and tried the best to pluck out the roots of Islam and put out its
light. He concealed all that for fear of the love of people to Imam
al-Hasan (a.s) and his father (Imam Ali) before. Imam al-Hasan (a.s)
wanted to clear the field to Mo'awiya, hand the matter (rule) over to
him, and remove the enmity so that he (Mo'awiya) would show what he had
hidden, reveal his disbelief, and remove from his face that membrane,
and then people would know his reality and hidden secrets. And really it
was so. On the day of the peacemaking, Mo'awiya ascended the minbar
before great masses of Muslims and said, ‘I have fought you neither to
fast nor to offer prayer, but I have fought you to be the emir over you.
I have undertaken some stipulations for al-Hasan but all of them are
under my foot.’

See how impudent, shameless, and bold-faced he was! By Allah, if the
accepting of the peace (by Imam al-Hasan) had no result except these
words of Mo'awiya, it was a sufficient proof to disgrace him and make
people know his disbelief. However, he kept on that plot of disbelief,
clear sin, resisting Islam, and trying to tear down its basics openly.

Without al-Hasan’s peace Mo'awiya would not ascribe (illegitimate)
Ziyad to Abu Sufyan (Mo'awiya’s father) who was his illegal child, and
so he brushed aside the Prophet’s tradition: “The child is to the bed
(to be ascribed to the woman’s husband on whose bed adultery is
committed) and the adulteress is to be stoned”. However, Mo'awiya stoned
the Prophet’s tradition and brushed it aside with no fear or care.

Except for the peace, Mo'awiya would not kill Hijr bin Adiy, the master
of the true believers, and ten men from the best of the Prophet’s
companions and successors. He killed them in Marj Athra’ for no guilt.
Except for the peace, Mo'awiya would not kill the great Prophet’s
companion Amr bin al-Hamq and carry his head to Sham. And it was the
first head that was carried in Islam.

Except for the peace, Mo'awiya would not insert poison to Imam al-Hasan
(a.s) through his (Imam al-Hasan) wife Ja’dah bint al-Ash’ath. And
except for the peace, Mo'awiya would not force the good remainder of the
Muhajireen and the Ansar to pay homage to his son Yazeed who was very
famous for disbelief, debauchery, and countless vices to a very far
extent. See who the winner was and who the loser was!

See what Imam al-Hasan (a.s) caused to Mo'awiya by the peace and how he
destroyed all his efforts and tore down what he built until the truth
appeared and falsehood vanished, and then who follow vanity will lose!
Peace, in those circumstances, was required and inevitable for Imam
al-Hasan (a.s) just as fighting against Yazid was required and incumbent
on his brother Al-Husayn (a.s). All that was due to the difference
between the two periods and the difference between the two men. Except
for the peace of Imam al-Hasan (a.s) that exposed Mo'awiya, and the
martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (a.s) that did away with Yazeed and did away
with the Sufyani rule quickly after no long…except for the sacrifices of
these two grandsons of the Prophet (a.s), the efforts of their
grandfather (a.s) would disappear in the twinkle of an eye, and the
religion would be the religion of Abu Sufyan full of deceit, wiles,
debauchery, and vices…would be religion of bars and wines…religion of
adultery, and playing with tigers and monkeys…religion of killing the
good, benevolent believers, and retaining the vicious unbelievers.

May Allah reward you, O the two masters of the youth of the Paradise,
with the best of reward on behalf of Islam and its people. By Allah, no
worshipper worshipped Allah, no monotheist believed in the oneness of
Allah, no obligation was performed, no sunna was followed, and no nation
turned from deviation to guidance, except for that you had the favor,
proof, and clear authority in that after Allah and His messenger.

The messenger of Allah (a.s) brought guidance, light, good, and
blessing to all mankind with no difference between a color and another,
a race and another, a nation and another, and a folk and another. He
brought Islam with clear light for all, and he built and firmed its
bases and made perfect with no defect or crook. Abu Sufyan and the
cursed tree (in the Qur’an), Mo'awiya, Yazeed, and Marwan came and
carried the picks of disbelief and polytheism and attacked those bases
and pillars trying to pluck out their roots and put out their light
(They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths, and Allah
will not consent save to perfect His light, though the unbelievers are
averse). So the two grandsons of the Prophet (a.s), with all their power
and authority, stood against that structure of evil (of the Umayyads),
and they could not restore the Sharia of their grandfather except by the
great sacrifice through offering their lives, monies, men, children, and
all the blessings and pleasures of this life. They offered all that for
the sake of Allah and to retain the religion of Allah. Were it not for
this sacrifice, the religion of Islam would be one of the legends in the
books that history mentions as it mentions any incidental event or
extinct nation.

Glory be to Allah, Allah is great, and praise be to Allah. Hence, you
know and must know the secret behind the great care and extreme
reverence that the greatest Savior met his two grandsons (al-Hasan and
al-Husayn) with… care and reverence that was not ordinary and was beyond
the limit of reason. This great Prophet and the most beloved one to the
Great Creator, this great personality that had been filled by the Lord
with greatness, gravity, and dignity that neither storms could shake nor
could emotions attract…due to this gravity and solemnity that someone,
who never seen him before, might come to him shaking of fear but the
Prophet (a.s) said to him, ‘Do not fear! I am but a son of a woman from
Quraysh who ate jerked meat (just like others)’ so that Muslims would
not say about him as the Christians said about Jesus Christ (a.s).

This great Prophet (a.s) carried al-Hasan and al-Husayn, who were young
children, on his shoulders, and walked before Muslims saying loudly
(addressing al-Hasan and al-husayn) so that Muslims could hear him,
‘Your camel is the best camel, and the best riders your are!’ How often
that al-Husayn came and ascended the Prophet’s back during his
prostration and the Prophet (a.s) did not raise his head until al-Husayn
got down willingly. Once, the Prophet (a.s) was making a speech in the
mosque and al-Husayn was toddling in the mosque. When he stumbled, the
Prophet (a.s) stopped his speech, hurried to him, embraced him and said,
‘May Allah kill Satan! Children are as seduction. When my son stumbled,
I felt that my heart had sunk down from me.’ Many many examples like
this happened showing the great love of the Prophet (a.s) to his tow
(grand)sons that cannot be counted here. I say: this infinite love was
not because they were his daughter’s children only, but definitely there
were secrets and reasons deeper and profounder; spiritual secrets that
were above these bodily relations.

Do you not agree with me that the Prophet (a.s) might go high over the
horizon of time and through his sacred spirituality he looked at the
book of creation from its A to Z, and he saw the past, the present, and
the future and saw the future events in the page of existence that would
happen to his two grandsons? He saw what they would suffer in the way of
defending his religion and protecting his Sharia. He saw that they would
sacrifice their lives, properties, and children. He saw that al-Hasan
would be poisoned by Mo'awiya many times until he would die in the last
time when he vomited his liver a piece after another. Then, al-Husayn
gave the highest example in sacrifice to guard his grandfather’s
Sharia.

He received swords, spears, and arrows and made his chest, neck, head,
and lungs as guards before the picks that the Umayyads had held to tear
down Islam and pluck out its roots. He put himself, children, and
supporters as a target to protect Islam that its pillars not to be
collapsed and its bases not to be demolished by the attacks of the
Umayyads, until Islam was saved, its lights shone, its facts were
revealed, the unbelievers were perished, the followers of falsehood
lost, the word of Allah was the highest, and the word of His enemies was
the lowest. Every Muslim, since the beginning of Islam until now and
until the Day of Resurrection, is indebted to these two imams, that
without their sacrifice, which history has never narrated the like of,
people would be taken back by the efforts of the Umayyads to their first
ignorance and even worse.

Then, would you find strange that love, care, and reverence of the
Prophet (a.s) to them when they were two young children where he knew
and saw with his eye of sight and insight those calamities and that
bitter struggle for the sake of and in the way of him? He smelt and
embraced them saying, ‘They are my sons and sweethearts.’ Definitely, he
smelt in them the divine scent and saw in them the Godly light. Hence,
we know and must know that al-Hasan and al-Husayn were one light that no
one of them would be preferred to the other inasmuch as a hair. Each of
them had achieved his duty, and fulfilled his mission as been determined
by his grandfather and father, and according to the covenant he had
received in the first day of his imamate.

If you want elaborately to know about the greatness, bravery, courage,
full-heartedness, strong argumentation, inadvertence to the splendor of
rule and the pomp of authority of al-Hasan (a.s), you may ponder on his
words and arguments in the meeting of Mo'awiya with the heads of
polytheists and the chiefs of unbelievers and atheists whom Mo'awiya
involved with al-Hasan (a.s) to laugh at them like Amr bin al-Aas,
al-Mugheerah bin Shu’bah, Marwan and the like of them from the clients
of the Hell who had never believed in Allah in the twinkle of an eye.
See these words and arguments and wonder at them as you like. There, you
see greatness in its summit, and courage in its apex. If you want more,
see his words at the time of dying and the moment of setting out from
this prison to the better world; the words that he said to his brother
Muhammad bin al-Hanafiyyah concerning his brother al-Husayn (a.s).
There, the locks of the secrets of imamate will open to you, and the
lights of prophethood and leadership will shine to you, and you will
know the Prophetic custody, and the absolute guardianship…there the
guardianship is to Allah, (the Prophet is closer to the believers than
their selves), “whoever I am his guardian Ali is to be his guardian”,
and (Only Allah is your Gurdian and His Messenger and those who believe,
those who keep up prayers and pay the poor-due while they bow down (in
prayer)).

My pen has crept beyond the limit, and leapt away from the path of
intention and the intention of the path. The least thing that I wanted
to say in my this word is that the enmity between the Hashemites and the
Umayyads was spontaneous and deep-rooted. It was the enmity between
guidance and deviation, and between light and darkness. What proves that
is that if you review the lives and conducts of the Umayyads since the
first of them Abd Shams until the last one Marwan the donkey, you shall
not find in the pages of most of them except treachery, wiling, breaking
of covenants and promises, sins, debauchery, adultery, obscenity, and
all kinds of vices.

And if you review the lives and conducts of the Hashemites since the
first of them until this day, you shall not find in the pages of most of
them except virtue, loyalty, truthfulness, bravery, chastity, pure
birth, honor, high determination, sacrifice for the sake of ideology,
and all good morals. Suppose that there is someone who excuses the
Umayyads and justifies their enmity to the Hashemites by saying: they
took it as a means that would take them to the rule and authority. But,
what is the excuse of the followers of the Umayyads in this age? What is
the justification of the modern Umayyadism? They shall neither be lucky
in this world, nor shall they have any share in the hereafter.

(Say: Shall We inform you of the greatest losers in (their) deeds.
Those whose effort goes astray in this life, and yet they reckon that
they do good work).[^1] (He loses this world and the hereafter; that is
the manifest loss).[^2]

Praise be to Allah Who has gouged the eyes of disbelief and hypocrisy,
and delighted the eyes of Islam and faith with al-Hasan and al-Husayn
and the pure progeny (of the Prophet). We pray Him, as He has favored us
with knowing and following them, to resurrect us with them, and grant us
with their intercession and disavowing their enemies and enmity.

Indeed, Abu Muhammad az-Zakiy (Imam al-Hasan) (a.s), during the short
period that he lived after his father, tolerated calamities and
disasters that no prophet had tolerated, and they were not less than
those which his brother Abu Abdillah al-Husayn (a.s) faced on the day of
at-Taff (Kerbala). The painful calamity and the sinful strike of the two
brothers were the same though the ways and the means were different. As
al-Husayn (a.s) faced his calamities with patience that the angels of
the Heavens were astonished at, al-Hasan as well fought his enemy and
faced his sufferings and calamities with unequalled patience and
endurance. He did never become weak a day, nor did he beg or submit to
anyone. He did not take from his wealth that Mo'awiya had plundered and
been as a play in the hands of the Umayyads. He did not take even one of
thousands or, in fact, hundreds of thousands of dinars.

As there is no filed for comparing between these two lights (al-Hasan
and al-Husayn), it cannot be said that the patience of al-Hasan was less
than the patience of al-Husayn, or that his calamity was easier than his
brother’s. Peace from Allah be on you O the two Imams of guidance and
the offspring of Ali and Fatima (peace be on them all) as long as virtue
shines and vice darkens.

These words have been written with weak fingertips and sick pens
improvisingly and flowingly in some hours the last of which was on the
twenty-first of Ramadan the anniversary of the martyrdom of the master
of guardians and the imam of the truthful Ameerul Mo'minin (thousands of
blessings, greetings, and peace be on him) in the year 1373 AH.

Muhammad al-Husayn Aal Kashiful Ghita’
in his Seminary (hawza) in Holy Najaf.

[^1] Qur’an, 18:103-104.
[^2] Qur’an, 22:11.


