In the Quarters of Basra
========================

A’isha’s caravan moved and covered the desert and was about to enter
Basra. When the governor of Basra, Uthman bin Hunayf[^1] , knew that, he
sent Abu al-Aswad al-Du’ali to her to ask her about her coming. When Abu
al-Aswad met with her, he asked her: -What has made you come, O mother
of the faithful? -To avenge Uthman! -None of those who killed Uthman is
in Basra! -You are right, but they are along with Ali bin Abi Talib in
Medina. I have come to arouse the people of Basra to fight against him.
Do we defend you from Uthman’s whip, and not defend Uthman from your
swords?

He answered her:

-There is no relationship between you and the whip and the sword. You
are the wife of Allah’s Apostle (a.s). He ordered you to stay at your
home and to recite your Lord’s Book. There is no is more appropriate
than you and closer than you to the Prophet in kinship. They are Abd
Manaf’s children. -I will not go away until I achieve what I have come
for. Do you think, O Abu al-Aswad, that there is someone who dares to
fight against me? -By Allah, they will fight against you with a fighting
the least of which is severe!

Then he left her and went to al-Zubayr. He reminded him of his past
relationship with Imam Ali (a.s) saying:

[^1] Uthman bin Hunayf al-Ansari was from al-Aws tribe. He was appointed
as a governor by Umar. Then Imam Ali appointed him as a governor over
Basra. When the Imam left it, he removed him from it and appointed over
it Abdullah bin Abbas. It was said that Umar bin al-Khattab consulted
the companions in respect of the man he wanted to send to Iraq, and they
unanimously agreed on Uthman bin Hunayf, saying: “If you send him for
something more important than that because he is a man endowed with
insight, reason, knowledge, and experience.” Accordingly, Umar hurried
and appointed him over Iraq. Uthman imposed as a tax a dirham and a
Qafiz (a certain measurement) of food on every Jarib (a measurement) of
land, whether it was cultivated or flooded. So the taxes imposed on the
land of Kufa amounted a hundred millions and some one year before Umar
died. After the event in Basrah, he resided in Kufa and stayed there
until the time of Mu‘awiya. Al-Isti‘ab, vol. 3, p. 79. -O Abu Abdullah,
people knew that on the day when the allegiance was pledged to Abu Bakr,
you were catching your sword and saying: “None is more appropriate for
this matter (the caliphate) than (Ali) bin Abi Talib.” There is a great
difference between this attitude and that. -We avenge Uthman.

-You and your friend had appointed him as a caliph, as we have heard.

Al-Zubayr yielded to Abu al-Aswad’s speech. He saw in it advice and
guidance but he asked him to meet with Talha and discuss the matter with
him. Abu al-Aswad quickly went to him and discussed the matter with him,
but he did not respond and insisted on error and aggression.[^1]

Abu al-Aswad set off to Uthman bin Hunayf and told him about the
people’s intention and their insistence on fighting. He gathered his
companions and addressed them, saying: “O people, you pledged allegiance
to Allah. The hand of Allah is above their hands. Therefore whoever
breaks (his faith), he breaks it only to the injury of his own soul, and
whoever fulfills what he has covenanted with Allah, He will grant him a
mighty reward.[^2] By Allah, if Ali knew that there was someone more
appropriate than him for this matter, he would not accept it, and if the
people had pledged allegiance to someone other than him, he would have
paid homage and obeyed that one.

He is in no need of the companions of Allah’s Apostle, and none is in
no need of him. He has their good qualities, but they did not. These two
men (Talha and al-Zubayr) paid homage not for the sake of Allah. They
hurried for weaning before suckling, and suckling before birth, and
birth before pregnancy. They sought the reward of Allah from the people.
They have claimed that they unwillingly paid homage. If they had been
forced before their pledge of allegiance and were from Quraysh, then
they would have to say, and not to be commanded. Most surely the
guidance is that which the majority followed; and the majority had paid
homage to Ali. Therefore, what do you think, O people?”

Hakeem bin Jabalah said: “We think that if they came in to us, we would
fight against them. And if they stopped, we would receive them. By
Allah, I do not worry if I fight against them by only myself even though
I love life. In the way of the truth I fear no loneliness, no change,
and no bad return to the Resurrection. The one who is killed during this
summon is martyr, and the one who remains alive is successful. And going
quickly to Allah before the reward is better than the delay in the
world. And this is (the tribe of) Rabee‘a. They are with you.”[^3]

[^1] Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 2, p. 8.
[^2] Qur’an, 48, 10.
[^3] Al-Imama wa al-Siyasa, vol. 1, pp. 64-65.

After that the people decided to resist the aggression and to return in
kind if they had aggressed against them and not to start them with
fighting if they did not start them with fighting.

**The Conclusion of the Truce**

Some violent clashes took place between the two parties and led to
killing some people and wounding others. As for Uthman bin Hunayf, he
had intended to make peace with them and to fight against the people
before he received a command from Imam Ali. Accordingly, he stopped
fighting and concluded a timely truce until he knew the Imam’s
viewpoint. This is the text of the truce: “This is for which Uthman bin
Hunayf al-Ansari and the believers from among the Shia of the Commander
of the Faithful, Ali bin Abi Talib, have made peace with Talha,
al-Zubayr, the believers, and the Muslims from among their followers.

The things that belong to Uthman bin Hunayf are the House of
Government, the courtyard, the mosque, the public treasury, and the
pulpit. And as for the things that belong to Talha, al-Zubayr, and those
with them, they are that they have the right to reside wherever they
wish in Basra. They should not harm each other on a road, at a gap (of a
river), in a market, through a law, or through a public utility until
the Commander of the faithful, Ali bin Abi Talib, comes. If they like,
they will follow that which the community has followed. And if they
like, every people have the right to follow their own opinion, or
fighting, peace, departure, or residence. Concerning that which they
have written, the two parties should conform to Allah’s promise and
covenant. They should also conform to the strong promise and covenant
Allah had taken from His prophets.”

The two parties signed the truce. As for Uthman bin Hunayf, he went to
the House of Government and commanded his companions to lay down their
weapons and go to their houses.

**Treachery and Treason**

Talha and al-Zubayr sent letters to the prominent and notable people.
They summoned them to avenge Uthman and depose Imam Ali, and dismiss
Uthman bin Hunayf. The tribes of al-Azd, Dhabbah, Qays, and Aylan
responded to them. Many simple people and the ambitious followed them,
too. When the affairs went well with them, they betrayed and broke the
truce they had concluded. They attacked Uthman bin Hunayf in the House
of Government in the dark night. They arrested and punished him. They
pulled out the hair of his head, his beard, and his eye-brows.[^1] They
looted that which

[^1] Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 2, p. 50. It has been mentioned: “They
dismissed

was in the public treasury. When the time of the prayer came, Talha and
al-Zubayr disputed with each other about leading the people in prayer.
Each one of them prevented his companion from leading the prayer, to the
extent that the time of the prayer passed, and people shouted at them.
A’isha interrupted the dispute between them and said that Muhammad bin
Talha had to lead the people in prayer one day, and Abdullah bin
al-Zubayr one day.[^1] Ibn al-Zubayr went to lead the people in prayer,
but Muhammad bin Talha drew him and tried to lead the people in prayer,
but Ibn al-Zubayr prevented him. All people thought that the best way to
end the dispute was to draw lots. They drew lots, and it was Muhammad
bin Talha who would lead the people in prayer. He recited this Qur’anic
verse: One demanding, demanded the chastisement which must befall[^2]
.[^3]

Most surely the people were moved by the motive of the reign and
supreme authority. If the affair had gone well with them, they would
have killed each other, for they were at the beginning of the way while
they showed the signs of division and disagreement. They mutinied
against Imam Ali’s government for nothing except some material
advantages. Ibn al-Zubayr admitted that. When some man went to him in
Basra Mosque and asked: “I adjure you before Allah in respect of your
travel, had Allah’s Apostle promised you anything in respect of it?”

As for Talha, he kept silent. Al-Zubayr answered him: “No, but we have
heard that you have some dirhams, and we have come to participate in
them.”[^4]

Al-Zubayr specified their mutiny against Imam Ali. It was only for
ambitions and advantages. There was no promise from the Prophet (a.s) in
respect of that.

Any way, Basra fell into their hands, and their troops occupied all the
places there. As for A’isha, she ordered Uthman bin Hunayf to be killed,
but a lady regarded that as a great sin and said to A’isha: “I adjure
you before Allah, O mother of the faithful, in respect of Uthman and his
companionship with Allah’s Apostle.” As a result, she changed her
opinion and ordered him to be

Uthman bin Hunayf, and he joined Ali. When he saw him, he wept and said
to him: ‘I left you while I had hair, and I have come to you without
hair.’ So Ali said: ‘To Allah we belong and to Him is our return!’ He
said that three times.”

[^1] Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 157.
[^2] Qur’an, 70, 1.
[^3] Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqat, vol. 5, p. 39.
[^4] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 5, p. 183.

imprisoned.”[^1] Then she ordered the policemen and the guards of the
public treasury to be killed. Their number was seventy persons. They
were from among the good, righteous Muslims.[^2] The mother of the
faithful (A’isha) paid no attention to shedding their blood nor did she
paid attention to committing sins in respect of orphaning children, and
spreading sadness and mourning among their families. She turned away
from what Allah had commanded in respect of refraining from shedding
blood with no right.

**The Murder of Hakeem Bin Jabalah**

When Hakeem bin Jabalah heard of what the people did to Uthman bin
Hunayf, and the killing of the policemen and the treasurers, he went out
along with three hundred men from (the tribe of) Abd Qays[^3] . The
people went out and carried A’isha on a camel. That day was called the
Minor Day of the Camel, and her battle against Imam Ali (a.s) was called
the Major Day of the Camel. The two parties engaged in a sword fight.
Hakeem and his faithful companions showed extreme courage. A man from
al-Azd from A’isha’s camp attacked Hakeem and cut off his leg. As for
Hakeem, he sat down on the ground. He took his amputated leg, hit
al-Azdi who had cut it off, and killed him. He went on fighting in spite
of his amputated leg and saying:

O my leg, do not be afraid! Most surely my arm is with me; I protect my
leg with it.

He was still in such a state of extreme heroism and bravery, defending
the thought and doctrine until his blood bled. He set off to the man who
cut off his leg and leaned against him, while he was dead. A person
passed by him and asked: “Who has done this to you?” “My relatives,” he
replied. Then Saheem al-Hamadani[^4] killed him, his three brothers, and
all his companions.[^5] That pure blood which was shed, the noble souls
which were killed for the sake of defending the religion of Allah and
Imam Ali, are in the protection of Allah.

**Imam Ali seeks the Help of Kufa**

Imam Ali (a.s) was ready to invade al-Sham where Mu’awiya had declared
the mutiny against his government and refused to pay homage to him.
While he was earnest in managing the affair, he was surprised by the
news of that

[^1] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 5, p. 178.
[^2] Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 2, p. 50.
[^3] In another narration it is that he went out along with seven
hundred of his companions.
[^4] Usd al-Ghaba, vol. 2, p. 40.
[^5] Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 2, p. 51.

the people of Mecca were excited to avenge Uthman out of the
provocation of Talha, al-Zubayr, A’isha, and their Umayyad followers.
Accordingly, the Imam feared that the Muslims will be divided. He
thought that their danger was stronger than that of Mu’awiya, and their
wickedness was stronger than that of his. If he had not hurried to put
an end to that trouble, it would have been about to be wider, and mutiny
and disagreement be greater. So he prepared himself to go to them. The
righteous from among the Muhajireen and the Ansar hurried to support
him.

They quickly went out to catch up with them before they could enter a
city lest they should corrupt it. When they arrived in al-Rabadha, they
knew that they (the enemy) had entered Basra and some events had taken
place there. The Imam stayed at al-Rabadha for some days to make firm
his affairs. He sent for the people of Kufa seeking their help and
support to put an end to the discord. He delegated to them Muhammad bin
Abi Bakr and Muhammad bin Ja’far.[^1] He supplied them with a letter in
which he said: “I have chosen you over the cities. I have hurried to you
because of what has happened. Therefore, be helpers and supporters for
the religion of Allah. Support us and rise with us. What we want is
righteousness, that the community may be brothers. Whoever likes that
and prefers it likes the truth, and whoever detests that detests and
overlooks the truth.”[^2]

The two messengers covered the desert and arrived in Kufa. They showed
the Imam’s letter to Abu Musa, the governor of the city. However they
did not find any response from him. Rather, they found that he had
unusual attitude. He discouraged the people, weakened the troops, and
prevented them from responding to the Imam’s call. The two messengers
severely talked with him. He answered them through justifying his
stubbornness, saying: “By Allah, the pledge of allegiance to Uthman is a
trust with me and with your leader. Therefore, if there is no escape
from fighting, we will not fight against anyone until we put an end to
those who killed Uthman!”

[^1] Muhammad bin Ja‘far bin Abi Talib al-Hashimi was the first emigrant
to be given the name of Muhammad. It was said that he was born in
al-Habasha. He married Umm Kulthum, daughter of Imam Ali. It was said
that he was martyred in Tastur, and it was said that he was martyred at
(the Battle of) Siffin. He fought against Ubaydillah bin Umar, and they
killed each other. Al-Isaba, vol. 3, p. 372. It has been mentioned in
the book Usd al-Ghaba, vol. 4, p. 313, that when the news of the death
of Ja‘far reached Allah’s Apostle, he went to Ja‘far’s house and said:
“Fetch me the children of my brother, Ja‘far!” Abdullah, Muhammad, and
Oun went out to him. He put them on his thigh and prayed for them, and
then he said: “I am their guardian in the world and in the hereafter.”
Then he said: “As for Muhammad, he looks like our uncle Abu Talib.”

[^2] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 393.

The two Muhammads sent the news to the Imam and informed him of the
mutiny of Abu Musa and his discouraging the people. The Imam sent Hashim
al-Mirqal to undertake the leadership and supplied him with a letter in
which he has mentioned: “I have sent Hashim to undertake the matter of
Muslims on my behalf. Therefore, return the people to him. I have
entrusted you to be among my helpers for the truth.”

Hashim went and arrived in Kufa. He knew that Abu Musa was insistent on
his mutiny and going too far in his malice and enmity. They tried to
convince him and return him to the true way but with no use. Abu Musa
sent for Sa’ib bin Malik al-Ashqari to consult with him about the
matter, and he advised him to follow the Imam and carry out his orders.
However, he did not pay attention to the advice and remained insistent
on his rebellion and stubbornness. As a result, Hashim sent the Imam a
letter in which he informed him of his failure in his task and
mediation.

**Imam Ali delegates al-Hasan**

Imam Ali delegated his son al-Hasan along with Ammar bin Yasir. He
supplied him with a letter in which he deposed Abu Musa from his office
and appointed Qurdha bin Ka’ab[^1] instead of him. The following is the
text of his letter: “I think you should withdraw from this matter in
which Allah has placed no share for you through your refraining from
carrying out my command. I have sent al-Hasan bin Ali and Ammar bin
Yasir to urge the people. I have also sent Qurdha bin Ka’ab as a
governor over the city. Therefore, withdraw from our work (while you
are) dispraised and expelled. If you do not do, then I have commanded
him to declare war against you.”

Imam al-Hasan arrived in Kufa, and the people gathered around him in
masses. They expressed their submission and obedience to him, and showed
him friendship and loyalty. In the meantime Imam al-Hasan announced the
deposal of the rebellious governor from his office and the appointment
of Qurdha in his place. However, Abu Musa remained insistent on his
deception and error. He went to Ammar bin Yasir and talked to him about
Uthman’s [^1] Qurdha bin Ka‘ab bin Tha‘laba al-Ansari al-Khazraji was
present with the Prophet (a.s.) at the Battle of Uhd and other battles.
During the time of Umar bin al-Khattab, Allah conquered (many countries)
at his hand. He was among the ten persons Umar sent to Kufa to teach its
people reading and writing. The Imam appointed him as a governor over
Kufa. When he went out for the Battle of Siffin, he took him with him.
And he appointed over it Abu Mas‘ud al-Badri. Qurdha bin Ka‘ab was
present with Imam Ali during all his battles. He died in the house he
had built in Kufa during the Imam’s caliphate. The Imam prayed over him.
(This has been mentioned in the book) al-Isti‘ab, vol. 3, p. 266.

affair that he might find a way in his speech to accuse him of the
murder of Uthman, and that he might use that as means to make the people
desert the Imam. He said to him: “O Abul Yaqdhan, have you wronged the
Commander of the Faithful (Uthman) as those who wronged him, and placed
yourself among the sinners?”

“I did not do,” replied Ammar, “why have you accused me of evil?”
Al-Hasan knew Abu Musa’s purpose, so he interrupted the argument, saying
to him: “O Abu Musa, why have you discouraged the people?” Imam al-Hasan
talked with him with kindness and leniency, that he might uproot the
spirit of wickedness and obstinacy from his soul, saying: “O Abu Musa,
by Allah, we have wanted nothing except righteousness, and none fears
the Commander of the Faithful (Imam Ali) for a thing.” Abu Musa became
astonished. He could not stand his obstinacy and tyranny, so he said to
the Imam: -You are right, may my father and mother die for you! However,
the adviser is trustworthy.

-Yes.

-I have heard Allah’s Apostle saying: “There will be a sedition. The
one who sits down during it is better than the one who stands up. The
one who stands up is better than the one who walks. The one who walks is
better than the one who rides.” Allah, the Great and Almighty, has made
us brothers and made it unlawful for us to plunder our properties and
shed our blood. He has said: “O you who believe, do not devour your
property among yourselves falsely, except that it be trading by your
mutual consent; and do not kill your people. Surely Allah is merciful to
you.[^1] ” And He, the Great and Almighty, has said: “And whoever kills a
believer intentionally, his punishment is hell.”[^2]

As for Ammar, he confronted him, refuted his false sayings and
deception, saying: -Have you heard that from Allah’s Apostle?

-Yes, and these are my hands (ready to be cut off) for what I said.
Ammar turned to the people and said to them: -Most surely, Allah’s
Apostle meant Abu Musa with that. For when he sits down is better than
when he rises.

[^1] Qur’an, 4, 29.
[^2] Ibid., 4, 93.

Ammar’s speech, and al-Hasan’s kindness and long patience were useless
to this rude, rebellious person, who did not yield to anything except
severity and force. He remained insisting on discouraging the people and
making them withdraw from going to support Imam Ali.

The Prophet’s grandson (al-Hasan) began arousing the determinations,
activating the souls, and motivating them for jihad. He addressed them,
saying: “O People, You have known what for Commander of the Faithful,
Ali bin Abi Talib jhas marched. We have come to you to seek your help,
for you are the front of the Ansar and heads of the Arabs. You have
heard that Talha, al-Zubayr, and A’isha have gone out (to fight against
Imam Ali) after their pledge of allegiance. And you know that women’s
feebleness and weak opinion vanish. For this reason, Allah has regarded
men as caretakers over women. By Allah, if none of you supports him, I
hope that those, who have come with him from among the Muhajireen and
the Ansar, will be sufficient; therefore, help Allah, and He will help
you.”

Then Ammar rose and began urging the people for jihad and he explained
to them the reality of the state in respect of Uthman’s affair, saying:
“O people of Kufa, if our news are absent from you, then our affairs
have reached you. Most surely those who killed Uthman have not
apologized to the people for killing him nor have they condemned that.
They have placed Allah’s Book between them and their arguments. Allah
has made some live and some others die . And as for Talha and al-Zubayr,
they were the first to stab (Uthman) and the last to command (the people
to avenge him). And they were the first to pay homage (to Imam Ali). But
when what they hoped missed them, they broke their allegiance without
any reason. And this is the son of the daughter of Allah’s Apostle. You
know him. He has come to seek your help. And Ali has (come to you) with
the Muhajireen, the Badris, and the Ansar who have headed the abode and
faith.”

After them, Qays bin Sa’d rose and summoned the people to carry out
their religious duty and support Ameerul Mo'minin (Imam Ali), saying:
“If we had faced the men of the Consultative Committee with the matter,
then Ali would have been the most appropriate for it, and the fight
against those who refused him would have been lawful. With a greater
reason the proof is against Talha and al-Zubayr. They had willingly paid
homage to him. But they have opposed him out of envy. Ali has come to
you along with the Muhajireen and the Ansar.”

Any way, Abu Musa went on insistence on his tyranny. He discouraged
people and summoned them to desert Ameerul Mo'minin (the Commander of
the faithful) and not to help him. He paid not attention to all that
which he heard from al-Hasan and the orators, to the extent that
al-Hasan became tired in spite of his clemency. He shouted at him with
excitement and violence. He said to him: “Withdraw from our work, O man,
and leave our pulpit!”

Al-Hasan went on urging the people to go to jihad and help his father.
He rose among them and said: “O people, respond to the summons of your
commander and go to your brothers, for there will be those who hurry for
this matter. By Allah, if men with reason undertake it, it will be
better for them in the sooner, the later, and the end. Respond to our
summons and help us with that with which you and we have been afflicted.
The Commander of the faithful (Ameerul Mo'minin) says to you: ‘I have
gone out (to fight) whether I am an oppressor or oppressed. I remind of
Allah the man who takes care of Allah’s right that he may hurry for
jihad. If I am oppressed, then he should help me, and if I am an
oppressor, he should punish me. By Allah, Talha and al-Zubayr were the
first to pledge allegiance to me and were the first to betray me. Have I
possessed alone any property or changed any religious precept? Hurry to
jihad, enjoin the good, and forbid the evil.”

People responded to al-Hasan with listening and obedience to his
summons. But the leader, Malik al-Ashtar, thought that the affair would
not go well unless that Abu Musa should be brought out as disrespected
and degraded. So he along with a group of his people went and surrounded
the palace. When Abu Musa’s servants looked at them, they quickly went
to him. Fear and terror prevailed them, so they said to him: “O Abu
Musa, this is (Malik) al-Ashtar. He has entered the palace. He has hit
and brought us out.”

Accordingly, the rogue (Abu Musa) came out of the palace. Astonishment
dominated him. Malik al-Ashtar shouted at him: “Get out of our palace,
may your mother lose you!”

Abu Musa al-Ash‘ary hesitated for a while, but Malik shouted at him
again: “Get out! May Allah bring out your soul! By Allah, you are among
the hypocrites!” Al-Ash‘ary said with a faint, weak voice: -Postpone me
for this night!

-You shall have it, and do not spend the night in the palace. The
people entered the palace to loot Abu Musa’s possessions and properties.
However, Malik al-Ashtar did not turn away from his opponent. He took a
noble attitude towards him. He prevented people from looting his
belongings and from punishing him. He said to them: “I have postponed
him for this night. I have driven him away, so refrain from him.”

Accordingly, people refrained from him. In the morning, this aggressive
sinner (Abu Musa) went out of the palace in disgrace. The affairs went
well with Imam al-Hasan. He talked to people to go out for jihad,
saying: “O people, I will leave early in the morning, so whoever likes
to go out with me on the backs of mounts or on water can do that.” The
people responded to the Imam’s summons. When Qays bin Sa‘ad saw that, he
became glad and delighted, and he recited some poetry. As a result, Kufa
was full of mujahideen. Many thousands of them left for Jihad. Some of
them embarked ships, and some others rode mounts. They were pleased and
satisfied. Al-Hasan headed them. When they arrived in Thi Qaar[^1] , they
met Imam Ali (a.s) who had stayed their. He was pleased with his son’s
success. He thanked him for his great efforts.


