Fabrication Against Imam Al-hasan
=================================

In his book al-Tarikh (history), al-Tabari has narrated a fabricated
tradition in which there are some fabrications against Imam al-Hasan. We
will mention the tradition to readers, and then we will explain that
which refutes the fabrications therein. He has mentioned that al-Hasan
walked towards his father after the mutiny of Talha and al-Zubayr and
said to him:

-I had commanded you, but you disobeyed me. You will be killed today in
loss, and you shall have no supporter.

-You still yearns (for Uthman) just as a slave girl does. What had you
commanded me with, and I disobeyed you?

-I commanded you to leave Medina on the day when Uthman was surrounded,
that he might be killed while you were not there. On the day when he was
killed, I commanded you not to accept the pledge of allegiance until the
delegations and the Arabs from the cities would come to you. When these
two men (Talha and al-Zubayr) had done what they did, I commanded you to
sit down in your house until they made peace with each other. If there
had been corruption, it would have been done through the hand of someone
other than you. You had disobeyed me in all of that.

-O my little son, as for your statement ‘if I had gone out of Medina
when Uthman was surrounded’, we were surrounded as Uthman was
surrounded. As for your statement ‘do not accept the pledge of
allegiance until the pledge of

[^1] Thi Qaar was a water (well) belonged to Bakr bin Wa’il. It was near
Kufa. It was between Kufa and Wasit. (This has been mentioned in) Mu‘jam
al-Buldan, vol. 7, p. 8.

allegiance of the cities will come’, most surely the affair belonged to
the people of Medina, and we hated to let this affair get lost. As for
your statement ‘when Talha and al-Zubayr mutinied’, that was a weakness
against the men of Islam. By Allah I have been defeated since I was
appointed as a ruler, and wsa deprived that I could not reach anything I
wanted.

As for your statement ‘sit down in your house’, what shall I do in
respect of that which is obligatory on me? Or what do you want me to do?
Do you want me to be like a hyena which is surrounded and it is said to
it: Come out! Come out!?[^1] It is not here until its hock appears, and
then it comes out. If I do not reflect on what is incumbent on and
concerns me, so who will reflect on it? Therefore, refrain from me, O my
little son.[^2] Al-Tabari has narrated this tradition on the authority of
Sayf bin Umar al-Asadi al-Tamimi. The tradition is among his
fabrications and the things created by him. Reliable traditionists have
unanimously agreed on that Sayf was weak and none has relied on his
traditions, for he was famous for lying, fabricating, and making up
traditions.

Some of them have accused him of bad religion. They have explained his
condition and reality. They have also showed his fabrications and the
news created by him. Among them is the religious scholar Allama Sayyid
Murtada al-Askari. He has mentioned that in his book Abdullah Bin Saba’
What clearly shows that the tradition has been fabricated is that it has
been mentioned in it that Imam al-Hasan has said to his father: “I had
commanded you, and you disobeyed me.” This is the ugliest and bitterest
speech. How did al-Hasan receive his father with that, while he was
knowledgeable of his reality and his great position? And he had already
said in respect of him: “The first did not precede him, nor did the last
reach him through a deed.” Without doubt this speech is contrary to the
moralities of Imam al-Hasan, who avoided evil deeds and nonsense even if
toward his enemies and opponents. Therefore, how did he address his
father with that.

Abdul Wahab al-Najjar has commented on this fabricated tradition,
saying: “It is as if that I hear him (Imam Ali) say Uthman’s statement
in respect of this affair: ‘I will not take off the garment that Allah,
the Great and Almighty, has clothed me with!’ This is the excuse which
one who wants safety for him and the Muslims does not accept. Or it is
like the excuse of the colonialist

[^1] Dubab is a ward said to a hyena, that it may come out.


states that say that there is no escape from undertaking the affairs of
the nations which they occupy and dominate, and control their public
utilities and the elements of their life.”[^1]

Abdul Wahab al-Najjar is famous for his siding with the Umayyads and
his turning away from Ahlul Bayt (the Prophet’s Household). He is
unsuccessful in many of his researches. He has depended on the
fabricated traditions. He has not considered them carefully. Through
these severe words he has showed impudence towards Imam Ali. He has
likened him to the oppressive colonialist states that spread tyranny and
oppression in the earth. As for Imam Ali (a.s), he established justice
and equality, spread all humanitarian ideals during the period of his
government. The history of mankind has never known a ruler like him in
his justice and righteousness, and that he was not deceived by the
appearances of power and authority. While the Imam was mending his
sandals with his own hands, Abdullah bin Abbas came in to him. The Imam
asked him:

-O son of Abbas, how much do you value them?

-They have no value. -By Allah, they are more lovable to me than these
affairs of yours but for the fact that I must establish what is true and
ward off what is false. This is the Imam’s viewpoint of government. In
his viewpoint the government was a mere means for establishing what was
true and warding off what was false. If he wanted government, Uthman
would not have won it. We have mentioned that when we talked about the
Consultative Committee. Then how is it correct that the Imam is compared
to the infidel colonialist states, while he was as the Prophet’s self,
his guardian, and the Gate of the city of his knowledge?

**The Two Parties meet**

The Imam’s regiments moved from Thi Qaar. They hurried and arrived in
al-Zawiya.[^2] The Imam stopped there and offered four rak’as. Having
finished his prayer, he covered his own cheek with dust while he was
weeping. Then he raised his hands to supplicate Allah, saying: “O Allah,
Lord of the heavens and what they shade, of the earth and what it
carries, and Lord of the Great

[^1] Al-Kulafa’ al-Rashidun, p. 414. Al-Sayyid Sa‘eed al-Afghani has in
detail refuted him in his book ‘Aa’isha wa al-Siyasa, p. 96.

[^2] Al-Zawiya is a place near Basrah. The famous battle between
al-Hajjaj and Abdurrahman bin Muhammad bin al-Ash‘ath took place at it.
(This has been mentioned in the book) Mu‘jam al-Buldan, vol. 4, p. 37.

Throne! This is Basra. I ask you (to grant me) some of its good. I seek
refuge with You from its evil! O Allah, settle us in the best abode! O
Allah, most surely, these people have disobeyed me, aggressed against
me, and broken the pledge of allegiance to me! O Allah, spare the
Muslims’ blood!”[^1]

When the Imam (and his troops) settled down, he immediately sent
Ubaydillah bin Abbas, and Zayd bin Souhan to A’isha to summon her to
spare the blood and unify the Muslims. He said to them: “Say to her:
‘Allah has commanded you to stay in your house and not to go out. Surely
you know that, but a group of people has deluded you. So you have gone
out of your house, and the people have fallen into the tribulation and
the tiredness due to your agreement with them. It is better for you to
go home and not to hover about dispute and fighting. If you do not go
home and this discord is not extinguished, it will bring about fighting,
and many people will be killed because of it. Therefore, fear Allah, O
A’isha, and return to Allah in repentance. Allah accepts the repentance
from His servants and pardons them. Beware of that the love for Abdullah
bin al-Zubayr and the kinship to Talha will move you to an affair
leading to the fire.”

If A’isha had understood this advice and given up her plot, she would
have brought about general good for the community. But she paid no
attention to that. She said to the two messengers: “I can not refute Ali
bin Abi Talib with speech because I cannot reach him through
arguing.”[^2]

She could not refute him with speech because she had no proof to defend
herself. Then the Imam sent Talha and al-Zubayr a letter in which he
summoned them to make peace and leave disagreement. This is the text of
the letter: “You have come to know, even if you have concealed, that I
did not go to the people until they came to me, and that I did not take
allegiance from them until they pledged allegiance to me. You were among
those who came and paid homage to me. The populace did not pledge
allegiance to me for a victorious authority nor for an offer. If you
willingly paid homage to me, then return and turn in repentance to Allah
as soon as possible. If you unwillingly pledged allegiance to me, then
you have placed for me a way against you through your showing obedience
and keeping disobedience a secret. By my life, you were not worthier of
the Muhajireen in the precautionary dissimulation and concealing. If
this affair had moved you to enter it before, then it was wider to you
than your coming out of it after your acknowledging it. You claim that I
have killed Uthman, then between you and me is one who

[^1] Muruj al-Thahab, vol. 2, p. 254.
[^2] Ibn A’them, Tarikh, p. 175.

fell behind you and me from among the people of Medina. Then it is
incumbent on each one as much as he stands. Give up, O two Sheikhs, for
your greatest affair is now disgrace, before the disgrace and the fire
that will come together.”[^1]

However, they did not respond to the call of the truth; rather, they
insisted on corruption, mutiny, and aggression. They declared resistance
and fighting against the Imam.

**Ibn al-Zubayr’s Speech**

Abdullah bin al-Zubayr was too extreme in instigating discords and
shedding blood. He spoiled all the means that Imam Ali (a.s) made to
make peace. He addressed the masses of Basra and urged them to fight
against the Imam. This is his speech: “O people, most surely, Ali bin
Abi Talib killed the true Caliph, Uthman. Then he has prepared the
armies to attack, control you, and take your city. Therefore, be men of
avenging the blood of your caliph, to keep your sacred things, and fight
on behalf of your women, children, ancestries, and lineage. Are you
satisfied that the people of Kufa enter your country? Be angry, for you
have been made angry! Fight, for you have been fought. Ali can see none
other than him in this matter. By Allah, if he won a victory over you,
he would destroy your religion and your world.”

Ibn al-Zubayr’s speech is full of fallacies, lies, and provoking of
religious fanaticism and party spirit against Imam Ali. He knew, without
doubt, that he told lies. However it was his own soul that enticed him
to do that out of craving after power and authority.

**Al-Hasan’s Speech**

When Imam Ali (a.s) heard al-Zubayr’s speech, he commanded his son
al-Hasan to refute him. Imam al-Hasan rose and made a speech. He praised
and lauded Allah, and then he said: “We have heard Ibn al-Zubayr’s
speech in respect of my father and his saying that he (Imam Ali) had
killed Uthman. You, O people of the Muhajireen and the Ansar and other
Muslims, have come to know Ibn al-Zubayr’s speech about Uthman and what
his name was with him and the blame he unjustly laid on him. On that
day, Talha hoisted his flag on his (Uthman) public treasury while he was
still alive. Therefore, how do they accuse my father of killing him and
dispraise him? If we wished the speech against them, we would say.

[^1] Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 3, p. 122.

“As for his speech that Ali has extorted the affair of the people, it
is the greatest proof of his father that he claimed that he pledged
allegiance to him with his hand and not with his heart. Certainly he
admitted the pledge of allegiance while he claimed the innermost
thoughts. Therefore, he must give a proof on what he has claimed. And
how can he do that?!

“As for his wonder at the coming of the people of Kufa to the people of
Basra, then what is his wonder at the people of the truth when coming to
the people of falsehood? “As for the supporters of Uthman, we have
neither war nor fighting against them, but we fight against the rider of
the camel and her followers…”[^1] Certainly Imam Abu Muhammad (al-Hasan)
has confuted Ibn al-Zubayr’s claims and refuted his fabrications. It was
Ibn al-Zubayr, Talha, and A’isha, who kindled the fire of the sedition
against Uthman. As for Imam Ali (a.s), he had no role in that. We have
already explained that.

**The Summons to Allah’s Book**

Imam Ali spared no effort to strengthen peace, avoid war, and summon
people to put into practice what Allah’s Book had commanded. He raised
the Qur’an with his right hand and walked through his companions. He had
a ray of hope in making peace. He said to them: “Which one of you can
show them the Qur’an and what there is in it? If his hand is cut off, he
must take it with the other. If it is cut off, he must take it with his
teeth. He will be killed.”

A Kufan young man rose zealously and nobly and said to him: “I will do,
O Ameerul Mo'minin.” The Imam turned his face away from him for a while.
He walked through his companions and asked them to achieve this task.
But none responded to him except that noble young man. So he gave him
the Qur’an and said to him: “Show them this Qur’an, and say that it is
between you and us. You should take Allah into consideration concerning
our and your bloods.”

The young man proudly set off. Neither fear nor terror was in his
heart. He waved the Qur’an before A’isha’s troops. He summoned them to
do according to the Qur’an. In the meantime he summoned them to cling to
brotherhood and peace. However, they turned away from him. Their
selfishness and their hating the truth moved them to attack him. They
cut off his right arm, and he took the Qur’an with his left hand and
summoned them to follow Allah’s Book. They attacked him again and cut
off his left hand, and he took the
[^1] Al-Jamal, pp. 158-159.

Qur’an with his teeth. He drowned in blood. In the moments of his life,
he summoned them to peace and to spare their blood, saying: “You should
take Allah into consideration in respect of our and your blood.”
Nevertheless, they attacked him and insisted on their error and
obstinacy. They showered him with arrows, and he fell to the ground a
martyr. After this excuse, the Imam found no means except war. He said
to his companions: “Now, it is lawful for you to fight against them and
it is good for you to strike them!”[^1]

**The Declaration of the War**

After the murder of his messenger, Imam Ali summoned the leaders of his
army. He specified for them their places. He mobilized the fighters for
war. Then he gave them some moral instructions on virtue, mercy, and
justice. He said to them: “O people, if you defeated them, do not finish
off the wounded, do not kill the captives, do not follow those who turn
back, do not seek those who retreat, do not disclose private organs, do
not maim a killed one, do not violate an honor, do not approach their
belongings except that which you find in their camps such as weapons,
horses, mules, slaves, and bondmaids. Other than that is inheritance
belongs to their inheritors according to Allah’s Book.”

A’isha rode her camel called Askar. She asked her men to give her a
handsome of pebbles. She threw these pebbles against Imam Ali’s
followers and said, ‘How ugly faces!’ A man from Imam Ali’s companions
cried at her, ‘O A’isha, and you did not smite when you smote, but it
was Satan who smote.’ She was the commander-in-chief. It was she who
organized the troops and gave commands. Her troops aimed their arrows at
Imam Ali’s camp. They killed some of his companions. After that, the
Imam found no escape from fighting against them. He girded himself with
his own sword and gave the standard to his son Muhammad[^2] . He said to
al-Hasan and al-Husayn: “I have given the standard to your brother and
left you due to your position with Allah’s Apostle.” Muhammad set off to
the field of the battle with a firm determination. He sought success and
victory, but the people showered him with their arrows from all
directions.

[^1] Al-Tabari, vol. 5, p. 204.
[^2] Muhammad bin Ali bin Abi Talib al-Hashimi, known as Ibn
al-Hanafiya. His mother was Khawla al-Hanafiya, daughter of Ja‘far.
Ibrahim bin al-Junayd has said: “We not know that there is anyone better
and more accurate than Muhammad in narrating traditions on the authority
of Ali.” Abu Na‘eem has said: “He (Muhammad) died in the year 80 A. H.”
(This has been mentioned in the book) Tahdhib al-Kamal, p. 21.

Imam Ali attacked the people while he was carrying the standard in his
left hand and showed in his right hand his sword Thul Faqar, with which
he fought against the infidels and the polytheists, and with which today
he fought against those who reneged their religion and deviated from
Islam. The leading Muhajireen and Ansar surrounded him. All the enemies
before them were like ashes on which the winds blow hard on a stormy
day.

**Al-Zubayr is killed**

Imam Ali (a.s) went out unarmored among the troops and shouted at the
top of his voice: -Where is al-Zubayr? Al-Zubayr walked towards him
while he was heavily armed. When the Imam saw him, he embraced him and
said: -O Abu Abdullah, what has made you come here? -I have come to
avenge Uthman! The Imam looked at him and asked: -Avenge Uthman?

-Yes.
- May Allah kill whoever killed Uthman!

The Imam gently began talking with him and reminded him of his support
to him, saying: -I adjure you before Allah, O Zubayr! Did you know that
you and Allah’s Apostle (a.s) passed by me, while he was leaning on your
hand? Allah’s Apostle greeted and smiled at me. Then he turned and said
to you: “O Zubayr, you will unjustly fight Ali!” Al-Zubayr bowed his
head. His face turned pale. His heart melted out of sorrow and regret.
He felt remorse for what he had neglected. He said to the Imam:

-O Allah, yes! -Then, why do you fight against me? -I have forgotten
it, by Allah! If I had known it, I would not have fought against
you.[^1]
[^1] Al-Imama wa al-Siyasa, vol. 1, p. 73.

-Return! -How can I return while the misfortune has become great and
the matter has become intense? -Go back before that the disgrace and
fire come together! Al-Zubayr decided to withdraw from this discord, but
he wanted to get rid of it peacefully. So he said to A’isha: “O mother
of the faithful, by Allah, I did not take a situation, unless I knew
where to put my foot except this one. I do not know whether I am coming
forwards or going backwards!” A’isha knew his hidden intention and what
he wanted through his speech. She understood that he wanted to withdraw.
She sneeringly said to him: -O Abu Abdullah, you are afraid of the
swords of the children of Abdul Muttalib. This mockery played with his
soul, and his wicked son Abdullah increased his upset and worry, and
made him come back to the battlefield. He said to him:

-You were aware of your coming out, but when you saw the standards of
(Ali) bin Abi Talib and knew that death is behind them, you have become
cowardly. His son accused him of weakness and cowardice which was a
disgrace, abasement, and a defect. The father said: -Woe unto you! I
swore (by Allah) before him (Imam Ali) that I should not fight against
him! -Expiate your oath by setting free your slave Sarjas. So he freed
his slave[^1] . Then he wandered in the battlefield to show his bravery
to A’isha and to his son. He wanted to show them that he paid no
attention to death. He attacked the left wing of the Army. Then he
returned and attacked the middle of the Army. Then he returned to his
son and said to him: “Is the one who does so cowardly?”

Then he went to Wadi al-Siba’. Al-Ahnaf bin Qays and his people had
been there. His people said to him: “This is al-Zubayr. He has passed.”
And he said: “What shall I do to al-Zubayr? He has brought together two
great groups of people and made them kill each other.” Some people from
the tribe of Tamim followed him. Amr bin Jarmuz preceded them to him.
Al-Zubayr stopped to perform the prayer and said to Amr: “Shall you lead
me (in prayer)
[^1] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 5, p. 200.

or shall I lead you?” Al-Zubayr led him, and Amr bin Jarmuz killed him
while praying.[^1] The end of al-Zubayr’s life was mixed with treachery,
treason, and mutiny against the truth. Unfortunately, he had a brilliant
past full of good deeds and merits. He was the leader of Hilf (alliance)
al-Fudool whose slogan was supporting the oppressed. Then, what was the
matter with him during that period of time? He turned away from Imam Ali
and forgot the persecutions that he suffered. That was when Taym usurped
his right for the first time, Adi for the second time, and Umayya for
the third time. And then he (al-Zubayr) came to usurp his right.
Unfortunately, al-Zubayr had such painful end though he had noble
attitudes. Through his sword he removed the sadness from the face of
Allah’s Apostle (a.s). After the Prophet (a.s) he stood beside Imam Ali.
He protected his side and announced his merits and gave him precedence
over others. So what made him rebel against the imam? Did Ali bin Abi
Talib possess alone the Muslims’ properties? Did he save up something
for himself and his family, that al-Zubayr might fight and mutiny
against him?

**A’isha is surrounded**

Some Arab tribes regarded death as good and delicious for the sake of
A’isha, so they offered sacrifices for her. They went too far in
protecting and defending her. They are as follows:

Al-Azd

The tribe of al-Azd adored A’isha and sacrificed their lives for her,
to the extent that they took her camel’s dung and smelt it. They said:
“The smell of the dung of our mother’s camel is like musk.”[^2] They
hurried to defend her death-defying. They surrounded her camel “Askar”
and caught its bridle. A’isha was astonished and she asked: -Who are
you?

-We are al-Azd. She began moving inside them the spirit of enthusiasm
and she urged them to die for her, saying: “The free are patient. I
still see that victory comes from the Banu Dhabba!” These words kindled
the fire of the revolt in themselves, and they rushed to death and
fought severely for her sake.[^3]

[^2] Ibn al-Athir, Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 97.
[^3] Ibid., vol. 2, p. 81.

**Banu Dabba**

Banu Dabba were from the mean and low Arabs. They had rude hearts and
natures. Their souls were full of the bad customs and vices of the
pre-Islamic era. They cheaply sacrificed their lives for A’isha. They
surrounded her camel death-defying. They stood steadfastly to the extent
that their hands and heads were cut off. On that day, they used Uthman’s
blood as a slogan for them. Forty men from them were killed around
A’isha’s camel. In this respect A’isha said: “My camel was standing
until I lost the voices of Banu Dhabba.” Banu Najiya From among the
tribes who were fond of A’isha was the Banu Najiya. They hurried to the
field of death for her sake. They held the bridle of her camel, and she
asked about them, and it was said to her: “We are the Banu Najiya.” She
urged them and threw them in the flame of the war, saying: “Be patient,
O Banu Najiya! I know that the qualities of Quraysh are available in
you!”[^1] These are some of the tribes who offered many sacrifices for
the sake of A’isha. Certainly, their mother (A’isha) deluded them and
threw them into a sedition because of her ambitions and spites.

**The Camel is killed**

A violent battle took place between the two parties. The companions of
Imam Ali (a.s) wanted to protect the Imam of the Muslims and the
guardian of their Prophet, while the companions of A’isha wanted to
protect their mother and to die for her that many of them were killed.
Imam Ali (a.s) thought that the battle would not end as long as the
camel was there. Accordingly, he summoned Ammar and Malik al-Ashtar.
When they were present before him, he said to them: “Go and kill that
camel, for the flame of the battle will not go out as long as it is
alive! They have used it as a qibla (direction) for them.”

Malik al-Ashtar, Ammar, and some young men from Murad set off. A young
man named Mu’ammar bin Abdillah[^2] went to the camel. He hit it on the
hock. The camel fell to the ground and cried in a way which none had
ever heard.

[^1] Ibn al-Athir, Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 81.
[^2] And it was said that someone other than him killed the camel. In
another narration it was mentioned that Imam Ali summoned his son
Muhammad bin al-Hanafiya. He gave him a spear and said to him: “Go and
kill the camel with the spear.” He went, but the people came between him
and the camel. So he came back and was unsuccessful. Then al-Hasan took
the spear from his hand. He went to the camel and stabbed it.

A’isha’s companions scattered. The idol (the camel) for which they
offered sacrifices was destroyed. Then, Imam Ali ordered the camel to be
burnt and to be scattered into the air lest some of it should remain and
the simple people might be fond of it. Having finished that, he said:
“May Allah curse this animal! It is similar to the calf of the children
of Israel!” Then he looked at the ashes of the camel that the wind took.
Then he recited this Qur’anic verse: “And look at your god to whose
worship you kept (so long); we will certainly burn it, then we will
certainly scatter it a (wide) scattering in the sea.”[^1]

**A’isha is pardoned**

Imam Ali (a.s) received A’isha with kindness and pardoning. He sent to
her brother Muhammad to ask her about her conditions. Muhammad went to
her. He entered his hand into her howdah. She was afraid of him, so she
shouted at him, saying: -Who are you? -The most hated one of your family
to you! She recognized him immediately. She said to him while her soul
was full of hatred and malice towards him: -The son of
al-Khath‘amiyya? -Yes, your dutiful brother! -Undutiful! She turned her
face away from him. But he turned to her and asked her with kindness and
leniency: -Has anything abominable befallen you? -An arrow that has not
harmed me!

He removed the arrow from her. At the last part of the night, he led
her camel and took her to Safiyya, daughter of al-Harith[^2] in the house
of Abdullah bin Khalaf al-Khaza’i[^3] . She stayed there for some days.

[^1] Qur’an, 20, 97.
[^2] Safiya, daughter of al-Harith bin Talha. Her father was killed as
infidel at the Battle of Badr. She was the wife of Abdullah bin Khalaf
and was the mother of Talha al-Talhat. Al-Isaba, vol. 4, p. 346.
[^3] Abdullah bin Khalaf bin As‘ad al-Khaza‘i was the father of Talha
al-Talhat. Abu Umar has said: “I do not know that he had companionship
(with the Prophet). He was

**The Amnesty**

Imam Ali gave a general amnesty to all of his enemies and opponents. As
for A’isha, she asked the Imam to give security to her nephew Abdullah
bin al-Zubayr, who was the bitterest enemy of the Imam. The Imam
responded to her for that. Al-Hasan and al-Husayn talked to him about
Marwan, and he gave security to and pardoned him. His caller called:
“The wounded should not be finished off, those who turn back should not
be chased, those who retreat should not be stabbed, those who lay down
their weapons will be safe, and those who stay in their house will be
safe.” Then he gave security to those black and red, as al-Ya‘qubi
says.[^1] He did not punish any of his opponents. In this manner peace
spread and tranquility included all the quarters of Basra.

**A’isha is released
**
Imam Ali (a.s) sent Abdullah bin Abbas to A’isha to ask her to leave
Basra for Medina, that she might stay in her house as Allah had
commanded her. Abdullah bin Abbas asked permission to enter her house.
But she refused to permit him. He came into her house without permission
and took a pillow from her luggage and sat on it. She was angry with him
and said to him: “By Allah, O Ibn Abbas, I have never seen (anyone) like
you. You have entered our house and sat on our cushion without our
permission.”

Abdullah bin Abbas said: “By Allah, it is not your house. Your house is
that which Allah has commended you to stay in, but you did not do.
Ameerul Mo'minin commands you to go back to your country which you had
gone out of.” She showed her hidden malice and hatred towards the Imam,
saying: -May Allah have mercy on the Commander of the Faithful, Umar bin
al-Khattab. -Yes, and this is the Commander of the faithful, Ali bin Abi
Talib. -I refuse! I refuse!

-Your refusal was but too short, and then you became in a state that
you neither go nor come, and neither order nor prevent! the script of
Umar bin al-Khattab over the Divan of al-Basrah. He was killed at the
Battle of al-Jamal. He belonged to ‘Aa’isha’s party, and his brother
Uthman was among the companions of Imam Ali.” Al-Isaba, vol. 2, p.
303.
[^1] Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 159.

His words hurt her, and she wept. Then she said to him: “Yes, I will go
back because the most abominable country to me is that in which you
are!” Ibn Abbas became excited by her speech, and he said to her: “By
Allah, this is not to be our reward from you when we have regarded you
as the mother of the believers and your father as truthful to them!” She
answered him with the silliest speech, saying: “Do you remind me of (the
favor) of Allah’s Apostle?” How far this speech is from faith! Had it
not been for Allah’s Apostle, she would be nothing? Because of the
Prophet (a.s), her star went high, and she had a reputation. Ibn Abbas
said: “We remind you of him. If he had a position with you similar to
his (the prophet) position with us, you would remind us of him (as
favor)!”

Then he left her and went away. He told Imam Ali about his dialogue
with her and her response to his speech. The Imam thanked him for
that.[^1] When A’isha decided to depart, Imam Ali supplied her with the
best of supply and prepared for her a full caravan that lacked nothing.
On the day when she was to travel, he, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn, came in
to her. When the women saw the Imam, they cried and shouted before him.
Safiya, the owner of the house, said to him: “O you who have killed the
beloved ones! O you who have divided the communities! May Allah make
your children lose you just as you have made the children of Abdullah
orphans!”

The Imam answered her: “If I were the one who killed the beloved ones,
then I would kill those who were in this house.” He indicated with his
hand to a room where some of his enemies and opponents were hidden
there. Those who were with the Imam wanted to attack them, but he
prevented them from doing that. Then a speech took place between A’isha
and the Imam. She said to him: “I want to stay with you, that I may go
to fight against your enemy!” However, the Imam refused and commanded
her to stay in the house where Allah’s Apostle had left her. If the Imam
wanted the timely policy, he would respond to her for that. However, he
was the source of piety and faith. He wanted to behave toward her
according to the Islamic law, which makes it incumbent on woman to
conform to her hijab and to educate her own soul and to set right her
house; and she has at all no right to enter party affairs or political
battles. At last, A’isha left Basra after she had filled its houses with
lost orphans, sadness, tears, terrified Muslims, and murder everywhere.
The number of the victims because of her was ten thousands; half of them
was
[^1] Al-Iqd al-Farid, vol. 3, pp. 103-104.

from the companions of Imam Ali, and the other half was from her
companions.[^1] Through her rebellion against Imam Ali she destroyed the
relationships among the Muslims, blew up the links of brotherhood the
that Prophet had established, opened a door to discords and evil among
the community of Muhammad (a.s). Besides, she paved the way for Mu’awiya
and the Umayyads to mutiny against the Imam. She also paved the way to
them to use Uthman’s blood as means to obtain government, to enslave,
and abase the Muslims. The ulama of the Muslims have unanimously agreed
on that those who made such mutiny were sinners, that they had no
justification at all to do that.

They have also described them as the oppressive. They have said that
the religious duty required fighting against them according to this
Qur’anic verse: “And if two parties of the believers quarrel, make peace
between them. But if one of them acts wrongfully toward the other, fight
that which acts wrongfully until it returns to Allah’s command.”[^2] Abu
Hanifa says: “No one ever fought against Ali, unless Ali was worthier of
the truth than him. Were it not for what Ali followed among them, no one
would know how to deal with the Muslims. Without doubt, Ali fought
against Talha and al-Zubayr after they had paid homage to him and then
they broke their homage. And at the Battle of al-Jamal, Ali treated them
with justice. He was the most aware of Muslims, and the Sunna has
decided to fight the men of oppression.”[^3]

Ibn Hajar has said: “The people who took part in the Battles of
al-Jamal and Siffin accused Ali of colluding with those who killed
Uthman, while he was innocent of that and was far from it.” He added:
“It is incumbent on the Imam to fight against the oppressive. The
companions (of the Prophet) had unanimously agreed on him. He had not to
fight against them unless he should send to them someone trustworthy,
clever, and loyal. He should ask them about the reason why they had
harbored malice against the Imam just as Ali did when he sent Abdullah
bin Abbas to the Kharijites at al-Nahrawan.”[^4]

Al-Huwayni has said: “Ali bin Abi Talib was a true Imam in respect of
appointing him as a ruler. And those, who fought against him, were
oppressive.”[^5]

[^1] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 5, p. 224. It has been said that the number
of the killed was more than that.
[^2] Qur’an, 49, 9.
[^3] Al-Khawarizmi, Manaqib Abu Hanifa, vol. 2, pp. 82-83.
[^4] Al-Nawawi, Tuhfat al-Muhtajj, vol. 4, p. 110.
[^5] Al-Irshad fi Usool al-I‘tiqad, p. 433.

The Islamic law requires the Imam of Muslims to fight against those who
rebel against the religious authority, for their mutiny divides the
unity of the Muslims and destroys their brotherhood.

Imam al-Hasan witnessed this terrible event, and it made him know the
people’s hatred and spites toward his father. During that event, he was
a unique hero and an experienced leader. He could urge the people to
fight against the forces who mutinied against his father. With this
point we will end our talk about the problem that took place in Basra
that we may meet with him at Siffin.


