Chapter Xi : At Siffin
======================

**Part 1**

Some events happen in the world of existence and go without leaving an
important effect that history may mention even if they have great
importance during their time. Some other events happen in the field of
life and they remain as immortal as time because they leave behind them
a social effect bringing about general good to man. Some other events
happen in the arena of life and fill the world with tragedies and
misfortunes, and bring about to man unhappiness and enslavement. Among
these tragic events and painful misfortunes is the event that took place
at Siffin where the conflict was between good and evil, justice and
injustice, light and darkness. The religious caliphate aimed at man’s
interests and happiness and the chaotic government aimed at nothing
except selfishness and trading with peoples’ interests.

The Islamic nation did not decide its fate decisively at the battle of
Siffin, so such an attitude led the nation to enslavement, abasement,
submission, oppression, and tyranny. Professor Malik al-Jaza’iri has
referred to that when he explained the correct foundations that the
Bandong Conference has adopted. He has said: “And certainly the Islamic
history has come to know of a moment like this (i.e.,
self-determination) at the Battle of Siffin. This battle was a sorrowful
event from which resulted the hesitation in choosing; the decisive
choosing between Ali and Mu’awiya, between Medina and Damascus, between
the democratic rule of the caliphate and the family rule. During that
decisive point in its history, the Islamic society chose the way that
led finally to colonialism.”[^1]

Indeed, the Muslim people were forsaken at the Battle of Siffin. They
did not decide their decisive fate. So they deserted Imam Ali and forced
Imam al-Hasan after him to accept the peace (with Mu’awiya).
Accordingly, the Umayyads undertook the leadership of the country and
went too far in killing the good, chasing the righteous, and spreading
oppression and tyranny in the land. Therefore, we have to explain the
stages of this tragedy briefly and reflect on its horrible conclusions,
which are as follows:

**Mu’awiya’s Mutiny**

Mu’awiya declared mutiny against Imam Ali’s government. He refused to
pay homage to him and to follow what the Muslims had followed. As for
the reasons for his rebellion, they are as follows:
[^1] The concept of Afro-Asiatic in the light of the Bandong
Conference111.

A. Mu’awiya knew that Imam Ali would not allow him to remain in his
office, and there was no escape from that he would deprived him of all
his properties that he had embezzled from the Muslims’ public treasury.
If he had come to know that he (Imam Ali) would allow him (Mu’awiya) to
practice his office, lavishness, and extravagance, he would not have
declared mutiny and rebellion against him. Imam Ali did not flatter him
in respect of his religion, nor did he seek victory through tyranny, nor
did he accept oppression that destroyed the oppressive and aggressors.
Therefore, how was it possible for the Imam to allow Mu’awiya to
undertake the office of a governor while he knew that he had neither
reality nor commitment to the religion? On the first day of his
caliphate, Imam Ali deposed Mu’awiya from his office. Mu’awiya wrote a
letter to him asking him to allow him to remain as he was or to appoint
him as a ruler over Egypt, but the Imam refused to respond to him.

Mu’awiya and his relatives knew Imam Ali’s inclinations and aims of
establishing justice in the country, putting an end to social
oppression, and removing the oppressive from their offices. Besides,
they knew that they would be unknown during Imam Ali’s government just
as they had been during the time of the Prophet. For this reason, they
declared aggression against the Imam that they might keep their
interests.

B. Mu’awiya knew that he had the ability to resist Imam Ali and fight
against him because of his influence and position in the country.
Mu’awiya did not behave in his district as just a governor, but he was
ambitious to obtain that which was beyond his district. He did as a
leader who would found a state and he supported the state for himself
and his own children after him. Accordingly, he gathered leading people,
purchased supporters, surrounded himself with power, wealth, and was
ready to stay for a long time.[^1]

C. From among the things that moved Mu’awiya to mutiny against Imam Ali
was the revolt led by A’isha, Talha, and al-Zubayr. They paved the way
for him because the Battle of Siffin was an extension to the battle of
al-Jamal and from its results. Had it not been for their (A’isha,Talha,
and al-Zubayr) revolt, their declaring rebellion, and avenging Uthman,
Mu’awiya would not have been able to divide the Muslims’unity, revolt
against the Imam, and fight against him.

D. There is another thing worthy of taking care and through which
Mu’awiya justified his rebellion and revolt against the then government.
This thing has been mentioned by Mu’awiya in the letter he sent to
Muhammad bin Abi
[^1] ‘Abqariyat al-Imam Ali, p. 115.

Bakr: “Your father and his Faruq (Umar bin al-Khattab) were the first
to usurp his (Ali) right and oppose his matter (the caliphate). They
agreed on that and then they summoned him to pledge allegiance to them.
But he was slow and tardy in responding to them and so they intended to
cause him troubles and wanted to kill him. Then he paid homage to and
submitted to them. However, they did not make him take part in their
affairs, nor did they inform him of their secrets until Allah took them
unto Him.” He added: “So if that ,which we are in, is right, then your
father had possessed it (the caliphate) alone, and we are his partners.
If your father had not done what he did, we would not have opposed (Ali)
bin Abi Talib, and we would have submitted to him. Your father had done
that toward him before us, and we have followed his example.”[^1]

This justification is very true, for had it not been for that the two
Sheikhs disputed with Imam Ali and usurped his right of authority,
Mu’awiya would not have been able to oppose or revolt against him.
Mu’awiya followed their example and their way. He aggressed against the
Imam, spoiled his army, and left him in the suburbs of Kufa wishing for
death, that he might get rid of the misfortunes and sorrows that had
befallen him.

E. Yet, from among the things that moved Mu’awiya to declare the
rebellion and the mutiny against Imam Ali was to avenge Uthman. He used
Uthman’s murder as means to get his own objectives and reach his wishes.
He employed all his hirelings to magnify his affair and to laud his name
to deem him above all sins, to the extent that all the hearts of the
people in al-Sham yielded to him and their souls were full of harboring
malice and hatred against Imam Ali. They showed sadness and sorrow
greater than that he showed. They urged and hurried him to war against
Imam Ali and to avenge Uthman more than he himself did.

There is no doubt that Mu’awiya paid no attention to Uthman’s murder,
because Uthman had sought his help when he was besieged, but he did not
respond or help him with anything. If he wanted to avenge Uthman, then
his advisor, Amr bin al-Aas, would be the worthiest of being punished,
for it was he who kindled the fire against Uthman, and he used to say:
“By Allah, if I found a shepherd, I would provoke him against Uthman as
well as the heads and the prominent people.”[^2] Therefore, his avenging
Uthman was for nothing except that he used it as means for achieving his
purpose and obtaining the power which he had dreamed of. These are some
of the reasons that moved Mu’awiya to fight against Imam Ali.

[^1] Al-Mas‘udi ‘ala Hamish bin al-Athir, vol. 6, pp. 78-79.
[^2] Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 1, p. 163.

**Delegation of Jareer**

When Mu’awiya declared his mutiny against Imam Ali’s government, the
companions of the Imam asked him to lead them in a war against Mu’awiya.
That was after they had finished the battle of al-Jamal. It was as if
they wanted to add another victory to their victory. However, the Imam
refused that because his plan was making peace and preferring
tranquility. He thought that he had to send to Mu’awiya some messengers
to call him for obedience and to follow what the people had followed.

Among those messengers was Jareer bin Ubaydillah al-Bajali[^1] . Imam
Ali sent him to meet Mu’awiya and supplied him with this letter: “You
are required to pledge allegiance to me in Medina even if you are in
al-Sham because the people who had paid homage to Abu Bakr and Umar have
pledged allegiance to me on the same basis on which they had pledged
allegiance to them. On this basis, one who is present has no choice to
consider, and one who is absent has no right to reject, and consultation
is confined to the Muhajireen and the Ansar.

If they agree on an individual and take him to be caliph, it will be
deemed to mean Allah’s good pleasure. If someone keeps away by way of
objection or innovation, they will return him to the position from where
he kept away. If he refuses, they will fight against him for following a
course other than that of the believers, and Allah will send him to what
he has chosen, and take him to Hell, and it is an evil resort. Talha and
al-Zubayr had paid homage to me, and then they broke the allegiance, and
their breaking is as their rejection. So I have struggled against them
for the sake of that until the truth has come and Allah’s command has
become clear while they are unwilling. Then, enter what the Muslims have
entered because the most lovable thing to me in respect of you is
wellbeing except that you intrude upon the tribulation. If you intruded
upon it, I would fight against you and seek help from Allah against you.
You have said too much in respect of Uthman’s murder. Enter in what the
Muslims have entered. Then let me rule the people, and I will make you
and them follow Allah’s Book. As for that which you want, it is as
deceiving the baby to make it leave the milk. By my life, if you see
with your own brain without any


[^1] The narrators have differed over the time when Jareer bin
Ubaydillah al-Bajali became Muslim. It was said that he became Muslim at
the time of the Prophet’s advent. It was said that he became Muslim
forty days before the death of the Prophet, and it was said other than
that. He was handsome. Umar has said concerning him: “He is Yousuf of
this community.” He gave him precedence, during his battles in Iraq,
over all (the tribe of) Bajeelah, who played a major role in conquering
Qadisiya (in Iraq). Jareer bin Ubaydillah al-Bajali resided in Kufa.
When Imam Ali sent him as a messenger to Mu‘awiya, he failed in his
task. So he isolated himself from the two parties and preferred
tranquility. Then he lived in Qirqisya until he died in the year 51 A.
H. And it was said (that he died in the year) 54 A. H.

passion, you will find me the most innocent of all concerning Uthman’s
blood. You should know that you are among al-Tulaqaa’[^1] , whom the
caliphate is not lawful for, nor consultation is confined to them. I
have sent to you Jareer bin Abdullah, who is among the men of faith and
emigration. Therefore, pay homage to me, and there is no power save in
Allah.”[^2]

This is the letter of the truth. It summoned Mu’awiya to follow the
truth through the shortest way and through the clearest style.

Moreover, it is a current sermon and a guiding wisdom for those who
want guidance and whom Allah delights, and in whose heart He causes the
spring of light to gush out. The letter indicates that Imam Ali was not
heedless of explaining the affairs that people said, nor did he leave a
gap through which his opponent could pass. Professor Abd al-Fattah
Maqsud has said: “When Mu’awiya wanted to use something as a trick or as
a pretext to confirm his opposition and support his deviation, the Imam
extended to him a pick and strong iron to destroy his falsehood and
demolish his strongholds.”[^3]

Jareer covered the desert and arrived in Mu’awiya’s palace. He said to
him: “O Mu’awiya, the men of the two Sacred Cities (Mecca and Medina),
the people of the two cities (Basra and Kufa), the people of al-Hijaz
and Yemen, the people of al-Arudh and Oman, and the people of Bahrain
and Yamama have come together to support your cousin (Imam Ali).
Therefore no people have remained behind except the people of these
strongholds where you are. If a flood from one of his valleys flew on
them, it would cover them. I have come to summon you to that which
guides and leads you to paying homage to the man (Imam Ali).”[^4]

When Mu’awiya heard that, he became breathless and said nothing.
However he went too far in competing with Imam Ali. He could find no
escape for himself except respite and delaying. During that period of
time, he could gather the prominent persons in Sham and the commanders
of the Army. He consulted them in respect of yielding to the Imam’s
government and responding to his messenger or to declare mutiny and
avenge Uthman. They showed him their urgent desire for avenging Uthman
and to declare rebellion against the Imam’s government.

[^1] Al-Tulaqa’ is the plural of taleeq, who is a released prisoner of
war. Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) released them on the day when he conquered
Mecca and did not enslave them.
[^2] Nasr bin Muzahim, Waqi‘at Siffin, p. 34.
[^3] Imam Ali Bin Abi Talib, vol. 4, p. 27.
[^4] Waqi‘at Siffin, p. 33.

**Mu’awiya corresponds with Amr**

Mu’awiya knew that the affair would not go well with him unless the
crafty person of the Arabs, Amr bin al-Aas, should join him, that he
might direct him, and that he would seek his help. He sent him a letter
in which he asked him to come to him. This is the text of the letter:
“Now, you have come to know the affair of Ali, Talha, and al-Zubayr.
Marwan bin al-Hakam has inclined to us… Jareer bin Abdullah has come to
us in respect of the pledge of allegiance to Ali. I have confined myself
to you until you come. Come, and I will discuss a matter with you.”

When Amr read the letter, he became perplexed. He consulted his two
sons Abdullah and Muhammad. Abdullah said to him: “I think that the
Prophet of Allah died and he was pleased with you as well as the two
Caliphs. Uthman was killed, while you were absent from him. Therefore,
stay in your home, for you will not be made a caliph, nor do you want to
be a follower of Mu’awiya for little world that is about to perish, and
you are unhappy therein.”

Abdullah asked him to cling to piety and fear of Allah and not to
respond to the motives of the troubles and vainglory. As for his son
Muhammad, he was deluded by the world, and he craved after authority, so
he said to him: “I think that you are the Sheikh of Quraysh and the
leader of their affairs. If you give up this matter, you will be
insignificant. Therefore, join the the people of Sham. Be one of their
hands and avenge Uthman, because you have submitted to the Umayyads in
respect of him.” Muhammad urged his father to destroy his hereafter and
keep to his life in this world. Amr turned to his son Abdullah and said
to him: “As for you, you have asked me to do what is good in my
religion.” And he said to his son Muhammad: “And as for you, you have
asked me to do what is good in my world.”

**Perplexity and Astonishment**

The world and the hereafter quarreled with each other in Amr’s mind. He
was full of perplexity. Suspicions surrounded him. He sleeplessly spent
the night. He thought of the affair too much. He hesitated whether he
had to join Mu’awiya’s camp and fight against (Imam Ali), the brother of
Allah’s Apostleand so he would lose his religion, or to join Ali and be
like the rest of the people and so he would win hereafter and religion.
He thought of the mater for a long time. His family heard him reciting
some poetry that showed his hesitation and perplexity.

However, his son Abdullah understood that he responded to Mu’awiya’s
summons, and he said: “The Sheikh has made water on his heels and sold
his religion for his worldly life!” In the following morning, he
summoned his servant Wardan, who was clever in physiognomy. He said to
him: “Halt, O Wardan!” Then he said to him: “Depart, O Wardan!” Then he
said to him: “Halt, O Wardan!” His servant Wardan knew his perplexity
and hesitation. So he said to him:

-You have mixed, O Abu Abdullah. If you want, I will inform you of
which there is inside you. -Come on!

-The world and the hereafter has quarreled with each other in your
heart. You have said: “The hereafter is with Ali with no life in this
world. In the hereafter there will be a recompense for the life in this
world. The life in the world is with Mu’awiya with no life in the
hereafter. There is no recompense in the world for the life in the
hereafter. Therefore, you are standing between them!” -By Allah, you are
not mistaken! What do you think? -I think that you have to stay in your
house. If the men of religion appear, you will live in the pardon of
their religion. If the men of the world appear, they will be in no need
of you. However, he did not respond to his servant’s advice. He decided
to join Mu’awiya. Amr responded to his desires. He preferred this world
to the hereafter. He decided to join Mu’awiya’s camp, and fight against
Imam Ali (a.s).

**His Arrival in Sham**

Amr bin al-Aas and his two sons went to Damascus. When he arrived in
it, he began weeping just as women do while he was saying: “O Uthman, I
announce the death of modesty and the religion!”[^1]

He pretended weeping that he might cheat the simple-minded and show
loyalty and obedience to Mu’awiya. When Mu’awiya met with him, he
discussed with him the ways and means he had to follow during his war
against Imam Ali. Amr bin al-Aas said to him: “As for Ali, by Allah, the
Arabs do not regard you as equal to him in anything. In war he has a
luck which none of Quraysh has except that you want to wrong him.”
[^1] Ibn Al-Athir, Tarikh, vol. 129.

Mu’awiya began explaining to him the reasons for his war and rebellion
against the Imam, saying: “You are right! But we will fight against him
for that which is in our hands and we ask him for the killers of
Uthman!” Mu’awiya decided to fight against the Imam for authority,
power, and the great wealth which he had embezzled from the public
treasury. Amr bin al-Aas explained to him the weakness of avenging
Uthman saying:

-How bad! We should not mention Uthman!

-Why, woe unto you! -As for you, you had deserted him though the people
of Sham were beside you until he sought the help of Yazid bin Asad
al-Bajali, and he hurried to him. As for me, I left him and escaped to
Palestine![^1] However, Mu’awiya paid no attention to his speech, for he
could find no means to cling to during his rebellion except avenging
Uthman.

**The Cheap Bargain**

Amr bin al-Aas always longed for Egypt. He bought Mu’awiya his
conscience and his religion for it. Mu’awiya asked him: -Do you love me,
O Amr! -Why? For the hereafter? By Allah, no hereafter is with you! Or
for this world? By Allah, this will not happen unless I should be you
partner in it. -You are my partner in it! -Therefore, write down that
Egypt and its districts shall be for me! Mu’awiya wrote down that Amr
would be the wali of Egypt. Then he wrote at the bottom of the document:
“Amr should listen and obey!” Amr said to him:

To listen and obey does not decrease anything of the stipulation! -Yes,
and the people do not care for this. Mu’awiya carried out what Amr
wanted[^2] for he sold his religion to him. Mu’awiya won the most
important crafty politician who played well over the rope and overcame
the events. It was he who has said about his craftiness: “I am Abu
Abdullah. If I itch an ulcer, I will make it bleed!”

[^1] Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 162.
[^2] Al-Iqd al-Farid, vol. 3, p. 113.

**Jareer is rejected**

When the affairs went well with Mu’awiya, and he made firm his
situation, he refused Imam Ali’s messenger (Jareer). He sent with him a
letter in which he has mentioned: “Now, if those you have mentioned paid
homage to you, and you are innocent of Uthman’s blood, then you would be
like Abu Bakr, Umar, and Uthman. However, you urged the people to shed
Uthman’s blood, so those ignorant obeyed you, and the weak became strong
through you. Certainly, the people of Sham have determined to fight
against you unless you give to them those who killed Uthman. If you did,
then the caliphate would be consultation among the Muslims. The people
of Hijaz were the rulers over the people, and the truth was with them.
When they separated themselves from it, the people of Sham became the
rulers over the people. By my life, your proof against the people of
Sham is not like that of Talha and al-Zubayr. If they had pledged
allegiance to you, I will not pledge allegiance to you! As for your
merits in Islam and your kinship to Allah’s Apostle, I cannot refute
them.”

This letter carried slanders and lies Mu’awiya accused Imam Ali of
killing Uthman, while he knew well that the Imam was innocent of that.
However, he could find no proof to cling to except these lies.

Jareer came back to Imam Ali while he was unsuccessful in his task. He
brought him Mu’awiya’s letter. The Imam read the letter and knew what
Mu’awiya intended such as rebellion and revolt against him. He thought
that he had to establish the proof against him again. He sent him some
messengers to summon him to obey and follow what the Muslims had
followed. That was useless, and Mu’awiya insisted on his obstinacy.

**Mu’awiya marches towards Siffin**

Mu’awiya took the pledge of allegiance to himself from the people of
Sham, that he might avenge Uthman. He had abilities and military forces.
The ambitious, the devious of the truth and the rebellious against Islam
joined him, because they had no faith in Islam. When the affairs went
well with Mu’awiya, he set off towards Siffin[^1] to fight against the
lawful authority, to overthrow the Islamic government, and return the
moralities of pre-Islamic era. When he arrived in Siffin, he stopped
there and controlled the Euphrates.

[^1] Siffin is a place near al-Riqqa, on the western bank of the
Euphrates, between al-Riqqa and Balsin. There the battle between Imam
Ali and Mu‘awiya took place at the beginning of the month of Safar, in
the year 37. The historians have differed over the number of the
fighters of the two parties. It was said that there were 120 thousand
fighters with Mu‘awiya, and there were 90 thousand fighters with Imam
Ali. It was said that Imam Ali had 120 thousand fighters, and Mu‘awiya
had 90 thousand fighters.

He regarded that as the beginning of conquer, because he could prevent
his enemy from water. His troops stayed there to manage their affairs
and organize their abilities to get ready for the battle.

**Imam Ali gets ready for the Battle**

When all the means that the Imam used for making peace failed, he got
ready for the battle. That was when he knew that his enemy had marched
towards Siffin to fight against him. He summoned the Muhajireen and the
Ansar who hurried to help him. He said to them: “Most surely you are
good in opinion, superior in clemency, believing in the truth, and
blessed in action. We have decided to march towards our enemy; so give
us your opinion!”

Hashim bin Utba rose and said to him: “O Commander of the faithful,
most surely I am very aware of people. They are enemies to you and to
your followers. They follow whoever seeks the worldly pleasures. They
will fight and struggle against you. They will spare no effort to cling
to this world and not to lose anything they have in it. They have no
purpose except that through which they deceive the ignorant such as
revenging Uthman bin Affan. They have told lies. They do not avenge, but
they want the world. So let us march towards them. If they respond to
the truth, so there is nothing beyond the truth except misguidance. If
they insist on discord, then that is what we think of them. By Allah, I
think that they will not pay homage (to you), as long as that there is
someone among them who is obeyed when he prohibits and heared when he
commands.”[^1]

Most surely Hashim was experienced in the inners of the people and
knowledgeable of their attitudes and inclinations. They sought the way
to the world. They fought against the Imam for their own ambitions. They
used Uthman’s blood as a pretext and means for their rebellion. They did
not leave their hypocrisy and error as long as there was among them a
person enjoying influence and force. Therefore, there was no escape from
fighting them and marching towards them to put an end to their error and
mutiny. Some other people from among the leading Muhajireen and the
Ansar confirmed Hashim’s statement. They showed obedience and submission
to the Imam. After that the Imam got ready for the battle. He
corresponded with the prominent persons, the heads of the tribes, and
the commanders of the army. He urged them to help him and to go out with
him to fight against the rebels. They all responded to the call of the
truth and expressed their inclusive readiness for defending him.

[^1] Waqi‘at Siffin, p. 103.

**Al-Hasan’s Oration**

Imam al-Hasan aroused the determinations, and moved decisiveness and
activity of the people. He urged them to go out to war against Mu’awiya
just as he had done that before at the Battle of al-Jamal. He rose and
delivered a speech among people to summon them to jihad. This is the
text of his speech. “Praise belongs to Allah whom there is no god but
Him, the One without a partner. I laud Him with that of which He is
worthy.

“Most surely among the things through which Allah has made great His
right against you, bestowed upon you His boons whose names cannot be
counted… thanks to Him cannot be given; neither description nor speech
can reach Him. We have become angry for Allah and you, because He is
kind to us through that of which He is worthy and through which we
should thank Him for His boons, His trial, and His favors. A speech that
ascend to Allah and there is good pleasure in it, and through which the
favor of truthfulness spreads, through which Allah confirms our speech,
and through which we deserve more from our Lord, a speech that increases
and does not decrease. That is if some people come together for a
certain affair, their affair becomes strong and their knot becomes firm.
Therefore, gather in crowds for fighting against Mu’awiya and his
armies, for he has come. Do not fail, for failure destroys the heart,
and the advance towards the spearheads is a help and protection. If
people become strong, Allah will remove from them the malady, suffice
them the hardships of abasement, and guide them to the principles of the
religion.”

Then he recited poetry, saying:

You take from peace (as much as) what pleases you, and a bit of war
breaths is too much for you.[^1] His eloquent speech is full of the
summons to unity, cooperation, and to spare no effort in fighting
against the rebellious forces. People responded to his summons. They
quickly hurried to support the truth and defend Islam.

**Al-Hasan with Sulayman**

Some Iraqi leaders did not take part in the Battle of al-Jamal, nor did
they help Imam Ali. Among them was Sulayman bin Surad al-Khuza’iy[^2] .
After the

[^1] The poetry line belongs to al-Abbas bin Mardas al-Salami, just as
it has been mentioned (in the book) al-Khazana, vol. 2, p. 82.
[^2] Sulayman bin Surad al-Khuza’iy was a prominent, honorable person
among his people. He narrated traditions from the Prophet, Imam Ali, and
Imam al-Hasan. He was among those who wrote letters to Imam al-Husayn,
peace be on him, and asked him to come to Kufa. When Imam al-Husayn
responded to their call, Sulayman remained behind. When the Muslims were
terrified through killing the Apostle’s

battle, Imam Ali (a.s) severely blamed and rebuked him, saying: “You
have doubted, lurked, and dodged! You were from among the most reliable
people to me and the quickest of them, as I think, in helping me! What
has made you refrain from your Prophet’s Household? And what has made
you leave supporting them?”

Sulayman was unable to stand the Imam’s rebuke against him, so he said
to him: “O Ameerul Mo’minin, do not compare things to what had passed,
and do not rebuke me for what had gone. Retain my love and I will be
sincere to you. Many things have remained that you can recognize your
enemy fro your friend through them.”

Then he went to Imam al-Hasan to tell him about his father’s (Imam Ali)
speech. He said to him: “Do you not wonder at the reproach I have met
from Ameerul Mo’minin?” Al-Hasan gently spoke with him, that he might
remove the sadness from him, saying: “One, whose love and loyalty are
hoped, is admonished.” However, Sulayman remained excited, for the
bitter admonishment and reproach had hurt him, and he said to Imam
al-Hasan: “Some things, which spears and swords meet in, have remained,
and the like of me is needed in them! Do not admonish, and do not
neglect my loyalty!” Al-Hasan calmed his anger and showed that he had
confidence in him, saying: “May Allah have mercy on you! You are not
suspected near us!”[^1] Sulayman’s excitement and anger calmed down,
because Imam al-Hasan treated him with kindness and gentleness. He could
remove from him the painful sorrow and return him to the ranks of the
Mujahideen.

**The March towards Siffin**

When Imam Ali had sufficient military forces, he got ready to go to
Siffin. He commanded al-Harith bin al-A’war to call people to go to
their camp at al-Nukhaylah. He called them for that, and Kufa was full
of Mujahideen. Imam Ali went out accompanied by the companions of the
Prophet. The regiments that were like a flood went with him. They were
riders or infantries. They had grandson (Imam al-Husayn), Sulayman and a
group of his people felt remorse for they had not risen to support him.
Accordingly, they hurried to avenge his blood. They marched until they
met the sinful, Ubaydillah bin Ziyad, at a place called Ayn al-Warda. A
battle took place between them. Sulayman and those with him were all
killed. That was at the month of Rabee‘ al-Aakhar, in the year 65 A. H.
He was then 93 years old.
[^1] Waqi‘at Siffin, pp. 9-10.

come to know why they went out. They went out to support the truth and
to fight against the enemies and opponents of Islam. With their quick
advance, the Imam’s troops walked beside the Euphrates. When they
arrived in al-Anbar, its people received them. Then they hurried to Imam
Ali. The Imam asked them denyingly: “What are these animals with you?
What have you wanted through that which you have done?”

They showed him great love and respect. They said to him: “O Ameerul
Mo’minin, it is among our customs through which we glorify our rulers.
As for these horses, they are as a gift for you. We have cooked food for
you and the Muslims. We have prepared a lot of fodder for your animals.”
Imam Ali scolded and prohibited them from doing that, saying: “As for
this custom through which you magnify the rulers, by Allah, this does
not profit the rulers, and you make yourselves and bodies tired through
it. Therefore, do not return to it. As for these animals of yours, if
you want us to take them from you and regard them as part of your land
taxes (kharajj), we will take them. As for your food you have cooked, we
hate to eat anything of your possessions except for a certain price.”

This is the logic of justice which Ali bin Abi Talib followed. He did
not permit the festivals and other ceremonies to be held for the rulers
and emirs, for they had pressure against the subjects and they glorified
the rulers who had, in the viewpoint of Islam, nothing to distinguish
them from the rest of people.

The people of al-Anbar said to him: “O Ameerul Mo’minin, we will
evaluate it (the food), and then we will accept its value.” “You cannot
evaluate its value,” retorted the Imam. Then he left them and went
away.[^1] The Imam’s troops walked and covered the desert till they were
face to face with the army of Mu’awiya.

**The fighting for Water**

The Imam’s companions found no place to get water from the Euphrates
because many guards had surrounded the drinking places and severely
prevented them from reaching the river. They came to the Imam and told
him about that, and he summoned Sa‘sa‘a bin Souhan and said to him: “Go
to Mu’awiya and say to him: ‘We have made this travel and we hate to
start you with fighting without any warning. You have come along with
your horses. You have started fighting against us before we start
fighting. We think that
[^1] Waqi‘at Siffin, pp. 160-161.

we have to refrain (from fighting) unless we summon you and protest
against you. You have done another thing, to the extent that you have
come between the people and the water. Let them get water that we may
reflect on that which is between you and us, on that for which we and
you have come. If you like that we leave what we have come for and let
the people fight against each other that the victor may drink water, we
will do.” Sa‘sa‘a bin Souhan went to Mu’awiya and told him about the
Imam’s speech. Mu’awiya consulted his companions. Al-Waleed bin Aqaba
said to him: “Prevent them from water just as they had prevented Uthman
bin Affan. They besieged him (Uthman) for forty days. They prevented him
from drinking cool water and fresh food. Kill them with thirsty! May
Allah kill them!”

Amr bin al-Aas advised him to allow them to get water. However,
al-Waleed repeated his saying. Then, Abdullah bin Sa’d bin Abi Sarh said
to him: “Prevent them from the water until the night. If they cannot
stand it, they will return. Their return will be a defeat. Prevent them
from the water! May Allah prevent them on the Day of Resurrection!”

Sa‘sa‘a bin Souhan was unable to keep silent, so he became excited and
said to him: “Most surely Allah will prevent the infidels, the sinful,
and those who drink wine from it on the Day of Resurrection! May Allah
strike you and this dissolute!” He indicated with his hand to al-Waleed.
People attacked, cursed, and threatened him. Mu’awiya commanded them to
refrain from him. Sa‘sa‘a unsuccessfully returned to Imam Ali.

Accordingly, al-Ash‘ath bin Qays[^1] hurried to the Imam and said to
him: “O Ameerul Mo’minin, the people have [^1] Al-Ash‘ath bin Qays
al-Kindi was the chief of his people. He and his people went to Allah’s
Apostle in the year 10 A. H. He and they became Muslim. When the Prophet
died, al-Ash‘ath reneged from Islam, and then he embraced it again
during Abu Baker’s caliphate. Abu Baker married him to his sister Umm
Farwa, daughter of Abi Quhafa. She was the mother of Muhammad bin
al-Ash‘ath. When Abu Bakr died, al-Ash‘ath, along with Sa‘d bin Abi
Waqqas went out to al-Qadisiya, Jalawla’, and Nahawand. Al-Ash‘ath bin
Qays built a house in Kufa, in the quarter of Kinda, and lived in it. He
died in the year 42 A. H., and it was said in the year forty. Imam
al-Hasan prayed over him. This has been mentioned (in the book)
al-Isti‘ab, vol. 1, p. 110. In the book Sharh Nahj al-Balagha it has
been mentioned: “Al-Ash‘ath craved after authority after the death of
the Prophet. He asked his people to crown him, and they responded to
that. He and the apostates battled against the Muslims but he was
besieged in his stronghold for some days. When he became desperate of
victory, he surrendered on the condition that his blood and that of ten
of his companions should be spared. The Muslims responded to him, so he
was safe from killing. Abu Bakr felt remorse for that he did not kill
him. When he was about to die, he said: “I wish that I had cut off
al-Ash‘ath’s head on the day when he was brought to me. I think that he
helps evil whenever he sees it.

prevented us from the water of the Euphrates while you are among us and
we have swords! Let us fight against them. By Allah, we will not return
until we drink water or die. Command (Malik) al-Ashtar to move with his
horsemen and stop where you command him.” The Imam permitted him. When
al-Ash‘ath won that, he returned to his people, saying: “Whoever wants
water or death, then his promise is the morning! I am going to rise
toward water!”

Twelve thousand fighters responded to him. When he saw them, he proudly
rose, wore his breastplate and recited some poetry. On the following
morning the Iraqi masses hurried towards al-Ash’ath, and he headed them
and attacked the people of Sham while he was saying to his people: “Go
ahead, may my father and mother die for you!” He went on calling his
people and arousing in them the spirit of determination and activity,
and they faced the people of Sham. Al-Ash‘ath shouted at the people of
Sham: “Leave the water!”

Abu al-A‘war al-Salami[^1] did not respond to him. Al-Ash‘ath and those
with him attacked the the people of Sham. They removed them from the
Euphrates and caused them heavy losses in properties and men. When the
Iraqis occupied the Euphrates, the Imam permitted the people of Sham to
drink from its water and did not pay them back twofold. He treated them
generously.


