Imam Al-hasan’s Speech
======================

When the painful news of the deposing of Imam Ali by Abu Musa was
announced before the Iraqis, the discord increased, and disagreement
among them became greater. They disowned and cursed each another. As for
Imam Ali, he thought that the dangerous situation required some men from
among his household to address the people and tell them about the real
condition, and explain to them that the arbitration was corrupt.
Accordingly, he said to al-Hasan: “Rise, O my little son, and speak in
respect of these two men; Abdullah bin Qays and Amr bin al-Aas.” Imam
al-Hasan ascended the pulpit. He said: “O people, you have said too much
about these two men. They were sent to act according to the Book against
the mean desire but they acted according to the mean desire against the
Book. Whoever is such is not called
[^1] Al-Mas‘udi has in detail written that in his book Murujj al-Dhahab,
vol. 1, p. 277.

an arbitrator, but a convict. Abdullah bin Qays has made a mistake when
he entrusted it (the caliphate) to Abdullah bin Umar. Abdullah bin Umar
has made a mistake in three qualities. The first, he (Abu Musa) opposed
his (Abdulla bin Umar) father (the caliph Umar), and he was not
satisfied with him to be entrusted with the caliphate, nor did he
appoint him as one of the members of the Consultative Committee. The
second, he did not appoint him as a commander. The third is that the
Muhajireen and the Ansar, who decided the authority and ruled the people
through it, had not unanimously agreed on him. As for the arbitration,
it is that the Prophet (a.s) appointed Sa’d bin Mu‘ath[^1] as an
arbitrator over the Banu Qurayda, and he decided according to

[^1] Sa‘d bin Mu’ath bin al-Nu‘man al-Ansari was from al-Aws Tribe. He
became Muslim at the hand of Mus‘ab bin Umayr. That was when the Prophet
sent him to teach the Muslims in Medina (to read and write). When Sa‘d
became Muslim, he said to the Banu al-Ashhal: “It is forbidden for me to
speak to your men and women unless you should be Muslim.” They became
Muslims and so he was from the greatest blessed in Islam. He fought
beside the Prophet at the Battle of Badr. When the Prophet headed for
Badr, the news came to him that the Quraysh were ready to fight against
him. The Prophet (a.s.) consulted his companions in respect of the
affair. Al-Miqdad and Abu Bakr announced their obedience to him.

However, he (a.s.) thought of the Ansar, for the majority of his Army
were from them. As for Sa‘d, he came to know that he meant the Ansar
through his consultation. So he said to him: “It seems that you mean us,
O Allah’s Apostle?” “Yes,” he (a.s.) replied. Sa‘d said: “O Allah’s
Apostle, we have believed in you, believed you, borne witness that what
you have brought is the truth, and given to you our covenants for
listening and obeying. Therefore, go, O Allah’s Apostle, to what you
want. We are with you. By Him Who has sent you with the truth, if you
reviewed this sea through us, we would wade into it along with you. None
of us will remain behind, nor do we hate to meet our enemy tomorrow. We
are patient during battle and truthful during meeting. May Allah show
you through us that which delights you. So make us walk through Allah’s
blessing.” The Prophet (a.s.) was pleased and delighted with his speech,
and was active to meet the polytheists. When the Battle of al-Khandaq
took place, Sa‘d went out wearing a narrow breastplate of which his arm
was out. There was a sword in his hand, and he was saying:

A camel stayed for a while that he might join the battle.

There is no fear of death when the moment of death comes!

His mother said to him: “Hurry up, O my son! By Allah, you have become
late!” On that, day an arrow hit him on the ankle and wounded it. When
the Banu Qurayda yielded to Sa‘d’s judgment, he came back while he was
wounded. The Prophet (a.s.) said to his companions: “Get up for your
master or the best of you!” When Sa‘d sat down, Allah’s Apostle (a.s.)
said: “O Sa‘d, decide among them!” Sa‘d said: “My judgment in respect of
them is that you kill their fighters and take the rest as captives.” The
Prophet (a.s.) said: “You have judged according to Allah’s judgment!”
When he finished the arbitration, his wound bled. So the Allah’s Apostle
embraced him. The blood flowed on him, and he died because of his wound.
Allah’s Apostle and his old companions wept for him. His mother elegized
him, saying:

Woe unto Sa‘d’s mother, Sa‘d is skill and help!

what pleased Allah. Without doubt, if he opposed, Allah’s Apostle (a.s)
would not be pleased with him.” Then he went down the pulpit.

In his wonderful speech, Imam al-Hasan has mentioned the most important
points that were the pivot of the conflict and source of the discord. He
has in detail mentioned them and clearly explained them to the crowded
people that he left no gap through which the rebels could pass. He (a.s)
has explained that the opinion of the chosen arbitrator would have been
followed and been a sound judgment if he had judged according to the
truth and not yielded to the corrupt disputes and desires. As for Abu
Musa, he, in his arbitration, did not yield to the truth; rather, he
followed his low desires and inclinations. Accordingly, he nominated for
the caliphate Abdullah bin Umar while his father had not seen that he
was worthy of it. If he thought that he was worthy of the caliphate, he
would nominate him for it or appointed him as one of the members of the
Consultative Committee. Besides, the basic condition in the election was
that the Muhajireen and the Ansar had to agree on the elected one. This
did not happen to him. In his speech, Imam al-Hasan (a.s) has expressed
that the arbitration was legal while the Kharijites denied it. He has
indicated that saying that the Prophet (a.s) had appointed Sa’d bin
Mu’ath as an arbitrator over the Banu Qurayda. If the arbitration had
been illegal, the great Prophet (a.s) would not have followed it.

After Imam al-Hasan, Abdullah bin Abbas rose. He lauded and praised
Allah, and then he said: “O people, some people have hit the truth
through success and consent. Some are satisfied with it (the truth) and
some are dissatisfied with it. As for Abu Musa, he went with guidance to
deviation, and as for Amr, he went with deviation to guidance. When they
met, Abu Musa withdrew his guidance, and Amr went on his deviation. By
Allah, if they had judged due to the Qur’an …Abu Musa walked, and Ali
was his Imam and Amr walked while his Imam was Mu’awiya.”

After Abdullah bin Abbas had finished his speech, Imam Ali commanded
Abdullah bin Ja‘far to deliver a speech. The later went up the pulpit
and said: “O people, this is a matter that Ali is decide on and others
are to be satisfied. You had brought Abu Musa and said: ‘We are
satisfied with this man; therefore, be satisfied with him.’ By Allah,
they did not reform Sham through what they made, nor did they corrupt
Iraq, nor did they deaden Ali’s right, or enlivened Mu’awiya’s
falsehood. The little followers and Satan’s incitement Woe unto Sa‘d’s
mother, Sa‘d is strictness and seriousness!

When the Prophet heard her, he said: “Every mourner is a liar except
the one who mourns for Sa‘d!” This has been mentioned in the book Usd
al-Ghaba, vol. 2, p. 296.

do not remove the truth. Today, we follow Ali just as we followed him
yesterday.” Then he went down the pulpit.[^1]

**The Mutiny of the Kharijites**

When the arbitration failed and the delegation of Kufa came back with
disappointment and failure, Imam Ali spared no effort to urge the people
to fight against the rebellious forces. The people responded to that.
However, the Kharijites made mischief in the land. They left Kufa and
camped at al-Nahrawan.[^2] They asked Abdullah bin Khabbab bin al-Arat[^3]
, a great companion of the Prophet, who passed by them:

-Who are you?
-A believing man!
-What do you think of Ali bin Abi Talib?
- he is Ameerul Mo’minin (commander of the believers); the first of the
Muslims to believe in Allah and His Apostle.
-What is your name?
-Abdullah bin Khabbab bin al-Arat, the companion of Allah’s Apostle.
-Have we terrified you? -Yes.

[^1] Al-Imama wa al-Siyasa, vol. 1, p. 144.
[^2] Al-Nahrawan was a district between Baghdad and Wasit from the
eastern side. Its border was connected to Baghdad. It had many towns
like Iskaf, al-Safiya, and others. The battle between Imam Ali and the
Kharijites took place there. There was a great river in it. However, the
river was destroyed. The reason for its destruction was that the kings
differed and fought against each other during the days of the Seljuks.
All the kings did not take care of it, and the river was in the way of
the troops. All these reasons required the inhabitants to leave it, that
destruction dominated it. This has been mentioned in the book Mu‘jam
al-Buldan.

[^3] Abdullah bin Khabbab bin al-Arat al-Mada’ini was the ally of Banu
Zahra. He narrated traditions on the authority of his father and Ubay
bin Abi Ka‘ab. Some traditionists reported on his authority such as
Abdullah bin al-Harith, ‘Abdurrahman bin Abzi, a companion of the
Prophet. In respect of him al-‘Ijli has said: “He is trustworthy. He was
among the second generation. The Harawrits killed him. Imam Ali sent him
to them, but they killed him. Ibn Hayyan has mentioned him as among the
trustworthy. Al-Ghalabi has said: “Abdullah was among the Muslim
masters.” This has been mentioned in the book Tahthib al-Tahthib, vol.
5, p. 196. I say: “The books of history and biography have not mentioned
that Imam Ali sent Abdullah to the Kharijites.” Only al-‘Ijli has
mentioned that. It has been mentioned in the book al-Isaba, vol. 2, p.
302: “The Kharijites killed Abdullah when he was going to Kufa to meet
Imam Ali.”

-Do not be afraid.

-Relate to us from your father a tradition he had heard from Allah’s
Apostle, that may Allah benefit us with it. -Yes. Allah’s Apostle (a.s)
has said: “After me there will be a sedition during which man’s heart
dies just as his body dies. In the evening, he is a believer and in the
morning he will be an unbeliever.” -We have asked you about this
tradition. By Allah, we will kill you in a way that we have never killed
anyone in.

Then they tied him. They brought him along with his wife, who was
pregnant and about to give birth. They put them beside a date palm. A
fresh date fell down. One of them hurried to it and put it into his
mouth. Another one said to him: “You have unlawfully eaten it.” He
immediately spat it out. One of them drew his sword, struck with it a
pig belonging to a non-Muslim man and killed it. One of them shouted at
him, saying: “This is of the mischief in the land!”

The man hurried to the owner of the pig and satisfied him. When
Abdullah bin Khabbab saw that, he said to them: “If you are truthful in
what I see, then I feel no fear of you. By Allah, I have made no mistake
in Islam. I am a believer, and you have given me security. You have
said: ‘There is no harm on you!’” However, they paid no attention to his
speech. They brought him along with his wife. They made him lie down at
the bank of the river. They put him on that pig which they had killed.
Then they killed him. Then they walked towards his wife, who was shaking
with fear. She knew that the ghost of death dominated her. She was
looking at her killed husband. She asked them for mercy and begged them,
saying: “I am mere a woman! Do you not fear Allah!”

However, they paid no attention to her asking for mercy and beseeching.
They hurried towards her as dogs. They killed her and split her belly
open. Then they went to three women and killed them. Among them there
was Umm Sinan al-Saydawiya, who was a companion of the Prophet (a.s).
The evil of the Kharijites did not stop at this limit. They previewed
the people, spread terror among them, and made corruption in the land.

**The Battle of al-Nahrawan**

Imam Ali sent to the Kharijites al-Harith bin Murrah al-‘Abdi to ask
them about the reason for their terrifying against innocent people and
their spreading of terror in the land. When he reached them, they killed
him. When the news of his murder reached Imam Ali, some of his
companions said to him: “O Ameerul Mo’minin, why you let these
(Kharijites) remain after us to succeed us in our properties and
families? Take us to them and when we finish that which is between us
and them, take us to our enemy from the people of Sham.” The Imam agreed
with them. He knew that the danger coming form the Kharijites was
greater than the danger of Mu’awiya, because of their nearness to his
capital. Without doubt, they would have made disorders if he had gone to
fight against Mu’awiya. The Imam decided to go to them. His caller
called among the troops: “The departure! O Servants of Allah, the
departure!”

The Imam’s troops moved. The Islamic thought urged them to fight
against those rebelled against the religion and played with the security
of people. When they reached the Kharijites, Imam Ali sent them a
messenger to ask them to hand him those who killed Abdullah bin Khabbab
and al-Harith bin Murrah. However, they all gave one answer: “We all
killed them! We all regard the shedding of your and their bloods as
lawful!”

Then, the Imam himself walked towards them and delivered a speech
saying: “O group of people, I warn you that the nation will curse you
tomorrow when you will be killed near this river while you have neither
clear excuse nor proof. Did you not know that I had prohibited you from
the arbitration, told you that the request of the people (of Mu’awiya)
was a trick, informed you that the people were neither the men of
religion nor of the Qur’an, and that I was more aware of them than you?
I realized them when they were children and grown-ups. They were the
wickedest grown-ups and children. They are the men of cunning and
treachery. If you parted with me and my opinion, you would part with
good and determination. However, you disobeyed me and forced me until I
accepted the arbitration. When I did that, I stipulated, made sure, and
required the two arbitrators that they should enliven what the Qur’an
has enlivened and deaden what the Qur’an has deadened. However, they
differed and opposed the judgment of the Book and the Sunna and acted
according to the mean desire. So we left their command. We are still on
our first affair. Therefore, what is your news? And from where did you
come?”

In his speech, Imam Ali (a.s) has explained that they forced him to
accept the arbitration, accepted it unwillingly and his life was liable
to danger, and that he required the two arbitrators to judge according
to the Qur’an and the Sunna of the Prophet. As they did not judge
according to that and did not follow the truth, their judgment was
refused. However, these wicked people, who did not understand the Imam’s
speech, answered the Imam in a way indicating that they went too far in
ignorance. They said: “When we appointed the two men as arbitrators, we
were mistaken in that and were infidels. We have repented of that. If
you bear witness against yourself that you were an infidel and you
repent as we repented, then we will be with you and belong to you;
otherwise, you should be away from us. If you refuse, we will part with
you.”

The Imam said to them: “Shall I say and bear witness against myself
that I am an infidel after my faith in Allah, and after my emigration
and jihad with Allah’s Apostle (a.s)? If I do, then I have gone astray,
and I am not among the rightly- guided. Woe unto you! Why have you
permitted killing us and the mutiny against our community? The people
chose two men and said to them: ‘Reflect through the truth on that which
sets right the community, that a man may be deposed and one may replace
another.’ Is it lawful for you to put your swords on your shoulders and
strike with them the people’s heads and shed their blood; this is the
clear loss!”[^1] When they knew that they were unable to refute the
Imam’s argument, they called each other: “Do not address them and do not
speak with them! Get ready for the battle! The departure, the departure
to the Paradise!”

When the Imam was hopeless of guiding them or taking them back to the
way of the truth, he mobilized his troops and commanded them not to
start fighting until they fought against them. When the Kharijites saw
that readiness, they got ready too. As their souls and hearts were full
of yearning for fighting as the thirsty yearned for water, they called
each other: “Is there anyone who wants to go to the Paradise?”

They all responded to that and strongly attacked Imam Ali’s troops,
saying: “No judgment except Allah’s!” The Imam’s horsemen formed two
parties. One party went to the right wing and the other went to the left
wing. As for the Kharijites, they were rushing between the two parties.
The Imam’s companions received them with arrows. It was only an hour and
they all were killed. None escaped death except nine persons.[^2] When
the battle came to an end, the Imam asked his companions to look for Thu
al-Thadya[^3] among the killed. They carefully looked for him but they
did

[^1] Al-Imam wa al-Siyasa, vol. 1, p. 155.
[^2] Al-Shahristani, al-Milal wa al-Nihal, vol. 1, p. 159. He has
mentioned: “Two of them escaped to Oman, two of them to Kirman, two of
them to Sajistan, two of them to al-Jazirah, and one of them to Tal
Mouzoon. They spread their beliefs in these places where their heresies
appeared.”
[^3] In respect of Thi al-Thadya, Anas bin Malik has said: “We admired
the worship of a man during the time of Allah’s Apostle (a.s.). We
mentioned that to Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) and gave him the man’s name,
but he did not recognize him. While we were mentioning him, a man came
towards us. We said to him: ‘O Allah’s Apostle: ‘That not find him. They
returned to Imam Ali (a.s) and told him that they had not found the man.
He asked them to look for him, saying: “I have never said a lie nor have
I been accused of lying. May Allah have mercy on you! Look for the man!
He is among the killed!”

They went and looked for him. One of the Imam’s companions found him,
and so he hurried to the Imam running and told him that. The Imam said:
“Allah is great! I have not fabricated a lie against Muhammad! He (Thi
al-Thadya) has a defective hand that has no bone. At the end of it there
is a nipple like that of a woman’s breast and there are five or seven
hairs on it whose ends are crooked.” The Imam ordered the corpse of Thi
al-Thidiya to be brought. It was brought before him. He looked at his
arm and found on it a breast like that of a woman and there were black
hairs on it. When the Imam saw that, he prostrated himself before Allah.
Then he divided among his companions the Kharijites’ weapons and
animals. He returned the equipment and the servants to their owners.

**The horrible consequences**

Great ordeals and troubles followed the battles of Siffin and
al-Nahrawan. They drowned the country into events and misfortunes. They
brought about a desertion to Imam Ali and his son al-Hasan. We will
mention some of them as follows:

is the man!’ When he (a.s.) looked at him, he said: ‘You are telling me
about a man on whose face there is one of Satan’s signs.’ The man came
towards us and stopped without greeting us. Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) said
to him: ‘I adjure you before Allah, did you say to yourself when you
stopped in front of the gathering: ‘None among the people is better than
me?’ ‘Yes, by Allah,’ he replied. Then he (the man) came in to perform
the prayer. However, Allah’s Apostle said: ‘Who can kill the man?’ ‘I,’
replied Abu Bakr. He went to him and found him praying, so he said:
‘Glory belongs to Allah! Shall I kill the man while he is praying and
Allah’s Apostle had prohibited from killing worshipers?’ He went out,
and Allah’s Apostle asked him: ‘What have you done?’ He replied: ‘I
hated to kill him while he is praying, and you had prohibited from
killing worshipers.’ The Prophet (a.s.) asked his companions: ‘Who can
kill the man?’ ‘I,’ Umar replied. He went to him and found him putting
his forehead on the ground. So Umar said: ‘Abu Bakr is better than me.’
Then he went out. ‘What have you done?’ asked Allah’s Apostle. ‘I found
him putting his face on the ground for Allah, so I hated to kill him,’
replied Umar. The Prophet asked: ‘Who can kill the man?’ ‘I,’ replied
Imam Ali. The Apostle said to him: ‘You are sufficient to him if you
found him!’ The Imam went to him but he did not find him. He returned to
Allah’s Apostle and told him what hapened, and the Prophet (a.s.) said:
‘If he is killed, no two men of my community will disagree! Their first
and last will be the same!’” This has been mention in the book al-Isaba,
vol. 1, p. 484.

1. The Mutiny of the Troops

After the two battles, the Iraqi troops were afflicted with division,
mutiny, weakness, and tiredness of war. The reason was that many men
were killed, and the killed ones belonged to those military regiments.
Therefore, mourning, impatience, and grumbling spread among them.
Because of that the military forces were tired of fighting. They liked
peace, and preferred tranquility. That clearly appeared when Imam Ali
wanted to go to fight against Mu’awiya after the Battle of al-Nahrawan.
They did not respond to him. For example, al-Ash‘ath bin Qays said to
him: “O Ameerul Mo’minin, our arrows are over, our swords are tired, and
our spearheads are blunt. Let us return to our headquarters to supply
ourselves with the best equipments. Perhaps, Ameerul Mo’minin can
recompense the number of those who were killed, for that will be
sufficient to us against our enemy!”

Because of the speech of this cunning, wicked person, the fighters left
their camps. They escaped and entered the nearby cities. The Imam was
sure that they mutinied against him and showed no obedience to him. He
was forced to return to his capital (Kufa). From this case, we
understand that the troops were desirous for peace and were tired of
war. After that the Imam tried to repair the conditions but he could
not.

2. Losing his prominent Companions

At the Battle of Siffin, Imam Ali lost his most important companions
who were very faithful and loyal to him. They were the righteous
remainder from among the Muhajireen and the Ansar, who struggled for the
dignity of Islam and built its edifices. If they had been alive, the
Imam’s troops would not have mutinied. He showed great sorrow at their
death and he bitterly wept for them. He remembered them when he was
delivering a speech from above the pulpit of Kufa. He deeply sighed and
said: “It is no harm for our brothers whose bloods were shed at (the
Battle) of Siffin that they are not alive today to suffer pangs and meet
offences! By Allah, they have met Allah, and He has given them their
rewards! And He has made them live in the Abode of Security after their
fear! Where are my brothers who walked in the way and followed the
truth? Where is Ammar? And where is Ibn al-Tayhan?[^1] And
[^1] Ibn al-Tayhan is Malik bin al-Tayhan bin Malik al-Awsi. He was
among the six persons who met Allah’s Apostle. He was the first of the
Ansar to meet him and was the first to pledge allegiance to him on the
night of al-Aqaba. It was said that he was not the first to pay homage.
Malik and Usayd bin Khudayr were the chiefs of the Banu Abdil Ashhal. He
was present at the battles of Badr, Uhd, and all of the battles. It was
said that he died during the reign of Umar in the year 20 A. H. And it
was said that he fought on behalf of Imam Ali at the Battle of Siffin
and died shortly after that. In the book al-Isti‘ab it has been
mentioned: “Most surely he fought on behalf where is Thu al-Shahadatayn
(the one of two testimonies)?[^1] And where are their equals from among
their brothers who made a contract for the intention and whose heads
were sent to the sinners?”

Then he put his hand on his holy beard. He wept for a long time, and
then said: “Ah for my brothers, who recited the Qur’an and mastered it,
reflected on the religious duty and performed it, enlivened the Sunna,
deadened the innovation, were summoned to jihad and they responded, and
trusted in the leader and followed him!”[^2]

He was very sad for losing the choice of his people whose high position
was well known, who understood his objectives, and followed his valuable
instructions and teachings, to the extent that they became models of
perfection and faith. When the Battle of Siffin destroyed these ideal
people, the Imam became helpless. He found none in that defective
society to support and help him achieve what he wanted in this life such
as reforming the society, and spreading the standards of justice and
equality among people. As for his opponent Mu’awiya, he did not lose at
the Battle of Siffin any of his followers who were loyal to him; rather,
many of those, who sold him their consciences and followed after the
pleasures of this world, joined him.

3. Occupation and Invasion

Mu’awiya studied the psyche of the Iraqi troops and understood their
weakness and their disobedience to Imam Ali. He occupied the Muslim
countries one by one. He sent huge troops to Egypt, which was the hope
and wish of Amr bin al-Aas. They occupied it and killed its governor the
good one, Muhammad bin Abi Bakr in a terrible way. As for the Iraqis,
they were of Imam Ali at the Battle of Siffin and was killed at it. The
Imam’s clearly speech indicates that.”

[^1] Thu al-Shahadatayn was Khuzayma bin Thabit bin al-Fakih al-Ansari,
al-Awsi. He was given the kunya of Abu Imarah. Allah’s Apostle (a.s.)
made his testimony as equal to that of two men. Once, the Prophet bought
a horse from Sawa’ bin Qays al-Muharibi. Sawa’ denied the purchase.
Khuzayma bore witness for the Prophet. Allah’s Apostle asked him: “What
has made you bear witness while you were not present with us?” He
replied: “I have believed you in respect of what you have brought and
come to know that you say but the truth. So how do I not believe you in
respect of this matter?” So Allah’s Apostle said: “For or against
whomever Khuzayma bears witness is sufficient to him.” Khuzayma fought
on behalf of Allah’s Apostle at the battles of Badr, Uhd and all the
battles. He fought on behalf of Imam Ali at the battles of al-Jamal and
Siffin. When Ammar bin Yasir was killed at the Battle of Siffin,
Khuzayma said: “I heard Allah’s Apostle say: ‘The oppressive party will
kill Ammar.’” Then he drew his own sword and fought until he was killed.
This has been mentioned in the book Usd al-Ghaba, vol. 2, p. 114.
[^2] Muhammad Abda, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 2, p. 130.

laggard to respond to the Imam and rise with him to resist this
aggression. Then, Mu’awiya sent other troops under the leadership of the
sinful rogue, Bisr bin Abi Arta’a[^1] . This rude leader headed for
Medina whose governor was Abu Ayyub al-Ansari[^2] , who felt fear and
escaped. Bisr entered Medina and he made terror and fear enter the
hearts. He made a speech before its people and his speech was full of
rudeness and severity. He said through speech: “O people of Medina, were
it not for Mu’awiya’s promise, I would kill all the adults.”

When this sinner (Busr) controlled Medina, he headed for Mecca and
occupied it. He, by force, took the pledge of allegiance (to Mu’awiya).
Then he went to Yemen whose governor was Ubaydillah bin al-Abbas, who
escaped and saved himself from Bisr’s evil, and headed for Kufa to
inform Imam Ali of that. When Bisr entered Yemen, he took from its
people the pledge of allegiance (to Mu’awiya). He looked for two
children of Ubaydillah. When he found them, he killed them.[^3] When
their news reached their mother, she was shocked, and was about to lose
her mind because of her great sorrow for them.

When the terrible news reached Imam Ali, he went to his companions
while he was so distressed for the continuous mutiny in his troops. He
addressed [^1] His full name is Bisr bin Abi Arta’a al-Qurashi. The name
of Abi Arta’a is Umayr. It was said that his name was Uwaymir al-Aamiri.
This rude person committed crimes and sins which none had committed. For
example, he killed the two sons of Ubaydillah bin al-Abbas. The two sons
were Abdurrahman and Qatham. They were children. Bisr did not pay
attention to their kinship to Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) and their being too
children. He attacked Hamadan and took the women therein as captives,
and they were the first Muslim women to be taken as captives. He killed
many people from the Banu Sa‘d. He also committed other similar crimes.
This sinful person fought against Imam Ali at the Battle of Siffin. The
Imam stabbed him, and he fell on the ground and showed his private
parts, so the Imam left him.

Busr doted at the end of his life and died in Medina. It was said that
he died in al-Sham during the last days of Mu’awiya’s rule. (This has
been mentioned in the book) al-Isti‘ab, vol. 1, pp. 154-163.

[^2] Abu Ayyub is Khalid bin Zayd bin Kulayb al-Ansari. He belonged to
the Banu al-Najjar. He was known for his name and kunya. He was present
with the Prophet at al-Aqaba, the Battle of Badr, and the battles after
it. When the Prophet arrived in Medina, he stopped at his house until he
built his houses and his mosque. The Prophet made him associate as
brother with Mus’ab bin Umayr. Imam Ali appointed him as a governor over
Medina when he went to Iraq. Then he (Abu Ayyub) joined him. He fought
with Imam Ali against the Kharijites. He kept on jihad after the Prophet
until he died in Constantinople. He died in the year 50 A. H., and it
was said that he was died in the year 52 A. H. This has been mentioned
in (the book) al-Isaba, vol. 1, p. 405.

[^3] Abi al-Fida, Tarikh, vol. 1, p. 180.

them, saying: “I have been informed that Bisr has overpowered Yemen. By
Allah, I think that those will overcome you by their unity on their
falsehood and your disunity on your truth, and separation, your
disobedience to your Imam in the truth, and their obedience to their
leader in falsehood, their fulfillment of the trust in favor of their
master and your betrayal, and their righteousness in their countries and
your mischief. If I entrust one of you with a bowl, I fear that he may
steal its handle.

“O Allah, I am bored of them and they are bored of me. Change them for
me with better than them, and change me for them with worse than me. O
Allah, melt their hearts as salt melts in water. By Allah, I wish I had
a thousand horsemen from Bani Faras bin Ghanam.”[^1] Then Imam Ali came
down the pulpit.[^2]

From this speech we can conclude that the Imam’s troops were corrupt
and treacherous; therefore, there is no wonder when Imam al-Hasan
refused them and let Mu’awiya rule them. The people who do not support
the truth and do not defend their dignity are worthy of being
subservient to tyrants. Mu’awiya was not satisfied with that. He sent
huge troops under the leadership of Sufyan bin Awf to attack the Iraqis
in their own country. His troops invaded Heet[^3] and Anbar[^4] . He
horribly killed their inhabitants and inflicted heavy damages on their
properties. When their news reached Imam Ali, he became very sad, for he
knew that falsehood had become firm, that he was unable to destroy and
put an end to it, when he saw his companions whose hearts were full of
fear, abasement, and cowardice. He (a.s) ascended the pulpit and
addressed them with a wonderful speech that showed what was in his soul
of continuous worries and sorrows, and pictured what was in the souls of
his companions such as subservience, weakness, and feebleness. He said:
“Beware! I called you insistently to fight these people night and day,
secretly and openly and exhorted you to attack them before they would
attack

[^1] The Banu Faras were a tribe famous for bravery. Among them there
was Alqama, who was delighted when he stabbed. Among them was Rabee‘a
bin Makdam, the protector of his womenfolk dead and alive. None other
than him protected his womenfolk.
[^2] Muhammad Abda, Sharh Nahj al-Belagha, vol. 1, p. 60.
[^3] It was a village near Baghdad and to the north of al-Anbar. It had
a lot of date palms and boons. This has been mentioned in (the book)
Mu‘jam al-Buldan, vol. 8, p. 486.
[^4] It is a city at the bank of the Euphrates. It is situated in the
western part of Baghdad. There are ten leagues between them. Sabur bin
Hurmuz Thul Aktaf, was the first to build it. Then Abu al-Abbas
al-Saffah, the first Abbasid caliph, renewed it, built palaces therein,
and resided in it until he died. (This has been mentioned in the book)
Mu‘jam al-Buldan, vol. 1, p. 340.

you, for, by Allah, every people are attacked in their own home, they
meet disgrace. However, you put it off to others and forsook it till
destruction befell you and till your cities were occupied. This is the
man from (the Banu) Ghamid whose horsemen have reached al-Anbar, killed
Hassaan bin Hassaan al-Bakri, and removed your horsemen from their
garrisons.

“I have come to know that everyone of them entered upon Muslim and
non-Muslim women and took away their ornaments from their legs, arms,
necks, and ears. No woman could but saying: To Allah we belong and to
Him is our return!

“Then they went back laden with wealth while losing no drop of blood.
If any Muslim dies of grief after that, he is not to be blamed but
rather he will be preferred near me.

“How wonder! By Allah, it kills the heart and causes grief that is to
see the unity of these people (Mu’awiya’s people) on their wrong and
your dispersion from your right. Woe and grief unto you! You have become
the target at which arrows are shot. You are being killed and you do not
kill. You are being attacked but you do not attack. Allah is being
disobeyed and you are satisfied. When I ask you to march against them in
summer, you say: it is hot. Respite us till heat subsides from us. When
I command you to march in winter, you say: it is severely cold; give us
time till cold clears from us. Is all that escaping from heat and cold?
By Allah, your escaping from the sword is greater. O you semi-men and no
men! O you children’s minds and women’s reasons! I wish I had not seen
you, nor had I known you! By Allah, this acquaintance has brought about
regret and grief. May Allah fight you! You have filled my heart with
pus, loaded my bosom with rage, made me drink grief a dose after
another, and destroyed my determination by your disobeying and
disappointing.”

This wonderful, enthusiastic speech did not move them, nor did it
remove the spirit of weakness and mutiny from them. They had surrendered
to the armed aggression. Mu’awiya took from their properties and their
souls whatever he wanted.

4. Sedition of al-Khurayt

The tribulation of the Imam was not confined to his companions and his
opponent Mu’awiya. The tribulation and the evil exceeded to that which
was greater and more intense. It was the thought of the Kharijites which
was not finished off at the Battle of al-Nahrawan, but some of its
adopters were killed. It grew wider and its supporters became more. They
created the most horrible problems in the Muslim society. They summoned
people to mutiny against the Imam’s government. The most important one
of them was al-Khurayt[^1] who, with a group of his companions, revolted
against the imam. Imam Ali (a.s) sent to them an army to make them come
back to obedience and or fight them if they refused.

There were debates and arguments between them. When al-Khurayt refused
to return to obedience, a violent battle happened between the two
parties, but they did not defeat each other. Then al-Khurayt and a group
of his companions escaped to Basra. The Imam’s troop returned without
winning anything. The Imam sent other troops greater in number and
power. He commanded them to follow after the rebels. In the meantime, he
wrote a letter to Abdullah bin Abbas, his governor of Basra, to supply
the troops with what they needed. Abdullah bin Abbas responded.

The two parties met and a violent battle happened between them. The
signs of weakness and feebleness appeared in al-Khurayt’s troops, but he
was able to flee with his companions during the dark night and go to
Ahwaz. There he sowed discord and propagated his thought among those
simple-minded people who did not understand the Islamic thought, nor did
they reflect on its objectives and reality. They responded to him, and
he made them refrain from Islam. He prevented the Arabs from giving alms
and the Christians from giving poll taxes, that many Christians, who had
been Muslims, renounced Islam. Many of those stupid followed him, and
his case became manifest and his power became strong. However, the
Imam’s troop followed them until they found them. Then a battle took
place between them and led to the murder of al-Khurayt and a group of
his party. The commander of the Imam’s troops took the rest of
al-Khurayt’s troops as captives. He was kind to those who became Muslim
and asked the apostates to turn to Allah in repentance. He took as
captives those who refused to be Muslim.

In this manner, the troubles widened and increased in the Muslim
capital, which was under the Imam’s control. They brought about
betraying and then killing the Imam, betraying his son al-Hasan, causing
many damages to the Muslim society, and making it sink into griefs and
distresses. The horrible results after the Battle of Siffin brought
about a collapse and weakness to the Muslims. The rebellious forces
overcame the forces of the truth and Islam, paved the way for the
Umayyads to govern the Muslims, possess alone their properties and
abilities, and spare no effort to fight against righteousness and all
good tendencies. The Muslims complained of their tyranny, dictatorship,
and oppression.

[^1] Al-Khurayt bin Rashid al-Naaji was the leader of all the tribe of
Mudhar at the Battle of al-Jamal. He was appointed as a governor by
Abdullah bin Aamir over a Persian district. He was with Imam Ali until
the arbitration took place. So he opposed him, parted with him, and went
to Persia. Al-Isaba, vol. 1, p. 422.


