Chapter I : the Two Lights Meet Together
========================================

Fatima, the truthful one and principal of Eve’s daughters, grew up
during the advent of Islam. She grew up while Islam was at the stage of
progress. The Prophet Muhammad, the savior of mankind and master of
Adam’s children (a.s) brought her up. He supplied her with his wisdom
and perfection. He poured on her a ray of his sacred soul. He supplied
her with the noble qualities of his great soul, that she might be a
model for the women of his community, an ideal of human perfection, and
a symbol of purity and chastity.

The Prophet (a.s) showed her love that he showed to none other than
her, for she was the righteous survival daughter from his pure wife
Khadija,[^1] mother [^1] Khadija al-Qurashiya, al-Asadiya, daughter of
Khuwaylid bin Asad, was the wife of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family. She was the first to believe in him according to the
unanimous agreement of the Muslims. In the pre-Islamic period she was
called al-Tahira (the pure one). She was very rich. She hired men to
trade with her property. She heard that Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless
him and his family, was truthful in speech, great in honesty, and noble
in ethics. So she sent for him and asked him to trade with her property.
He responded to her and went to Sham (Syria) along with her boy called
Maysara. When he arrived in Sham, he sat in the shadow of a tree close
to the hermitage of a monk. The monk looked at them and asked Maysara:
“Who is that man?” “He is from Quraysh, among the people of the Sacred
City (Mecca),” replied Maysara. “None sits in the shadow of the tree
except a prophet,” explained the monk. Then Allah’s Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family, sold the things he had brought. He bought what
he wanted, and then he returned to Mecca. He gave Khadija the property
and the profits. Maysara told Khadija about the monk’s statement.

your noble moral traits, and your truthful speech.

” Then she proposed to him. She was from the middle of Quraysh in
lineage, the greatest of them in honor and wealth. The Apostle went away
and told his uncles about her statement. So his uncle Hamza went out and
visited her father. He asked him for his daughter’s hand, and he
responded to that. Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
married her. She was forty years old, and his holy age was twenty-five
years. When Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) was sent as a prophet, she was the
first to believe in him and to help him. When he heard a detested thing
from those who opposed him and accused him of lying, she relieved him
and made easy to him the affairs of the people. Because of her great
jihad in Islam, Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) gave her good news of a reed
house in the garden where there is neither noise nor tiredness. Gabriel
carried to her greetings from Allah. The Prophet (a.s.) said in respect
of her: “Four (women) are the best of the women of the world. (They are)
Maryam, daughter of Imran, Asya, daughter of Muzahim and Fir‘un’s wife,
Khadija, daughter of Khuwaylid, and Fatima, daughter of Muhammed.
Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) always remembered her, to of the faithful, may
Allah be pleased with her. Khadija was kind and affectionate to the
Prophet. She believed in him before other than her. She appropriated her
wealth and abilities to straighten Islam and to spread its mission, to
the extent that her wealth ran out. The Prophet (a.s) did not forget the
efforts she rendered to Islam. So he thanked her very much. After her
death he always asked Allah to have mercy on her. He mentioned her
loyalty and kindness, to the extent that A’isha was angry with him and
said to him: “Why do you remember an old woman whose corners of the
mouth were red? Allah has given you (a wife) better than her in place of
her!”

The Prophet (a.s) became angry and he said to her: “Allah has not given
me (a wife) better than he! She believed in me when the people accused
me of lying, and helped me with her wealth when the men deprived me. I
was given children from her and was deprived of children from other than
her.”[^1]

Khadija helped the Prophet when the Qurashi tyrants were angry with
him. She stood beside him to protect him and to save his message through
her great wealth. He was given a child from her and was not given from
other than her. He was given from her (Fatima), the mistress of the
women of the world, the like of Virgin Mary, daughter of Imran in
chastity and purity. He was given Fatima al-Zehra’, peace be on her. She
was called Fatima because Allah has protected her and her progeny from
the Fire.[^2]

the extent that when he slaughtered a ewe, he went to Khadija’s
relatives and gave them some of its meat as gift. Khadija died three
years before Hijra. It was said that she died three days after the death
of Abu Talib. Accordingly, misfortunes continuously befell Allah’s
Apostle (a.s.). She died in the month of Ramadan at age of sixty-five.
She was buried at al-Hijoon. This has been mentioned in the books Usd
al-Ghaba, al-Isaba, al-Isti‘ab.

[^1] Is‘af al-Raghibeen. A narration similar to that has been narrated
in Ahmed’s Musnad, vol. 6, p. 150, al-Isti‘ab, Usd al-Ghaba, al-Isaba,
and Sinan Ibn Maja.

[^2] Ibn Hajar, al-Sawa‘iq, p. 96. In this book it has been mentioned:
“Ali, peace be on him, asked Allah’s Apostle (a.s.): ‘Why has she been
called Fatima?’ ‘Allah has protected her and her progeny from the Fire,’
he (a.s.) replied.” Al-Hafiz Muhib al-Deen al-Tabari has mentioned the
tradition in his book Dhakha’ir al-‘Ukkkba, p. 26. In it he has
mentioned: “Imam Ali bin Musa al-Rida narrated the tradition through its
chain of authorities and its words. (He said) that Allah’s Apostle
(a.s.) said: ‘Allah, the Great and Almighty, protected from the Fire my
daughter Fatima, her children, and those who love them.’” It has been
narrated on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas, may be pleased with him, who
said: “Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) has said: ‘Surely my daughter Fatima
having eyes with a marked contrast between white and black (hawra’). She
did not menstruate.’ He named her Fatima because Allah protected her and
those who love her from the Fire.’” The tradition has been narrated by
al-Nisa’i.

**Her High Position**

The Prophet (a.s) has mentioned the remarkable position of Fatima
al-Zahra’, peace be on her, with Allah. He (a.s) addressed her, saying:
“Surely Allah is pleased when you are pleased and He is angry when you
are angry.”[^1] He took her by the hand and said to the Muslims: “Whoever
recognizes this (daughter of mine) knows her, and whoever does not
recognize her, (let me tell him who she is). She is Fatima, daughter of
Muhammad. She is a part of me. She is my heart and my soul between my
two sides. Whoever hurts her hurts me, and whoever hurts me hurts
Allah.”

The Prophet has compared her rest to his rest, and her happiness to his
happiness. The religious scholars have agreed on the traditions narrated
from the Prophet (a.s) in this respect. He has said: “Fatima is a part
from me. What pleases her pleases me, and what displeases her displeases
me.”[^2]

A’isha has narrated a tradition in respect of his care for Fatima
al-Zahra’, peace be on her, and his honoring her. She has said: “When
she (Fatima) visited him, he got up for her. He kissed, and welcomed
her, took her by the hand, and seated her in his sitting-place.”[^3]

A’isha was asked about:

“Which of people was the most lovable to Allah’s Apostle (a.s)?”
“Fatima,” she replied.
Then she was asked: “Of men?”
“Her husband,” she answered, “as I know he fasted and prayed two
much.”[^4]
In his Musnad, Ahmed bin Hanbal has narrated a tradition from the
Prophet (a.s) who said: “May her father die for her!. He said that three
times.”[^5]

The Prophet went too far in loving and respecting her, to the extent
that when he wanted to travel, she should be the last one whom he
visited before travel,

[^1] The tradition has been mentioned in the books Usd al-Ghaba,
al-Isaba, Dhakha’ir al-‘Uqqba, p. 39.
[^2] Al-Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 3, p.154.
[^3] Ibid., p. 157. Is‘af al-Raghibeen, p. 169.
[^4] Al-Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 3, p. 157. Dhakha’ir al-‘Uqqba, p. 35. An
addition to the narration has been mentioned in it, “It is worthy of
saying the truth….” In the book al-Isti‘ab, it has been narrated on the
authority of Burayda, who has said: “The most lovable (one) of the women
to Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) was Fatim, of the men was Ali.”
[^5] Al-Sawa‘iq al-Muhriqa, p. 109.

and the first when he came back from travel. [^1]

Anas bin Malik has narrated that Allah’s Apostle (a.s) passed by the
door of Fatima’s house for six month. When he went out to perform the
Morning Prayer, he said: “The prayer, O members of the house!” Then he
recited this verse: (Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness
from you, O people of the House and to purify a (thorough) purifying).
The love and care of the Prophet (a.s) toward his daughter Fatima
al-Zehra’, peace be on her, were more than those of other fathers toward
their children.[^2] Without doubt, it is well known that the Prophet
(a.s) granted his daughter this affection and poured upon her this honor
not because she was his daughter and he had no child other than her.
Prophethood was far away from favoritism and rushing through the
sentiment of desire and love. Rather he did that to build virtue and to
raise the level of the high values. For he (a.s) found no girl or woman
among Muslims equal to his daughter in perfection, chastity, and purity.
It was due to the fact that it had been gathered in her all good ideals
such as knowledge, worship, piety, and the like of the qualities that
were rarely found in Eve’s daughters.

**Imam Ali proposes to Fatima**

When the daughter of the Prophet (a.s) reached the prime of youth, the
notables from among the companions of the Prophet (a.s) had the honor of
meeting him (the Prophet). They put before him their desire of having
honor to be related to him by marriage. Abu Bakr visited him and
proposed to his daughter, but he (a.s) refused and said to him: “I am
waiting for Allah’s Act in respect of her.” Then Umar visited him, and
he gave him an answer similar to that of his companion.[^3] When the
Muslims came to know that the affair of Fatima al-Zahra’ was in the hand
of Allah, and that the Prophet (a.s) had no

[^1] Al-Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 3, p. 154.
[^2] In his book Fatima and Muhammed’s Daughters, Lamans, an
orientalist, has written fallacies and wrong facts. Talking about Fatima
(a.s.), he has said: “Her position in her father’s house was not
apparently important. Rather, it was less than that of Aa’isha, Zaynab
and Hafsa.” He has added: “She was normally treated in her father’s
house.” Surely, Lamans is famous for his being a hireling of colonialism
and his harboring malice against Islam. From which book has he concluded
such results? It is worth mentioning that the Islamic books are full of
the authentic traditions reported from the Prophet (a.s.) concerning her
high position and great importance with him. The traditions we have
already mentioned and on which the Muslims have agreed clearly indicate
that the Prophet (a.s.) honored his daughter Fatimaa. However, Lamans
has intended to distort Islam and to disparage its remarkable
personalities.
[^3] Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqat, vol. 8, p. 11. Tarikh al-Khamis, vol. 1, p. 407.
Dhakha’ir al-‘Uqqba, p. 29.

right to decide it, they refrained from asking him about that. After a
period of time, a group of the companions met Imam Ali and mentioned to
him his kinship to the Prophet (a.s), his extreme bravery in Islam, and
his supporting the Prophet (a.s) in all situations and battles. They
urged him (Imam Ali) to propose to the Prophet’s daughter, that he might
be successful in relating to him by marriage and to add the honor of the
relation of marriage to the honor of his jihad. Accordingly, he (a.s)
slowly and hesitatingly went to the Prophet (a.s). He was silent, so the
Prophet (a.s) asked him: “What is the need of Ibn Abi Talib?”[^1]

Shyness overcame Imam Ali for a while, and then he answered: “I have
remembered Fatima, O messenger of Allah!”

The Prophet answered him while delight manifested on his face and a
smile appeared on his lips, saying: “Welcome! Surely Allah has commanded
me to marry you to my daughter!”

Delight covered Imam Ali’s heart with the good of this life and the
hereafter that the Generous Creator wanted to him. He was the cousin of
the Prophet (a.s) and would be his son-in-law. In some exegesis of the
Qur’an it has been mentioned that it was he who was meant by this verse:
“And He it is Who created man from the water, then He has made for him
blood relationship and marriage relationship, and your Lord is
powerful.[^2]”[^3] Then the Prophet turned to his companions and told them
about what Allah had commanded him. He said to them: “An angel came and
said to me: ‘O Allah’s Prophet, surely Allah recites you greetings and
says to you: ‘I have married Fatima before the exalted chiefs (in the
heaven); therefore, marry her to him (before those who

[^1] Some of those who have harbored malice against (Imam Ali), the
Commander of the faithful, explained that (Imam Ali) kept silent because
he was afraid of that the Prophet would refuse him due to his poverty.
This is an imaginary explanation, for the Prophet (a.s.) paid no
attention to any of the Muslim’s qualities except his virtues and his
reverential fear. He paid no attention to wealth and property. He
fraternized with Ali though he had knowledge of his poverty. In
al-Hakim’s Mustadrak, vol. 3, p. 14, and in (the book) al-Isti‘ab, vol.
3, p. 35, it has been mentioned: “When Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) associated
as brother with his companions, Ali went to him and asked: ‘You have
associated as brother with your companions and have not fraternized me
with anyone?’ ‘You are my brother in this world and in the next world!’
Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) replied.” There are other traditions indicating
that Ali was the soul of the Prophet (a.s.) his brother, his
testamentary trustee (of authority), his helper, and his successor after
him over his community. Imam Ali obtained this high position because of
his great relationship with Allah.

[^2] Qur’an, 25, 54.
[^3] Nur al-Absar, p. 42. Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 6, p. 218. Al-Mustadrak,
vol., 3, p. 153.

are) on the earth.”[^1]

The Prophet went in to his daughter. His holy soul was full of delight,
so he told her about that, saying: “I have married you to the best one
of my community. He is the greatest of them in knowledge, the most
meritorious in clemency, and the most inspired in peace.”[^2] He said to
her again: “O Fatima, did you not know that Allah, the Great and
Almighty, looked thoroughly over the people of the earth and chose your
father from them and made him a prophet, then he looked over them a
second time and chose your husband? He inspired me to marry you to him,
and I have made him (Imam Ali) as a guardian.”[^3]

He also said to her: “He (Imam Ali) was the first of my companions to
be a Muslim, the most senior of them in peace, the greatest of them in
knowledge and clemency.”[^4]

As these excellent ideals and high values were available in the
personality of Imam Ali (a.s), the Prophet (a.s) married him to his
daughter to whom there was no equal among the Muslims except the
Commander of the faithful (Ali). This has been mentioned in the holy
tradition: “If Ali had not been created, there would have been no equal
to Fatima.”[^5]

**The Dower
**
Delight covered the Prophet (a.s) so he turned to Ali and asked him:
“What kind of dower do you have?”

Imam Ali answered him that he had nothing except his horse and his
breastplate. The breastplate was among the things Allah had given to him
at the Battle of Badr. The Prophet (a.s) said to him: “As for your
horse, it is necessary for you, and as for your breastplate, you can
sell it.” Imam Ali (a.s) went to the market and sold his breastplate for
four hundred and eighty dirhams. He brought the money tied in the edge
of his garment and put it before the Prophet (a.s).[^6] Shyness overcame
him, for he knew that that

[^1] Majjma‘ al-Bayan (Beirut), vol. 9, p. 175.
[^2] Al-Khatib, al-Muttafaq. Al-Sayuti, Jama‘ al-Jawami‘, vol. 6, p.
398.
[^3] Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 6, p. 153.
[^4] Ahmed, Musnad, vol. 5, p. 26. Majjma‘ al-Zawa’id, vol. 6, p. 101.
Al-Riyad al-Nadira, vol. 2, p. 194.
[^5] Al-Manawi, Kunuz al-Haqa’iq, p. 124. Man la Yahdarahu al-Faqeeh,
vol. 3, p. 249.
[^6] Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 7, p. 114. In the book Tarikh al-Khamees, vol.
1, p. 407: “ Ali sold his camel and some of his belongings and gave (the
money) as a dower.” This narration opposes the famous one on which the
Muslims have agreed, and that is dower was less than that which the poor
gave to their wives. However, the Prophet (a.s) liked his being related
to him by marriage for nothing of the vanities of the world, nor other
than that whose affair belonged to the earth. Rather, he singled him out
with noble deed due to the fact that Imam Ali was the first person from
his community to believe in Islam, to struggle for it with his abilities
of which no person had.[^1]

**The Trousseau**

When the Prophet (a.s) received the dower, he gave some of it to Bilal
al-Habashi that he might buy some perfume. He also gave some of it to
Salman al-Farisi that he might buy the rest of the furniture. After an
hour they completed the trousseau, which was a ram’s skin that they
turned on its woolly face when they slept, a pillow full of coir[^2], a
bed tied with a strip[^3], two hand mills, one water skin, two jars, and
other simple things.[^4] From an Islamic viewpoint, they were more
expensive than the jewels and the belongings the kings and the rich had.
However, Lamans, an English orientalist, has concluded an opposite
result from this noble trousseau. He says: “Rather, this trousseau
Muhammad had ordered is a proof of the hatred that was in his soul
toward his daughter and her husband. His hatred toward him was not less
than that toward her.”[^5]

As Lamans harbored malice against Islam and was ignorant of its
precepts, he concluded such a result. He thought that the aspects of
love from a father for his child appear if he increases for him or her
pleasures, eases and beautiful

that he sold his breastplate and gave the money to Fatima as a dower.

[^1] In the books al-Mustadrak, vol. 3, p. 112 and al-Isti‘ab, vol. 3,
p. 31, it has been mentioned that Muhammed (a.s.) was made a prophet on
Monday, and Ali became a Muslim on Tuesday. The same narration has been
mentioned in other books. The Muslims have unanimously agreed that he
was the first to be a Muslim and to believe in the Prophet (a.s.).

[^2] Ibn Sa‘d, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 8, p. 14. He has reported the
narration through his chain of authorities on the authority Ja‘far bin
Muhammed and his father, peace be on them.

[^3] Abu Na‘eem has reported the narration in his book Hulyat
al-Awliya’, vol. 3, p. 329. He has narrated it on the authority of
‘Ukrima.

[^4] Ahmed Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 1, p. 113. Kenz al-‘Ummal, vol. 7,
p. 113. In his booked al-Mustadrak, vol. 2, p. 185, al-Hakim has said:

“Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) prepared Fatimaa’s trousseau, which was velvet,
a water skin, and a pillow willed with coir.” In the book Dhakha’ir
al-‘Uqqba, p. 35, it has been mentioned that Ali, peace be on him, said:
“I married Fatimaa while we had no bed except a ram’s skin. We slept on
it by night and gave food to al-Nadih (a camel used for watering) on it
by day.”

[^5] Fatimaa and Muhammed’s Daughters.

things. He did not know that the position of the Prophet (a.s) was far
above yielding to the sentiment of love leading to the embellishment of
life. He, through this deed, was in the position of legislating and
founding the most Islamic vital point on which the happiness of Muslims
would be based, and that makes easy marriage and does not complicate it.
The dower he accepted for his daughter and the simple trousseau he
prepared for her, though she was the most lovable of his children to
him, was a law of his immortal, high regulation that denied
excessiveness in giving dower. Excessive dowers prevent the poor and the
needy from getting married. For this noble purpose, the Prophet (a.s)
has said: “The best women of my community are the least of them in
dower.”[^1] Imam Musa bin Ja‘far (a.s) says: “During the time of Allah’s
Apostle, man got married to a woman for a Sura of the Qur’an, a dirham,
and some wheat.[^2] The Prophet (a.s) married one of his companions (to a
woman) for teaching a Sura of the Holy Qur’an (as dowry).”[^3] The
Islamic law has urged Muslims to get married. It is lenient toward
dower. It abrogates rivalry for precedence between wife and husband, and
regards a Muslim man as equal to a Muslim woman. It is so to remove
corruption, put an end to fornication, and reproduce more children.

However, Lamans was not aware of these reasons, for he looked at things
through a material corner. He concluded the previous ideas without fully
understanding them. He was ignorant of the Islamic regulations aiming at
spreading happiness among society and removing unhappiness from it.

**The Sermon of the Contract**

After the trousseau had been bought, the Prophet (a.s) invited a group
of al-Muhajireen and of the Ansar to attend the meeting of the contract
of marriage. When they were present before him, he (a.s) made the sermon
of marriage saying:

“Praise belongs to Allah. He is praised for His bounties, worshipped
for His might, obeyed for His sovereignty, and feared for His
chastisement and punishment. His commands pervade in His heaven and His
earth. He has created the creatures through His might, distinguished
them through his laws, made them dear through His religion, and honored
them through His Prophet Muhammad (a.s). Surely Allah, Holy is His name
and Exalted is His might, has made relationship by marriage as a
following reason and an imposed command through which He has entwined
relationships and made obligatory

[^1] Man la Yahdarahu al-Faqeeh, vol. 3, p. 243.
[^2] Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 7, p. 366.
[^3] Muslim, Saheeh, vol. 1, p. 545.

on mankind. Allah, the Almighty, has said: ‘And He it is Who has
created man from the water, then He has made for him blood relationship
and marriage relationship, and your Lord is powerful.’[^1] Allah’s
command heads for His acts, and His acts head for His decree. There is a
decree for every act, a fixed term for every decree, and a book for
every fixed term. And Allah makes to pass away and establishes what He
pleases, and with Him is the basis of the Book.[^2] Then Allah, the Great
and Almighty, has ordered me to marry Fatima to Ali and to call you to
witness that I have married Fatima to Ali for four hundred weights of
silver if he is satisfied with that according to the standing law and
the obligatory duty. May Allah reunite and bless them, make good their
children, make their children as keys of mercy and sources of wisdom,
and security for the community! I say this and ask Allah’s forgiveness
for me and you!”

Imam Ali was not present in the meeting for the Prophet (a.s) had sent
him to carry out something. When the sermon of the contract was over,
Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful, came in to the Prophet (a.s).
When the Prophet (a.s) saw Imam ali, he smiled at him and: “O Ali, Allah
has commanded me to marry Fatima to you. So I have married her to you
for four hundred weights of silver.” “I have accepted (that),” retorted
the Commander of the faithful. Then he (a.s) fell down in prostration
before Allah and thanked Him. When he raised his head from the
prostration, the Prophet (a.s) said: “May Allah bless you both, make you
happy, and bring forth from you many, good children”[^3]

Then the Prophet (a.s) ordered a container full of dates to be offered
to those invited and said to them: “Help yourselves!” Having finished
eating, they wished the bride and the bridegroom happiness, bliss, and
good children, and then they went away.[^4]

**The Banquet**

When the night of the marriage came, Allah’s Apostle (a.s) happily
said: “O Ali, it is necessary to give a banquet for the bride.”
Accordingly, Sa‘d bin Ubada denoted a ram. The Ansar denoted measures of
durra (corn).[^5] The

[^1] Qur’an, 25, 54.
[^2] Ibid., 13, 39.
[^3] Noor al-Absar, p. 42. The narration has been mentioned in a little
bit difference in the books al-Riyad al-Nadira, vol. 2, p. 183,
Dhakha’ir al-Uqba, p. 29.
[^4] Dhakha’ir al-Uqba, p. 30. Al-Riyad al-Nadira, vol. 2, p. 181
[^5] Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqat, vol. 8, p. 13. Usd al-Ghaba, vol. 5, p. 521. In
the book Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 7, p. 114, it has been mentioned that
Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) said: “It is necessary to give a banquet for the
bride, and then he ordered a ram (to be Muslims were invited to have
dinner. Asma’ says: “No banquet at that time was better than that of
Ali.”[^1] After having food, the invitees congratulated Imam Ali and
prayed Allah for him.

**The Wedding**

The Prophet (a.s) asked Umm Salama to carry his daughter to the house
of Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful. Umm Salama and some women
headed by the Prophet’s wives carried pure Fatima (a.s) in procession to
Imam Ali’s house. They were singing and reciting poetry. After Allah’s
Apostle (a.s) had finished the evening prayer, he headed for Ali’s
house. Umm Ayman received him, and he happily asked here: “Is my brother
in?”

Umm Ayman became astonished, so she asked him: “May my father and
mother die for you! Who is your brother?”

“Ali bin Abi Talib,” he replied.

“How is he your brother while you have married your daughter to him?”
she asked.

“That is so, O Umm Ayman,” he retorted.

The Prophet (a.s) came in and the bride and the bridegroom got up for
him. Then he turned to Fatima and asked her to bring him a vessel full
of water. He took the vessel and spitted out into it. He said to her:
“Get up!” When she rose, he sprinkled some water at her breasts[^2] and
her head. He supplicated Allah loudly, saying: “O Allah, I commend her
and her offspring into Your protection from the accursed Satan!”[^3]

He said to Ali: “Bring me some water!” He brought him some water. The
Prophet took some of it, and then he spitted it out into the vessel and
poured it onto Ali’s head, and he invoked Allah for him, saying: “O
Allah, I commend him and his offspring into Your protection from the
accursed Satan!”

Then he said to him: “Turn your back on me!” He turned his back on him,
and he poured the rest of the water between his two shoulders,
supplicated for him, and said to him: “Come in to your wife in the name
of Allah and His slaughtered) and gathered them around it.”

[^1] Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqat, vol. 8, p. 14. It has been mentioned in al-Riyad
al-Nadira, vol. 2, p. 182 on the authority of Jabir, who said: “We
attended the wedding of Ali. I have never seen a weeding better than it.
We filled the house with perfume. We brought dates and oil , and then we
ate of it.”
[^2] In another narration: “He poured the water upon her hands.”
[^3] Qur’an, 3, 36.

blessing!”[^1] The women went to their houses. Asma’ bint Umays stayed.
The Prophet (a.s) asked her: “Who are you?” “I am the one who will guard
your daughter. The girl is in need of a woman at the night of her
marriage. I will carry out her needs and affairs.” The Prophet (a.s)
thanked her for that, and went on supplicating for his daughter, saying:
“I ask my Lord to protect you from the accursed Satan from before you,
from behind you, from your right-hand side, and from your left-hand
side.”

The Prophet (a.s) rose, closed the door with his own hand, and went a
way. He especially supplicated for them and associated none in his
supplicating for them until he came into his room.[^2] This new house was
founded in the second year A.H.[^3] Time passed after the marriage of the
Imam. The life was calm. Home life was always delightful. It was covered
with love, ease, cooperation, simplicity and humbleness. Imam Ali helped
his wife in her house affairs and needs. Accordingly, their life was the
noblest model of high marriage ties.

During that happy period, Truthful Fatima, peace be on her, became
pregnant. The Prophet (a.s) gave good news to her of giving birth to a
male baby. That was when Umm al-Fadhl[^4] went to him and asked him to
explain her dream. “I

[^1] Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 7, p. 114.
[^2] Al-Haythemi, Majjma‘, vol. 6, p. 207.
[^3] In the book Tarikh al-Khamees, vol. 1, p. 407, it has been
mentioned: “Ali got engaged to Fatima in Ramadan, the second year A. H.
and married her in Dhi al-Hijja.” In his book Murujj al-Dhahab, vol. 2,
p. 187, al-Mas‘udi has mentioned: “Ali married Fatima, peace be on her,
a year A. H.” It was said that he married her at a time less than that.
The Imam, peace be on him, was then twenty-one years and five months
old. Fatima, the truthful, peace be on her, was fifteen years and five
months old. This narration has also been mentioned by Ibn Hajar in his
book al-Mawahib al-Laduniya, vol. 1, p. 257. In his book Murujj
al-Dhahab, vol. 1, p. 403, al-Mas‘udi has mentioned: “(Fatimaa)
al-Zahra’, peace be on her, was eighteen years old; and Ali, peace be on
him, was fifteen years old.” This narration has also been mentioned in
the book Tabaqat al-Sahaba, vol. 8, p. 13. In the book Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 10, p. 4, it has been mentioned: “Fatimaa was ten years old and she
died at the age of eighteen.”

[^4] Umm al-Fadhl was the wife of al-Abbas bin Abd al-Muttalib. Her name
was Lubaba. She was the daughter of al-Harith al-Hilali. She was the
first woman after Khadija, may Allah be pleased with her, to believe in
Islam. She was the sister of Maymuna, the wife of the Prophet (a.s.).
She was one of those who narrated traditions on the authority of the
Prophet (a.s.). It has been mentioned in the books al-Isaba, vol. 4, p.
483 and al-Isti‘ab, vol. 4, p. 398: “The Prophet (a.s.) visited her and
napped in her house.” She narrated many traditions on his authority. Umm
al-Fadhl born al-Abbas six men the like of whom no women had born. They
are al-Fadhl, by whose name she and her husband were called, ‘Abd
al-Ilah al-Faqeeh,

saw one of your limbs falling in my house”, said she. “You have seen
something good,” the Prophet (a.s) explained, “Fatima will give birth to
a boy baby, and you will suckle him with the Milk of Qathem.[^1]

The then Muslims and especially the Prophet (a.s) impatiently were
waiting for the hour of Fatima’s giving birth. They were longing for the
newborn child, that life might go well with Imam Ali (a.s) and his wife,
and that happiness might cover them.

‘Ubaydillah al-Faqeeh, Ma‘bad, Qatham, and ‘Abd al-Rahman. She also
gave birth to a female baby called Umm Habiba. [^1] It has been mentioned
in the book Tarikh al-Khamees, vol. 1, p. 418: “When al-Hasan, peace be
on him, was born, Umm al-Fadhl suckled him.” In the book al-Isaba, vol.
4, p. 484, it has been mentioned: “Most surely the dream of which Umm
al-Fadhl told (the Prophet), was before the birth of al-Husayn, peace be
on him. When he was born, she suckled him.”


