Chapter Xv : Declaration of War
===============================

When Mu’awiya’s fallacies and political plans failed, he thought that
the best means to overcome the events was that he had to hurry to
declare war lest the attitude should be clear and the chance should
escape him. Most likely he hurried to declare war for the following
reasons:

1. He firmly communicated with the Iraqi leaders, the military
commanders, and the chiefs of the tribes. He bought their cheap
consciences for money and made them wish for offices, and they secretly
responded to him to betray Imam al-Hasan and to carry out his
objectives. The proof of that is the note he sent to his leaders and
governors asking them to help and join him. In this note, he expressed
his firm communication with the commanders of the Iraqi army and their
response to him.

2. He came to know that the Iraqi Army was divided, defeated, and did
not obey Imam al-Hasan. That resulted from the affairs we will mention
in detail when we talk about the reasons for the peacemaking.

3. He came to know the local danger with which Iraq was afflicted and
from which Sham (Syria) was safe. That was the Kharijites’ thought whose
principles spread among the Iraqi circles. Among their principles was
the declaration of mutiny and rebellion against the then government and
the spread of chaos in the country, that they might overthrow the
government and undertake the leadership over the community.

4. The murder of Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful (a.s) made the
Iraqis lose a leader, guide, and orator who directed them to the truth.
After missing him, the Iraqis walked in utter darkness and were at
random. They lost the pioneer and guide.

As far as we know that these are the affairs that urged Mu’awiya to
declare war (against Imam al-Hasan). If Iraq had not been afflicted with
such disasters and troubles, Mu’awiya would not have found a way to
declare war, would have spared no effort to delay war and to conclude a
timely truce, just as he did with the Romans, that the affair might
become clear to him. We cannot forget his words showing his fear of the
Iraqis when they were one rank and were not afflicted with discord and
weakness. He said: “When I remember their eyes under the armors (at the
Battle) of Siffin, I lose my mind!” He described their unity, saying:
“Their hearts were like one man’s heart!” Had it not been for their
disagreement and dispersion, Mu’awiya would not have hurried to declare
war (against them).

**Mu’awiya’s Note to his Governors**

Mu’awiya sent to his governors and leaders a note with one meaning. In
the note he urged them to set out to battle against Imam al-Hasan and
commanded them to join him in the best way and most complete readiness.
This is the text of the note: “From the servant of Allah, Mu’awiya, the
Commander of the faithful, To so-and-so, son of so-and-so, and the
Muslims. Salamun ‘alaykum, I thank on your behalf Allah Whom there is no
god other than. Praise belongs to Allah, Who sufficed you the burden of
your enemy and his killing your caliph. Most surely Allah through His
mercy enabled a man from among His servants to kill Ali bin Abi Talib.
He killed him and left his companions in division and disagreement. The
letters of their noble men and their leaders have come to us asking for
security for themselves and their tribes. Therefore, when this letter of
mine reaches you, come to me along with your efforts, fighters, and good
equipment. Certainly, through thanking Allah, you have hit the vengeance
and reached the hope; and Allah has destroyed the men of error and
aggression; and peace, Allah’s mercy and blessings be on you.”[^1]

When this letter reached his leaders and his governors, they provoked
the people and urged them to set out and to get ready to battle against
Imam al-Hasan, the Prophet’s darling and grandson. Shortly after that
Mu’awiya was joined by huge, organized troops supplied with weapons and
equipment.

When Mu’awiya had huge troops from among the fighters and those
ambitious who yield to nothing except wealth and pleasures, he took them
and set off towards Iraq. He himself was the commander-in-chief. He
appointed al-Dahhak bin Qays al-Fihri as a governor over his capital.
The troops with him were about sixty thousand men, and it was said more.
Anyway, the troops obeyed Mu’awiya, and carried out his commands and
wishes. They submitted to him. They did not oppose him nor did they
disobey him. Mu’awiya and his army covered the desert. When they arrived
at the Bridge of Manbaj,[^2] they stayed there. There he made his affair
firm, that he might overcome the events.

[^1] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 13.
[^2] The Bridge of Manbaj was an old town. There was a two days’
distance between it and Halabin. Khousrow (the Persian king) was the
first to build it. Some poets lived there like al-Buhtary. This has been
mentioned (in the book) Mu‘jam al-Buldan, vol. 8, p. 169.

**The Iraqis are terrified**

When the news of that Mu’awiya and his troops headed for Iraq to fight
against the Iraqis spread, terror and fear prevailed them. As for Imam
al-Hasan, he ordered a companion of his to call in the capital: “The
prayer is to be congregational.” The call was made. Shortly after that
the people crowded in the mosque. So Imam al-Hasan (a.s) went out and
went up on the pulpit. He praised and lauded Allah, and then he said:
“Allah has determined jihad on His creation and named it hatred. Then He
said to the men of jihad: ‘Be patient! Most surely Allah is with the
patient.’ O people, you will not obtain what you like except through
patience with what you dislike.

I have been informed that Mu’awiya has been informed that we have
decided to advance towards him. So he has reacted owing to that. Set out
to your camp at al-Nukhaylah,[^1] may Allah have mercy on you, that we
may think, and you think; and we see, and you see.”[^2] When he ended his
speech, those present kept silent, their tongues became dumb, and their
faces turned yellow as if they were driven to death. None of them
answered Imam al-Hasan. They were afraid of the people of Sham. They
liked peace, and preferred comfort. This weakness at the beginning of
the summons to jihad warned of the danger, indicated pessimism and
despair of setting them right. When ‘Adiy bin Hatam[^3] , a great,
determined, and watchful companion of the Prophet, came to

[^1] Al-Nukhaylah was a place near Kufa in the direction of al-Sham
(Syria). At it Mu‘awiya killed the Kharijites when he came to Kufa. This
has been mentioned (in the book) Mu‘jam al-Buldan, vol. 8, p. 276.
[^2] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 13.
[^3] His full name is ‘Adi bin Hatam al-Taa’i. His father Hatam was
cited as an example of generosity and munificence. ‘Adi was given the
Kunya of Abu Tareef. He came to the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, in the year 9 A. H. He was a Christian, and then he became a
Muslim. There is a long, original speech on his becoming Muslim. It has
been mentioned by Ibn al-Athir in his (book) Asad al-Ghaba. He (‘Adi)
narrated many traditions from the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family. He was generous and noble among his people. He was great with
them and other than them. He was ready to answer. He was among the men
of religion and piety.

It was he who said: “When the time of prayer came to me, I was yearning
for it.” One day he came into ‘Umar bin al-Khattabin He came to know
that he showed pride toward him and made little of his right. So he
turned to him, saying: “Do you recognize me?” “Yes, by Allah, I know
you,” replied ‘Umar, “Allah has ennobled you with the best knowledge. I
know you, by Allah. You became a Muslim when they were unbelievers. You
knew when they denied. You were loyal when they betrayed. And you
advanced when they escaped.” So ‘Adi said: “Enough! Enough!” He
witnessed the conquest of Iraq, the Battle of al-Qadisiya, the Battle of
al-Nahrawan, and the Day of the Bridge along with Abu ‘Ubayda, and the
like of that. An example of his generosity and nobility is that
al-Ash‘ath bin Qays sent a man to him to borrow from him Hatam’s cooking
pots. ‘Adi filled them with food and know that the people kept silent
and did not respond to Imam al-Hasan, he became angry with them. He
rebuked them for their silence and flagrant weakness. He said to them
with enthusiasm and determination: “I am ‘Adiy bin Hatam. Glory belongs
to Allah! How ugly this attitude is! Why do you not respond to your Imam
and son of your Prophet’s daughter? Where are the orators of the city
whose tongues are eloquent during ease, and who dodge like a fox at the
time of seriousness? Do you not fear Allah’s detest with its defect and
disgrace?”

Then he turned to Imam al-Hasan showing obedience and yielding, saying:
“May Allah achieve through you wise attitudes, keep you away from the
detested things, and give you success to laudable results! We have heard
your speech, come to your command, listened to you, and showed obedience
to what you said and saw!”

Then he immediately showed the people that he was determined to set out
to fight against Mu’awiya, saying: “I am heading for our camp! Whoever
likes to come, then let him come!”

Then he went out of the mosque. His mount was at the door. He rode it
and went out alone. He commanded his servant to supply him with that
which set him right. He arrived in al-Nukhaylah and camped at it
alone.[^1] When Qays bin Sa‘d bin Ubada, Ma‘qal bin Qays al-Riyahi,[^2]
and Ziyad bin Sa‘sa‘a saw the carried them to him. So al-Ash‘ath told
him that he wanted them empty. But ‘Adi answered him: “We do not lend
them empty!” ‘Adi used to crumble bread to the ants and said: “They are
my neighbors and have right against me!” He was among those who turned
away from ‘Uthman (bin ‘Affan). He witnessed with Imam Ali the Battle of
al-Jamal. So his eye was knocked out at it. He had two sons. One of them
was killed with Imam Ali; and the other was killed with the Kharijites.
He also witnessed the Battle of Siffin and had famous attitudes at it.
He died in the year 67 A. H., and other than that was said. He was then
120 years old. It was said that he died in Kufa, and it was said that he
died in Qirqisya. The former is more correct. This has been mentioned in
(the book) Usd al-Ghaba, vol. 3, p. 392. Narrations similar to it has
been mentioned in (the books) al-Isaba, al-Isti‘ab, and Tahdhib
al-Tahdhibin

[^1] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 14.
[^2] Ma‘qal bin Qays al-Riyahi lived during the time of the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family. Ibn ‘Asakir has said: “‘Ammar (bin
Yasir) sent Ma‘qal to ‘Umar to tell him about the conquest of Tastar. He
also sent him to the Banu Najiya when they became apostates. He (Ma‘qal
bin Qays al-Riyahi) was among Imam Ali’s commanders at the Battle of
al-Jamal and was the director of his policemen. Khalifa bin al-Khayyat
has mentioned: “ Al-Mustawrad bin ‘Alqama al-Yarbu‘i al-Khariji dueled
with him after (the murder of Imam) Ali; and they killed each other.”
That was in the year 42 A. H. during the reign of Mu‘awiya, and it was
said in the year 39 A. H. during the caliphate of Ali. This has been
mentioned in (the book) al-Isaba, vol. 3, p. 475.

people keeping silent and not responding to Imam al-Hasan, they became
angry. They blamed and rebuked the people for their weakness. They urged
them to fight against their enemy. Then they turned to Imam al-Hasan and
said to him as ‘Adi had said to him. They showed obedience to him and
yielding to his commands. Imam al-Hasan thanked them for their noble
attitudes. He lauded their good feelings, saying: “I still know you
through the true intention, loyalty, and advice. So may Allah reward you
with good!”

Then Imam al-Hasan (a.s) immediately went out to encounter the Umayyad
aggression. He appointed al-Mughira bin Nawfal bin al-Harth[^1] as a
governor over his capital. He ordered him to urge the people to struggle
(against Mu’awiya) and to send them to him at al-Nukhaylah. Then he and
his weak, huge Army covered the desert. He arrived in al-Nukhaylah and
stayed there to organize his troops.[^2] Then he left it and walked until
he reached Deir Abdurrahman.

He stayed there for three days, that those from among his troops who
remained behind might join him. He thought that he had to send the
vanguard of his Army to explore the conditions of the enemy and to
prevent him from advancing towards another place. He chose for his
vanguard the sincerest ones from among his brave, skillful companions
whose number was twelve thousands. He gave the general leadership to his
cousin Ubaydillah bin al-Abbas. Before this part of the Army moved, Imam
al-Hasan had summoned Ubaydillah, the commander-in-chief of his armed
force. He supplied him with this valuable advice which is as follows: “O
cousin, I am going to send with you twelve thousand Arab horsemen and
reciters (of the

[^1] Al-Mughira bin Nawfal bin al-Harth bin ‘Abd al-Muttalib was born in
Mecca at the time of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family.
That was before the Hijri calendar. It was said that he did not live
during the lifetime of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, except for six years. He was given the kunya of Abu Yahya. He
married Imama, daughter of al-‘Aas bin al-Rabee‘. Imama was Imam Ali’s
wife. When the Imam was murdered, he advised al-Mughira to marry her.
When the Imam, peace be on him, died, al-Mughira married her. Al-Mughira
witnessed the Battle of Siffin with Imam Ali. He was a judge during the
reign of ‘Uthman. He narrated one tradition from the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family. The tradition is the words of him, may Allah
bless him and his family: “Whoever does not praise justice and does not
dispraise injustice fights against Allah.” This has been mentioned in
(the book) Asad al-Ghaba, vol. 4, p. 407.

[^2] In the book al-Kharaiij wa al-Jaraiih, p. 228 it has been
mentioned: “Those who wanted to go out went with Imam al-Hasan. Many
people tarried. They did not fulfill what they had said and promised.
They deceived him just as they had deceived Imam Ali, peace be on him,
before. Imam al-Hasan camped at al-Nukhaylah for ten days. None was
present with him except four thousand people. So he returned to Kufa to
urge the people. He made a speech in which he said: ‘You have deceived
me as you had deceived those before me.’”

Qur’an) of the city. A man of them is more than a regiment. Therefore,
take them and go away. Be lenient and cheerful to them. Lower your wing
in gentleness for them. Let them approach your sitting-place, for they
are the remainder of those trusted by (Imam Ali), the Commander of the
faithful. Make them walk by the Euphrates. Then go ahead till you place
them face to face with Mu’awiya. If you meet him, then prevent him until
I come to you, for I am about to follow you. Inform me (of the events)
day by day. Consult these two (persons)-Qays bin Sa‘d, and Sa‘eed bin
Qays. If you meet Mu’awiya, do not fight him until he fights you. If he
does, then battle against him. If you are struck, then Qays bin Sa‘d
would be over the people. If he is struck, then Sa‘eed bin Qays would be
over the people.” This advice contains the following points:

1. It indicates the imam’s abundant knowledge of managing the affairs
of the state. That is because of his commandment in respect of the Army
in such a manner including pity, affection, and praise. For example, he
said that the Army was the remainder of the ones trusted by Imam Ali,
the Commander of the faithful, and that the commander-in-chief should be
kind to it. This procedure made the Army loyal and faithful to the
state. Of course, when the Army is loyal to the government and believes
in its policies, it makes firm its bases, and it wins a strong fence
that protects it from external aggressions, local discords, and brings
about to it increasingly tranquility and stability.

2. As for his command that Ubaydillah had not to aggress against
Mu’awiya and not to fight against him until he would start fighting, it
does not mean that the holy verse orders (Muslims) not to aggress.
Allah, the Exalted, has said: “And fight against those who fight against
you, and do not exceed the limits, surely Allah does not love those who
exceed the limits.”[^1] The holy verse does not concern Mu’awiya, who
followed all possible means to aggress against the Muslims. For example
he refused to pay homage to Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful,
peace be on him. This means that he mutinied against the Muslims’ will
and unity. He fought against Imam Ali in the Battle of Siffin; and this
means that he aggressed against the Muslim community. Besides he made
mischief in the land. That was when he and his governors unjustly went
too far in shedding the Muslims’ blood. Throughout the periods of his
reign he aggressed against Islam and revolted against the community’s
will. Anyway al-Hasan (a.s) commanded Ubaydillah not to start fighting
to prevent him from dodging through saying that he did not come for the
purpose of war, and that he came to negotiate with them about setting
right the Muslims’ affairs.

[^1] Qur’an, 1, 190.

3. In his advice, Imam al-Hasan made it incumbent on Ubaydillah to
consult Qays bin Sa‘d and Sa‘eed bin Qays. He nominated them for the
leadership after him. He wanted to draw the attention of the members of
the Army to that they had to obey their commander’s orders if he
consulted the two men. Also he wanted to tell them that they were
trustworthy. Indeed none in the Imam’s Army was equal to them in their
good tendencies, their obedience to the Prophet’s Household, peace be on
them. For this reason Imam al-Hasan had confidence in them and took
great care of them.

Before we end the talk about this topic, we have to deal with some
affairs concerning it as follows:

**Choosing of Ubaydillah**

Many people ask about the reason why Imam al-Hasan nominated Ubaydillah
for leading the vanguard of his Army. They say that there were in the
Army persons firmer than him in faith, stronger than him in thought, and
more loyal such as Qays bin Sa‘d, Sa‘eed bin Qays, and the like of them
from among the trustworthy believers. The answer to that is as
follows:

A. Through that Imam al-Hasan (a.s) wanted to encourage him and to make
him sincere through entrusting the general leadership to him. Ubaydillah
had a qualification, ability, and determination which made him worthy of
this high office. That is because he was brought up in the school of
Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him. Imam Ali (a.s)
had installed him as a governor over Yemen because of his qualifications
and abilities.

C. He was worthy of being loyal and of sparing no effort in fighting
against Mu’awiya. That is because Bisr bin Arta’a had killed his two
sons.

D. Most surely Imam al-Hasan (a.s) did not place the general leadership
in his hand; rather he had placed it between him and two persons who
were, Qays bin Sa‘d, and Sa‘eed bin Qays. His Eminence late Aal Yaseen
has explained this subject matter in detail.[^1]

**The Number of the Army**

The historians’ words have differed over the number of the Army that
went with Imam al-Hasan to Saabaat. Ibn Abi al-Haddeed has mentioned
that a huge Army went with Imam al-Hasan, but he has not mentioned its
number. He has mentioned the number of the vanguard under the leadership
of
[^1] Sulh al-Hasan, p. 96.

Ubaydillah. He has said: “The number of the vanguard was twelve
thousand men from among the Arab knights and the reciters (of the
Qur’an) in the city (of Kufa).”[^1] Al-Tabari and others have mentioned
that the number of the Army was forty thousand men.[^2] From the talks
that took place between Imam al-Hasan and some of his companions about
peacemaking, we understand that the number of the army was a hundred
thousand people. For example, Sulayman bin Surad criticized Imam
al-Hasan (a.s) for his accepting peacemaking, saying: “Our astonishment
at your paying homage to Mu’awiya does not come to an end. That is
because you have a hundred thousand fighters from among the people of
Iraq!”[^3] Ziyad’s answer to Mu’awiya indicates that the number of the
Army was ninety thousand men.[^4] It was said that the number of the Army
was seventy thousand men.[^5] I (the author) think that the number of the
Army was more than forty thousand (people). The proof of that is the
speech of Nawf al-Bakali[^6] , who said: “When Imam (Ali) decided to
return to war against Mu’awiya a week before his death, he entrusted
al-Hasan with ten thousand (fighters), Abu Ayyub al-Ansari with ten
thousand (fighters), Qays bin Sa‘d with ten thousand (fighters). He also
entrusted other than them with other numbers. He intended to return to
Siffin. When Friday came to him, Abdurrahman bin Muljim struck him with
the sword.”[^7]

[^1] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 14.
[^2] Tarikh al-Tabari, vol. 6, p. 94.
[^3] Al-Imama wa al-Siyasa, vol. 1, p. 151.
[^4] Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 194. Ziyad has said: “Most surely
the son of the woman who ate the liver (of Hamza at the Battle of Uhd),
cave of hypocrisy, and remainder of the allies (Mu‘awiya) has written (a
letter in which he has) threatened me while there are between me and him
two grandsons of the Prophet along with ninety thousand (people).
[^5] Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 8, p. 42. It has been mentioned in it:
“A man came in to al-Hasan bin Ali in whose hand there was a letter. The
man asked him: ‘What is this?’ ‘Mu‘awiya has threatened me in it,’
replied the Imam. ‘You treated him with justice,’ retorted the man. The
Imam answered: ‘Most surely I fear that on the Day of Resurrection
seventy or eighty thousand (people) or more or less will come and their
jugular veins will exude (blood), and that all of them will ask Allah
for help against those who shed their blood.’” A narration similar to
this has been mentioned by Ibn Abi al-Hadeed in his book Sharh Nahj
al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 7.

[^6] Nawf al-Bakali was among the companions of Imam Ali, the Commander
of the faithful, peace be on him. It has been reported on the authority
of Taghlub that he (Nawf al-Bakali) was ascribed to Bakal, a tribe from
Hamadan (a city in Iran). It was said that (the name of the tribe was)
Bukayl. Ibn Abi al-Hadeed has said: “(The name is) Bikal, a tribe from
Himyar to whom belongs this person, who is Nawf bin Fudala, the
companion of Imam Ali, peace be on him.” This has been mentioned in (the
book) al-Ta‘leeqat, p. 354.

[^7] Muhammed ‘Abda, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 2, p. 132.

This speech narrates to us that a huge, armed troops were ready to war
against Mu’awiya. It has mentioned the name of some of their commanders
whose authority was over thirty thousand armed fighters. It has not
mentioned to us the names of the other commanders whom Imam Ali had
appointed over the regiments of his Army nor has it mentioned the number
of the Army that was with them. Without doubt their number was over ten
thousand fighters. All of them pledged allegiance to al-Hasan and went
with him to battle against his enemy. The proof to that is what Abu
al-Fida’ has narrated: “Most surely al-Hasan got ready to fight against
Mu’awiya with the Army that had pledged allegiance to his father.”[^1]
This is confirmed by Ibn al-Athir who has said: “Forty thousand fighters
had pledged allegiance to the Commander of the faithful, Ali, for death.
That was when what he told them about the people of Sham appeared. While
he (a.s) was getting ready to go, he was killed; and when Allah pleases
a thing, none repels it. When he was killed and the people paid homage
to his son al-Hasan, he heard of the advance of Mu’awiya along with the
people of Sham. So he and the Army that had paid homage to Ali left Kufa
to meet Mu’awiya (at a battlefield).”[^2]

Al-Musayb bin Nujba confirms this in his speech with Imam al-Hasan in
respect of the peacemaking. He said to him: “My astonishment with you
does not expire. You made peace with Mu’awiya while you had forty
thousand (men).”[^3]

According to these numerous narrations the number of the Army was forty
thousand fighters. I (the author) believe that. His Eminence, Hujjat
al-Islam, late Aal Yaseen discussed the previous narrations and
concluded that the number of the Army was twenty thousand or a little
bit more.[^4] Anyway the difference over the number of the Army is not
important. That is because if the members of the Army have different
trends and tendencies, they become weak and win neither a conquest nor a
victory though they are many. Victory is always obtained through
loyalty, faith, thought, and the unity of word, and not through a huge
number. If few people co-operate with each other and unify, they win a
victory, make a clear conquest, and defeat their enemies regardless of
their number, readiness, and forces. As for the men of Iraqi Army,
regardless of their number, they suffered from disagreement, division,
and weakness; therefore, how would they win a victory? What would the
huge number benefit them?

[^1] Abu al-Fida’, Tarikh, vol. 1, p. 193.
[^2] Al-Kamil, vol. 3, p. 61.
[^3] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 6.
[^4] Sulh al-Hasan, p. 106.

**A Description of the Army**

Without doubt the Army is the pillar on which the throne of a state
stands and its entity is built. The members of an army are the fence
that protects the government and the people from any aggression. The
protection of the regulation and security depends on them. It is so when
they are loyal in their defense and they believe in their government.
But if they are traitors, if they harbor malice against their state,
seize the opportunity to take vengeance on it, and enable the enemy
against it, definitely their state does not succeed in any field of the
internal and external conflict. Definitely the nation does not win any
victory when its political atmosphere is disordered and when it is
liable to fatal dangers. The Iraqi Army that went with Imam al-Hasan to
battle against Mu’awiya had suffered from discords and confusion. Hence,
the danger of the army against the state was greater than that of
Mu’awiya. Sheikh al-Mufid, may Allah have mercy on him, has described
them, saying: “Al-Hasan called the people for war. They were slow to
respond to him and then they came forward. Al-Hasan had a mixed band of
men; some of them were from his and his father’s Shia (followers).

Some of them were from the Kharijites who were influenced by (the
desire of) fighting Mu’awiya with every possible means. Some of them
were men who loved discords and were anxious for booty, some of them
were doubters, and others were tribal supporters who followed the
leaders of their tribes without reference to religion.”[^1] In his
speech, Sheikh al-Mufid, may Allah rest him in peace, has expressed:
Firstly, the Army disliked the war, preferred rest, and wished for
peace. Secondly, the Army had members who had different thoughts and
trends. He has divided them as follows:

1. The Shia

It seems that they were few in number in the Iraqi Army. If they had
been many in number in the Army, Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful
(a.s) would not have been forced to accept the arbitration (at the
Battle of) Siffin, and al-Hasan would not have made peace with Mu’awiya.
They were different from the members of the Army in thought, feelings,
and faith. They had maintained that the Prophet’s Household were worthy
of the caliphate, the guardians of the Prophet, supporters and
protectors of Islam, and that the obedience to them was obligatory on
all the Muslims.

[^1] Al-Irshad, p. 169. This has been mentioned by Ali bin Muhammed,
better known as Ibn al-Sabbagh, in (his book) al-Fusool al-Muhimma, p.
143. Al-Arbali, Kashf al-Ghumma, p. 161. Al-Majjlsi, Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 10, p. 110.

2. Al-Muhakkima

They were the Kharijites whom Imam Ali’s Army included. They intended
to battle against Mu’awiya with all means possible. They had no faith in
al-Hasan’s affair and Mu’awiya’s falsehood; rather they thought that
al-Hasan and Mu’awiya were on the same level, and that they were not
worthy of the caliphate. They hurried to fight against Mu’awiya because
they had come to know that he had forces stronger than those of
al-Hasan. So they thought that they had to join al-Hasan’s Army timely
to put an end to Mu’awiya’s affair. If they had ended it, then
al-Hasan’s affair would have been easy to them. That is because they
would easily assassinate him just as they had assassinated his father
before.

3. The Ambitious

Imam Ali’s Army contained some fighters, who did not believe in the
spiritual values, nor did they sanctify justice, nor did they understand
the truth; rather they sought their interests and ambitions. They
closely watched the two parties to know which of them would be
successful and victorious, that they might join it.

4. The doubters

More likely the doubters were those who were influenced by the
Kharijites’ summons and the Umayyad propaganda, to the extent that they
doubted the beliefs of the Prophet’s Household, peace be on them. If the
war had broken out, they would not have helped Imam al-Hasan with
anything, for they had no faith in supporting the Prophet’s Household.

5. The Followers of Leaders

They were the greatest in number and in danger. They blindly followed
the leaders of their tribes. They had neither will, nor thinking nor
feeling in the (religious) duty. They were the so-called mobs. The
majority of the then Iraqis belonged to a tribe just as they do in the
present time. The majority of the Iraqi leaders wrote letters to
Mu’awiya to obey and submit to him. Examples of them are Qays bin
al-Ash‘ath, ‘Amr bin al-Hajjaj, Hajjar bin Abjar. Besides there were
leaders like them from among the Kharijites and the hypocrites who took
part in the most dangerous tragedy that history has recorded, which is
the murder of Imam al-Husayn, the master of the youths of the Garden,
peace be on him. The Iraqi Army was composed of these elements. Rather
all the Iraqis, whether they joined Imam al-Hasan or not, were under
these titles mentioned by Sheikh al-Mufid, may Allah have mercy on him,
in his valuable speech. Imam al-Hasan was not safe from the wickedness
of the majority of them in peace and war.

**Historical Mistakes
**
Some historians and writers have made mistakes in respect of this
research. It is important to mention them. They are as follows:

Al-Hakim


Al-Hakim al-Nisaburi has mentioned that al-Hasan entrusted his vanguard
to his cousin Abdullah bin Ja‘far and added to him ten thousand
fighters.[^1] Only al-Hakim has mentioned this narration, which is
contrary to that on which the narrators have unanimously agreed, and
which is that the leadership over the vanguard was entrusted to
Ubaydillah bin al-Abbas in co-operation with Qays bin Sa‘d and Sa‘eed
bin Qays. Likewise, the number of the vanguard was twelve thousands, and
not ten thousands, as historians have mentioned.

Al-Ya‘qubi

Al-Ya‘qubi, a famous historian, has mentioned: “Most surely, Imam
al-Hasan got ready to fight against Mu’awiya eighteen days after his
father’s death.”[^2] This is a mistake, for the Imam got ready to fight
against his opponent after he had sent him the letters we have already
mentioned. Apparently, the period of the correspondence was more than
two months; likewise the Imam not get ready for the battle after all the
means he used to make peace and friendliness had failed, and he had come
to know that Mu’awiya and his troops advanced against him. So at that
time he got ready for war, and not before it just as the historians have
unanimously agreed on it. If we want to correct what al-Ya‘qubi has
mentioned, then the period he has mentioned was the beginning of the
correspondence that took place between them.

Ibn Katheer

Ibn Katheer has said: “Al-Hasan did not intend to fight against anyone,
but they overcame his opinion. They held a great meeting the like of
which was not heard. So al-Hasan bin Ali appointed Qays bin Sa‘d bin
Ubada as a commander over the vanguard with twelve thousand (fighters)
before him…”[^3] This speech is not trustworthy because if Imam al-Hasan
had not intended to fight against Mu’awiya, he would not have sent him
the letters in which he threatened him with declaring war if he had not
enter the obedience to him. If he had not intended to war (against him),
he would not have gone up on the pulpit and urged the people to struggle
(against him) and summoned them to

[^1] Al-Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 3, p. 174.
[^2] Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 191.
[^3] Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 8, p. 14.

war (against him); we have mentioned that in detail. As for his speech:
“They held a great meeting the like of which was not heard,” it is
contradicted by that they tarried, did not respond to him, and kept
silent when he (a.s) summoned them to jihad in his previous speech.

Dr. Taha Husayn

Dr. Taha Husayn has said: “After the pledge of allegiance (to him),
al-Hasan remained for about two months without mentioning war and
showing readiness for it. (He continued so) until Qays bin Sa‘d, and
Ubaydillah bin al-Abbas insisted on him, and Abdullah bin al-Abbas wrote
to him from Mecca, urged him to war (against Mu’awiya), and insisted on
him to rise for which his father had risen.”[^1] The mistakes in his
speech are as follows:

1. As for his speech: “After the pledge of allegiance (to him),
al-Hasan remained for about two months without mentioning war and
showing readiness for it,” it is far from the reality and is close to
what Ibn Katheer has mentioned in his previous speech. Perhaps Dr. Taha
Husayn has depended on it. Imam al-Hasan’s previous letters refute it.
They are clear in showing his determination for warring (against
Mu’awiya). We will mention some paragraphs of them as examples of that.
Imam al-Hasan (a.s) says: “If you refused (all things) except going too
far in your error, I and the Muslims shall march towards you and judge
you until Allah judges between us; and He is the best of the judges!”
This paragraph is clear in respect of what we have mentioned. Perhaps
Dr. Taha did not see this part of the Imam’s letters, so he gave a
decision full of mixture and mistakes. Besides it was incumbent on Imam
al-Hasan to battle against Mu’awiya, for Allah made it obligatory to
fight against the rebellious who revolt against the Imam of Muslims. He,
the Most High, has said: “…but if one of them acts wrongfully towards
the other, fight that which acts wrongfully until it returns to Allah’s
command.”

Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, has said: “Whoever
summons (the people) to himself or to someone else while there is an
Imam over the people, Allah’s cures be on him, then fight against him.”
As for Mu’awiya, he revolted and rebelled against Imam Ali, the
Commander of the faithful, drowned the country into blood, spread among
the Muslims sadness, bereaving children, and mourning. Therefore,
fighting against him was the most important of the religious duties. So
how was it possible for Imam al-Hasan to refrain from it while he was
the Prophet’s darling grandson? [^1] Ali wa Banuh, p. 195.

2. As for his statement: “Qays bin Sa‘d and Ubaydillah bin al-Abbas
insisted on him to rise for war,” it is an imagination and mixture. That
is because we have mentioned, at the beginning of the research, the
historical texts indicating that Imam al-Hasan hurried to war against
Mu’awiya when he came to know that he advanced against him. None
insisted on him in respect of that; rather it was the critical situation
and the urgent necessity that urged him to set out. If he had not
hurried to fight against Mu’awiya and to stop his attack, Mu’awiya would
have occupied Kufa and taken Imam al-Hasan as a prisoner of war.
Therefore, it was obligatory on him to go out for defense and jihad; and
there was none to insist on him in respect of that.

Most surely Dr. Taha Husayn’s researches in this respect are full of
mistakes and mixture, void of the scrutiny required by the scientific
research that does not yield to sentiment and desires. That is because
history, as they say, is full of mixed topics. It is difficult for a
true historian to conclude even the simplest affairs; therefore, he is
not able to understand such vague subject matters because the narrators
deliberately wrote some narrations to support the Umayyads and to
belittle the Prophet’s Household, peace be on them. Therefore, it is
obligatory to make sure of the narrations only they have mentioned and
to take into consideration the sayings of the historians, who are famous
for their honesty, have not deviated from the truth, and refrained from
fabricating. It is not an act of rightness that Dr. Taha Husayn depends
on the narrations of Ibn Katheer and the like of him from among those
fanatics and who deviated from the truth and approached that which was
contrary to the reality and far from the truth.

Certainly, the source of the mistakes in the researches of the later
resulted from their dependence on such sources and their refraining from
checking the narrations only they mentioned to support the then
government. There is nothing more important to the historian who wants
to be honest to the truth than examining the narrations, for it is among
the things the free research requires and we are in need of.


