Chapter Xvii : the Reasons of the Peacemaking Part 1
====================================================

There are many doubts and sayings about the peace Imam al-Hasan made
with Mu’awiya. From them we can conclude two different decisions; indeed
one of them is wrong and far from correctness, just like two different
decisions.

The first decision is about justifying Imam al-Hasan’s attitude in
respect of his making peace (with Mu’awiya) and his great success in it.
The justifications for it are different. Some religious scholars and
researchers have justified it with that al-Hasan is an Imam, the Imam is
infallible; therefore, he makes no mistake. The Imam does nothing except
good things that include all the community. At the end of the chapter we
will mention those who maintain this viewpoint. Yet there is another
justification for indicating the meaning of the first viewpoint and
explaining its originality and its goodness. The justification depends
on some material reasons that forced Imam al-Hasan to make peace such as
the desertion of his Army, the corruption of his society, the treason of
the leaders and the prominent persons from among his Shia, and the like
from among the factors.

The second justification briefly indicates that Imam al-Hasan had a
weak will, had no knowledge of the general political affairs, was feeble
of managing the state, and did not set right the attitude through
depending on some political methods even if they are religiously
forbidden. If he had won a victory, it would have been good and well;
otherwise he had to die a martyr for glory that was the Hashimites’
slogan and reformers’ objective. This viewpoint is based on some unreal
justifications. That is because it has not been based on studying the
conditions that surrounded Imam al-Hasan and understanding the
inclinations of his people who suffered from bad manners and thoughts.
Therefore, this viewpoint is surface and void of an inquiry and far from
reality. As for those who have maintained this viewpoint, they are as
follows:

Al-Safadi

Commenting on this poetry line of (the poem) Lamiyyat al-‘Ajam,
al-Safadi has said:

The love for safety turns the determination of its owner away from high
positions and incites one (to cling to) laziness. Some chiefs and
leading persons who were advanced in knowledge and office parted their
positions and abdicated the thrones. Then he has mentioned some of those
who were satisfied with laziness and abdicated the caliphate, saying:
“And this is al-Hasan bin Ali bin Abi Talib (peace be on him) said to
Mu’awiya: ‘Most surely there is a debt against me. Pay my debt, and I
will abdicate the caliphate. They paid his debt, and he abdicated the
caliphate.’”[^1]

Dr. Philip Hatty

Professor Philip Hatty has said: “Another movement arose at the
beginning of Mu’awiya’s reign. The movement was of great importance
among the following generations. I mean (when) the people of Iraq
declared al-Hasan bin Ali as a legal caliph. Perhaps this foundation is
logical, for al-Hasan was the eldest son of Ali and Fatima, the
Prophet’s only daughter who survived after his death. However al-Hasan-
who inclined to luxury and lavishness, and not to government and
management-was not the man of the attitude. So he abdicated the
caliphate and was satisfied with a yearly gift he (Mu’awiya) gave to
him.”[^2]

Al-Alaa’ili

Professor al-Alaa’ili has said: “But he (al-Hasan) was able to repeat
the disbanded groups through consultation and enthusiasm. He spread
(among them) the spirit of determination and will. He was like the iron
leaders such as Napoleon, who undertook a people whom the long
revolution exhausted just as it exhausted the Arabs, and whom he
increased in exhaustion through the continuous, successive wars through
which he took Europe. However the leader was covered by the wave of
boredom that covered the people.”[^3]

R. M. Ronalds

R. M. Ronalds, an orientalist, has said: “Most surely the reports
indicate that al-Hasan lacked morale strength and a mental ability that
he might successfully lead his people.”[^4]

[^1] Sharh Lamiyat al-‘Ajam, vol. 2, p. 27. Al-Safadi has said something
at random. When did Imam al-Hasan sell the caliphate to his opponent for
repaying his debt? We seek refuge with Allah from this accusation!
[^2] Al-‘Arab, p. 78.
[^3] Hayat al-Hasan, vol. 2, p. 283.
[^4] ‘Aqidat al-Shia translated by A. M. S. This orientalist has filled
his book with lying, criticizing Islam and degrading the value of its
brilliant, great figures. In al-Bayan bright Magazine, no. 35-39
(assigned to Imam al-Hasan, the master of martyrs), the second year,
professor al-Sayyid ‘Abd al-Hadi al-Mukhtar has falsified his researches
and displayed his lies.

Lamans

This English person, who harbored malice against Islam, did not
understand its values and reality, has said: “The pledge of allegiance
was given to al-Hasan after the murder of Ali. So his supporters tried
to persuade him to return to fight against the people of Sham. This
persistence from their side changed the anger of al-Hasan with the
crippled determination. So he no longer thought (of anything) except
reaching an agreement with Mu’awiya; likewise he led to a division
between him and the people of Iraq. They reached a stage where they
weakened their Imam, by word not by deed, by wounding him. So from that
time al-Hasan was controlled by one thought, which was reaching an
agreement with the Umayyads. Mu’awiya let him appoint what he requested
as a reward for his abdicating the caliphate. Al-Hasan was not satisfied
with the two million dirhams he requested as a livelihood for his
brother al-Husayn; rather he asked for himself other five million
dirhams and entered into a district of Persia throughout his lifetime.
After that he opposed the people of Iraq in carrying out the last item
of this agreement. But he was responded to with all that which he asked
to the extent that the grandson of the Prophet dared to repent openly
that he did not double his demand. And he left Iraq filled with the
people’s displeasure with him, that he might keep to Medina.”[^1]

[^1] Daa’irat al-Ma’arif al-Islamiya, vol. 7, p. 400. This Daa’irat
(encyclopedia) is nothing but an encyclopedia of lying and fabrications.
It is full of defaming Islam and cursing its great figures, especially
as it concerns Laamans’s researches on the Shia and their Imams. They
are full of slanders and buffoonery against them. The reason for that is
that the Christian missionary committees urged the like of these
mercenary pens to distort Islam and to scheme against it. Besides the
researches of the orientalists depended on a surface studying void of
examination and inquiry. It is worth mentioning that an orientalist
visited Tehran (Iran’s capital) after he had learned the Persian
language in the Eastern Language Schools. He tried to write a history on
Iran’s social and moral conditions as he saw them.

He saw some porters carrying vessels and excellent necessities on their
heads. There were tambourines and flutes in front of them. He asked
about that, and it was said to him: “It was a bride’s trousseau!” Then
he asked about the name of the bridegroom. One of the attendants said to
him: “Madha yahumaka (i.e. What does concern you?)” In the evening this
orientalist saw a man hitting a women in the street. He asked one of the
attendants about the story, and he answered him: “The hitter is her
husband, and she has unjustly abandoned him.” Then he asked him about
the name of the husband, and he answered him: “Madha yahumaka?” As a
result the orientalist thought that the name of the husband was Madha
yahumaka, and that he was the bridegroom whose trousseau he saw in the
morning. Accordingly, this orientalist wrote in his book the History of
Iran that he saw in its capital a man marrying his bride in the morning
and hitting her in the street in the evening and that his name was Madha
yahumaka! This is the condition of the orientalists in respect of
axiomatic, manifest affairs, just These people who have criticized
al-Hasan for his making peace with Mu’awiya have harbored malice and
enmity against Islam. Some of them have not yielded to the freedom of
opinion. All of them have deviated from the reality and gone far from
the truth in respect of what they have written from among the researches
on Imam al-Hasan. They have not fully understood the severe factors that
surrounded Imam al-Hasan to the extent that they forced him to make
peace with his opponent Mu’awiya. It is incumbent on the writer who
wants to give his opinion about this important subject matter to fully
understand it from all sides that his opinion may be close to
correctness and far from mistake.

As for us, we have understood some reasons and factors that forced Imam
al-Hasan to make peace with his enemy. These reasons and factors are
brief. We have concluded some of them from the previous researches. We
have concluded the others from our studying Mu’awiya’s psyche, observing
his governors, understanding the Imam’s high character, and acquiring
knowledge of the policy of the Prophet’s Household, peace be on them,
used for reaching government. It is worth mentioning that the Prophet’s
household did not use the means that Islam has condemned. Before we deal
with the reasons of the peacemaking, we would like to explain that we
may repeat some examples of the previous subjects. We are forced to do
that as proofs for what we maintain. That is because the repetition is
necessary and required by the research. Indeed talking in detail about
this subject matter and understanding it is more important than others,
as we think. We will draw the attention of readers to these reasons
which are as follows:

**The Army is divided**

Most surely the most dangerous disaster a state faces in all its fields
most likely results from the wickedness of the Army, its intense
opposition, and its mutiny against its commanders-in-chief. The then
Iraq Army was afflicted with mutiny and weakness where as Mu’awiya’s
Army was not afflicted with that; it kept its obedience to its
government; it was not stricken by such shocks and relapses.

As for the reasons that led to the division of the Iraqi Army, they are
as follows:

imagine how much more their condition in respect of difficult, obscure
affairs is! This is if they do not depend on distortion, just imagine
how much more it is if they depend on it! Unfortunately our young people
have taken care of studying their books and depended on them in respect
of their theses though they have no share of correctness and reality.

**The Party Opposition**

If some parties in an army oppose each other -because they harbor
malice against their standing government or because they have a
relationship with a foreign state that inspires them with work and give
them instructions to overthrow their government-then their government
will face its inevitable end sooner or later. As for the then Iraqi
Army, it was afflicted with two parties that showed no friendship to the
Hashimite government, nor did they keep it; rather they spared no effort
to put an end to it. The two parties are:

**The Umayyad Party**

The children of the prominent family and possessor of the aristocratic
houses belonged to this party. They paid attention to nothing except the
authority in this world and obtaining property. Some of them are ‘Umar
bin Sa‘d, Qays bin al-Ash‘th, Amr bin Hurayth, Hajjar bin Abjar, Amr bin
al-Hajjaj, and the like from among those void of virtue and dignity.
They were the most dangerous elements among the Army. They promised to
hand over Imam al-Hasan to Mu’awiya as a captive or to assassinate him.
In the meantime they did things of great importance of which are:

A. They recorded all the aspects and movements of the army and sent
them to Mu’awiya to have knowledge of them.
B. They were a link between Mu’awiya and the rest of the prominent
persons.
C. They spread rumors and terrorism among the members of the Army
through displaying Mu’awiya’s strength and al-Hasan’s weakness.

Theses destructive acts led to the collapse of the Army, shaking its
entity, and the weakness of their morale in all the fields.

**The Harawri Party**

This party undertook the revolt against the then government and
fighting against it in all means possible. Its principles were terribly
spread among the Iraqi Army. That is because those who spread their
beliefs were good at invading the hearts and the opinions and (they
were) good at the means of propaganda. Ziyad bin Abeeh has described
their ability in this respect, saying: “Most surely the speech of these
people is quicker in reaching the hearts than the fire in reaching the
reeds!” Al-Mughira bin Shu‘ba has described their intense influence on
the people, saying: “When they resided in a country, they spoiled all
those who associated with them.”[^1] They controlled the simple-minded
from among the (Iraqi) Army through their slogan: “The
[^1] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 6, p. 109.

government belongs to Allah!” With this they meant nothing except the
government through the sword, as Flotin says.[^1] The crooked plans of
the Harawriyya (Kharijites) made it incumbent on their followers to
revolt against the ruler of the Muslims when he did not belong to them.
This was religious jihad with them, and they had to sacrifice their
lives for it. The Kharijites strongly revolted against the rulers to the
extent that they were unable to resist them. They carried in their souls
strong malice against the Hashimite government, for its members had
killed their prominent persons and put an end to many of them at the
Battle of al-Nahrawan. They killed Imam Ali, the Commander of the
faithful, and left him thrown down in his mihrab as a sign of their
taking a vengeance on him due to what he had done to them. They also
tried to assassinate Imam al-Hasan (a.s) when they stabbed him in the
thigh. Besides they accused him of unbelief. This group of people was
numerous. Some books have mentioned that the majority of the Army were
from them.[^2]

These two parties dominated Iraq and spared no effort to spoil the
Army, to sow disagreement and division among all its units to the extent
that they suffered from troubles and disorders. Besides, a large group
of them took a negative attitude towards the affair of Imam al-Hasan,
peace be on him. That is because they did not understand the original
objectives the Imam sought. Because of their narrow thinking they
maintained that the Imam was every one who ascended the throne of
government through any means possible; therefore al-Hasan and Mu’awiya
were the same (for them), though al-Hasan fought against Mu’awiya for
the religion, and Mu’awiya fought against al-Hasan for the world.

After that, none was ready to support the Hashimite government or to
side with it except the Shia who maintained that the Alawids were worthy
of the caliphate. Such Shiites were the leader Qays bin Sa‘d, Sa‘eed bin
Qays, ‘Adi bin Hatam al-Taa’i, Hijr bin ‘Adi, Rashid al-Hajjri, Habeeb
bin Muzahir, and the like from among the followers of Imam Ali (a.s).
However, they were few in number just as Allah, the Exalted, has said:
“And they are few.” Accordingly, they were unable to save the Army from
the dangers that surrounded it. If they had been many in the Army, Imam
Ali, the Commander of the faithful, would not have been forced to accept
the arbitration, and al-Hasan would not have resorted to the
peacemaking.

[^1] Al-Siyada al-‘Arabiya, p. 69.
[^2] A’yan al-Shia, vol. 4, p. 42.

**Boredom of War**

The Kufans were tired of war, “and the tired has no opinion.” In
addition to this psychological phenomenon for which they were famous,
there are two reasons that brought about and doubled the boredom. They
are as follows:

**The Successive Battles**

Among the reasons that brought about tiredness and boredom to the souls
of the Iraqi army are the successive battles. That is because the state
used to send the Army to make conquest and to defend it. The Battles of
Siffin and al-Nahrawan increased the weakness of the nerves of its
members and the collapse of their strength. During these two battles
many people were killed to the extent that they hated battle and
preferred tranquility and peace.

**The Despair of Booties**

The Iraqi Army won nothing of the weapon and property during the
Battles of al-Jamal (the Camel), Siffin, and al-Nahrawan. That is
because Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful, did not regard the
people who fought against him at these battles as unbelievers and did
not divide their belongings among the Muslims. Rather he ordered them to
be returned to their owners after the end of Basra Battle (the Battle of
the Camel).[^1] The Army came to know that Imam al-Hasan would not change
his father’s conduct and program. So they had no confidence in the
property and the booty if they fought against Mu’awiya. Accordingly,
they declared rebellion, showed mutiny and boredom of war.

Most surely that the Iraqi Army hated war and preferred peace to it,
and this did not result from Maskan events; rather it resulted from
raising copies of the Qur’an (at the Battle of Siffin) and from the
Battle of al-Nahrawan. All the units of the Army inclined to peace. In
the first part of the book we have mentioned some examples of the
treacherous aggressions which Mu’awiya’s troops made through the Iraqi
borders. We have also mentioned some examples of their invading the
Iraqi cities, their terrifying and killing the innocent people, while
they (the Iraqis) were too weak and laggard to resist them. The
religious sentiments did not move them nor did human feelings shake them
to repel the oppression and abasement. Imam Ali (a.s) commanded them to
perform jihad, but they did not obey him. He invited them to support
him, but they did not respond to him. This attitude left in his soul
bitter sorrow and permanent sadness. Accordingly, in many of his
speeches, the Imam has disparaged and dispraised them. He (a.s) has
said: “I am tired of admonishing you. Are you satisfied with this
worldly life in place
[^1] Dr. Taha Husayn, Ali wa Banuh, p. 55.

of the next life? Or disgrace in place of dignity? When I summon you to
fight against your enemy, your eyes revolve as though you are in the
clutches of death and in the senselessness of the last moments….”

Imam Ali goes on rebuking and admonishing them. He shows his
displeasure with their weakness and their turning away from war, saying:
“Neither you are a support for me to lean upon…. By Allah, most surely,
I think that if battle rages and death hovers around you, you will cut
away from the son of Abi Talib like the severing of head from the
trunk….”

In another speech he (a.s) describes their turning away from the jihad
in the way of Allah, his terrible ordeal and tribulation in respect of
them, saying: “I called them secretly as well as openly, again and
again. Some of them unwillingly came; some of them affected illness; and
some of them tarried and deserted. And I ask Allah to give me a quick
relief from them! By Allah, were it not for my ambition for martyrdom
during meeting my enemy (in battle), I would like that I would not
remain with these people for one day and never meet with them!”[^1]

In another speech he (a.s) says: “By Allah, deceived is one whom you
have deceived while, by Allah, he who is successful with you receives
only useless arrows. You are like broken arrows thrown over the enemy.
By Allah, I am now in the position that I neither confirm your views nor
hope for your support, nor challenge the enemy through you. What is the
matter with you? What is your ailment? What is your cure?”[^2]

Nahj al-Balagha contains a large group of Imam Ali’s speeches in which
he has expressed his displeasure with his Army and their turning away
from supporting him. He has said that they filled his heart with pus,
loaded his bosom with rage, and caused him griefs one after the other.
They remained tired of war and hated jihad throughout the days of Imam
Ali, the Commander of the faithful. When Imam al-Hasan (a.s) became a
caliph, they showed that in the worst manner. When he asked them about
Mu’awiya’s summons to peacemaking, they said at the top of their voices:
“The remainder! The remainder!”

This indicates that they were tired of war, they hated jihad, and would
never been with Imam al-Hasan if he had opened a door to battle against
Mu’awiya.
[^1] Muhammed ‘Abda, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 3, p. 67.
[^2] Ibid., vol. 1, p. 70.

**Missing the aware Figures**

Among the reasons for dividing the Iraqi Army is that it lost the aware
forces from among the Muslim great figures who believed in the right of
the Prophet’s Household, peace be on them, and regarded their
excellence. All the military units respect them, for they were good
Muslims, show extreme courage (at battles), played an important role in
organizing the military movements, and guided the army to serve the
Islamic objectives. Examples of them are ‘Ammar bin Yasir, a great
companion (of the Prophet), Hashim al-Mirqal, an inspired leader, Thabit
bin Qays, the one of two testimonies, and the like from among those who
had precedence in Islam and faith. Most of them were killed at the
Battle of Siffin. Historians have counted the number of those who had
taken part in the Battle of Badr, and it was sixty-three men (from among
those who fought with Imam Ali in). There is another group of the pious,
good companions who died martyrs at the battles made by those ambitious
and devious from Islam against Imam Ali. Missing them left a large gap
in the Iraqi Army, that lost the leading personalities and was afflicted
with the hypocrites and the Kharijites who were like a woodworm boring
in its entity. If Imam al-Hasan’s Army had had the like of those pious,
the Imam would not make peace with his opponent.

**The Summons to Peacemaking**

Another reason for undermining the determinations and putting out the
fire of the revolt in the souls of the Army is Mu’awiya’s summons to
peacemaking and sparing blood. For this summons was very agreeable. That
is because the simple-minded regarded it as good. However the
overwhelming majority had not come to know Mu’awiya’s intentions and the
evil he had schemed against them. So his summons to peacemaking deceived
them just as the raising of copies of the Qur’an had deceived them.
Besides, their leaders betrayed Imam al-Hasan and joined Mu’awiya’s
camp.

Anyway the majority of the Army hailed the summons to peacemaking and
preferred peace to war. As for Imam al-Hasan, he was unable to force
them to fight against Mu’awiya and to resist him.

**Ubaydillah’s Treason**

The desertion of Ubaydillah bin al-Abbas is regarded as among the
factors that divided and undermined the Army. Through his treason he
deadly stabbed the Iraqi army, opened a door to treason and perfidy, and
paved the way for people to join Mu’awiya. The men of he weak souls
found a wide room to desert their Imam. They used Ubaydillah’s treason
as means for that, for he was the Imam’s cousin and the closet of the
people to him in kinship. In the past it was said:

If the closer (in kinship) to whose party you belong deserts you, then
there is no wonder when those far desert you! Ubaydillah’s treason
created in the Imam’s soul strong sadness and a bitter sorrow. That is
because he paid no attention to the religion, the revenge, the tribal
links, the close relationships with Allah’s Apostle, and with his
commander-in-chief. Nor did he pay attention to the pledge of allegiance
he had made before Allah, for he was the first to summon the people to
pledge allegiance to al-Hasan in Kufa Mosque. Nor did he pay attention
to the fear of the people’s speech and the vengeance of history.

**The Treason of Rabee’a**

Among the reasons for the collapse of the Army, the division of their
bases, and their feebleness in resistance was the treason of (the tribe
of) Rabee‘a, who were like a strong armor to the Imam. That was when
Khalid bin Mu‘ammar, a brilliant leader among Rabee‘a, joined Mu’awiya
and said to him: “I will pledge allegiance to you on behalf of Rabee‘a.”
He paid homage to him on their behalf. The poet said in respect of him
when he addressed Mu’awiya, saying:

O Mu’awiya, honor Khalid bin Mu‘ammar, for, most surely, were it not
for Khalid, you would not be appointed as a commander! When al-Hasan
heard of that, his became very angry. He headed for the Iraqis and
addressed them, saying: “O People of Iraq, it was you who forced my
father to fight (against Mu’awiya) and (to accept) the arbitration. Then
you disobeyed him. I have heard that the men of honor from among you
have come to Mu’awiya and paid homage to him. Therefore sufficient unto
me is that which (has issued) from you! Do not deceive me in respect of
my religion and my soul!”

Uthman bin Shurhabeel, the chief of the the tribe of Tamim, secretly
pledged allegiance to Mu’awiya. Accordingly, the treason spread over the
military units.[^1]

**Mu’awiya’s Bribes**

For money the protections of men are bought, homelands are sold, and
thoughts are suppressed. A mouth waters for money! Indeed Mu’awiya
deliberately spent money on the prominent persons, the noble, and the
leaders. That is because he had come to know that he had no means to
overcome the event except through spending money. Accordingly, the
people
[^1] Ansab al-Ashraf, Q1/vol.1, p. 223.

betrayed Imam al-Hasan and slipped away in the night and in the
daylight to join Mu’awiya’s camp. They paid no attention to shame,
disgrace, and Allah’s punishment. Their treason led to the disorders of
the army, division, and the declaration of rebellion and mutiny. Most
surely, the overwhelming majority of the Army had no noble objective;
rather they wished for their profits and ambitions. One of them stated
that at one of the battles, saying: “Whoever gives us a dirham, we will
fight on his behalf!” A poet dispraised a person who was killed at those
battles. The poet said to his children:

Your father met his death not for the sake of Allah but for the sake of
the dirhams.[^1] If the members of an army fight for material motives,
they are not loyal to their defense, their mutiny is very possible, and
their danger against their government is more than an external danger.

The then Iraqis were corrupt and greedy to get money from Mu’awiya. For
example, after Imam al-Hasan had received a wound, he went to al-Mada’in
for cure. There he stopped at the house of Sa‘d bin Mas‘ud al-Thaqafi[^2]
, who was appointed as a governor over al-Mada’in by Imam Ali (a.s) and
by Imam al-Hasan (a.s). Then his (Sa‘d) young nephew called al-Mukhtar
came to him and said:

-O uncle, do you have (an objective) in riches and honor?
-What is that?
-Shackle al-Hasan and seek security from Mu’awiya through him.
-Allah’s curse be on you! Do I shackle the son of the daughter of the
messenger of Allah? How a bad man you are![^3]
[^1] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 19.

[^2] Al-Bukhari has mentioned Sa‘d bin Mas‘ud al-Thaqafi (and regarded
him as) among the companions (of the Prophet). Al-Tabarani has said: “He
(Sa‘d bin Mas‘ud al-Thaqafi) had companionship (with the Prophet). (Imam
Ali), the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, appointed him as a
governor over one of his works. He took him with him to (the Battle of)
Siffin. He (Sa‘d bin Mas‘ud al-Thaqafi) narrated the following tradition
on the authority of the Imam, who said: “When Noah wore a garment, he
thanked Allah. When he ate or drank, he thanked Allah. So he was called
a grateful servant.” Al-Isaba, vol. 2, p. 34.

[^3] Al-Tabari, Tarikh. Al-Isaba. Some researchers have negated the
correctness of the narration and regarded it as among the fabricated
ones. That is possible, for al-Mukhtar was the best of the men in his
conduct, his piety, and all his tendencies. The treason included
al-Mukhtar, if this narration was true, and the majority of the army who
were with Imam al-Hasan, and they competed with each other for the
worldly ambitions. That was not only during the time of Imam al-Hasan,
peace be on him. It was also during the time of Imam Ali (a.s). Imam
Zayn al-‘Abidin (a.s) has said: “Mu’awiya fought Ali through his
gold!”[^1] Most surely Mu’awiya came to know the point of weakness in
Imam al-Hasan’s army, so he showered it with bribes to the extent that
it responded to him and abandoned the Prophet’s family and his trust
among his community.

**The false Rumors**

Among the reasons for the division of the army are the false rumors
which Mu’awiya’s hirelings spread in al-Mada’in. They rumored that Qays
bin Sa‘d was killed. They also rumored that he made peace with Mu’awiya.
The members of the Army believed these rumors, so they suffered from
troubles and discords. The most dangerous of these rumors in tribulation
and greatest of them in destruction was that which was spread by the
delegation sent by Mu’awiya to Imam al-Hasan. When the members of the
delegation left Imam al-Hasan, they rumored that he responded to
peacemaking. When the members of the Army heard of that, they rushed
like waves. They plundered Imam al-Hasan’s property and aggressed
against him. If the leaders and the prominent figures had had a little
bit of humanity and dignity, they would have protected the Imam and
driven the mobs away from him till the affair would be clear to them.
However they remained in their camps. They neither protected nor helped
him.

With this topic we will end our speech about the factors that led to
the division and destruction of the Army. Of course, military forces are
the core of a state and the source of its protection. If such shocks and
dangers strike them, can the commander-in-chief achieve his objectives
or open a door to war against the enemy forces?

**The Enemy’s Forces**

The second factor that urged Imam al-Hasan to make peace (with
Mu’awiya) was that his opponent had military forces and the like against
whom the Imam was unable to fight, nor was he able to resist. With these
forces Mu’awiya had fought against Imam Ali, the Commander of the
faithful, before and forced Imam al-Hasan to make peace with him. We
will give a brief outline on some of them as follows:
[^1] Al-Maqreezi, Khutat, vol. 2, p. 439.

**The Obedience of the Army**

Mu’awiya planted the love for him in the hearts of his Army. He
dominated their feelings and sentiments. It was because he knew their
inclinations and trends. So he complied with them to the extent that
they loved him, and he loved them. They obeyed him and their opinion of
him was fully developed because of his propaganda and his cheating
through that he was the proof after the Caliphs, and that the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family, had no lawful inheritor other than
the Umayyads. The historians have narrated: “When Abu al-Abbas
al-Saffah[^1] conquered Sham, a group of leaders and prominent persons
came to him. They swore by Allah that they had come to know that the
Prophet had neither kinship nor household to inherit him except the
Umayyads. They knew that when the Abbasids undertook the caliphate.”
Concerning that, Ibrahim bin al-Muhajir al-Bajali[^2] says:

O people, listen to me so that I tell you something wonderful (and) has
exceeded all wonderful things.
I wonder at ‘Abd Shams; they have opened to the people doors to
lying.
They have inherited Ahmed (Muhammad) in what they have claimed
excluding Abbas bin ‘Abd al-Muttalib.
They have told lies. By Allah, as far as we know that none obtains the
inheritance except those near.[^3]

The reason behind that were the narrations that the mercenary narrators
fabricated and rumored among the people of Damascus. They told the
people there that Mu’awiya was the inheritor of the Prophet and the
nearest of the people to him. They ascribed to him and to the cursed
tree of his family good qualities and noble descriptions, to the extent
that they placed him in the first class from among the good reformers to
whom obedience was one of the religious duties. The people of Sham
believed in other things as to Mu’awiya and the Umayyads. Professor Fan
Floten says: “The great majority thought that the Umayyad party was that
of the religion and the regime.” He added:

[^1] Abu al-‘Abbas was the first ‘Abbasid caliph. He was at al-Hamiya, a
district of al-Balqa’, in the year 108 A. H. He grew up at it. He was
given the pledge of allegiance as a caliph in 3rd Rabee‘ al-Awwal, in
the year 132. He hurried to shed blood. His governors in the east and
west followed his examples. He died in the year 136. Al-Sayuti, Tarikh
al-Khulafa’, p. 100.

[^2] Ibrahim bin al-Muhajir al-Bajali is Abu Ishaq al-Kufi. He narrated
traditions on the authority of a group of the trustworthy, and others
reported on his authority. (The traditionists) have differed over his
narration. So it was said that he was trustworthy, and it was said that
he was weak. Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 1, p. 167.

[^3] Al-Mas‘udi Murujj al-Dhahab, vol. 2, p. 167.

“In the viewpoint of the Umayyad party Mu’awiya was the vicegerent of
Allah just as his son Yazid was the Imam of the Muslims, ‘Abd al-Malik
was the Imam of Islam and one entrusted by Allah.”[^1] The people of Sham
loved and obeyed Mu’awiya to the extent that he made them walk on all
the ways far and contrary to the religion, while they did not know that.
Through them he could achieve all what he wanted. Because of their
increasingly obedience to Mu’awiya, Imam Ali, the Commander of the
faithful, had wished that Mu’awiya would have given him one of his
companions and taken ten of the Iraqis who were famous for riot and
mutiny.

**Simplicity and Naiveté**

The bad time helped Mu’awiya dominate the Army that was a model of
simplicity and naiveté, for the great majority of it did not know which
anecdote was the longest. History has mentioned many examples of their
stupidity indicating their inactivity and lacking insight. The
historians have mentioned that a man from Kufa came to Damascus on the
back of a camel. That was when they went away from Siffin. A man from
Damascus clung to him and said to him: “This is my she-camel! You took
it from me at Siffin!” A quarrel took place between them. So they
brought their case before Mu’awiya. The man from Damascus brought fifty
men to bear witness that the she-camel belonged to him. Accordingly,
Mu’awiya decided against the Kufan and commanded him to hand over the
camel to the Syrian man immediately. So the Iraqi man turned to Mu’awiya
and showed his astonishment at this judgement, saying: “May Allah set
you right! It is a he-camel, and not a she-camel!”

“The decision is over!” exclaimed Mu’awiya.

When the people went away, Mu’awiya ordered the Iraqi to be brought
before him. When he was before him, he asked him about the value of the
he-camel. The Iraqi told Mu’awiya about its value, and Mu’awiya gave a
double of its price to him. He was kind to him and said: “Say to Ali
that I will meet him (in battle) with one thousand men who do not
distinguish the she-camel from the he-camel!”[^2]

Most surely the overwhelming majority did not distinguish between a
she-camel and a he-camel. Without doubt they did not distinguish truth
from falsehood. They did not carefully consider the differences among
the sensible things. They were mobs and rabbles. The clearest proof of
their inattentiveness

[^1] Al-Siyada al-‘Arabiya, p. 70.
[^2] Al-Mas‘udi Murujj al-Dhahab, vol. 2, p. 332.

was the story of ‘Ammar bin Yasir, the great companion of the Prophet.
When he obtained martyrdom, the Syrians differed over him because of the
tradition of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family: “Most
surely the oppressive group will kill Ibn Sumayya (i.e. ‘Ammar bin
Yasir).” When Amr bin al-‘Aas saw that they differed, he said to them:
“Most surely, he who brought him (Ammar) out has killed him!” So they
believed his speech and returned to the obedience to Mu’awiya. Of course
when a state has such an inattentive, obedient army, it will reach its
purposes and achieve its objectives.

Mu’awiya made the people of Sham inattentive, ignorant, and wretched.
He made them sink under the yoke of the Umayyad enslavement. He placed
between them and the people an iron curtain. He did not allow the others
to communicate with them nor did he allow them to communicate with the
others lest they should come to know the truth and know Mu’awiya’s
falsehood and his usurping the caliphate from its actual people. The
politicians after Mu’awiya followed this policy. They deliberately made
them lead a life of ignorance. They did not allow awareness to be spread
among them. The historians have narrated that Ayas disputed with an old
man from among the people of Sham, and their case was brought before the
judge. The judge said to him: “Do you not feel shame of that you
disputed with an old man, while you are a young man?” “The truth is
greater than him,” replied Ayas. So the judge rebuked him and commanded
him to keep silent. As a result Ayas said to him: “Who will utter my
proof?” So the Judge went to ‘Abd al-Malik and told him about Ayas’s
case. ‘Abd al-Malik said to the judge: “Grant his need and bring him out
of Sham lest he should spoil the people against us!”[^1]

The historians have mentioned many examples of such cases showing the
Umayyad policy aiming at deadening awareness and spreading ignorance.


