The Unanimous Agreement
=======================

In the previous researches we have mentioned that the Iraqis were
afflicted with disagreement and division. That is because the members of
the parties spared no effort to shake the entity of the Hashimite
government and to destroy its throne. But all the classes in Sham were
not afflicted with such parties, nor were they stricken by the opinions
hostile to the standing government. Peace, harmony, and tranquility
prevailed over Damascus and all its districts. In the Army and the
kingdom the Kharijites had neither place nor
[^1] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 133.

summoners to them or to other than them from among those who worked to
overthrow the government. This unanimous agreement was the reason for
Mu’awiya’s power, his wide range and influence.

The huge Army

Mu’awiya spent all his spiritual and material efforts to set right his
Army and to reinforce it. For example, when Sham was afflicted with the
Romans’ danger, Mu’awiya hurried to conclude a timely truce with their
Emperor and to give him important properties. He did not open a door to
war against him lest the nerves of his Army should be weak. Besides he
did not employ his Army during the conquests and the battles. He did not
employ it at any battle except that of Siffin, so the Army kept its
activity and strength.

In addition to his Army residing with him in Damascus, Mu’awiya wrote
to his governors and his leaders in all the countries when he decided to
war against Imam al-Hasan. He asked them for help and to be fully ready
for fighting against the Prophet’s grandson (Imam al-Hasan). Shortly
after that, huge military forces joined him. So he added them to those
of Sham and set off towards Iraq along with a huge Army full in number,
good in appearance, abundant in strength, and obedient to his commands.
Accordingly, Imam al-Hasan understood that he had no ability to meet him
(in battle) and to fight against him with his weak Army among which
treason and perfidy spread.

His Entourage

In addition to the military forces Mu’awiya enjoined, he had other
forces with effective influence on reinforcing his front, directing him,
and managing his affairs. That was when the experienced and the
politicians joined him because they craved after his property and his
world. An example of these persons was al-Mughira bin Shu‘ba about whose
trick and cunning it has been said: “If al-Mughira was in a city with
eight gates and none could pass through them except through trick and
deception, he would pass through all its gates!” And it was said
concerning his great cunning: “When an affair happened to al-Mughira, he
found an outlet to it. When two affairs became vague to him, he showed
an opinion of one of them.” Yet another example of such people is Amr
bin al-‘Aas who was a castle of cunning and falsehood. In respect of
describing him it was said: “I have never seen (a man) greater than Amr
bin al-‘Aas in overcoming the men when they came together and in
spending!” He was on top of those who raised the flag of the revolt
against ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan, for the latter removed him from his office.
He moved against him in spites of the people and urged those far and
near to fight against him. In this respect he said: “By Allah, when I
met a shepherd, I provoked him against ‘Uthman! Besides (I provoked
against him) the heads and the prominent persons!”When he heard of the
murder of ‘Uthman, he said: “I am Abu Abdullah.When I move an ulcer, I
make it bleed!” He had deceived the Iraqi Army through raising copies of
the Qur’an. He divided the Army into parts and made it different in
desires.

Mu’awiya attracted these cunning people, who mixed poison with honey,
clothed falsehood with the garment of truth, did not refrain from sin,
and detested things for their evil tendencies. They had no objective
except putting an end to the progeny of the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, and those associated with them from among the righteous
Muslims. That was because they wanted to put an end to Islam and to go
too far in practicing dissoluteness wherever they wished. As for Imam
al-Hasan (a.s) he took the decisive attitude that thinkers took. He
protected the progeny of Allah’s Apostle (a.s) and spared the blood of
the believers from among his followers. He thought that the sacrifice at
that time would never give general interests to the Muslims, for the
Umayyads would give to it various kinds of distortion and misguidance
through which it would lose its morale and originality.

**Enormous Properties**

Mu’awiya had immense wealth in Sham prepared throughout his governing
it. He did not spend it on the interests of the Muslims; rather he
bought by it the consciences and the religions to clear the way for him
to win the supreme authority and to control the Muslims.

Mu’awiya sent cruel tax collectors to take taxes from the Muslim
peoples in the countries he had occupied, and they unjustly took the
Muslims’ properties to the extent that they went too far in exhausting
them and forcing them to pay taxes. He also imposed on them taxes Islam
had not legislated such as al-Nawruz[^1] gifts. So his treasuries were
full of properties, and he freely spent them on fighting Imam al-Hasan,
the Prophet’s darling grandson, and overcoming him. As for the Prophet’s
grandson (al-Hasan), he came to know that Mu’awiya, Hind’s son, became
powerful. He thought that he would not be able to fight against him,
that he would win no victory over him, and that the attitude required
peacemaking, not war and fighting. He was sure that war would bring
about to the community bad complications whose dangers none knew except
Allah.

[^1] Al-Nawruz is the Persian New Year’s Day.


**The Assassination of Imam Ali**

Among the factors that urged Imam al-Hasan to make peace with Mu’awiya
is the murder of his father through which he was terrified. This left in
his soul permanent sadness and strong sorrow, because Imam Ali was
killed not for money he had taken nor for a sunna he had changed nor for
a right with which he had singled himself out excluding them. Rather
throughout his reign he led a life of the poor and the weak. In the
meantime he spared no effort to make the community lead a life full of
boons and blessings. He did his best to establish justice, deaden
tyranny, support the oppressed, and to relieve the weak and the
deprived. However the people denied this shining justice and
deliberately assassinated him at the time when he was before Allah. They
paid no attention to his sacredness and to that of Allah’s Apostle
(a.s). They committed this abominable crime, so Imam al-Hasan (a.s)
thought that it was difficult for him to set them right or to return
them to the way of the truth and rightness. He turned away from
undertaking the authority over them and refrained from meeting with
them. He wished that he had not known them just as his father had wished
before. He (a.s) has mentioned this attitude, saying: “Your
assassinating my father has made me refrain from you!”

Indeed the murder of Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful, and the
pioneer of the social justice, was among the most important reasons that
made Imam al-Hasan refrain from those ignorant people who made troubles,
had desires, and deviated from the straight path!

**Sparing of Blood**

Among the reasons for the peacemaking is that Imam al-Hasan’s urgently
wanted to spare and not to shed the Muslims’ blood. If he had opened a
door to war against Mu’awiya, he would have sacrificed his followers and
his household; and through that the torch of faith would have been put
out and Islam would have been uprooted. He (a.s) has mentioned that in
his answer to the reasons of his making peace (with Mu’awiya). He has
said: “Most surely I was afraid that the Muslims would be uprooted from
the surface of the earth. So I wanted someone to announce the
religion!”

He (a.s) answered those from among his followers who harbored malice
against him because of the peacemaking, saying: “Through my making peace
with Mu’awiya I wanted (nothing) except keeping murder away from
you.”[^1] In the speech he made in al-Mada’in, he expressed his great
taking care of sparing the Muslims’ blood. In it he has mentioned: “O
people, most surely
[^1] Al-Daynawari, p. 303.

the affair over which I and Mu’awiya have differed is a right (of
mine). I am going to leave the right to set right the community’s affair
and to spare its blood!”[^1] An example of his taking care of that is
that he advised his brother al-Husayn when the inevitable moment of
death came to him, saying: “I swear by Allah that you should not shed
even a bit of blood in carrying out my command.”

Certainly the most lovable thing to Imam al-Hasan (a.s) was keeping the
Muslims’ blood, spreading security and peace among them. He spared no
effort to achieve that.

**Mu’awiya’s Favor**

Imam al-Hasan (a.s) came to know that if he had fought against
Mu’awiya, then the Iraqi rogues would have handed him over to Mu’awiya
as a prisoner of war. Most likely Mu’awiya would not kill him, rather he
would release him and recorded for him a laudable deed and favor against
all the Hashimites, that he might remove from him the shame due to the
fact that he (Mu’awiya) and his father (Abu Sufyan) were prisoners of
war. As for al-Hasan (a.s) he has mentioned that, saying: “If I fought
against Mu’awiya, they would seize me by the neck and peacefully hand me
over to him. By Allah, if I made peace with him while I was powerful, it
would be better for me than that when he would kill me and I was a
captive, or he would be kind to me, and it would be shame on the
Hashimites for ever. Mu’awiya and his children would remind the living
and the dead from among us of it.”

This reason was too remarkable, for the Imam wanted his opponent not to
gain any favor or laudable deed through him.
Events of al-Mada’in

Among the reasons that prompted Imam al-Hasan to make peace with
Mu’awiya is the severe events that he faced in al-Mada’in. We have
mentioned that in detail. Yet it is important for us to summarize them
as follows:

1. The treason of the leaders and prominent persons and their
communication with Mu’awiya,
2. Accusing him of unbelief,
3. Assassinating him, and
4. Plundering his belongings.

[^1] A‘yan al-Shia, vol. 4, p. 42.

These are some factors that moved Imam al-Hasan to make peace with
Mu’awiya. As far as we know that they required him to make peace and not
to open a door to war against Mu’awiya.

**The Prophetic Traditions**

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, predicted the events
that would happen after him. He saw them in reality, not in pictures and
forms. He saw that disasters would spread over his community, troubles
and misfortunes would befall it. He saw that his community would reach
the lowest level of deterioration and backwardness, and that saving them
from the bitter condition would be through the hands of his elder
grandson, Imam al-Hasan, peace be on him. So he has said his immortal
statement: “Most surely, this (grand) son of mine is a master. Perhaps
through him Allah will make peace between two great groups of the
Muslims.”[^1]

This tradition was impressed in Imam al-Hasan’s inner self from his
early childhood. It appeared before him during that terrible attitude.
Most surely he (al-Hasan) was sure of his grandfather’s tradition just
as he was sure of the Qur’an. His grandfather said to him so. It was as
if his holy voice sounded in his ear. He said to his pure mother. He
said on his pulpit. He said among his companions and said on many
occasions: “Most surely, this (grand) son of mine is a master. Perhaps
through him Allah will make peace between two groups of the Muslims.”

This memory reacted strongly in his soul. In al-Mada’in he remembered
what his grandfather, may Allah bless him and his family, suffered. That
was when he saw two groups of the Muslims fighting against each other:
The first group included his followers (Shia) from among the good,
righteous Muslims who understood the true objectives of Islam.

The second group was composed of the naïve, the simple-minded, and
those who deviated from Islam. Although they were rebels and they
revolted against the Imam of their time, they claimed that they were
Muslims. If the war had broken out between them, it would have destroyed
many of them, and through that the entity of Islam would have been weak
and its forces would have been collapsed. Then who, from the Muslims,
would stand against the enemy who was watching the events to attack
them. I (the author) wonder who would take care of Islam and protect the
Muslims other than the Prophet’s grandson and his inheritor.
Accordingly, Imam al-Hasan preferred peace to war regardless of the
hardships. Shams al-Deen al-Siqqli, died 565 A. H., maintained that
the
[^1] We have mentioned the sources of the tradition in the first part of
the book, p. 81.

reason which moved al-Hasan to abdicate the caliphate was the tradition
of the Prophet (a.s) concerning that.[^1] Narrators have claimed that the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, talked to his companions
about the period of the Islamic caliphate, saying to them: “Most surely
the caliphate after me will continue for thirty years, and then it will
be monarchy.” They noticed that al-Hasan made peace with Mu’awiya when
the thirty years was over, as they said.[^2]

Al-Hasan carefully considered the tradition of his grandfather (a.s)
and came to know that there was no escape from that Mu’awiya would
undertake the authority. Besides, his father had told him about that as
imam al-Hasan (a.s) himself narrated: “One day my father said to me: ‘O
Hasan, how will you behave if the Umayyads undertake this authority?
Their ruler will be wide-necked and big-bellied. He eats but he will not
be satisfied. He will control the west and east. The people will follow
him. His kingdom will last long. He will legislate heresies and
misguidance. He will deaden the truth and the Sunna of Allah’s Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family. He will divide the property among
the people of his and withhold it from those who are worthy of it. The
believers will be abased in his kingdom, and the sinners will be
powerful during his supreme authority. He will make his supporters
succeed one another in respect of the property. He will regard Allah’s
servants as slaves. During his reign the truth will be effaced, and
falsehood will appear. He will kill those who oppose him for the
truth.”[^3]

Most surely the Prophet and his guardian Imam Ali looked through the
veil of the unseen and knew the ordeals and the tribulation with which
the community were afflicted. That is because the members of the
community turned away from supporting the truth and fighting against
falsehood. For this reason, the freed prisoners of war and their
children undertook the authority

[^1] Anba’ Nujaba’ al-Abnaa’, p. 56.
[^2] Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 8, p. 41. I (the author) think that
this tradition is fabricated. That is because the caliphate became a
biting king during the days of ‘Uthman, who changed its concept and
preferred the Umayyads to others in respect of the properties and
government. He prepared to them forces to make them ready to fight
against the Commander of the faithful (Imam Ali). The Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, talked about the form of the government after
him, saying: “Most surely the beginning of your religion is prophethood
and mercy, then it would be a king and fatalism.” (The tradition) has
been narrated by al-Sayuti in his Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 6. His
tradition became true. That is because the begging of the religion was
prophethood and mercy, and then it changed during the time of the
Umayyads into kingdom, tyranny, and fatalism.
[^3] Bihar al-Anwar.

over them, treated them unjustly, possessed alone the wealth of Allah,
and regarded people as salves. As for Mu’awiya, he came to know that the
authority would reach him during the time of Imam Ali. That was when he
made a premise through which he asked him about to whom the authority
would pass. He sent to him some of his companions to Kufa to rumor that
Mu’awiya had died. Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful, heard of
that; and the people repeatedly talked about that rumor. So he (a.s)
Said: “You have announced the death of Mu’awiya very much! By Allah, he
has not died! He will not die until he will possess that which is under
my feet!”[^1]

When Mu’awiya heard of that, he believed it. For he had come to know
that Imam Ali was the Gate of the City of the Prophet’s knowledge, and
the Store of his secrets, that his speech did not remain behind the
reality and did not miss the truth. Anyway the Muslims gave Imam
al-Hasan (a.s) the name of the great reformer because of his making
peace with Mu’awiya. It is worth mentioning that his grandfather the
Apostle had given him this name before.

**Infallibility**

Some great religious scholars have mentioned the peacemaking of Imam
al-Hasan, peace be on him. They have justified it through infallibility
saying that the infallible Imam did not make any mistake and did nothing
except that which brought about good and righteousness to the community.
Perhaps the points we have mentioned have indicated the meaning of this
speech and explained that it is good. That is because of the conditions
that surrounded the Imam and forced him to make peace with Mu’awiya. Now
we will mention some of those who have maintained this viewpoint. They
are:

1. Al-Shareef al-Murtadha

Al-Shareef al-Murtadha Alam al-Huda, may Allah have mercy on him, has
said: “It has been established that he (al-Hasan) is infallible and
strengthened with manifest proofs and strong signs.[^2] Therefore, there
is no escape form

[^1] Al-Mas‘udi Murujj al-Dhahab, vol. 2, p. 295.
[^2] Al-Shareef al-Murtada, is Ali bin al-Husayn. His very clear lineage
reaches the Imam of the Muslims, Musa bin Ja‘far, peace be on him. He
was the head of al-Talibiyyin. He was given the nickname of al-Murtada
and ‘Alam al-Huda (the Flag of Guidance). He was born in the year 355 A.
H. and died in the year 436. He was older than his brother al-Shareef
al-Radi. Abu Ja‘far al-Tusi has said: “(Al-Shareef) al-Murtada was
unique in many sciences. There is an unanimous agreement on his
excellence and has given precedence in many sciences such as theology,

submission to his deeds though they have something whose meaning is not
known in detail or has a surface from which people keep away.”[^1]

2. Sayyid Ibn Tawus[^2]

In his will to his son, the genius of Islam, the great Sayyid Ibn
Tawus, may Allah rest him in peace, has justified Imam al-Hasan’s
peacemaking trough infallibility and some of the reasons we have
mentioned. He, may Allah have mercy on him, said to his son: “It is not
strange that the people criticized your grandfather for his making peace
with Mu’awiya while he did that according to the command of his
grandfather. His grandfather (Muhammad) had made peace with the
unbelievers, and his excuse in respect of that was the clearest of all
excuses. When his brother al-Husayn rose to support the Iraqis, to
respond to their request, and to leave making peace with Yazid, they
were either a killer or a deserter. It is worth mentioning that we have
not known that they became angry during the days of Yazid for that
horrible murder. Nor did they revolt against him nor did they remove him
from his authority; whereas they became angry for Abdullah bin al-Zubayr
and helped him with his misguidance. So they were exposed out of this
large contradictory attitude; their bad choice made the misfortune
appear. Therefore is it regarded as unlikely the deviation of these
jurisprudence, the fundamentals of jurisprudence, literature, and the
like. He has a collection of poems containing more than ten thousand
(poetry) lines. He has many books on various sciences.” This has been
mentioned in (the book) Mu‘jam al-Udaba’, vol. 13, p. 146.

[^1] Tanzeeh al-Anbiya’, p. 69.
[^2] Ibn Tawus is a great, perfect Sayyid, a worshipper, and mujahid.
(His full name is) Radi al-Deen Abu al-Qasim bin Ali bin Musa bin Ja‘far
bin Tawus al-Hasani, al-Husayni. He was given the nickname of al-Tawus
because he was handsome and his legs were coarse. He lived in al-Hillah
(a city in Iraq). He is among the magnified Sayyids and one of the
heads. He has many books. All his good qualities and sciences have been
collected by al-Hujjah al-Thabt Muhammed al-Khunsari in his Roudaat
al-Jinaan, vol. 3, pp.43-47. In the book al-Kuna wa al-Al-Qaab it has
been mentioned: “He (al-Sayyid bin Tawus) undertook the union of the
Talibiyyin. He used to sit in a green dome and was visited by the people
who dressed in green instead of black. That was after the Battle of
Baghdad.” In respect of that Ali bin Hamza has said:

This is Ali, the (grand) son of Musa bin Ja‘far the like of Ali, the
son of Musa bin Ja‘far.
That was dressed in green for the Imamate, and this was dressed in
green for the union.
By that he meant Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, when he undertook the
succession (after al-Ma’mun) and was dressed in green. Al- Sayyid bin
Tawus died on Monday, 5th Dhi al-Qu‘da in the year 664 A. H.

people from the straight path while they reached this ill, ugly
condition?”[^1]

Sayyid Ibn Tawus, may Allah have mercy on him, has justified Imam
al-Hasan’s peacemaking with (firstly) infallibility from mistakes. He
compared his peacemaking with the peacemaking of his grandfather the
Prophet (a.s) with the polytheists in the Peace Treaty of al-Hudaybiya.
There is no doubt about the peacemaking of the Apostle and none can
criticize it due to the existence of the interest. And so is that of
al-Hasan with his opponent, for it was surrounded by the inclusive
interest of Muslims in general. Secondly, he justified it with the
tribulation and ordeal the Imam suffered from those devious people who
paid no attention to virtue and did not understand any of the spiritual
values. Therefore, it was they who forced Imam al-Hasan to make peace.
Sayyid ibn Tawus has offered reasons for the bad manners of those people
and their going too far in practicing evil deeds. That was when they
followed Yazid (son of Mu’awiya), who drank wine, and practiced
dissoluteness openly. They also supported him and took part with him in
the most horrible crime history has ever recorded, which was the murder
of the master of the youths of the Garden, al-Husayn, peace be on him.
They showed neither sorrow nor sadness at this crime. They did not
revolt against Yazid nor did they remove him from his office. In the
previous researches we have mentioned the reasons for these lowly
manners of the Iraqi masses.

**Showing the Umayyad Reality**

Before he took the reins of government, Mu’awiya was apparently
committed to the Islamic teachings. He affected taking care of the
Muslims’ affairs. However, that was, without doubt, hypocrisy and a
plot. He walked slowly to hunt the game as they say. He concealed
unbelief and hypocrisy. He harbored evil and enmity against the Muslims.
So through his making peace with him, Imam al-Hasan (a.s) wanted to show
his reality and to show the people his defects and plot. He wanted to
make those whom he deceived know that he was the most hostile to Islam.
As a result he left the field and handed over the authority to him.
However, suddenly the Khousrow of the Arabs, as they say, showed his
hellish policy through opposing Allah’s Book, and the Sunna of His
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family. He violated the Islamic
teachings, destroyed the abilities of Islam, and ruined the
knowledgeable forces. He showered them with various kinds of painful
torture. He executed and severely punished whomever he wished. He forced
the Muslims to disown the family of their Prophet, to curse them openly
and to disparage them on the
[^1] Kashf al-Muhjah li Thamrat al-Muhjah, p. 46. It contains valuable
commandments to his son.

pulpits. Through that the hidden things of his soul appeared. The
Muslims came to know this tyrant and what he schemed against them. If
the peacemaking had had no benefit except showing that, it would have
been sufficient, just as Imam Kashif al-‘Ghita’, may Allah have mercy on
him, has said in his introduction to the book.

After Mu’awiya had taken the reins of government, he carried a
destructive axe and began destroying all the Islamic foundations
attempting to extinguish the light of Islam, to fold its standard, to
efface and uproot it, and to return the pre-Islamic life. Before we deal
with some of his offences and bad manners through which he had blackened
the face of history, we have to mention what have been reported from his
parents from among malice and enmity against Islam. We also have to
mention what have been narrated from the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, from among the traditions on disparaging and dispraising
Mu’awiya. That is because we want to understand whether he was worthy of
being entrusted with the authority, being imposed as a ruler over the
Muslims, and of acting freely in respect of whatever he pleased without
any reckon and supervision. We mention that to readers as follows:

Abu Sufyan and Hind

As for Abu Sufyan, he was the bitterest enemy to the Prophet (a.s). It
was he who led the allies, helped the Jews, and supported all the forces
hostile to Islam. His malice toward the Prophet (a.s) doubled when some
of his family and seventy valiant Qurayshi polytheists were killed at
the Battle of Badr. So his sinful soul was full of sadness at them. He
went on fighting against the Apostle (a.s), and moved against him the
spites. But Allah repelled his plot. That was when he gave victory to
His Apostle, strengthened His religion, abased Abu Sufyan and his party.
Accordingly, the Prophet (a.s), conquered Mecca and entered it
successfully and victoriously. He destroyed and smashed the idols. As
for Abu Sufyan, he reluctantly embraced Islam. He was low and defeated.
Shame and disgrace followed him. Though he became a Muslim, he
maintained his pre-Islamic beliefs. Islam changed nothing of his natures
and manners. His house was a place of treason; and he was a cave of
hypocrisy.[^1]

When the Muslims suffered the loss of the Prophet (a.s) and when Abu
Bakr usurped the caliphate, Abu Sufyan went to Imam Ali (a.s). Abu
Sufyan asked Imam Ali (a.s) to revolt and to fight against Abu Bakr,
that he might return the caliphate to him. He had no faith in the right
of Imam Ali (a.s); rather he

[^1] Al-Isti‘abin

through that wanted to find a gap through which he wanted to destroy
and ruin Islam. However his wicked intentions were clear to the Imam,
and he turned away from and rebuked him. After that Abu Sufyan kept to
the corners of inactivity. The Muslims looked at him with the looking of
suspicion and doubt about his faith. When ‘Uthman became a caliph and
brought nigh the Umayyads and entrusted them with the Muslims’ affairs,
Abu Sufyan appeared, his star went high, he showed his spites and enmity
toward the Prophet. One day he stood by the grave of Hamza, the master
of the martyrs, peace be on him. He looked at it through his hollow
eyes. Then he moved his lips, saying: “O Abu Immarah, most surely, the
affair for which we met in duel yesterday is in the hands of our boys;
they are playing with it!”

Then he kicked the holy grave with his leg and went tranquilly and
delighted. All these things happened before the very eyes of ‘Uthman but
he neither blamed nor punished him. So we belong to Allah and to him we
will return!

This is the reality of Abu Sufyan in his unbelief and his malice toward
Islam. As for his wife Hind, she was not less than her husband in
cruelty. She was more malicious than him toward Allah’s Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family. She moved the polytheists to fight
against him. When the Battle of Badr was over and her polytheist family
and relatives were killed, she did not show mourning and sadness at
them.[^1] That is because she wanted through that to provoke Quraysh to
avenge their blood. The Qurayshi women came to her and said: “Why do you
not lament for your father, bother, uncle, and your household?”

She angrily answered them, saying: “If I lament (for them), Muhammad
and his companions will heard of that; they will gloat over us and the
womenfolk of the Banu al-Khazrajj! No, by Allah, (I will not lament for
them) until I take vengeance on Muhammad and His companions! It is
forbidden for me to oil my head until we invade Muhammad! By Allah, if I
came to know that sadness went away from my heart, I would weep! But
nothing drives it away until I see with my own eye that my vengeance on
those who killed my beloved ones is taken!”

[^1] The people before Islam used to delay their lamentation over their
killed until they took their vengeance. When it was taken, their
womenfolk lamented for them. In this respect their poet say:

Whoever is delighted at the murder of Malik, then let him come to our
womenfolk in broad daylight! He will find our womenfolk bare (headed).
They lament for him (and) scratch their hot cheeks in the early
mornings! Subh al-A‘sha, vol. 1, p. 405.

Hind went on her condition. She did not show sadness. She did not
approach Abu Sufyan’s bed and did not oil her hair until the Battle of
Uhd happened.[^1] She took vengeance on Hamza, the master of the martyrs.
She maimed him and did to him that ugly deed. Then she showed delight
and rejoicing. Then she composed poetry, saying:

I satisfied myself (for revenge) at (the Battle) of Uhd. That was when
I split open his stomach (and cut off) his liver! That removed from me
what I had found from among the agony of the followed intense sadness!
The war overtopped you with a shower of hailstones! We came to you with
the coming of a lion! When Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, saw what Hind did to his uncle, he became angry and burnt with
grief. Then he said: “No attitude made me angry as this one did!” He
also said: “I have never been stricken by anything like by Hamza!”[^2]
When the day of the conquest came and the Muslims entered Mecca, Abu
Sufyan walked through the streets and lanes. He unwillingly called out:
“Whoever lays down his weapon is safe! Whoever enters his house is safe!
And whoever enters Abu Sufyan’s house is safe!” When Hind heard that
from him, she scratched her face and unwillingly shouted: “Kill the
wicked, dirty one! How ugly the head (chief) of the people is!”

Then she turned to the masses and provoked them. She enthusiastically
said:

“Why did you not fight for your own city and defend yourselves?”

Through that she tried to move the anger of the people and to kindle
the fire of the revolt among her people. However Allah repelled her plot
and frustrated her effort. That was when Allah gave a victory to Islam
and its men. These are Mu’awiya’s parents. According to the hereditary
rule, I (the author) definitely think that what was settled in their
souls from among malice, hatred, and hostility to Islam and Allah’s
Apostle (a.s), passed to Mu’awiya. Besides, Allah’s Apostle met all the
Umayyads with disdain and disrespect because of what he had met from
them of tiredness and pain. He ordered them to be exiled from Yathrib
(Medina) such as al-Hakam, his son Marwan, Sa‘eed bin al-‘Aas, and
al-Waleed. He ordered the Muslims to avoid them and to call them the
accursed tree. These things that Mu’awiya saw brought about in his soul
malice against the Prophet (a.s) and his Household.

[^1] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 3, p. 342.
[^2] Ibid., p. 387.

**The Prophetic Traditions about Mu’awiya**

Many authentic traditions have been narrated from the Prophet in
respect of dispraising and disdaining Mu’awiya. Some traditions are as
follows:

1. The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, said: “A man will
come out of this mountain pass. He will be mustered (in a manner) other
than (that) of my community.” So Mu’awiya came out.[^1]

2. Allah’s Apostle (a.s) saw Abu Sufyan riding a donkey, his son
Mu’awiya leading the donkey, and his son Yazid driving it. He said: “May
Allah curse the leader, the rider, and the driver.”[^2]

3. Al-Barra’ bin ‘Aazib narrated: “Abu Sufyan came forward and Mu’awiya
was with him, so Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
said: ‘O Allah, take al-Uqay‘is!’” Al-Barra’ asked his father about
al-Uqay‘is, and he answered: “He is Mu’awiya.”[^3]

4. A woman came to the Prophet (a.s) and consulted him in respect of
marrying Mu’awiya. He prohibited her and said to her: “He (Mu’awiya) is
low.”[^4]

5. Abu Barzah al-Aslami[^5] has narrated: “We were with Allah’s Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family. We heard singing. A man rose and
listened to it. That had been before the wine was prohibited. The man
came to us and told us that Mu’awiya and Amr Ibn al-‘Aas answered each
other through this verse of poetry:

[^1] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 11, p. 357. Nasr bin Muzahim has narrated
in his Kitab Siffin, p. 247, that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family, said: “A man will come to you from this mountain pass. When
he dies, he dies in (a manner) other than my Sunna.”

[^2] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 11, p. 357. Imam al-Hasan, the Prophet
grandson, peace be on him, narrated the tradition from his grandfather.
Nasr bin Muzahim has mentioned it in his Kitab Siffin, p. 247.

[^3] Nasr bin Muzahim, Kitab Siffin, p. 244. Imam al-Hasan also narrated
it.

[^4] Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqat, vol. 8, 200. Asas al-Ghaba, vol. 5, p. 527.
Tarikh al-Khamis, vol. 2, p. 29.

[^5] Abu Barzah al-Aslami is Naddlah bin ‘Ubayd. He was a companion of
Allah’s Apostle. He narrated (traditions) from him and Abu Bakr. Some
other traditionists reported (traditions) on his authority. Ibn Sa‘d has
said: “He lived in Medina, and then he (lived) in Basrah. He invaded
Khurasan.” Al-Khatib has said: “He witnessed (the Battle of
al-Nahrawan). He fought against the Kharijites at (the Battle of)
al-Nahrawan. After that he invaded Khurasan and died in it.” It was said
that he died in Nisabur; it was said (that he died) in Basrah; other
than that was said. Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 10, p. 446.

‘…his bones appeared, turned the war away from him, that he may be
killed and buried. “When Allah’s Apostle heard of that, he raised his
hands to supplicate, saying: ‘O Allah, throw them into sedotion! O
Allah, drive them away to the fire with violence!”[^1] He said to
Mu’awiya: “You will take, O Mu’awiya, the heresy as sunna (law) and the
ugly as good!”[^2] Allah’s Apostle (a.s) looked through the unseen and
came to know that Mu’awiya would undertake the affairs of the
government. Accordingly, he warned the Muslims and ordered them to fight
against him. He said to them: “When you see Mu’awiya make a speech from
on my pulpit, then behead him!”[^3] When al-Hasan (a.s) narrated this
tradition, he became displeased and said: “They did not do nor did they
succeed!”[^4]

In this manner during the lifetime of the Prophet (a.s), Mu’awiya was
humiliated,, low, and abased. Shame and disgrace followed him. The
Prophet (a.s) cursed him. The Muslims disdained and disparaged him. When
‘Umar became caliph, he turned away from what had been reported from the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, in respect of Mu’awiya. He
brought him nigh to him. He promoted him after lowliness and
humiliation. He appointed him as a governor over Sham. He gave him wide
authorities, entrusted to him the affair of judgeship, prayer,
collecting taxes, and the like from among the affairs that required
trustworthiness and justice. He loved and directed him so much that he
reckoned his governors and looked into their acts every year except
Mu’awiya. He did not reckon him nor did he watch him. It was said to
‘Umar that Mu’awiya deviated from the straight path, wasted the wealth,
and wore silk garments, but he paid no attention to that; rather he gave
him the

[^1] Waqi‘at Siffin, p. 246. Ahmed, Musnad, vol. 4, p. 421.
[^2] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 79.
[^3] The devious have narrated the tradition in another way. For example
al-Khatib, in his Tarikh, has narrated on the authority of Jabir, who
said: “Allah’s Apostle said: ‘If you see Mu‘awiya make speech from on my
pulpit, then accept him, for he is faithful.” In his Tarikh al-Hakim has
narrated on the authority of Ibn Mas‘ud who said: [Allah’s Apostle
said:] “If you see Mu‘awiya on my pulpit, then accept him, for he is
faithful and trustworthy.” When was the son of Hind (Mu‘awiya) faithful
and trustworthy? Was that through his fighting against Allah’s Apostle?
Or through his going too far in shedding the Muslims’ blood, killing the
good and righteous people, and the like from among the heavy events that
indicate that he had the beliefs of those lived before Islam, and that
he paid no attention to the religion?
[^4] Waqi‘at Siffin.

garment of pomp and glory, saying: “That (Mu’awiya) is the Khousrow of
the Arabs!” When he distorted the rules of the Consultative Committee to
remove the Household of the Prophet (a.s) from the government and to
participate the Umayyads in the rule, he praised Mu’awiya and inspired
into him the spirit of ambition. He was then at the last days of his
life. He said to the members of the Consultative Committee: “If you envy
each other, tarry one another, be hostile to each other, and hate one
another, Mu’awiya will overcome you for this (authority). At that time
he (Mu’awiya) was the governor of Sham.”[^1]

‘Umar’s governors were many. Why did he praise Mu’awiya and exclude
them? How was it possible for him to threaten the members of the
Consultative Committee through his power while they had high positions
near the Prophet (a.s) who died while he was pleased with them, as it
was? If he had fear for them from Mu’awiya, then why did he reserve him
in the government? Most surely these affairs make one ask questions and
find them strange!

Anyway, ‘Umar preferred Mu’awiya to others, and Mu’awiya was the most
beloved to ‘Umar. An example of his preferring him and showing love
toward him was what Muslim bin Jundub narrated on the authority of
Aslam, ‘Umar’s retainer, who said: “We went to Mu’awiya. He was the most
tender-skinned and the most handsome. He performed the hajj with ‘Umar.
‘Umar looked at him and admired him. He put his finger on his back and
raised it as he raised it from the shoelace. Then he said: ‘Bravo!
Bravo! Therefore, we are the best of the people if the good in the world
and the hereafter is gathered for us!’”[^2] In this manner ‘Umar loved
Mu’awiya.

When ‘Uthman became a caliph, he increased the area of Mu’awiya’s
authority and reinforced his influence. We have explained that in the
first part of the book. Accordingly, Mu’awiya did in Sham as if he
wanted the domain and the supreme authority. When the Muslims killed
‘Uthman for his unwanted, heavy doings, Mu’awiya used his (Uthman)
murder as means to achieve his purposes and objectives. So he rebelled
against Imam Ali (a.s) claiming that he was satisfied with the murder of
‘Uthman and gave a refuge to those who killed him. Misfortunes and
ordeals with which Islam was afflicted followed that, and through which
the unity of the Muslims was divided. So the sorrowful events brought
about his victory, deserting Imam Ali and his son Imam al-Hasan.

[^1] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 1, p. 187.
[^2] Samt al-Nujoom al-‘Awali, vol. 3, p. 48.


