Ascribing Ziyad To His (mu’awiya) Father
========================================

Allah’s Apostle (a.s) has said: “The child belongs to bed; and the
prostitute is to be stoned.”

Certainly Mu’awiya turned away from the speech of Allah’s Apostle (a.s)
without fear and care. He openly opposed his speech and refused his
decision to strengthen his domain and establish his authority. As a
result, he added Ziyad bin Abeeh (the illegitimate) to himself
(considered him as his brother from his father Abu Sufyan) according to
the procedures before Islam.

Allah, the Most High, says: “Is it then the judgement of (the times of)
ignorance that they desire? And who is better than Allah to judge for a
people who are sure?”[^1] Certainly Mu’awiya wanted the time of those who
lived before Islam and enlivened their laws. That was when he added
Ziyad bin Abeeh to himself, while Ziyad was the son of a prostitute. For
surely Sumayya, Ziyad’s mother was among the women of flags (openly
prostitute) in al-Ta’if. She gave tax to al-Harith bin Kildah[^2] from
her prostitution. She went to the place where the prostitutes went
outside al-Hadar, in a district called Harat al-Baghayaa (the district
of the prostitutes).[^3] This was Ziyad’s mother in dirtiness and
dissoluteness. As for Mu’awiya, he did not feel shame in joining this
illegitimate to him.

The historians have mentioned the reasons of joining Ziyad, saying:
“Imam Ali (a.s) had appointed Ziyad (as a governor) over a district of
Persia and chose him for himself. When the Imam (a.s) was martyred,
Ziyad went on practicing his work. Mu’awiya was afraid of his side, came
to know of the difficulty of his district, and feared his inclination to
al-Hasan bin Ali (a.s) so he wrote him this letter:

‘From the Commander of the faithful Mu’awiya bin Abi Sufyan, to Ziyad
bin ‘Ubayd. Now then, surely you are a salve; you have been ungrateful
for the blessing and you called for the vengeance. Most certainly
gratefulness is more

[^1] Qur’an, 5, 50.
[^2] Al-Harith bin Kildah bin ‘Umar al-Thaqafi was a famous physician
among the Arabs and he was a poet. This has been mentioned (in the book)
Mu‘jam al-Shu‘ara’, p. 172.
[^3] Al-Mas‘udi, Murujj al-Dhahab, vol. 2, p. 310.

appropriate for you than ungratefulness; surely the tree takes root and
branches from its origin. You are motherless; rather you have no father.
You have perished and destroyed (others). You have though that you can
come out of my grip, and that my authority does not reaches you. How
far! Not all the possessors of mind are correct in opinion, nor all the
possessors of opinion are loyal in their advice. Yesterday you were a
slave; and today you are the commander of a plan none like you has ever
ascended, O son of Sumayya! When this letter of mine comes to you, then
urge the people to obey and to pledge allegiance to me. Respond (to me)
quickly! For surely if you did, you would spare your blood and set right
yourself; otherwise I would kidnap you with the weakest feather and
obtain you with the easiest effort! I have taken an oath that I will
bring you among flutes and make you walk bare-footed from the land of
Persia to Sham. I would show you in the marketplace, sell you as a
salve, return you to where you were and bring you out of it! With
Greetings.”

In his letter Mu’awiya has ascribed Ziyad to ‘Ubayd and acknowledged
his slavery. He said that if he had captured him, he would have sold him
in the marketplaces of Damascus and returned him to his origin. When
this letter reached Ziyad, he became angry. He ordered the people to
gather. He made speech before them. He praised and lauded Allah. Then he
said: “(Mu’awiya)-the son of the woman who ate (Hamza’s) liver and
killed the lion of Allah (Hamza), the one who showed the difference, hid
hypocrisy, the head of the allies and who spent his money on putting out
Allah’s Light-has written (a letter) to me. He thundered and lightened
from a waterless cloud; shortly the wind will change the cloud into
rack. The thing that shows me his weakness is his threat before the
power (over me). Is it an act of mercy on me that he warns and excuses
(me)? No! But he has followed another way. He has clattered to one who
grew up among Tuhama thunderbolts! How shall I fear him and there is
between me and him (al-Hasan), the son of the daughter of Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family. (There is between him and
me) the cousin of his uncle with whom there are one hundred thousand
(people) from among the Muhajireen and the Ansar. By Allah, if he
(al-Hasan) permitted me in respect of him or summoned me to him, I would
show him the stars during the daylight and make him snuff mustard water!
The speech is before him today; the meeting is tomorrow; and the
consultation is after that, Allah willing!”

Ziyad lightened, thundered, threatened, and promised. That is because
he had no knowledge of that with which Imam al-Hasan’s army was
afflicted with. He thought that the members of the army were still in
their first condition, that they still had their activity and strength,
and that they were one thousand (fighters) from among the Muhajireen and
the Ansar. He did not know that they suffered from weakness and troubles
that divided them and put an end to their activity. He also did not know
that the great figures from among the Muhajireen and the Ansar were
destroyed at the Battles of Siffin and al-Nahrawan, and that the army
had few people from among those brave heroes. I (the author) swear by
Allah that if Imam al-Hasan had summoned Ziyad, he would have betrayed
him and would not have responded to him. The proof is that when he came
to know about the weakness of the Imam’s army, he sided with Mu’awiya
and deserted the Imam. How was he not deceived while he was among the
shaky consciences? Then the time showed his wickedness and his bad
intention. He became one of the bitterest enemies to Imam Ali, the
Commander of the faithful, his children, and his followers (Shia). That
was after Mu’awiya had added him to himself.

Anyway after his speech, Ziyad wrote a letter to Mu’awiya. This is the
text of the letter: “Your letter came to me, O Mu’awiya. I have
understood what is there in it. I have come to know that you are like
the drowned one covered with waves who catches the weeds and clings to
the frogs’ legs as a sign of carving after life. The one who is
ungrateful for the blessing is he who turns away from Allah and His
Apostle, and makes mischief in the land. As for your cursing me, were it
not for the clemency that withheld me from you and for that I called
foolish, I would move against you disgraces no water would wash. As for
your reviling me because of Sumayya, then you are the son of a group (of
men).[^1] As for your claiming that you can kidnap me with the weakest
feather and capture me with the easiest effort, have you ever seen that
a lark can terrify a falcon or have you ever heard that a lamb can eat a
wolf? Now, carry out your plan and do your best, for I will not stop
except at where you dislike, nor will I do my best except about that
which displeases you! You will come to know who will yield to his
companion! With Greetings.”

When Mu’awiya read Ziyad’s letter, he became terrified, so he summoned
(al-Mughira bin Shu‘ba), the crafty person of the Arabs. He said to him:
“O Mughira, I want to consult you about an affair that concerns me!
Therefore, advise me in respect of the affair! Counsel me with the
opinion of someone expert! Be for me, and I will be for you! I have
singled you out with my own secrets and preferred you to my sons!”

[^1] He refers to that which history narrates that (his mother) Hind had
become pregnant before she married Abu Sufyan. She married him to cover
her crime. A group of the Bedouins were accused of that.

Al-Mughira said to him: “What is that? By Allah, out of my obedience to
you, you will find me stronger than the water (running) from a slope and
the sword in the hand of a brave hero!”

When al-Mughira yielded and submitted to Mu’awiya, the latter presented
his affair, saying: “O Mughira, surely Ziyad has resided in Persia and
rattled to us as snakes do. He is a man with a shrewd opinion, a strong
determination, and wandering thinking. When he shoots, he hits (his
target). I have become afraid of him. I am not safe from him if his
companion (Imam Ali) was alive. I fear his inclination to al-Hasan.
Therefore, how is the way to him? And what is the stratagem to set right
his opinion?”

When the crafty person (al-Mughira) came to know Mu’awiya’s affair, he
advised him to deceive Ziyad, make him desire, and to write to him a
soft letter. His opinion was based on his studying Ziyad’s psyche and
his knowledge of his trends and inclinations. Al-Mughira said to
Mu’awiya: “Surely Ziyad likes honor, fame, and ascending pulpits. If you
flattered him and wrote to him a soft letter, he would be lenient to you
and have confidence in you. Therefore write (a letter) to him and I will
be the messenger.”

Mu’awiya responded to al-Mughira’s advice. He wrote Ziyad a letter in
which he displayed equivocation and deception. This is the text of the
letter: “From the Commander of the faithful, Mu’awiya bin Abi Sufyan, to
Ziyad bin Abi Sufyan. Caprice may throw man into the places of
destruction. You are the one who has been set as an example (for
others). You have cut off the relations and linked the enemy. Your bad
opinion of me and your detestation toward me have urged you to disobey
the kinship to me, cut off the relationships with me, turn away from my
lineage, and to deprive me (of you).

It is as if that you are not my brother, Sakhr bin Harb (Abu Sufyan) is
not your and my father. There is a great difference between you and me.
I avenge the blood of Ibn Abi al-‘Aas while you are fighting against me.
However, the weak race from women has reached you, and you have become
“like that which has left its eggs in the open and covered with its wing
the eggs of others.” I have seen that I have to sympathize with you and
not to punish you because of your bad effort, to link your relations,
and to seek a reward in respect of your affair. O Abu al-Mughira, know
that if you waded into the sea for the obedience to the people through
striking with the sword until its back is cut off, you would increase
nothing except farness from them. That is because the Banu Shams are
more detestable to the Banu Hashim than the blade to the ox which has
been tied for slaughtering. Therefore, return, may Allah have mercy on
you, to your origin and link your people. Do not be like al-mosool that
flies with the feathers of other than it. Certainly you have become
astray (because of losing your) lineage. By my life, nothing has done
that to you except obstinacy; therefore, keep it away from you, for you
have clearly understood your affair and your proof. If you liked my side
and had confidence in me, then there would be an authority for an
authority. And if you disliked my side and had no confidence in me, then
there would be a good deed which was neither against you nor against me.
With Greetings.”

Al-Mughira took the deceiving letter which Mu’awiya had written
according to al-Mughira’s suggestion, and in which there was no ray of
truthfulness. He left Damascus for Persia and came to Ziyad. When Ziyad
saw him, he welcomed him and brought him nigh to his assembly. The
crafty person (al-Mughira) talked with Ziyad through different ways and
various styles, to the extent that he invaded his heart and dominated
his feelings. So Ziyad responded to what he wanted.

After Ziyad had fallen into the snares of al-Mughira, he left Persia
for Damascus. When he arrived in Damascus and was present before
Mu’awiya, Mu’awiya welcomed him, brought him nigh, and ordered his
sister Juwayriyah, daughter of Abu Sufyan, to invite him. When Ziyad was
present before her, she uncovered her hair in his presence and said to
him: “You are my brother. Abu Maryam has told me about that.” Then
Mu’awiya took Ziyad to the mosque and ordered the people to come
together, that he might declare before them that Ziyad was his brother.
As for Abu Maryam al-Saluli, a vintner, he rose in front of the people
and witnessed that Abu Sufyan had fornicated with Sumayya with a witness
that disgraced Abu Sufyan and Mu’awiya, and inflicted shame on Ziyad.
This is the text of the testimony: “I testify that Abu Sufyan came to us
in al-Ta’if (at the time when) I was a vintner during the pre-Islamic
period (al-Jahiliya). He said: ‘I want a prostitute.’ I came to him and
said: ‘I have found (no prostitute) except al-Harth bin Kullidah’s slave
girl called Sumayya.’ He said: ‘Bring her to me regardless of her stench
and dirt.’” As for Ziyad, he became excited and interrupted Abu Maryam’s
testimony saying to him with voice dripping anger: “Slowly Abu Maryam!
You have been sent as a witness only! And you have not been sent as an
abuser!”

So Abu Maryam said: “If you exempted me, then it would be more lovable
to me! I only bear witness as to what I have seen!”

Then he went on explaining his testimony, saying: “By Allah, he took
through you her breastplate. Then I closed the door for them. I sat down
with astonishment. Shortly after that he came out to me rubbing his
forehead, so I asked him: ‘What, O Abu Sufyan?’ ‘I had found none
similar to her,’ he replied, ‘were it not for the flabbiness of her
breasts and the stench of her mouth!”

This was Abu Maryam’s witness as to Sumayya’s dissoluteness. The face
of mankind becomes moist because of its horribleness and disgrace.
However Mu’awiya did not feel shame because of it. How did Mu’awiya
(Hind’s son) feel shame of these bad deeds and scandals while he drew
his tail on vices and deception, as he said[^1] , to the extent that vice
was one of his elements and among his basics?

Certainly Mu’awiya added Ziyad to him that he might get rid of his
hostility and to seek help through him to achieve his objectives and to
strengthen his supreme authority.

**The inclusive Displeasure**

Mu’awiya’s adding Ziyad to himself created an inclusive displeasure in
the Muslims’ souls, for they came to know that Mu’awiya intentionally
opposed the Prophet (a.s) and abandoned his Sunna. They feared him for
their religion. Accordingly, some free people and reformers hurried to
declare their displeasure and their denial against him and Ziyad. We
will mention some of those who denied and criticized him for his deed.
They are as follows:

A. Imam al-Hasan

Imam al-Hasan (a.s) sent a letter to Ziyad in which he explained the
corruption of his adding to Mu’awiya. He explained to him that Islam did
not acknowledge that at all. This is the text of the letter: “From
al-Hasan bin Fatima to Ziyad bin Sumayya. Surely Allah’s Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family, said: ‘The child belongs to the bed (is
to be ascribed to the owner of the bed [the husband or the owner of the
adulteress] where adultery is committed), and the prostitute is to be
stoned.’”[^2]

He (a.s) said to Ziyad in the presence of Mu’awiya, Amr bin al-‘Aas,
and Marwan bin al-Hakam: “O Ziyad, what is the relationship between you
and Quraysh? I do not know that you have with them a correct origin, a
growing branch, constant oldness, or a noble source. Rather your mother
was a prostitute whom the Qurayshi men and the dissolute Arabs
alternated. When you were born, the Arabs did not come to know of your
father. So this (Mu’awiya) claimed that you (were his brother) after the
death of his father. You have no pride! Sufficient unto you is Sumayya,
and sufficient unto us is Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family.”[^3]

[^1] Al-Jahidh, al-Taj, p.103.
[^2] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol.4, p.73.
[^3] Al-Bayqahi, al-Mahasin wa al-Masawi’, vol. 1, p. 58.

B. Imam al-Husayn

When Imam al-Husayn (a.s) came to know that Mu’awiya carried the
destructive axe to destroy all the Islamic foundations, he hurried to
revolt against him and to send him a letter in which he mentioned to him
all his offences and presented in it his adding Ziyad to himself. This
is the text of what he wrote in connection with that: “Have you not
claimed Ziyad bin Sumayya who was born on the bed of ‘Ubayd Thaqif? So
you have claimed that he is the son of your father where as Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said: ‘The child belongs to
bed; and the prostitute is to be stoned.’ So you have intentionally left
the Sunna of Allah’s Apostle and followed your mean desire without any
guidance from Allah.”[^1]

C. Yunus Bin Ubayd

Yunus bin ‘Ubayd was among those who attended this tragedy and
witnessed its stages. So he hurried to oppose Mu’awiya and criticize him
for it, saying: “O Mu’awiya, Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, has decided that ‘the child belongs to bed; and the
prostitute is to be stoned,’ while you have judged that ‘the child
belongs to the prostitute.’ This is an opposition to the Book of Allah,
the Most High, and turning away from the Sunna of Allah’s Apostle
according to Abu Maryam’s witness concerning Abu Sufyan’s
fornication.”

So Mu’awiya threatened him with killing, saying: “By Allah, you should
stop or I will kill you!”

“In the way of Allah?” asked Yunus. “Yes,” replied Mu’awiya.[^2]

D. Abdurrahman bin al-Hakam

Even the Umayyads were not satisfied with this ascription. They
criticized Mu’awiya for that. Abdurrahman bin al-Hakam with a group of
the Umayyads went to Mu’awiya. Abdurrahman said to him: “O Mu’awiya, if
you had found (none) except the Negroes, you would regard them as too
many against us.” He meant the Banu al-‘Aas, who were few in number and
mean.

So Mu’awiya turned to Marwan and said to him: “Take this dissolute
(person) away from us!”

“Yes, by Allah, he is dissolute! I cannot stand him!,” retorted
Marwan.

[^1] Al-Kashi, Rijal, p. 33.
[^2] al-Mas‘udi, Murujj al-Dhahab, vol. 2, p. 311.

Mu’awiya said: “Were it not for my clemency and tolerance, I would come
to know that he was unbearable. Did his poetry about me and Ziyad not
reach you?” Marwan said: “What has he said?” He says:

Oh! Inform Mu’awiya bin Harb that the hands have become narrow because
of what he commits.
Do you get angry when it is said that your father is chaste and you are
satisfied when it is said that your father is a fornicator?
I testify that your blood relationship with Ziyad is like the blood
relationship between the elephant and the young of the female donkey.
I witness that Sumayya gave birth to Ziyad while Sakhr did not approach
her!
Mu’awiya felt pain when he read this poetry and said: “By Allah, I will
not be pleased with him unless he goes to Ziyad, pleases, and apologize
to him!”

Mu’awiya became angry with Abdurrahman. So the latter went to Kufa and
headed for Ziyad to apologize to him. He asked permission to come in to
him, but Ziyad did not permit him. The Qurayshi great figures mediated
in respect of his affair, and he permitted him to enter. When he came in
to him, he turned away from him. Then he turned to him and asked him:

-Are you the sayer of what you said? -What did I say? -You said that
which is not said! -May Allah set right the Commander. Surely he who
admonishes has no crime but the pardon is for him who commits a sin.
Therefore listen to what I say. -Give me what you have. Abdurrahman
said,

Abu al-Mughira, I have repented to you of what had happened in Sham
because of the nonsense of the tongue.
I made the Caliph angry in respect of you to the extent that his
excessive anger moved him to satirize me.
I said to him who abused me about my apologizing to you: Go away! Your
affair is other than mine.
I have come to know the truth after the misguidance of my opinion and
after the error (that issued) from the deviation of the heart.

Ziyad is a branch of Abu Sufyan swinging freshly among the gardens. I
see that you are a brother, an uncle, a cousin but I do not know the
defect through which you see me. Surely an addition to Harb’s family is
more lovable to me than my middle finger. Oh! Inform Mu’awiya bin Harb,
for I have obtained what the hands bring.

Ziyad said: “I can see that you are foolish and a poet with skilful
tongue. Your saliva is savory to you whether you are pleased or
displeased. However, we have heard your poetry and accepted your
apology; therefore tell me about your need!” -Will you write to the
Commander of the faithful (Mu’awiya) that you are pleased with
me? -Yes.
Then he summoned his secretary to write to him a letter about his
pardon and pleasure. Abdurrahman took the letter and went to Mu’awiya.
When the latter read the poetry lines, he said: “May Allah curse Ziyad!
Why has he not paid attention to ‘the addition to Harb’s family’?” Then
he was pleased with Abdurrahman and returned him to his first
state.[^1]

E. Abul Aryan

Abu al-‘Aryan was a blind, old man of a sharp tongue. Ziyad passed by
him in a procession, and he asked: “What about this noise?” “It is the
procession of Ziyad bin Abi Sufyan,” was the answer. “By Allah, Abu
Sufyan left (none) except Yazid, Mu’awiya, ‘Uttba, ‘Anbasa, Hanzalah,
and Muhammad,” retorted Abu al-‘Aryan, “ so from where has come
Ziyad?”

Adulators conveyed Abu al-‘Aryan’s speech to Ziyad. Some of his special
associates advised him to gift him with money that he might withhold his
tongue from him. He regarded their viewpoint as correct. Then he ordered
two hundred dinars to be given to him. The messenger brought the money
to him and said: “O Abu al-‘Aryan, your cousin Ziyad, the emir, has sent
you two hundred dinars, that you may spend it.” When Abu al-‘Aryan heard
of that, he became very happy. Then he said: “The link of the blood
relationship! Yes, by Allah, he is really my cousin!”

[^1] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol.4, p.71. Al-Isti‘ab,
vol. 1, pp. 552-554.

On the following day Ziyad’s procession passed by him, and Ziyad
greeted him. So Abu al-‘Aryan wept, and it was said to him: “What has
made you weep?” “I felt Abu Sufyan’s voice through that of Ziyad!” In
this manner money moved the dirty consciences in which the thought was
not impressed. As for Abu al-‘Aryan, he was void of faith. He changed
through this little gift. When Mu’awiya heard of his speech, he wrote to
him: Shortly after the dinars I sent, you have been changed into many
colors, O Abul Aryan! Ziyad’s origin was unknown to you but now the one
whom you had denied has become known!

How good Ziyad is! If he had given it (the money) sooner, it would have
been a sacrifice for him for what he had feared. When these verses were
recited to Abul Aryan, he answered:

You have created for us a link through which the people live while you
O Ibn Abi Sufyan was about to forget us! As for Ziyad, his lineage has
become correct with me, so I do not seek slander in respect of the
truth! Whoever does good, he obtains it. When he does evil, he gets it
wherever it is![^1]

E. Abu Bakra

Among those who criticized Mu’awiya for adding Ziyad to himself was Abu
Bakra[^2] , Ziyad’s brother. He strongly rebuked his brother. He
boycotted him

[^1] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p.71.
[^2] Abu Bakra’s name is Nufay‘ bin al-Harith bin Kulidda. It was said
that his father’s name was Masruh. He was al-Harith’s servant. So
al-Harith added him, Ziyad’s brother, to himself. He was given the
nickname of Abu Bakra because he descended from the stronghold of
al-Ta’if to the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, with a
pulley. So he was called with this name. He and a group of his
companions had committed a crime. So ‘Umar bin al-Khattab whipped them.
Then they repented, and ‘Umar accepted their witness after the
repentance except Abu Bakra, for he did not regard his testimony as
permissible. Ibn Sa‘d has said: “He (Abu Bakra) died in Basrah during
the reign of Ziyad.” Al-Mada’ini has said: “Abu Bakra died in the Year
50 A. H.” It was said that he died in the year when al-Hasan, peace be
on him, died. This has been mentioned in (the book) Tahdhib al-Tahdhib,
vol. 10, p. 469. In (the book) al-Isti‘ab printed on the footnote of
(the book) al-Isaba, vol. 3, p. 537, it has been mentioned that he told
his children when he was about to die: “Surely, my and did not
communicate with him. When Ziyad intended to go to the Sacred House of
Allah (the Kaaba), Abu Bakra came to him. When some bodyguards saw him,
they quickly went to Ziyad and said to him: “O Emir! That is your
brother Abu Bakra. He has entered the palace.”

-Woe unto you, have you seen him?
-That is he. He has come forward.

Abu Bakra came and stopped beside Ziyad, who had embraced a boy of his.
He addressed the boy and did not address Ziyad as a sign of pride and
disrespect to him. He said to the boy: “O boy, surely your father has
committed a great sin in Islam. He fornicated his mother and disowned
his father. By Allah, I have never seen that Sumayya saw Abu Sufyan.
Then your father wants to commit something greater than that. He wants
to come to the season (of hajj) tomorrow and to come to Umm Habiba,
daughter of Abu Sufyan, who is among the mothers of the faithful. If he
came to ask permission to enter her house, and she permitted him, then
it was a fabricated lie to Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family. If she prevented him, then it would be a great scandal against
your father!”

Then he left him and went away. Ziyad said: “My brother, may Allah
reward you with good for the advice, whether you are pleased or
displeased!”[^1]

G. Yazid bin al-Mufarragh

This genius poet satirized Ziyad with two verses of poetry that were as
disgrace and shame on him throughout generations and times.

Think! There is a lesson in that if you thought. Have you obtained a
laudable deed but with being a commander? Sumayya lived what she lived
and did not come to know that her son was from Quraysh in the masses.
Ziyad became afraid and sad because of this satire. So he said: “No
satire is severer against me than these two verses of poetry!”[^2] This
unique poet did not confine himself to that. He composed the best of all
kinds of poetry in bitterness, criticism, and satire against Ziyad and
Mu’awiya because of their committing this crime through which the
sacredness of Islam

father is Masruh al-Habashi.”

[^1] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol.4, p.550. In
Al-Isti‘ab, vol. 1, p. 550, it has been mentioned in a little
difference.
[^2] Nihayat al-Irab fi Funun al-‘Arab, vol. 3, p. 281. In another
narration: “I have never become sad at a thing severer than Ibn
al-Mufarragh’s speech!”

was violated. We will mention to you some of what his talent and his
rich imagination did well: I have borne witness that your mother, who
wore the mask, did not sleep with Abu Sufyan. But it was an affair in
which was confusion with strong caution and fear. When Mu’awiya was
perished, then convey good news to your people of division.

He has also said:

Surely Ziyad, Nafi‘, and Abu Bakra are among the most wonderful wonder
with me. They are three men created in a female’s womb; and all of them
belong to one father. This is a Qurayshi, as you say. This is a
retainer; and this is (the man) whose cousin is an Arab. In his book
Muruj al-Dhahab, al-Mas‘udi has mentioned that these poetry lines
belonged to Khalid al-Najjari, and that he said them in satirizing Ziyad
when he added ‘Abbad to himself:

O ‘Abbad, meanness is not removed from you. You have neither mother nor
father from Quraysh. And say to Ubaydillah: You do not have a real
father; and none knows how to trace back your ancestry. Certainly Ziyad
added ‘Abbad to himself as Mu’awiya had added Ziyad to himself. He
opposed the Sunna of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, who has said: “Whoever claims, in Islam, a father other than his
own father, then it is forbidden for him (to enter) the Garden.” It was
Mu’awiya who encouraged Ziyad to commit such a sin. It was he who opened
a door to corruption. He opposed the Islamic percepts, teachings, and
duties without any fear and caution.

H. Al-Hasan al-Basri

Among those who criticized and rebuked Mu’awiya (for his adding Ziyad
to himself) is al-Hasan al-Basri[^1] . He regarded this adding as one of
Mu’awiya’s

[^1] Al-Hasan al-Basri’s father was Abu Yasar. He was the retainer of
Zayd bin Thabit al-Ansari. His mother Khayyarah was the female servant
of Umm Salama, the wife of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family. He was born in Medina two years before the end of the caliphate
of ‘Umar bin al-Khattabin It was said that he was born as a slave. He
was among the masters and the leading figures of the second generation.
He died in Basrah at the beginning of the month of Rajab, in the year
serious offences and among his bad deeds. He said: “Mu’awiya had four
qualities. If he had had only one of them, it would have been a grave
sin. He controlled this community through the fools. So he usurped its
affair (the caliphate) without asking people whether there were among
them the remainder of the companions (of the Prophet) and the men of
virtue. He appointed his son Yazid as a successor while he drank wine,
wore silk (garments), and played the lutes. He claimed that Ziyad was
his brother while Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
said: ‘The child belongs to bed; and the prostitute is to be stoned.’
Woe unto him from Hajar and his companions twice.”[^1]

These four crimes, which are some of Mu’awiya’s grave sins, are
regarded as among the greatest sins he had committed and for which he
will be severely reckoned by Allah. That is because of the bad
complications with which the Muslims have been afflicted.

I. Al-Saktwari

Allama al-Saktwari has said: “The first affair of those of Allah’s
Apostle to be openly refused was that Mu’awiya claimed (that) Ziyad (was
his brother). However Abu Sufyan had disowned him (Ziyad), claimed that
he was not among his sons, and decided his ancestry to be cut off.
However when Mu’awiya became a caliph, he brought him nigh and appointed
him as a governor. So Ziyad bin Abeeh did what he did just out of
tyranny and damage toward the Prophet’s Household.”[^2]

These are some people who criticized and rebuked Mu’awiya for his
adding Ziyad to himself. Without doubt they did that because of faith
and zeal for Islam. They came to know that Mu’awiya deliberately gave
life to the laws 110. The people overcrowded in a peerless way to escort
him to his final resting -place. Hameed al-Taweel has said: “Al-Hasan
died on Thursday evening. When we enter upon morning on Friday, we
finished his affair. We carried him after Friday prayer and buried him.
All the people followed his coffin and were busy with him, to the extent
that the afternoon payer was not performed in the mosque.

As far as I know that the prayer was not left from the advent of Islam
to that day. That is because all of them followed his coffin. None was
in mosque to perform the afternoon prayer. Ibn Sireen did not attend his
funeral procession because there was a thing between them.” This has
been mentioned in Wafayat al-A‘yan, vol. 4, p. 124. Al-Hasan (al-Basri)
was among those who supported the Banu Marwan, to the extent that they
said about him: “Were it not for al-Hasan’s tongue and al-Hajjajj’s
sword, the Marwani state would be buried in its grave and was taken from
its den.” Al-Hafiz has mentioned that al-Hasan was fraud in his
(reporting) traditions.

[^1] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 6, p. 157. Abu al-Fida’, Tarikh, vol. 1, p.
196.
[^2] Muhadarat al-Awaa’il, p. 136.

and heresies of the pre-Islamic era. In the meantime he tried to deaden
the Islamic duties. He responded to his urgent sentiments in controlling
the Muslims and to make the opposing forces yield to him with all means
and styles.

Anyway Ziyad used all means to establish his ancestry that he might
join the Umayyad race. An example on that is that he wrote a letter to
‘A’isha and started the letter with: “From Ziyad bin Abi Sufyan!” He
thought that she would acknowledge his ancestry when he would use that
as a proof on the his lineage. That was clear to ‘A’isha, so she wrote
to him: “From ‘A’isha, mother of the faithful, to her son Ziyad.”[^1]
Thus, his effort failed, and he got nothing except failure and disgrace.
When he became a governor over Kufa, he said to its people:

-I have come to you for an affair! I have demanded the affair for none
except for you!
-Summon us to whatever you will.
-You have to add my ancestry to Mu’awiya!

The free and the believers refused to respond to him, saying:

-No to the false witness![^2]

The Arabs refused to add this bastard (Ziyad) to them. However, the
Umayyad authorities wrote down his name in the Qurayshi Divan. So he and
his children remained so. When the Umayyad state came to an end and the
state of the the Abbasids came, the Caliph al-Mahdi cancelled this
adding and ordered Ziyad’s family to be omitted from the Qurayshi Divan
and from the Arabs. That was in the year 159 A. H. Through that Ziyad’s
family returned to their early grandfather ‘Ubayd al-Roomi (the
Roman).

**His Governors**

During the days of Mu’awiya, the Muslim peoples suffered from terrible
kinds of ordeal and misfortunes. The standing government was based on
violence, tyranny, severe punishment, exhaustion, using up wealth, and
refusing all the human values, to the extent that the society was full
of oppression, tyranny, and dictatorship. So fear, terrorism, and
disorder included all the Muslim countries.

Among the aspects of that social oppression is that Mu’awiya empowered
on

[^1] Al-Nasaa’ih, p. 58.
[^2] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 6, p. 123.

the Muslims some ignoble people from among the devious headsmen and
blood-shedders. They went too far in shedding blood, intentionally
plundered the wealth of the people, and arbitrarily ruled the country
according to their mean desires and pleasures. Accordingly, the people
witnessed neither welfare nor justice. The Kharijites described the
severity, deviation, and tyranny of that government, saying: “Surely the
Umayyads were a sect; their punishment was severe. They punished
according to suspicion, decided according to caprice, and killed
according to anger.”[^1]

This is an exact description of the tyrannical Umayyad policy that
followed a severe method in all fields. That is because the Umayyads did
not believe in man’s rights, dignity, and his right to live. So they
drove the citizens to massacres and prisons. They decided according to
mean desires and pleasures. They did not depend on Allah’s Book and the
Sunna of His Prophet in respect of their judgments. They killed
according to rage and anger for the sake of their narrow interests and
objectives.

Amr bin al-‘Aas, Mu’awiya’s minister and governor of Egypt, expressed
what he harbored in his wicked soul from among recklessness and
disdaining the Muslims’ rights, saying: “Al-Sawad (Iraq) is a garden
belongs to Quraysh only!” Surely al-Sawad, which belonged to all the
Muslims, and all the economic affairs, in his viewpoint, belonged to
Quraysh. What right did they have in that, while they fought against the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, declared war against his
objectives and teachings, strongly defended their pre-Islamic beliefs
and their idols? So what right did they have in the Muslims’ properties?
And what right did they have in controlling their rights?

Anyhow, Khousrow of the Arabs (Mu’awiya), as they say, enabled the
criminals and the blood-shedders to control the Muslims. He entrusted
them with an absolute government, and they freely acted in respect of
the people’s lives of the countries. He accepted their tyranny and their
oppression. He protected them, and they in return enslaved, abased, and
exhausted the Muslims. We will give a brief account on the biographies
of these blood-shedders along with an explanation to what issued from
them from among the barbaric deeds. That is up to readers:

[^1] Al-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 95.


