Chapter Xviii : the Stipulations of the Peacemaking
===================================================

The historians have greatly differed over the one who had started
making peace. Ibn Khaldun and a group of historians have maintained that
it was Imam al-Hasan (a.s) who began that when he came to know that his
affair became weak.[^1] Another group has maintained that it was Mu’awiya
who started making peace after he sent him his companions’ letters
containing perfidy and assassinating him whenever he wished and
wanted.[^2] Al-Sibt bin al-Jawzi has mentioned that it was Mu’awiya who
secretly corresponded with Imam al-Hasan and summoned him to make peace,
but the Imam did not respond to him. Then he responded to him after
that.[^3] Most likely it was Mu’awiya who hurried to make peace and took
the initiative to it, because he was afraid that the Iraqis might return
to their reason, for they were famous for the quick change in opinion.
The reason for that it was Mu’awiya who started seeking peace was the
Imam al-Hasan’s speech in al-Mada’in. In his speech he has mentioned:
“Most surely Mu’awiya has summoned us to an affair in which there is
neither glory nor justice!”

Anyway it is not important to examine that, because there would have
been no harm on Imam al-Hasan if he had hurried to the peacemaking owing
to the hard ordeals that surrounded and forced him to make peace. If it
was Mu’awiya who had hurried to the peacemaking, also there would not
have been harm on the Imam because of what we have explained about the
reasons of the peacemaking. The most important thing is examining the
stipulations

[^1] Ibn Khaldun, Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 186. In the book al-Isaba, it has
been mentioned: “When Imam al-Hasan was stabbed with a sword, he
summoned ‘Amru bin Salama al-Arjahi and sent him to Mu‘awiya and
stipulated against him.” In the book al-Kamil, vol. 3, p. 205, it has
been mentioned: “When Imam al-Hasan came to know that his companions
scattered from him, he wrote to Mo’awiya.” Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj
al-Balagha, vol.4, p.8., has also mentioned that.

[^2] Al-Shaykh al-Mufid, al-Irshad, p. 170. Kashf al-Ghumma, p. 154.
Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, p. 26.

[^3] Tadhkirat al-Khawas, p. 206. In his book Fada’il al-Ashab, p. 157,
al-Hajj Ahmed Afandi has mentioned: “Surely it is possible to gather the
narrations and say that it was Mo’awiya who firstly corresponded with
al-Hasan concerning the peacemaking. So al-Hasan secondly wrote to him
and demanded what he (Mo’awiya) had mentioned.” Some sources have
briefly mentioned the affair. In his book Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 192,
al-Ya‘qubi has mentioned: “When al-Hasan came to know that he had no
power and that his companions had scattered from him, he made peace with
Mo’awiya.” Others than him have mentioned that.

the Imam made against his opponent. History is greatly different in
respect of them. The historian’s statements are disordered about them.
The following are some of their statements:

1. A historian has mentioned that Imam al-Hasan sent two messengers to
Mu’awiya. The messengers were Amr bin Salama al-Hamadani and Muhammad
bin al-Ash‘ath al-Kindi to be sure of Mu’awiya’s situation and to know
what he had. So Mu’awiya gave them the letter that reads as follows: “In
the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. This is a
letter to al-Hasan bin Ali, from Mu’awiya bin Abi Sufyan. Surely I have
made peace with you for that you shall have the authority after me. To
you belong Allah’s promise, His covenant, His protection, and the
protection of His Apostle, Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his family,
and the severest of what Allah took against any of His creatures from
among the promises and covenants. I will seek against you neither a
calamity nor a detested thing. I should give you a million dirhams from
the public treasury every year. You shall have the land tax of Basra and
Dar Abjard. You send to them your governors and to do with them asyou
like. Abdullah bin ‘Umar, Amr bin Salama al-Kindi, Abdurrahman bin
Samra, and Ibn al-Ash‘ath bore witness as to that. It was written in the
month of Rabee‘ al-Aakhar, in the year 41 A. H.”

The document indicates that Mu’awiya has given al-Hasan three things:

1. He appointed him as his hire apparent.
2. The Imam shall have a million dirhams from the public treasury every
year.
3. He gave him two districts. The Imam had to send his governors to
them and to do with them whatever he wished.

Imam al-Hasan kept Mu’awiya’s letter. So he sent to him a man from the
Banu ‘Abd al-Muttalib. The man’s name was Abdullah bin al-Harth bin
Nawfal. His mother was Mu’awiya’s sister. The Imam said to him: “Go to
your uncle and say to him: ‘If you gave security to the people, I would
pledge allegiance to you.”

When Abdullah reached Mu’awiya, he told him about Imam al-Hasan’s task,
which was seeking the general security to all the people. Mu’awiya
responded to him. He stamped a parchment at the bottom. He gave the
parchment to him and said: “Let al-Hasan write on it whatever he
wishes.” So Abdullah returned carrying this absolute authorization to
the Imam. So the Imam (a.s) wrote what he wanted from among the
stipulations. We will mention the text of what he wrote when we deal
with some of the narrations, for it does not differ from them. Dr. Taha
Husayn has depended on this narration.[^1]
[^1] Al-Fitnatu al-Kubra, vol. 2, p. 200.

2. Al-Tabari and Ibn al-Athir have narrated another copy saying that
Imam al-Hasan corresponded with Mu’awiya regarding the peacemaking and
made some conditions against him; if Mu’awiya conformed to the
conditions, he would make peace with him; otherwise, he would not
conclude it. When the Imam’s letter reached Mu’awiya, he kept it. Before
this letter came to him, he had sent the Imam a blank page stamped at
the bottom and wrote to him: “Stipulate whatever you wish!” This
document reached the Imam after he had sent Mu’awiya the document in
which he wrote what he wanted. Then the Imam wrote on that blank page
additional stipulations to the ones he had stipulated, and then he kept
them. When he handed over the authority to him and asked him to fulfill
the conditions he had stipulated, he (Mu’awiya) did not fulfill them and
said to him: “You shall have what you had written and asked me to give
to you. So surely I gave them to you when your letter came to me.”
Al-Hasan (a.s) said to him: “And I stipulated when your letter came to
me and gave me the covenant to fulfill that which was in it.”
Accordingly, they differed over that. Mu’awiya did not fulfill anything
to al-Hasan.[^1]

The narration has not mentioned to us the stipulations the Imam had
made nor has it mentioned what he wrote on the blank page Mu’awiya had
sent to him. However in his book Tarikh, Abu al-Fida’ has mentioned the
conditions the Imam had made, saying: “And al-Hasan wrote to Mu’awiya
and made some conditions against him and said: ‘If you responded to
them, I would listen and obey.’ So Mu’awiya responded to them. The thing
al-Hasan demanded was that Mu’awiya had to give him what was in the
public treasury of Kufa, the land taxes collected from Dar Abjard of
Persia, and not to curse Ali. But Mu’awiya did not respond to him
concerning cursing Ali. So al-Hasan asked him not to curse Ali while he
heard. Mu’awiya responded to him, and then he did not fulfill that to
him.”[^2]

I (the author) think that what Ibn al-Athir and al-Tabari have
mentioned is far from correctness. That is because if the conditions
Imam al-Hasan lastly made were of great importance, then why did he
neglect them and did not mention them at the beginning of the affair? If
we overlooked that, then what was the benefit of writing them while
Mu’awiya did not come to know them and did not acknowledge them? A part
from that, Mu’awiya was at that stage ready to respond to anything the
Imam demanded from him.

3. Ibn ‘Abd al-Birr has narrated: “Surely Imam (al-Hasan) wrote to
Mu’awiya and told him that he would pass the authority to him provided
that he should

[^1] Al-Kamil, vol. 3, p. 205. Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 6, p. 93.
[^2] Abu al-Fida, Tarikh, vol. 1, p. 192.

not pursue any of the people of Medina, al-Hijaz, and Iraq because of
anything that happened during the days of his father. Mu’awiya responded
to him and was about to fly because of happiness. However he said: ‘I
will not give security to ten people.’ So al-Hasan wrote to him again
regarding them, but he (Mu’awiya) wrote back to him, saying: ‘Surly I
have taken an oath that if I arrested Qays bin Sa‘d, I would cut out his
tongue and cut off his hand!’ Al-Hasan wrote him back again (and said to
him): ‘I will never pay homage to you while you demand Qays and other
than him because of a certain result, whether it was great or small.’ So
Mu’awiya sent him at that time a blank document and said: ‘Write
whatever you wish and I will conform to it.’ So they made peace with
each other. Al-Hasan stipulated that he should have the authority after
him, and Mu’awiya conformed to all of that.”[^1]

The narration contains that the most important thing the Imam demanded
is asking the general security to all his and his father’s companions.
Without doubt this condition is among the first and most important
conditions with the Imam. As for that the peacemaking happened in this
manner, then I (the author) have doubt about that.

4. Some historians have mentioned that Imam al-Hasan and Mu’awiya made
peace with each other and had a mutual consent about what the following
document has contained. They both signed it. This is its text: “In the
Name of Allah the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. This is for which
al-Hasan bin Ali bin Abi Talib has made peace with Mu’awiya bin Abi
Sufyan. He has made peace with him that he should hand over the
authority to him provided that he (Mu’awiya) should act according to
Allah’s Book and the Sunna of His Apostle and the conduct of the
righteous Caliphs. Mu’awiya bin Abi Sufyan has no right to entrust a
covenant to anyone after him. Rather, the authority after him should be
consultation among the Muslims. The people should be safe wherever they
are of Allah’s earth, in their Sham, their Iraq, their Hijaz, and their
Yemen. Ali’s companions and followers should be safe in respect of their
souls, properties, womenfolk, and their children. Allah’s promise and
covenant and what He took against anyone from His creatures through
fulfilling, and through what He gave of His Own Self be on Mu’awiya bin
Abi Sufyan regarding that. He (Mu’awiya) should scheme neither secretly
nor openly against al-Hasan bin Ali, his brother al-Husayn, and the
members of the House of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family. He should not terrorize any of them in any of the horizons
(regions). So-and-so has borne witness as to that. Enough for a witness
is Allah!”[^2]

[^1] Al-Isti‘ab, vol. 1, p. 370.
[^2] Ibn al-Sabbagh, al-Fusool al-Muhimma, p. 145. Al-Arbali, Kashf
al-Ghumma, p. 170. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 10. p. 115. Fada’il al-Ashab, p.
157. Al-Sawa‘iq al-Muhriqa, p. 81.

This document is the best of the previous ones in explaining the way of
making peace. It contains some important affairs that achieved many
benefits to Muslims in general. I doubt that the document contains all
what Imam al-Hasan demanded and wanted. In the following we will mention
all the conditions the traditionists have mentioned even if they have
not mentioned the whole of them. However some historians have mentioned
some of them, and some others have mentioned another group of them. The
two parties have confessed that each party has not mentioned all the
conditions the Imam made. The conditions are as follows:

1. The Imam handed over the authority to Mu’awiya provided that he
should act according to Allah’s Book, the Sunna of His Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family,[^1] and the conduct of the righteous
Caliphs.[^2]

2. Mu’awiya had no right to entrust the authority to anyone after him.
The authority after him would be for al-Hasan.[^3] If something happened
to him, the authority would be for al-Husayn.[^4]

3. The general security should be given to the people in general; the
red and the black of them were equal in it. Mu’awiya had to stand their
slips and not to pursue any of them according to the past and not to
punish the people of Iraq out of a grudge.[^5]

4. (Imam al-Hasan stipulated) that he had not to call him (Mu’awiya)
the Commander of the faithful,[^6]

5. That he did not have to bear witness in his presence,[^7]

[^1] This condition has been mentioned in the document we have
mentioned. It has also been mentioned by Ibn Abi al-Hadeed in his Sharh
Nahj al-Balagha, vol.4, p. 8.
[^2] Bihar al-Anwar, vol.10 p. 115. Al-Nasaa’ih al-Kafiya, p. 159
(second edition). He quoted it from Fath al-Bari and Saheeh
al-Bukhari.
[^3] Al-Isaba, vol. 1, p. 329. Al-Sha‘rani, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, p. 23.
Al-Dimyari, Hayat al-Hayawan, vol. 1, p. 57. Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol.2,
p.229. Al-Nawawi, Tahdhib al-Lughat wa al-Asmaa’, vol. 1, p. 171.
Al-Qunduzi, Yanabee‘ al-Mawadda, p. 293. It has been mentioned in it:
“The authority after him would be consultation among the Muslims.”
[^4] Jamal al-Hasani, ‘Umdat al-Talib fi Ansab Aal Abi Talib, p. 52.
[^5] Al-Dinyawari, p. 200. Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, p. 26.
[^6] Ibn al-Jawzi, Tadhkirat al-Khawas, p. 206.
[^7] A‘yan al-Shia, vol. 4, p. 43.
6. That Mu’awiya had to refrain from cursing Imam Ali, the Commander of
the faithful;[^1] he had not to mention him except with good,[^2]
7. That he had to repay rights to their owners.[^3]
8. Mu’awiya had to give security to the followers of Imam Ali, the
Commander of the faithful, and not to subject them to any detested
thing.[^4]
9. He had to divide a million dirhams among the children of those who
were killed with his father (Imam Ali) at the Battles of al-Jamal and
Siffin, and he had to appoint that from the land tax of Dar Abjard.[^5]
10. He had to give him what was in the Public Treasury of Kufa[^6] , to
settle his debts, and to give him a hundred thousand (dirhams) a
year.[^7]
11. He should not plot secretly and openly against al-Hasan, his
brother al-Husayn, and the the Prophet’s progeny, may Allah bless him
and his family. He should not terrorize any of them in any of the
horizons (regions).[^8]

These are the stipulations and items of the peacemaking the
traditionists have mentioned. As for that Imam al-Hasan stipulated all
of them or part of them, we will mention that when we deal with studying
and analyzing the stipulations. Before we end this chapter, we have to
deal with the place and time of the peacemaking:

[^1] A‘yan al-Shia, vol. 4, p. 43.
[^2] Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, p. 26. Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj
al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 15.
[^3] Ibn al-Sabbagh, al-Fusool al-Muhimma, p. 144. Ibn Shahrashub,
al-Manaqib, vol. 2, p. 167.
[^4] A‘yan al-Shia, vol. 4, p. 43. Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 6, p. 97.
‘Ilal al-Sharaaiya‘, p. 81.
[^5] Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 10, p. 101. Tarikh Duwal al-Islam, vol. 1, p.
52. Al-Imam wa al-Siyasa, p. 200. Ibn ‘Asakir, vol. 4, p. 221. It has
been mentioned in it that Mo’awiya had to give al-Hasan the land taxes
of Bisa and Dar Abjard.
[^6] Tarikh Duwal al-Islam, vol. 1, p. 53.
[^7] Jawhart al-Kalam fi Madh al-Sada al-A‘laam, p. 112.
[^8] Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 10, p. 115.

**The Place of the Peacemaking**

As for the place where the peacemaking took place, it was at Maskan
according to what the trustworthy sources have mentioned. At that place
the peacemaking was concluded and carried out in the presence of a lot
of people from among the Iraqi and Syrian armies. Some historian has
mentioned that the peacemaking happened in Bayt al-Maqdis.[^1] Another
historian has mentioned that it was concluded at Adhruh of the land of
Sham. These two statements are too irregular to depend on them.

**The Year of the Peacemaking**

As historians have differed over the place where the peacemaking
happened, they have differed over the time when it occurred. It was said
that it was in the month of Rabee‘ al-Awwal, in the year 41 A.H. It was
said that it was in the month of Rabee‘ al-Aakhar, and said that it was
in the month of Jamadi al-Ula. According to the first date, Imam
al-Hasan’s caliphate was five months and a half. According to the second
date it was six months and some days. According to the third date it was
seven moths and some days.[^2] It was said that the peacemaking took
place in the month of Rabee‘ al-Awwal, in the year 40 A.H. [^3] Other
than that was also said. The correct statement is that the period of his
caliphate was six months according to what most historians have
mentioned.

Anyway some historians have called that year, immortal in the world of
sorrows, the Year of the Unity (‘Aam al-Jamaa‘a) because of that the
word of the Muslims became united after the division and that unity was
achieved after disagreement. However this name is contrary to the
reality, for since that year the Muslims have fallen in great evil.
Troubles have been poured upon them like the shadows of the dark night,
to the extent that the principles of the religion have been changed. The
laws of Islam have been altered. The Islamic caliphate has come to a
painful fate due to the fact that it has been handed down from father to
son, from an oppressor to an oppressor, to the extent that the nation
has been drowned into blood, tragedies, and sorrows. Al-Jahiz says:
“Mu’awiya controlled the authority and overcame the remainder of the

[^1] Tarikh al-Khamis, vol. 2, p. 323. Al-Bustani, Da’irat al-Ma‘rif,
vol. 7, p. 38.
[^2] Abu al-Fida’, Tarikh, vol. 1, p. 193.
[^3] Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 2, p.299. In the book al-Isti‘ab it has
been mentioned: “Imam (al-Hasan) handed over the authority to Mo’awiya
in the half of Jamadi al-Ulaa, in the year 41. A. H. All those who said
that it was in the year 40 A. H. are mistaken.” In Sina’s history: “Imam
al-Hasan abdicated the caliphate on the 26th of Rabee‘ al-Thani, in the
year 41 A. H.”

consultation and the community of the Muslims from among the Ansar and
the Muhajreen in the year that was called the Year of Unity (‘Aam
al-Jamaa’a). This was not a year of unity; rather, it was a year of
division, overcoming, and compulsion; the year when the Imamate changed
into Khousrowian dominion and the caliphate changed into a Caesarian
office.”[^1]

The door to oppression was widely opened from that year when the
authority reached to the Khousrow of the Arabs (Mu’awiya). The Muslims,
especially as it concerns the followers (Shia) of the family of
Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his family, met tiredness, oppression,
and exhaustion the like of which history has never witnessed. Ibn Abi
al-Haddeed says regarding what befell the Muslims after the year of the
peacemaking: “The believers had either fear for their blood or were
homeless. They sought security but they did not find it.” After this
inclusive oppression and exhausting tyranny, is it right to call that
year the Year of Unity and Friendliness?

**Study and Analysis**

It is necessary for us to pause to examine the conditions Imam al-Hasan
made against Mu’awiya; likewise, it is necessary to study and understand
them even if generally, because they contain affairs of great importance
that they endangered Mu’awiya’s victory, brought out disgrace to him,
brought him out of the just rulers into unjust ones.

I (the author) believe in all the said conditions except two of them,
which are that Imam al-Hasan would have the property in Kufa Public
Treasury, and that Mu’awiya would give a yearly salary to him and his
brother al-Husayn.

As for the first condition, it is far. That is because Imam al-Hasan
was in charge of the possessions and the properties in the Kufan Public
Treasury. He acted freely in respect of them. They were not veiled or
withhold from him that he might make a condition on Mu’awiya to grant
him an authority over them. I doubt that there were many properties in
the Public Treasury. That is because the policy of Ahl al-Bayt required
spending the properties on that which Islam had specified.

As for the second condition, it is incorrect, for Imam al-Hasan was in
no need of Mu’awiya’s properties. If we accepted that, then there would
be no harm on the Imam from taking them. That is because saving the
Muslims’ properties from the unjust rulers is a necessary affair. We
will explain that when we deal with the Imam’s travel to Damascus. I
think that Mu’awiya gave these two stipulations at the beginning.
However, some historian has
[^1] Al-Ghadir, vol. 10, p. 227.

imagined that they were among the conditions Imam al-Hasan had made.

Anyhow, the stipulations aimed at seeking general security and
inclusive peace for all the Muslims. In the meantime they urged the
Muslims to be alert and to free themselves from the Umayyad enslavement.
Moreover they indicate that the Imam was skillful in keeping his lawful
right, that Mu’awiya had usurped it, and that the Imam had not disposed
of his right. As for the contents of the stipulations, they are as
follows:

**Mu’awiya should act according to Allah’s Book**

Imam al-Hasan did not let Mu’awiya act freely in respect of the
Muslims’ affairs. He stipulated that Mu’awiya should act according to
the Book and the Sunna in respect of his policy and that of his
governors. If he had come to know that Mu’awiya had followed the light
of the Qur’an and Islam, he would not have stipulated that against him,
and regarded that as among the most important conditions he imposed on
him.

**The Succession**

Imam al-Hasan treated an important point. The point is the fate of the
Islamic succession after Mu’awiya’s death. He stipulated on him that the
caliphate after him would return to him (Imam al-Hasan) and his brother.
Some sources have mentioned that the Imam stipulated that the caliphate
should be consultation among the Muslims after Mu’awiya’s death.
According to both statements, the Imam returned the caliphate to its
high entity. He stipulated that on him because he had come to know his
bad trends, that he would move the Islamic caliphate from its reality to
a hereditary kingdom, and place it among his progeny the deviants, the
criminals. As a result the Imam intended to enlighten the people and
urge them to fight against Mu’awiya if he did that.

**The general Security**

The most important thing from among those stipulations Imam al-Hasan
sought was spreading security and wellbeing among the Muslims whether
they were black or red. This indicates that he had mercy and affection
on all the Muslims. This stipulation also said that he should not follow
after anyone because of the past, and should not punish the people of
Iraq because of the past grudge. Al-Hasan stipulated that on Mu’awiya
because he had come to know that he would exhaust them and severely
punish them as a sign of vengeance on that which issued from them during
the days of Siffin.

**Mu’awiya should not be called the Commander of the faithful**

Imam al-Hasan (a.s) refused to call Mu’awiya the Commander of the
faithful to deprive him of the religious authority over all the Muslims.
Mu’awiya was not attentive to this dangerous stipulation. If he was not
a commander over al-Hasan, he had, of course, no authority and command
over the Muslims. According to that Mu’awiya was among the unjust,
rebellious rulers. Through that he striped him of the office of the
Imamate and caliphate, and proved that he (Mu’awiya) usurped this great
office.

**Witness is not borne in the presence of Mu’awiya**

This stipulation exposed and disgraced Mu’awiya. It indicated that he
was among the tyrannical rulers. Witness, as the jurists have mentioned,
would be borne in the presence of the legal judge as a part of his duty.
If bearing witness was incorrect in the presence of Mu’awiya, then he
was not a just ruler; rather, he was a tyrannical ruler; and the
judgment of the tyrannical rulers was invalid and their conduct was not
accepted in the viewpoint of the Islamic law. So it was incumbent of the
community to remove them from this office to which sparing the blood,
protecting the honor, and keeping the properties were entrusted. Through
this stipulation Imam al-Hasan showed that he was the owner of a right,
and that Mu’awiya usurped that right.

**Mu’awiya should give up cursing Imam Ali**

Through this condition Imam al-Hasan (a.s) showed that Mu’awiya went
too far in committing sin. He had come to know that Mu’awiya would not
leave cursing Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful, and degrading his
dignity. So he (a.s) wanted to show the Islamic community that Mu’awiya
was very reckless and did not take care of the Islamic affairs and
teachings. Islam has made it forbidden to curse and disparage a Muslim.
However Mu’awiya, Hind’s son , paid no attention to Islam. He openly
cursed Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful, after concluding the
peacemaking. We will explain that when we deal with Mu’awiya’s violating
the stipulations of the peacemaking. It is clear that Imam al-Hasan
exposed Mu’awiya through this stipulation and removed from him the thin
cover with which he covered himself in the name of the religion.

**The general Security**

Imam al-Hasan (a.s) took great care of his and his father’s followers
(Shia). He made peace with Mu’awiya to spare their blood and to protect
them. He stipulated that Mu’awiya should not subject them to any
detested thing. With him this condition was the most important and
greatest of all other conditions. His Eminence late Aal Yaseen has said:
“And he (Imam al-Hasan) sought protection with it (the agreement) to
achieve security for his and his father’s followers (Shia) and to
refresh their orphans. Through that, he wanted to reward them (the
followers) for their steadfastness with him and their loyalty to his
father. He also wanted to keep them as loyal to his creed and as sincere
supporters, that he might strengthen his position and that of his
brother on the day when the truth would return to its people.”[^1]

Surely most of the conditions Imam al-Hasan made aimed at the interests
of his followers, guaranteeing their rights, and turning them away from
harm and detested things.

**The land tax of Dar Abjard**

Imam al-Hasan stipulated on Mu’awiya special properties, that he might
spend on his and his father’s followers. The properties were the land
taxes of Dar Abjard[^2] The meaning of this specification is that some of
the taxes collected to the state are called al-Fay’, which is the tax
imposed on the lands conquered by force. Such a kind of tax is spent on
the general interests and social affairs such as improving the army,
establishing foundations, and the like from among the vital projects.
Some properties are called alms, which are financial taxes Islam imposed
on certain properties and kinds of imports on which the trade market in
the world depends. Islam has imposed such a tax on the rich. This tax is
taken from the rich and given to the poor to combat against poverty and
to uproot misery. The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, has
said: “I have been commanded to take alms from your rich and give it to
your poor.” As a result Imam al-Hasan hated to take such a kind of
property for himself and his followers.It was forbidden for him to take
such a kind of property, for it was forbidden for Aal al-Bayt to take
alms. He (a.s) hated to give alms to his followers and decided to give
them properties from Dar Abjard that was conquered by force; and that
which was conquered by force was not considered as alms. Through that he
chose to his followers some properties far from the suspicion. Dar
Abjard belonged to the Muslims and it was obligatory on the Imam to
spend its revenue on Muslims’ interests.

[^1] Sulh al-Hasan, p. 258.
[^2] Dar Abjard is a wide land of Persia on the borders of al-Ahwaz. The
Muslims conquered it by force.

**Mu’awiya should not oppress them**

Among the stipulations of the agreement was that Mu’awiya should not
oppress al-Hasan and al-Husayn. He should not harbor grudge against the
Prophet’s progeny, may Allah bless him and his family, nor should he
terrify any of them. He made such a condition due to the fact that he
had come to know that Mu’awiya would plot against them through evil and
cunning. Out of his grudge, Mu’awiya put poison into some food and
offered it to Imam al-Hasan to eat it. We will explain that. Through
this stipulation and the like from among the stipulations of the
peacemaking, Imam al-Hasan wanted to remove the curtain from Mu’awiya,
to show his defects and shortcomings, and to display that he had neither
protection nor religiousness.

These are some of the stipulations of the peacemaking. They are full of
elements of great importance. They indicate that Imam al-Hasan was
skillful and had unique abilities in overcoming his opponent. In respect
of this agreement, his Eminence late Aal Yaseen has said: “It is an act
of truth to confess that al-Hasan bin Ali had wonderful political
abilities. In the light of what transmitted from him procedures and laws
that are the best things the diplomatic tact has reached, appeared
clearly in his traditions. If he had assumed the authority in a
condition other than this condition, he would have been on the top of
the experienced politicians and the Muslim, brilliant rulers. Neither
the deprivation on some day nor the failure in some field through its
reasons standing on the nature of time is a proof of weakness or a way
to a criticism.


