Chapter Xx : Imam Al-hasan Meets With Mu’awiya
==============================================

Perhaps the severest ordeal through which the soul of any man passed
was that which befell Imam al-Hasan (a.s) when he met with Mu’awiya bin
Abi Sufyan, for that meeting filled his noble soul with an exhausting
pain and a bitter sorrow. He came to know that Mu’awiya’s falsehood
became firm and his tyranny became victorious. The thing that increased
his sadness was that from which the community would suffer during the
reign of this tyrant of calamities and misfortunes. This left in his
soul the deepest pain and sadness.

Imam al-Hasan unwillingly met with Mu’awiya. The meeting was at
al-Nukhaylah.[^1] It was said that it was in Kufa.[^2] Many Muslims
attended the meeting. They impatiently waited for what the victorious
king would say in respect of security, welfare, and establishing justice
among the people. What would Mu’awiya do during that terrible hour? He
went up on the pulpit and showed the wickedness of his selfness and his
bad intention. He declared what he had harbored against the Muslims from
among evil and exhaustion. He also showed them the reason for his
warring against Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful, and his son
al-Hasan, saying: “O people, if the affair of a community is different
after its prophet, then men of its falsehood will overcome the men of
its truth.”

When he started his speech through which he said the truth, he paid
attention that he meant himself by it. He repented of that and made it
right, saying: “Except this community!”

Then he rudely addressed the Iraqis expressing to them the reality of
the war he launched against them. He told them about that and the aim he
sought from that war was controlling the authority and not avenging
‘Uthman’s blood. He said to them: “O people of Kufa! Do you think that I
fought you in order that you may offer prayers or give zakat or perform
the pilgrimage? I know that you do pray, pay zakat, and perform the
pilgrimage. Indeed, I fought you in order to take command over you with
contempt, and Allah has given me that against your wishes. Rest assured
that whoever killed any of us will himself be killed. And the treaty
between us of amnesty is under my feet.[^3] Nothing

[^1] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol.4, p.16. He has
mentioned that the following speech of Mo’awiya was at al-Nukhaylah.
[^2] Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 192. Al-Mufid, al-Irshad, p. 170.
[^3] In the narration of Abi Ishaq al-Subay’i: “All the things I had
given to al-Hasan bin

will set right the people except three things: giving salaries in time,
sending the troops in time, and invading the enemy in his homeland. If
you do not invade them, they will invade you.”

Indeed this is the excessiveness in sin. When Abdurrahman bin
Shurayk[^1] narrated that, he said: “By Allah, this is the impudence!”
Abu Ishaq al-Subay‘i, among those who narrated Mu’awiya’s speech, has
said: “By Allah, he (Mu’awiya) was treacherous!” Then Mu’awiya cursed
Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful (a.s) and his son al-Hasan. He
paid no attention to the sin resulted from that. In this manner he
violated the stipulations of the treaty he had signed.

**Imam al-Hasan’s Speech**

Mu’awiya asked Imam al-Hasan to go up on the pulpit and tell people
about his abdicating the authority. It was said that it was Amr bin
al-‘Aas who advised Mu’awiya to do that, that he might, as he claimed,
show the people Imam al-Hasan’s incapability of expressing himself and
of making a speech. He was mistaken in that. Imam al-Hasan addressed the
people more than one time during his father’s lifetime and after his
death. He was not known for incapability of expressing himself and
aphasia, for he was from among Ahl al-Bayt, who were the origin of good
style, eloquence, and sound judgment. The Imam went up on the pulpit.
The people who were willing and unwilling listened to him. He made a
long wonderful, eloquent speech. He preached to the people and summoned
them to friendliness and love. In his speech he pictured the terrible
events that befell Ahl al-Bayt after the death of the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family.

He ascribed that to the early men who turned people away from the Ahlul
Bayt (a.s). He refuted Mu’awiya at the end of his speech. This is the
text of his speech: “Praise belongs to Allah whenever a man praises him.
I testify that there is no god but Allah whenever a man testifies to
him. I testify that Muhammad is His servant and His apostle whom He has
sent with the truth and whom He entrusted with the revelation, may Allah
bless him and his family. By Allah, I hope that I shall always be with
Allah’s praise and kindness. I am the sincerest of Allah’s Ali are under
these two feet of mine. I will not fulfill them.” This has been
mentioned by Ibn Abi al-Hadeed in his book Sharh Nahj al-Balagha. A
narration similar to that has been mentioned by al-Mufid in his
al-Irshad.

[^1] ‘Abd al-Rahman bin Shurayk al-Nakha‘i al-Kufi narrated on the
authority of his father, and al-Bukhari narrated on his authority in his
Kitab al-Adabin Ibn Habban regarded him as among the trustworthy. He
said: “Perhaps, he made a mistake.” He (‘Abd al-Rahman bin Shurayk) died
in the year 227 A. H. This has been mentioned in (the book) Tahdhib
al-Tahdhib, vol. 6, p.194.

creatures in giving advice to them. I have not become one who bears
malice to any Muslim, nor one who wishes evil or misfortune to others.
Indeed what you dislike in unity is better for you than what you like in
division. I see what is better for you than you see for yourselves.
Therefore do not oppose my commands and do not reject my judgement. May
Allah forgive both me and you and may He guide me and you to that in
which there is love and satisfaction.”[^1]

Then he turned to the people and said to them: “O people, surely the
pious is the cleverest of the clever, and the sinful is the most foolish
of the foolish. By Allah, if you search for a man whose grandfather is
Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, between Jabliq[^2]
and Jabris[^3] , you would not find him other than me and other than my
brother al-Husayn. You have come to know that Allah has guided you
through my grandfather Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his family. So
He has saved you from misguidance through him, raised you from ignorance
through him, strengthened you after the abasement through him, and made
you many after the fewness through him. Mu’awiya has disputed with me
about a right that belongs to me, with the exclusion of him. So I have
considered that which sets right the community and puts an end to the
discord. You had pledged allegiance to me provided that you should make
peace with whom I make peace with and fight him whom I fight. So I think
I have to make peace with Mu’awiya and to put an end to the war between
him and me. I have pledged allegiance to him. I think that sparing blood
is better than shedding it. Through that I do not want anything except
setting you right and your survival. I know that that may be a trial for
you and a provision for a time.”[^4]

[^1] Al-Mufid, al-Irshad, p. 169.
[^2] It has been narrated on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas that Jabliq was
(a place) in the Far West, and that its inhabitants belonged to ‘Ad’s
children. This has been mentioned in the book Mu‘jam al-Buldan, vol. 3,
p. 32.
[^3] Jabris was a city in the Far East. The Jews claimed that the
children of their Prophet Musa, peace be on him, escaped either during
the Battle of Taloot or during the Battle of Bucht Nussar. So Allah made
them walk to it and made them live in this place, so none reached them.
He folded the earth to them and made the night and the day similar to
them until they reached Jabris and lived in it. None can account their
number but Allah. When a Jew went to them, they killed the Jew and said:
“You have come to us because your law has become corrupt!” According to
this consideration they regarded as lawful killing him. This has been
mentioned in the book al-Mu‘jam, vol. 3, p. 33.
[^4] Kashf al-Ghumma, p. 170.

Then he (a.s) mentioned the persecutions from which Ahl al-Bayt
suffered, saying: “And that Mu’awiya has told you that I have seen him
worthy of the caliphate and have not seen myself as worthy of it. We are
more appropriate for the people than the people in the Book of Allah,
the Great and Almighty, and on the tongue of His Prophet. We, Ahl
al-Bayt, have been oppressed since Allah took His Prophet to Him.

So Allah is between us and him who has wronged us, controlled us, moved
the people against us, prevented us from taking our share of al-Fay’,
and deprived our mother of that which the Prophet (a.s) had apportioned
to her. I swear by Allah, if the people had pledge allegiance to my
father at the time when Allah’s Apostle departed from them (died), the
heaven would have given them its rain, the earth (would have given them)
its blessing, and you, Mu’awiya, would not have craved after it

When it (the caliphate) came out of its origin, Quraysh disputed with
each other about it. So the released (prisoners of war), son of the
released, you and your companions, have craved after it. Allah’s Apostle
has said: ‘When a community entrusts its affair to a man and there is
among it one who is more knowledgeable than him, its affair will come to
nothing until it returns to what it has left.’ The children of Israel
left Harun while they had come to know that he was the vicegerent of
Musa among them, and followed al-Samiri. And this community left my
father and paid homage to other than him, while it had heard Allah’s
Apostle say to him: ‘You are to me as Harun was to Musa except for
prophethood.’ They saw Allah’s Apostle installing my father (as a
caliph) on the Day of Ghadir Khum and ordering the present to inform the
absent. Allah’s Apostle escaped from his people while he was summoning
them to Allah until he came into the cave. If he had found helpers, he
would not have escaped. My father withheld his hand (from them) when he
summoned them and asked them for help, but none helped him. So Allah
placed Harun in ease when people deemed him as weak and were about to
kill him. And Allah placed the Prophet in ease when he entered the cave
and did not find helpers. Likewise my father and I are in ease from
Allah when this community has deserted us. The laws and examples follow
each other.”[^1]

Then he turned to those who attended the meeting and said to them: “By
Him Who sent Muhammad with the truth, when someone decreases our right,
Allah decreases his deed. When the circumstance is against us, the final
result belongs to us. And most certainly you will come to know of it
after a time.”

Then he (a.s) turned to Mu’awiya and denied his cursing his father,
saying to
[^1] Bihar al-Anwar, vol.10 p. 114.

him: “O you who mention Ali, I am al-Hasan and Ali is my father. You
are Mu’awiya and your father is Sakhr (Abu Sufyan). My mother is Fatim
and your mother is Hind. My grandfather is the Apostle of Allah and your
grandfather is Harb, My grandmother is Khadija and your grandmother is
Futayla. May Allah curse him who tries to degrade our reputation and to
diminish our nobility, who does evil against our antiquity and yet who
has been a head in unbelief and hypocrisy.”

Groups of the people in the mosque shouted out: “Amen! Amen!” Those who
heard them said: “Amen!” And we say: “Amen! Amen!”

This is the most eloquent speech history has ever known. In it the Imam
has clearly explained all things, pictured the critical situation where
he was, made a comparison between the events he met and those his father
had met. He has indicated that the events dated back to those who
usurped the caliphate after the death of the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family. Had it not been for them, Mu’awiya would not have
craved after the caliphate and disputed with Imam al-Hasan about it. The
Attitude of Leader Qays When the great leader Qays bin Sa‘d heard of the
painful news, he became astonished, a wave of cares dominated him, and
clouds of sorrows covered him, to the extent that he wished that he had
departed life. He repeated with himself: “How did the Commander of the
truth make peace with the commander of falsehood?”

He stood with a perplexed mind. His abilities were weak. He wanted to
move his feet from the ground but he could not. He shook all over with
fear. Perplexity prevailed his heart. Stormy pain appeared on his face.
Then he burst into tears and composed poetry, saying: He has come to me
in the land of al-‘Aal from the land of Maskan (and told me) that the
Imam of the truth has become peaceful. Since I saw him I have looked
right and left. I have observed the stars while I am humble-hearted and
silent.[^1] Defeat overcame him. Impatience and astonishment prevailed
over him. He turned to the troops and said to them with a faint voice
and sad tones:

[^1] Al-Manaqib, vol. 2, p. 167.

“Choose between two! Either you fight without an Imam or you pledge
allegiance (to Mu’awiya) with pledge of misguidance!” Abasement and
humiliation dominated them, so they answered him, saying: “Rather we
fight without an Imam!” Then they advanced towards the troops of the
people of Sham and returned them to their ranks. As for Mu’awiya, he
became very disordered. He wrote a letter to Qays to make him wish and
to threaten him. However Qays answered him: “No, by Allah, you will not
find me as you like. Only the sword and the spear are between me and
you!”

When Mu’awiya despaired of him, he sent him a letter in which he cursed
and threatened him. This is the text of the letter: “Surely you are a
Jew. You are making yourself unhappy and killing yourself for that which
is not yours. If the more beloved of the two parties to you overcame, he
would forsake and desert you. If the more detested one of them to you
overcame you, he would severely punish and kill you. Your father
stringed (a bow) other than his bow and shot at other than his target.
He made much cutting off and made a mistake in respect of the judgement.
So his people deserted him. His day (death) reached him, and he died
strange in Hawran. With Greetings”

Qays answered him: “You are an idol, and son of an idol! You
unwillingly embraced Islam, timely followed it, and willingly withdrew
from it. Allah has not placed for you a share in it. Your Islam is not
old, and your hypocrisy is not new. You are still fighting against Allah
and His Apostle. You are one of the parties of the polytheists, an enemy
to Allah, to His Prophet, and to the faithful of His servants. You have
mentioned my father. By my life, he stringed (no bow) but his own bow
and shot at (no target) but his own target. However, those, to whom you
are not like in glory, provoked against him. You have claimed that I and
my father are Jews, while you and the people have come to know that I
and my father are the enemies of the religion from which you withdrew
(pre-Islamic beliefs) and are the supporters of the religion you
followed and come to it (Islam). With Greetings.”

This letter has shown Mu’awiya’s fact and reality. When Mu’awiya read
the letter, he became angry, and he wanted to write an answer to it, but
his crafty, cunning minister (Amr bin al-‘Aas) prevented him from doing
that, saying to him: “Surely if you wrote him (a letter), he would
answer you with a (letter) severer than yours. If you left him, he would
follow what people have followed.”

Mu’awiya regarded his viewpoint as correct so he turned away from
strictness and violence.[^1] He sent him a letter in which he has
mentioned: “According to whose obedience are you fighting? The one to
whom you had pledged allegiance has pledged allegiance to me!”

Qays was not satisfied with that, and he insisted on his opinion.
However Mu’awiya was afraid of the trouble and of the development of the
events, so he sent him a parchment and stamped at the bottom of the
parchment. He said to the messenger: “Say to him: ‘Write on it whatever
you wish!’” ‘Amr bin al-‘Aas was displeased with that, for it contained
a kind of welcome to Qays. He turned to Mu’awiya and said to him: “Do
not give him that! Fight him!”

Mu’awiya came to know that Amr bin al-‘Aas had harbored malice against
Qays and that he was not sincere in what he advised him. So he answered
him: “Slowly! We do not reach killing them unless a number from the
people of Sham equal to their number should be killed. So there is no
good in life after that. Surely, by Allah, I will not fight him until I
find no escape from fighting him.”

The messenger handed the parchment to Qays and told him about
Mu’awiya’s statement. Qays carefully considered the affair. He thought
of it for a long time. At last he could find no escape from following
what the people had followed. He had no forces with which he had to
fight against Mu’awiya. There was no powerful person to whom he had to
resort to get rid of the pledge of allegiance to Mu’awiya. Accordingly,
he answered the messenger through accepting Mu’awiya’s summons. He wrote
in the parchment about security for him and his followers. He asked
nothing other than that.[^2] However he refrained from meeting with
Mu’awiya, for he had promised Allah that he would not meet with him
unless there should be a sword and a spear between them. When Mu’awiya
came to know of that, he ordered a sword and a spear to be brought
between them in order that Qays might fulfill his oath, and do not break
it. So Qays was ready to meet with him. He came and was surrounded by
groups of people. The people looked at him while he was bowing his head,
walking heavily, being unable to see his way because of sorrow and
abasement, and sighing deeply. When he sat down, he turned to the groups
of people and said to them: “O people, you have replaced evil by

[^1] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol.4, p.15. In his book
Murujj al-Dhahab, vol. 2, p. 319, al-Mas‘udi has mentioned: “This speech
occurred between Mo’awiya and Qays during the lifetime of (Imam Ali),
the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him. That was when Qays was
his governor over Egypt.”
[^2] Al-Kamil, vol. 3, p. 207. Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 6, p. 94.

good, abasement by glory, and unbelief by belief. After the authority
of (Imam Ali) the Commander of the faithful, the lord of the Muslims,
and cousin of the Apostle of the Lord of the worlds, you have become
under the authority of (Mu’awiya) the released prisoner of war, son of
the released one. He will treat you unjustly and behave toward you
through the sword. So how have you failed to know that? Or has Allah set
a seal upon your hearts so you do not understand?”

Abasement and defeat appeared on his face. Then he turned to Imam
al-Hasan and asked him with a faint voice and shaking tones: “Am I free
from the pledge of allegiance to you?”

The Imam greatly burnt with grief owing to Qays’s statement, so he
answered him with one word: “Yes.” Mu’awiya was not satisfied with that.
Impudence urged him to ask: “Will you pledge allegiance (to me), O
Qays?” “Yes,” replied Qays with a faint, sad sound.

Then he lowered his head, put his hand on his thigh, and did not
stretch it out to Mu’awiya. The latter rose from his chair, walked
towards the former, stooped, and rubbed his hand, but the former did not
lift his hand.

With this topic we will end our speech about Imam al-Hasan’s meeting
with Mu’awiya. The meeting was among the most difficult and severest
ordeals. After that Imam al-Hasan (a.s) got ready to go to Yathrib
(Medina) and to leave the Iraqis who deserted him and had deserted his
father before, who did not fulfill their covenant and promise toward
them (Imam Ali and Imam al-Hasan). The Imam decided to leave Mu’awiya
and the Umayyads to act freely toward the Iraqis and according to their
wishes. The Umayyads brought Iraq out of ease, welfare, and security
into strictness, severity, and torture. After the Imam’s departure, the
Iraqis remembered the days of their life under the Hashimite government.
They grieved very much and strongly repented of their deserting (Imam
Ali) the Commander of the faithful and his son al-Hasan, peace be on
them.


