Chapter Xxi : the Critics of the Peacemaking
============================================

Imam al-Hasan’s immortal ordeal and tribulation was not limited to what
he met from among the hard trial and the severe ordeal resulted from his
making peace with Mu’awiya and his meeting with him. His tribulation
exceeded to that which was greatest in influence on him. That is the
speech of the critics from among his opponents and his companions. That
was when they criticized him for his making peace with Mu’awiya. They
faced him with statements whose effect on him was stronger than that of
a sharp sword. He met from them a coarse speech, rude talks, and strong
alienation. So he (a.s) was displeased with his followers (Shia) more
than he was with his enemies, for they (his followers) knew well the
black circumstances and the bitter factors that forced him to make peace
with Mu’awiya and to conclude a truce with him. The following are the
statements of the critics along with the Imam answers to them.

**Hijr Bin Adiy**

The hero of thought, the example of faith, and the pride of Islam (Hijr
bin ‘Adi) went to Imam al-Hasan. He shook with fear, and sadness
prevailed him. He said to the imam: “Would that you and we died on that
day and did not see this day. We unwillingly returned with that which we
had disliked, and they happily returned with that which they had
liked.”

I (the author) do not know how Hijr said such a rude speech while he
was the most knowledgeable of people of the Imam’s position and reality.
He was the most knowledgeable of them in the difficult circumstances and
severe hardships that surrounded the Imam (a.s) and forced him to make
peace with Mu’awiya. However he is excused because the agony of the
misfortune and the astonishment of the soul make man deviate from the
balance of moderation and straightness. Anyway Imam al-Hasan (a.s) rose,
took Hijr by the hand and was alone with him in a corner of the house.
He explained to him the reason why he made peace with Mu’awiya. He said
to him: “O Hijr, I heard your speech in Mu’awiya’s meeting. Not all the
people like what you like, nor their opinion is like yours. Surely I did
nothing except keeping you. And Allah, the Most High, is in a state (of
glory) every moment.”[^1] [^1] Ibn Shahrashub, al-Manaqib, vol. 2, p.
169.

Imam al-Hasan (a.s) explained that he had no loyal people in the Iraqi
army, that if he had had people similar to Hijr in creed, faith,
opinion, and sincerity, he would not have made peace with Mu’awiya. He
(a.s) explained that he made peace with his opponent to keep safe Hijr
and the like of Hijr from among the faithful.

**Adiy Bin Hatim**

Adiy bin Hatim was unique and ideal. He set a record in thought, faith,
and sacrifice in the way of Allah. According to his psychological,
violent excitement, this great companion (of the Prophet) hurried to
criticize Imam al-Hasan for making peace with Mu’awiya. His speech was
modern; the speech of someone completely polite. His soul melted out of
sadness and sorrow. So he said: “O son of Allah’s Apostle, would that I
died before what I had seen. You have brought out of justice into
tyranny. So we have left the truth we had followed and entered the
falsehood from which we had escaped. We have been given vice because of
us; and we have accepted the low that is not suitable to us.”

‘Adi’s speech left in the Imam’s soul strong sorrow and sadness. So the
Imam (a.s) explained to him the reason why he made peace (with
Mu’awiya), saying: “O ‘Adi, surely I have come to know that most people
desired for making peace and hated war. I did not want to force them to
do what they disliked. I have thought that I have to postpone this war
to someday, for surely Allah is in a state (of glory) every moment.”

In his answer, Imam al-Hasan has explained that his army was tired of
war, inclined to well-being, and preferred peace to war, and that he was
determined to battle against Mu’awiya during a suitable time that would
guarantee success and victory. However ‘Adi was not satisfied with the
Imam’s speech. Rather he walked to Imam al-Husayn (a.s) with heavy
steps. His heart was boiling with anger and enthusiasm. Ubaydillah bin
‘Umar was with him. When he reached Imam al-Husayn, he said to him with
tones dripping enthusiasm and determination for starting war: “O Abu
Abdullah, you have bought abasement for glory. You have accepted the
little and left the much. Obey us today and disobey us throughout the
time! Leave al-Hasan and what he has thought of this peacemaking. Gather
your followers from among the people of Kufa and the like. Appoint my
companion and me over this vanguard. So Hind’s son (Mu’awiya) will not
feel but we fight against him with the sword.”

Imam al-Husayn (a.s) said to him: “Surely, we have pledged allegiance
(to Mu’awiya) and promised (him) and there is no way to break our
allegiance (to him).”[^1]

**Al-Musayyab Bin Nujba**

Al-Musayyab Bin Nujba[^2] was among the great, good, righteous believers
who were known for their love and loyalty to Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on
them. He was displeased with the peacemaking. He felt pain in the full
sense of the word. He walked to Imam al-Hasan while he was sad and
distressed. He said to him: “My astonishment at you does not come to an
end. You have pledged allegiance to Mu’awiya while you have forty
thousand (fighters). You have not taken a document and a manifest
covenant. He gave you an affair between you and him. Then he said what
you have heard. He meant none other than you.”

Imam al-Hasan asked him: “What do you think?” “I think that you have to
return to that which had been before. That is because he (Mu’awiya) has
broken what is between you and him.” The Imam denied him. He explained
to him that the interest required peacemaking, saying: “O Musayyab, if I
wanted, through what I did, (the life in) the world, then Mu’awiya would
not be more patient than I would in meeting (in war), nor would he be
more steadfast than I would in war. However, I sought your righteousness
and wanted to prevent you from fighting against each other.”[^3]

In his speech, Imam al-Hasan (a.s) has expressed that if he had been
among those who sought the life in this world, loved domain and
authority, Mu’awiya would not have been more patient than he was, nor
was he more steadfast than he was. However victory in Mu’awiya’s
viewpoint depended on

[^1] Al-Daynwari, p. 203.
[^2] Al-Musayyab Bin Nujba was a Kufan. He narrated traditions on the
authority of Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him,
and Hudhayfa. A group of traditionists narrated on his authority. He and
Sulayman bin Surad went out (in revolt) to avenge the blood of
al-Husayn. He was killed in the year 65 A. H. Ibn Sa‘d has said:
“Al-Musayyab bin Nujba bin Riyah belonged to the first class from among
the people of Kufa. He witnessed (the Battle of) al-Qadisiya and the
battles led by Imam Ali. He was killed at the Battle of ‘Ayn al-Warda.”
Al-‘Askari has said: “Al-Musayyab (bin Nujba) narrated incompletely
transmitted (traditions) on the authority of the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family. He had no companionship (with the Prophet).”
This has been mentioned in (the book) Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 10, p.
154.
[^3] Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarikh, vol. 225.

the ways the religion did not accept such as equivocation, flattering,
deception, and the like. As for Imam al-Hasan, he refused to employ such
ways. He followed his father’s plan aiming at clinging to the truth and
justice.

**Malik Bin Dhamra**

Malik bin Dhamra[^1] came in to Imam al-Hasan. He said to him some rude
words. Imam al-Hasan said to him: “Surely I feared that the Muslims
would be uprooted from the face of the earth. I wanted someone to spread
the religion.”[^2] In his speech Imam al-Hasan has expressed that he took
care of sparing the Muslims’ blood, and that if he had opened a door to
war against Mu’awiya, there would not have been a Muslim on the face of
the earth. As a result he made peace to spare the Muslims’ blood and to
keep them safe.

**Sufyan Bin Abi Layla**

Sufyan bin Abi Layla was among those who embraced the Kharijites’
thought. He came in to Imam al-Hasan and said to him some words
indicating his alienation and ignorance. He said to him: “Assalamu
‘alayka, O you who have abased the faithful!” The Imam was displeased
with him, so he hurried to say: “Woe unto you, O Kharijite! Do not
rebuke me! The thing that made me in need of what I did was your killing
my father, your stabbing me, and your plundering my possessions. When
you walked to Siffin, your religion was before your life in this world,
while today your present life is before your religion. Woe unto you, O
Kharijite! Surely I have come to know that none has confidence in the
people of Kufa. None feels strength through them but one abased. Their
opinions are different. My father met from them difficult affairs and
bitter

[^1] Malik bin Damra al-Damri was famous for abundant knowledge and
excellence. He associated Abu Dharr, the great companion of (the
Prophet). He lived during the lifetime of the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family. When he was about to die, he ordered his weapon to
be given to the mujahideen from among the Banu Damra. He stipulated that
they should not fight against Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, with it.
His brother said to him: “At death you are saying that?” “It is so,” he
replied. When Imam al-Husayn, the master of martyrs came to Iraq, and
the people of Kufa went out to fight against him, one of Ibn Ziyad’s
helpers came to Musa bin Malik to borrow his father’s spear to fight
against the plant of sweet basil of Allah’s Apostle (Imam al-Husayn). He
gave him the spear. When he (the helper) went out, a woman from among
Malik’s women folks asked him (Malik): “O Musa, did you not remember
your father’s will?” When he heard of that, he looked for him. He took
the spear from him and broke it. This has been mentioned in (the book)
al-Isaba, vol. 3, p. 460.
[^2] Bihar al-Anwar.

hardships. Kufa is the quickest of the cities to be destroyed. Its
inhabitants are those who divided their religion and became parties.”

**Bashir al-Hamadani**

Bashir al-Hamadani came in to Imam al-Hasan and said: “Assalamu
‘alayka, O you who have abased the faithful!” “‘Alayka Assalamu, sit
down,” said Imam al-Hasan. When Bashir had sat down, the Imam (a.s) said
to him: “Through my making peace (with Mu’awiya) I wanted nothing but
driving killing away from you. That was when I came to know that my
companions lagged and recoiled.”

**Sulayman Bin Surad**

Sulayman bin Surad was among the sincere companions of Imam al-Hasan in
his faith, creed, and obedience to Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them. He was
not present in al-Mada’in when the peacemaking occurred. When he heard
of the painful news, he headed for the Imam, who was in Yathrib
(Medina). When he reached him, he said to him: “Assalamu ‘alayka, O you
who have abased the faithful!” “‘Alayka Assalamu, sit down,” said Imam
al-Hasan.

After he had sat down, he rushed to say: “Surely our astonishment at
your pledging allegiance to Mu’awiya does not come to an end! You have a
hundred thousand fighters from among the people of Iraq. All of them
take the pay. In addition to them there is (a number) equal to them from
among their followers with the exception of your followers from among
the people of Basra and al-Hijaz. Then you did not take certainty in
respect of the covenant nor did you take luck of the affair. You did
what you did and he gave you what he gave you between you and him from
among the covenant and agreement. If you wrote a document against him
about that, and made witnesses from among the people of the east and the
west bear witness against him that the authority would come to you after
him, the affair would be easier to us. But he gave you this and you were
satisfied with it according to his speech. Then he said and claimed
openly what you have heard: ‘Surely I made some conditions to some
people. I promised them with some promises, for I wanted to extinguish
the fire of the war and to comply with the discord, for Allah has
gathered for us our word and our unity. However all that which was there
is under these feet of mine.’ By Allah, he meant nothing except
violating that which was between you and him. Therefore prepare a trick
for the war. Allow me to go to Kufa, to remove its governor from it, and
to declare his deposition. Then throw back to them on terms of equality.
Surely Allah does not guide the device of the unfaithful.”

Sulayman’s speech indicates that he was obedient and loyal to Imam
al-Hasan, peace be on him. He urged him to revolt against Mu’awiya’s
government and to break the pledge of allegiance (to him). He did not
fulfill the covenant and did not conform to the stipulations of the
peacemaking, just as he declared that in the presence of the people.
Sulayman’s speech was suitable to the desires of those who attended the
Imam’s meeting, so they confirmed his speech, saying: “Send Sulayman and
send us with him. Then follow us when you come to know that we have
dismissed Mu’awiya’s governor and announced his deposition.”

As the Muslims’ general interest did not help deposing Mu’awiya and
breaking the truce, Imam al-Hasan (a.s) ordered them to keep silent and
he calmed their excitement. That was impossible because the atmosphere
was covered with discords and disorders, the supporters were few, those
who loved the Imam deserted him, and the enemies were many and powerful.
Imam al-Hasan praised Allah and lauded him, and then he said to them:
“You are our followers, the men of affection on us, and among those whom
we know for loyalty, companionship, and straightness toward us. I have
understood what you mentioned.

If I was determined in respect of the affair of the life in this world,
worked and toiled for the present life, Mu’awiya would be not braver
than I am and not greater than me in the sense of honor. However my
opinion is other than yours. I bear witness before you that I did not
want anything through what you thought except sparing your blood and
correcting discord. Therefore, fear Allah, hand over the affair to
Allah, keep to your houses, and hold back your hands that the pious may
get rest or you get rid of the dissolute. My father told me that
Mu’awiya would undertake the authority. By Allah, if we walked to him
with the mountains and the tress, I had no doubt that he would win a
victory. Surely there is no repeller of Allah’s judgment, and none
repels His decree.

As for your statement, ‘O you who have abased the faithful,’ by Allah
if you were abased and had wellbeing, then that would be more beloved to
me than to be powerful but to be killed. If Allah returned to us our
right in wellbeing, we would accept that and ask Allah for help in
respect of His affair. If He turned it away from us, we would be
satisfied and would ask Allah to bless turning it away from us.
Therefore all of you should keep to your houses as long as Mu’awiya is
alive. If he died, you and we were alive, we would ask Allah for a
determination for guiding us and help with our affair and not to entrust
us to ourselves. Surely Allah is with those who guard (against evil) and
those who do good (to others).”[^1]
[^1] Al-Bayqahi, al-Mahasin wa al-Masawi’, vol. 1, pp. 60-65.

Imam al-Hasan ordered his followers to incline to patience and calmness
as long as Mu’awiya was alive. He justified his making peace as we have
previously explained in detail.

**Abdullah Bin al-Zubayr**

Abdullah bin al-Zubayr was wicked. He was famous for detest and enmity
toward the Ahlul Bayt (a.s). He criticized Imam al-Hasan for making
peace with Mu’awiya. The Imam (a.s) answered him, saying: “And do you
claim that I have handed the authority over to Mu’awiya? How is that?
Fatima, the mistress of women, gave birth to me. Woe unto you! I did not
do that out of cowardliness and weakness. But those like you had pledged
allegiance to me. He (Mu’awiya) demanded revenge. He flattered me
through the affection. I have no confidence in his helping me.”

Abdullah bin al-Zubayr accused Imam al-Hasan of cowardliness, while he
was far from that. From where did cowardliness come to him? Did it come
to him from his father, who was the lion of Allah and of His Apostle? Or
from his two grandfathers, the Prophet (a.s), and Abdul Muttalib? Or
from his two uncles Hamza and Ja‘far, the great masters of martyrs? Or
from his brother (al-Husayn), the father of martyrs? Or from his famous
attitudes in the various fields, such as the Day (battle) of al-Daar,
the Day of Basra, and at Muzlim Sabat? He was the lion who (when he
walked, death walked wherever he walked), according to his enemy’s
expression.

**Abu Sa‘eed**

Abu Sa‘eed went to Imam al-Hasan. He admonished him for his making
peace with Mu’awiya. He rebuked him saying: -O son of Allah’s Apostle,
why have you concluded a truce with Mu’awiya and made peace with him,
while you have come to know that the right belongs to you, and not to
him, and that Mu’awiya is devious and rebellious? -O Abu Sa‘eed, am I
not the proof of Allah over his creatures and an Imam over them after my
father?

-Yes.
-O Abu Sa‘eed, the reason for my making peace is the reason why Allah’s
Apostle made peace with the Banu Damra, Banu Ashja‘, and the people of
Mecca. That was when he went away from al-Hudaybiya. Those were infields
according to the Revelation. As for Mu’awiya and his companions are
infields according to the interpretation.

O Abu Sa‘eed, if I was an Imam appointed by Allah, the Most High, then
my opinion should not be stultified in respect of what I did from among
concluding a truce or fighting, though the meaning of what I did was
vague. Did you not know that when al-Khidr tore the ship, killed the
boy, and demolished the wall, Musa became displeased with his deed, for
the reason was vague to him? When he told him, he became pleased. And so
am I. You have become displeased with me because you are ignorant of the
reason (for that). Had it not been for what I did, our followers on the
face of the earth would have been killed.

Surely the Imam’s position is similar to that of the Prophet. He did
nothing except that which had a general interest. However the interest
is sometimes vague to the people; they do not understand it but after a
time. Imam al-Hasan likened his peacemaking to al-Khidr’s when he tore
the ship, demolished the wall, and killed the boy. As his companion
(Musa) did not understand the interest in that, he became displeased
with him, strongly opposed, and criticized him. When Musa came to know
that, he yielded to al-Khidr and obeyed him. Such was Imam al-Hasan in
his making peace, because the reasons were vague to many of his
followers. They hurried to express their displeasure with him and
criticized him for making peace.

A Companion

One of Imam al-Hasan’s companions came in to him. The companion was
very excited, sad and sorrowful. He said to the Imam: “O son of Allah’s
Apostle, you have abased us through your handing over the authority to
this tyrant (Mu’awiya).” The Imam answered him: “By Allah, I handed over
the authority to him because I did not find supporters. If I had found
supporters, I would have fought him day and night until Allah would
judge between him and me. However I came to know the people of Kufa and
I tested them. I could not set right the corrupt from among them. They
fulfilled neither their speech nor their deed. They were different and
they said to us: “Our hearts are with you, and our swords are against
you.”

Imam al-Hasan (a.s) explained that he had neither supporters nor
helpers to fight Mu’awiya. He had none except the Kufans who fulfilled
neither their speech nor their act. So how was it possible for him to
fight Mu’awiya by them? The Imam (a.s) refuted the vague errors of the
critics. He explained to them the reasons for his making peace. He
answered their admonition with a skillful proof, a wonderful
presentation, and an original opinion.


