Chapter Xxii : To Yathrib (medina)
==================================

Imam al-Hasan remained in Kufa for some days. He was heavy-hearted.
Cares and pain appeared on him. He met from his followers bitter words
and rude criticism. Likewise, he met from Mu’awiya and his party making
light of his high position. Nevertheless, he was patient anticipating
Allah’s reward. He restrained his anger and entrusted his affair to
Allah. He decided to leave Iraq-the country that deserted him and had
deserted his father before-for the city of his grandfather. He showed
his determination and intention to his companions. When that was
announced, al-Musayyab bin Nujba al-Fazari and Zabyan bin ‘Ammarah
al-Tamimi[^1] went to see him off. He turned to them while his sacred
soul was full of pain and sorrow at what the Muslims had reached. He
said to them: “Praise belongs to Allah Who is Master of His affair! If
all the creatures had agreed on that which was not to be, they could not
(do it).”

From his speech we understand that he submitted to Allah’s decree. He
was sad and distressed for losing his legal right. Al-Musayyab saw that
sadness appeared on the faces of al-Hasan and al-Husayn out of fear that
their followers would be wronged during the time of this tyrant
(Mu’awiya). So he turned to them, calmed their fear, and said to them:
“By Allah, this affair is not great to us except that you will be
wronged and disparaged. As for us, they will request our affection as
far as possible.”

Imam al-Husayn thanked him for his allegiance and loyalty, saying: “O
Musayyab, we know that you love us.” Imam al-Hasan turned to him and
gave him good news of his love for them, saying: “Whoever loves some
people is with them.” Al-Musayyab and Zabyan asked Imam al-Hasan to stay
in Kufa, but he refused to respond to them, saying: “There is no way to
that.”[^2]

[^1] Zabyan bin ‘Ammarah al-Tamimi narrated traditions on the authority
of Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him. Al-Bukhari
has mentioned him as among his companions. Ibn Hatam and Ibn Habban have
regarded him as among the successors. This has been mentioned in (the
book) al-Isaba, vol. 2, p. 232. In the book Lisan al-Mizan, vol.3, p.
215, it has been mentioned: “Ibn Habban has regarded Zabyan as among the
trustworthy. Ibn Hatam has not criticized him.”
[^2] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p.6.

Imam al-Hasan (a.s) got ready to travel. Then he and his household
headed for the capital of his grandfather (Medina). The people of Kufa,
of all classes, went out to see him off. Some of them wept, and some of
them felt sorry (for his departure).[^1] They wept for their miserable
luck and their lost happiness that they had destroyed with their own
hands. The caliphate and the public treasury were moved from their
country to Damascus. That deprived them of sleep, but it was too late.
They were the leaders of the state. Suddenly their country, after their
deserting Imam al-Hasan and refraining from supporting him, became one
like any other city. The Syrian military units entered their country and
controlled them. A terrorist, violent, merciless government was
established in their country.

Imam al-Hasan, his household, along with Abu Rafi‘, the treasurer,
departed Kufa. Depression and sadness dominated Kufa. Unhappiness,
plague, and destruction befell it. Allah let down upon them plague after
the departure of Imam al-Hasan. The plague put an end to many Kufans.
Al-Mughira bin Shu‘ba, the governor of Kufa, escaped from Kufa, and then
he returned to it after a time. When he arrived in it, the plague swept
him away, and he died of that.[^2]

The Imam’s caravan walked and covered the desert. When it arrived in
Deir Hind[^3] , the Imam looked at his capital with sorrow and agony.
Then recited a poetry line from which we understand that he was
displeased and sad. He said:

Not because of hate I have left the house of my associates, who had
protected my possessions and my sacred things.[^4] Imam al-Hasan said
farewell to Kufa with sorrow and sighs. He did not mention the desertion
and treason he met from its inhabitants. Therefore, what an angelic this
soul was! He met an opposition and misfortunes from this city. Then he
said farewell to it through this verse of poetry. He mentioned nothing
of its long, wide history but the faithfulness of the faithful, “who
protected his possessions and his sacred things,” protected him from
those who attacked him in al-Mada’in, and obeyed him on the hard day at
Maskan. So they were truthful brothers and good supporters though they
were few in number.

[^1] Al-Fakhuri, Tuhfat al-Anam, p. 67.
[^2] Al-Mas‘udi, vol. 6, p. 97.
[^3] Deer Hind is a place at al-Hira. Hind, daughter of al-Nu‘man bin
al-Mundhir, became a nun at it, and it was called by her name.
[^4] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p.6.

The procession of the Imam walked. Shortly after that Mu’awiya’s
messenger came and asked the Imam to come back to fight against a group
of the Kharijites who revolted against Mu’awiya. However the Imam (a.s)
refused to return. He wrote to Mu’awiya: “If I preferred to fight
against any of the men of the qibla (the Muslims), I would start with
fighting you. Surely I have left you to reform the community and to
spare its blood.”[^1]

Then the Imam went away and paid no attention to Mu’awiya. When his
procession moved through a district or a village, its people hurried to
receive him and to have the honor of meeting him. In the first place
they asked him about his affair with Mu’awiya. So he (a.s) told them
immediately. They expressed displeasure, grumble, and dissatisfaction,
for they were afraid of Mu’awiya’s authority. However, what would the
Imam do at the time when his army and his people were afflicted with
mutiny and desertion, to the extent that they forced him to make peace
with Mu’awiya?

The caravan of Imam al-Hasan arrived in Yathrib (Medina). When its
people knew about his arrival, all of them hurried to receive him, for
they thought that good came to them, happiness and mercy halted at them,
and the good that ceased from them when Imam Ali, the Commander of the
faithful (a.s) left them, returned to them. Imam al-Hasan came to
Yathrib and resided therein for ten years. He filled its districts with
his flowing mercy, gentle affection, and clemency. We will give a brief
account of the Imam’s works and affairs when he resided there.

**His School**

Imam al-Hasan established his great school in Yathrib. He worked hard
to spread the Islamic culture, direct the Muslims towards the religion,
and to make them understand the Islamic rulings. The great, religious
scholars, the traditionists, and the narrators joined his school. He
found them good helpers in delivering his immortal, reformative message
that crystallized the minds of the people and awakened them from the
inattentiveness and inactivity. The historians have mentioned some of
his prominent students and the narrators of his traditions. They are as
follows: His son al-Hasan al-Muthanna, al-Musayyab bin Nujba, Swayd bin
Ghafla, al-‘Alaa’ bin Abdurrahman, al-Sha‘bi, Hubayra bin Barkam,
al-Asbagh bin Nabata, Jabir bin Khuld, Abu al-Jawza’, ‘Isa bin Ma’mun
bin Zurara, Nufala bin al-Ma’mum, Abu Yahya ‘Umayr bin Sa‘eed al-Nakh‘i,
Abu Maryam Qays al-Thaqafi, Tuhrub al-‘Ijjli, Ishaq bin Yasar (the
father of Muhammad bin Ishaq), Abdurrahman bin ‘Awf,
[^1] Al-Kamil, vol. 3, p. 208.

and Amr bin Qays.[^1] Yathrib flourished through this group of religious
scholars and narrators. It was the richest of the Islamic cities in
knowledge, literature, and culture. Imam al-Hasan undertook spreading
knowledge in Yathrib. In the meantime he summoned the people to follow
noble, moral traits, good manners, and the Sunna of the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family. He hoisted the signpost of the morals
his grandfather, the Apostle, had brought to reform the people and to
educate them. An example of his high moral traits is that he did favors
to his enemies and his opponents. He heard that al-Waleed bin ‘Aqaba was
ill. He went to visit him though he had come to know that al-Waleed was
famous for harboring malice and enmity against Ahl al-Bayt. After the
Imam had sat down, al-Waleed turned to him and said: “I will turn to
Allah in repentance of that which is between me and all the people
except that which was between me and your father. I will not repent of
it.”[^2]

The Imam turned away from him and did not reply to him. Perhaps he gave
him some gifts and did him some favors.

**Being kind to the Poor**

Imam al-Hasan (a.s) did good and kindness to the poor and the
miserable. He spent all what he had on them. He filled their hearts with
delight through his charity and favors. An example of his generosity was
that a needy man came to him. The Imam said to the man: “Write down your
need on a parchment and hand it over to us.” The man wrote down his need
and handed it over to him. The Imam (a.s) ordered his need to be
doubled. One of those who were present said to him: “How great the
blessing of this parchment is, O son of Allah’s Apostle!”

The Imam (a.s) answered him: “Its blessing toward us is greater when we
have been made qualified for favor. Did you not know that favor is that
which is done before begging? As for him whom you give after begging,
you make him lose face. Perhaps he spends his night restless and
sleepless. He inclines between despair and hope. He does not know that
which he would return in his need, with depression or with the delight
of the success. He comes to you shaking with fear, and his heart
beating. If you meet his need through that with which he may lose face,
then that would be greater than that which he obtains of your favor.”

[^1] Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarikh, vol. 12. A photograph available in the Library
of Imam (Ali), Amir al-Mu’minin.
[^2] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol.1, p.364.

Imam al-Hasan was a refuge for the poor, the deprived, the widows, and
the orphans. In the first part of the book we have mentioned some
examples of his generosity and favor which were cited as an example for
generosity and liberality.

**Seeking Protection with him**

In the capital of his grandfather, Imam al-Hasan (a.s) was an
impregnable cave for those who resorted to him, and a well-fortified
shelter for those who sought refuge with him. He dedicated his time for
granting the people’s needs and driving oppression way from them. Sa‘eed
bin Abi Sarh escaped from Ziyad bin Abeeh. He sought protection with the
Imam, and the imam protected him. The narrators have mentioned that
Sa‘eed was famous for his obedience to Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them.
For this reason Ziyad summoned him. Sa‘eed escaped to Yathrib and sought
refuge with the Imam. When Ziyad knew that, he imprisoned his children
and his wife, demolished his house, and confiscated his properties.

When Imam al-Hasan heard of that, he became displeased. So he wrote a
letter to Ziyad. In the letter he ordered him to give security to
Sa‘eed, to release his children and his wife, to rebuild his house, and
to return his properties. This is the text of his letter: “You summoned
a man from among the Muslims. He (the man) has what they have and on him
there is that which is on them. You have demolished his house, taken his
property, and imprisoned his children and wife. When this letter of mine
reaches you, rebuild his house, return his property, and accept my
intercession concerning him, for I have protected him. With
Greetings.”

In this letter Imam al-Hasan ordered Ziyad to do good and prohibited
him from practicing evil. He advised him to return to Sa‘eed what he had
taken from him and not to punish him, for he had made no mischief in the
land in order that he might deserve torture and punishment. When Ziyad
read this letter, he became angry, because the Imam did not ascribe him
to Abu Sufyan. So he answered the Imam with an answer indicating his
wickedness and his ignoble race. This is the text of the letter: “From
Ziyad bin Abi Sufyan to al-Hasan bin Fatima. Your letter has reached me.
In it you have started with yourself before me, while you are a seeker
of a need. I am a sultan while you are from among the common people. In
it you have commanded me with the command of someone obeyed and has
power over his subjects. You have written to me concerning a sinner to
whom you have given a residence according to your bad opinion and
satisfaction with that. By Allah, you will not precede me to him even if
he is between your skin and your flesh. If I obtained some of you, I
would not be gentle to you. Surely the most lovable flesh to me to eat
is that in which you are. Therefore hand him over (to me) because of his
guilt towards those who are more appropriate than you for him. If I
pardoned him, I would not accept your intercession regarding him. If I
killed him, I would not kill him but because of his love for your
father, the sinner. With Greetings.”

This letter indicates that Ziyad was impudent, shameless, and
ungrateful. He forgot that Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful, and
his son al-Hasan, peace be on them, did him a favor through appointing
him a governor over Persia. However he returned the favor with an
offense, and the blessing with ingratitude. Ugh be upon you, O time! Woe
to you, O time! Sumayya’s son (Ziyad) had the audacity to the Prophet’s
grandson and disparaged him. Nothing made him turn up his nose at him
except the authority he enjoyed. He had neither excellence nor laudable
deeds through which he had to pride himself on him. When Imam al-Hasan
received Ziyad’s letter, he read it and smiled. He came to know the
secret for his anger and excitement. It was because he did not ascribe
him to Abu Sufyan, the head of the hypocrites and leader of the parties
that opposed Islam.

Imam al-Hasan wrote a letter to Mu’awiya. In the letter he made him
know his task. He enclosed with it Ziyad’s letter. He (a.s) wrote Ziyad
another letter in which he destroyed his entity, repelled his
excessiveness, and spoiled his joining Abu Sufyan. We have previously
mentioned the letter.

When Mu’awiya received the Imam’s letter and saw Ziyad’s impudence,
recklessness, and his making light of the Imam’s position, he
immediately wrote him a letter. This is the text of the letter:
“Al-Hasan bin Ali sent me your letter to him (which was) an answer to a
letter he had written to you concerning (Sa‘eed) bin Abi Sarh. I am very
astonished at you. I have known that you have two opinions. One of them
belongs to Abu Sufyan, and the other belongs to Sumayya. As for the
opinion belongs to Abu Sufyan, it is clemency and determination. As for
that which belongs to Sumayya, it is similar to her opinion. Of that is
your letter to al-Hasan (in which) you have cursed his father and
accused him of sin. By my life, you are more appropriate for sin than
his father is. As for that al-Hasan has started with himself to be far
above you, that does not disparage you if you understand.

As for that he has gained power over you, it is right for the like of
al-Hasan to gain power. As for your leaving his intercession for the man
whom he interceded with you, that is a luck you pushed from yourself to
him who is more appropriate for it than you. When my letter reaches you,
release Sa‘eed bin Abi Sarh, rebuild his house, return his property, and
do not interfere with him. I have written to al-Hasan (peace be on him)
to tell him (Sa’eed): ‘If he willed to reside with him (he could do),
and if he willed to return to his city (he could do). You have no
authority over him neither with a hand nor with a tongue. As for your
letter to al-Hasan (peace be on him) in his name and his mother’s name,
and you have not ascribed him to his father, surely al-Hasan, woe unto
you, is glorious. With which mother have you entrusted him? May you have
no mother! Did you not know that she was Fatima, daughter of Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family? That is greater to him in
pride if you knew and understood it.”

At the bottom of the letter Mu’awiya wrote the following poetry
lines:

As for al-Hasan, he is the son of him who was before him. If he walks,
death walks where he walks. Does the lion beget aught but its like. This
is al-Hasan, who is his like and equal.[^1] In this letter Mu’awiya has
confessed Imam al-Hasan’s talents, honor, great position, and great
clemency. Therefore woe to the time that made Ziyad dare to disparage
Imam al-Hasan (a.s) and aggress against him!

**With Habeeb Bin Maslama**

Habeeb bin Maslama al-Fihri[^2] was among the Qurayshi rogues and one of
Mu’awiya’s hirelings who harbored malice against Ahl al-Bayt. Imam
al-Husayn (a.s) met him during circumambulating the Kaaba and said to
him: “O Habeeb, you may make a journey for something other than
obedience to Allah!” Habeeb said with mockery: “As for my journey from
your father is not of that!”

The Imam refuted his statement, saying: “Yes, by Allah, but you have
obeyed Mu’awiya for the little, transient life in the world. If he has
undertaken you in your present life, he will desert you in your next
life. If you, when you did, said good, that would be as Allah, the Most
High, said: ‘And others have confessed their faults, they have mingled a
good deed and an evil one.’[^3] But you are as Allah, glory to Him, said:
‘Nay! Rather, what they used to do has become like rust upon their
hearts.’”[^4] Then he left him and went away.

[^1] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 72.
[^2] Habeeb bin Maslama bin Malik al-Qarashi al-Fihri was called the
lover of the Romans. That is because he always went to them and obtained
from them. He was the most loyal of the people to Mo’awiya. He did not
part with him at the Battle of Siffin, and the like. Mo’awiya appointed
him as a governor over Armenia, and he died in it in the year 42 A. H.
This has been mentioned in (the book) al-Isti‘ab, vol. 1, p. 327.
[^3] Qur’an, 9, 102.
[^4] Ibid., 83, 14.

**Imam al-Hasan refuses to be related by Marriage to the Umayyads**

Mu’awiya wanted to be related by marriage to the Hashimites that he
might, through that, obtain honor and glory. He wrote a letter to his
governor over Medina, Marwan bin al-Hakam, to marry Yazid to Zaynab,
daughter of Abdullah bin Ja‘far, according to her father’s decision
regarding dowry. He intended to pay her father’s debts whatever they
were, and to reconcile the two families; the Hashimites and the
Umayyads. Marwan sent for Abdullah. Abdullah came, and Marwan negotiated
with him about the affair of his daughter. Abdullah answered him:
“Surely the affair of our womenfolk is in the hand of al-Hasan bin Ali;
therefore, go and ask him for that.”

Marwan went to the Imam and asked him for Abdullah’s daughter. The Imam
said to him: “Gather whomever you want!” Marwan set out and gathered the
Hashimites and the Umayyads in one place. Then he addressed them,
saying: “The Commander of the faithful, Mu’awiya, has commanded me to
marry Zaynab, daughter of Abdullah bin Ja‘far, to Yazid. That is
according to her father’s decision regarding dowry. (He has decided) to
pay his debts whatever they are, and to reconcile the two families; the
Hashimites and the Umayyads. Yazid bin Mu’awiya is well-qualified, and
none is equal to him. By my life, one envies you Yazid more than he
envies Yazid for you. Yazid is among those through whom the prayer for
rain is said.”

In his speech, Marwan expressed his foolishness and ignorance. Imam
al-Hasan refuted his false things and commented on all the paragraphs of
his speech. He praised and lauded Allah, and then he said: “As for what
you have mentioned about her father’s decision regarding dowry, we do
not turn away from the Sunna of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, with regard to his family and his daughters.”[^1]

“As for paying the debt of her father, when did our womenfolk pay the
debts of their fathers through their dowries?” “As for reconciling the
two tribes, we have shown enmity toward you for Allah and in Allah;
therefore, we do not make peace with you for the life in the world.”

“As for your statement, ‘Yazid is well-qualified, none is equal to
him,’ his today equals are his yesterday equals. His authority has
increased him nothing.”
[^1] The Sunna of Allah’s Apostle, (a.s.) with regard to the dowry of
his wives and his daughters was four hundred dirhams.

“As for your speech, ‘one envies us for Yazid more than he envies him
for us,’ if the caliphate led the prophethood, then we were envied. If
the prophethood led the caliphate, then he was envied through us.” “As
for your speech, ‘surely rain is asked through Yazid’s face,’ that does
not happen but through the family of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless
him and his family.”

Through his speech Imam al-Hasan refuted Marwan’s claims and slanders.
Then he (a.s) frustrated his efforts and destroyed his hopes, saying:
“We have seen that we have to marry her (Zaynab) to her cousin al-Qasim,
Muhammad bin Ja‘far. I have married her to him. I have specified my
country estate in Medina as a dowry for her. Mu’awiya has asked me to
sell it to him for ten thousand dinars.”

When Marwan heard of that, he lost his mind and unwillingly shouted
out: “You have betrayed us, O Banu Hashim!” Surely Marwan was more
appropriate for betrayal and wickedness. Imam al-Hasan did well when he
refused to be related by marriage to Yazid, the sinner, the dissolute.
Marwan immediately wrote a letter to Mu’awiya and told him about the
matter. When the letter reached Mu’awiya, he said with displeasure: “We
proposed to their daughter, but they did not do. If they proposed to our
daughter, we would not refuse them.”[^1]

Imam al-Hasan had come to know Mu’awiya’s objectives and what he wanted
from among building his family and creating glory for it. So the Imam
did his best to frustrate his means. He heard that Mu’awiya said: “The
Hashimite must be generous, the Umayyad must be clement, al-Zubayri must
be brave, and al-Makhzumi must be haughty.”

[^1] Al-Khawarizmi, Maqtal al-Husayn, vol. 1, p. 124. In the book
Majjma‘ al-Zawa’id, vol. 4, p. 278, it has been mentioned on the
authority of Mo’awiya bin Khudayj, who said: “Mo’awiya bin Abi Sufyan
sent me to al-Hasan bin Ali to marry Yazid to a daughter of his or a
sister of his. I went to him and mentioned Yazid to him, but he said:
‘We do not marry our womenfolk unless we ask them.’ So I went to her and
mentioned Yazid to her, but she said: ‘By Allah, that will not be until
your leader leads us as Fir‘oun led the children of Israel; he
slaughtered their sons and let their women live.’ I came back to
al-Hasan and said to him: ‘You sent me to a restless woman. She calls
the Commander of the faithful Fir‘oun.’ He, al-Hasan, peace be on him,
said: ‘O Mo’awiya, beware of detesting us. That is because Allah’s
Apostle, (a.s.) said: ‘If someone detests and envies us, he will be
driven away from the pond with whips of fire on the Resurrection
Day.’”

Imam al-Hasan (a.s) came to know that Mu’awiya aimed at destroying the
Hashimite family and building his family. So he refuted his statement,
saying: “May Allah fight him! He wants the Hashimites to be generous so
that what is in their hands may run out. He wants the Umayyads to be
clement so that they show love to the people. He wants the family of
al-Zubayr to be brave so that they perish. And he wants the Banu Makhzum
to be haughty so that the people detest them.”[^1]

In this manner Imam al-Hasan exposed Mu’awiya’s wickedness and bad
intention. He indicated that Mu’awiya did nothing good to the people
through any of his ways.

**With Mu’awiya in Yathrib**

Al-Khawarizmi narrated: “Mu’awiya traveled to Yathrib. He saw the
people welcome and admire Imam al-Hasan. That displeased him so he
summoned Abu al-Aswad al-Du’ali and al-Dhahhak bin Qays al-Fihri. He
consulted with them about the affair of al-Hasan and about how he could
disgrace him, that he might use that as a means to degrade his position
and decrease his importance before the people. Abu al-Aswad advised him
to leave that, saying: ‘The opinion of the Commander of the faithful is
better. I think he has not to do so. If the Commander of the faithful
says a statement with regard to him, those who hear it from him regard
it as envy, and they promote him. Al-Hasan, O Commander of the faithful,
is moderate in his youth; the most present of all things is his
answer.

I fear that he refutes your speech with penetrating (words) that deter
your arrows. So, through that, he strikes your shinbone and shows your
defects. For surely your speech about him will be an excellence for him
and fatigue against you except that you know that he has a defect in
(his) good manners or a slander in (his) lineage. And most surely he is
well-mannered. He has become from the pure Arabs in their mighty
essence, noble origin, and their good race. Therefore, do not do, O
Commander of the faithful.”

Abu al-Aswad gave him a good advice. Which shortcoming or defect did
Imam al-Hasan have that Mu’awiya might disgrace him with? Imam al-Hasan
was purified from all kinds of uncleanness and defect, as the Holy
Qur’an says. However al-Dahhak bin Qays advised Mu’awiya to do something
contrary to that. He urged him to disparage the Imam and to have the
audacity to him. He said to him: “Use your opinion with regard to him
and do not turn away from him through your malady. If you shoot him with
your biting speech and your firm answer, he will yield to you as the old
camel does.”
[^1] Ibn Qutayba, ‘Uyun al-Akhbar, vol. 1, p. 196.

Mu’awiya responded to al-Dahhak’s viewpoint. On Friday he ascended the
pulpit. He praised Allah and lauded him, and called down blessings upon
His Prophet. He disparaged Imam Ali bin ‘Abi Talib, the Commander of the
faithful and Master of the Muslims, peace be on him. Then he said: “O
people, the fates have tired some Qurayshi boys with foolishness,
recklessness, and troubled life. Satan has used their heads as seats and
their tongues as files. He has stayed and multiplied in their hearts and
walked through their throats. He has made them commit slips, made
nonsense fair-seeming to them, made blind the ways to them, guided them
to wrong, aggression, falsehood, and slander. Therefore they are his
partners, and he is their associate; and as for him whose associate is
the Shaitan, an evil associate is he! Enough for educator is He, and
Allah is He Whose help is sought.”

Imam al-Husayn enthusiastically refuted Mu’awiya’s falsehood. He said:
“O people, whoever recognizes me knows me, and whoever does not, (let me
tell him who I am and to what family I belong): I am al-Hasan bin Ali
bin Abi Talib. I am the (grand) son of Allah’s Prophet. I am the son of
him to whom the earth has been made as a prayer place and purity. I am
the son of the light-giving torch. I am the son of the bearer of good
news, the warner. I am the son of the last of the prophets, master of
the apostles, Imam of the pious, the Apostle of the Lord of the worlds.
I am the son of him who was sent to the jinn and men. I am the son of
him who was sent to people as mercy.”

Imam al-Hasan’s speech was difficult to Mu’awiya, so he interrupted it,
saying: “O Hasan, stick to describing ripe dates!” The Imam (a.s) said:
“The wind pollinates them, heat makes them ripe, night cools them and
makes them good, in spite of you, O Mu’awiya!”

Then the Imam went on introducing himself, saying: “I am the son of the
obeyed intercessor. I am the son of the first to shake dust off his head
and to knock on the gate of the Garden. I am the son of him with whom
the angels fought, and had not fought with a prophet before him. I am
the son of him who was granted victory over the allies. I am the son of
him to whom Quraysh yielded in spite of them.”

Mu’awiya became angry and shouted out: “You are talking yourself into
the caliphate!”

The Imam (a.s) answered him about one who was worthy of the caliphate,
saying: “As for the caliphate, it belongs to one who acts according to
Allah’s Book and the Sunna of His Prophet. The caliphate does not belong
to him who opposes Allah’s Book and stops the Sunna. That (man) is like
the man who obtains a dominion and enjoys it. Then he withdraws from it,
but its consequences last against him.” Mu’awiya dodged, and his pride
was degraded. Then he said: “We have done favors to all the men from
Quraysh.” The Imam refuted him, saying: “Yes, those through whom you
have become powerful after the abasement and become many after the
fewness.” “Who are those, O Hasan?” asked Mu’awiya.

“Those who divert you from knowing them,” replied al-Hasan. Then Imam
al-Hasan (a.s) went on introducing himself to the people, saying: “I am
the son of him who ruled Quraysh when young and middle-aged. I am the
son of him who governed the people with generosity and nobility. I am
the son of him who ruled the people of the world through the true
munificence, the tall branch, and the preceding excellence. I am the son
of him whose pleasure is Allah’s pleasure, and whose displeasure is His
displeasure.”

“Can you compete with him for highness, O Mu’awiya?” asked the Imam. “I
say ‘no’ as confirmation to your speech,” replied Mu’awiya. Al-Hasan
said: “The truth has shone, and the falsehood has stammered. Whoever
follows the truth does not regret, and whoever follows falsehood fails.
The possessors of reason know the truth.”

As usual Mu’awiya dodged and said: “No welcome to him who treats you
badly!”

**The Political Party**

Dr. Taha Husayn thought that Imam al-Hasan, during his residence in
Medina, formed a political party and undertook its leadership. It is an
act of good to mention his speech. He said: “I think that one day
al-Hasan met the delegation from among the people of Kufa, heard from
them what he heard, said to them what he said, and drew to them their
plan. On that day he formed to Ali’s followers and his children a
political, organized party. The party was organized during that assembly
and al-Hasan became the head of it. The noble from among the people of
Kufa returned to their followers and told them about the new regulation
and the drawn plan. They prepared them for this timely peacemaking and
for the war which would be moved when the command of moving it came from
the Imam residing in Yathrib.

“At the beginning of its formation, the program of the party was, as
you see, clear and easy; there was neither difficulty nor complication
in it. (It included) the obedience to the Imam from among Ali’s sons and
waiting in peace and ease until they would be ordered (to move) the war,
and they would move it.”

Dr. Taha’s opinion is firm. Imam al-Hasan traveled to Damascus to
criticize Mu’awiya and to spread his evil deeds and his defects in his
capital and royal court. Among the objectives of that travel was that
Imam al-Hasan propagated the party he had formed to overthrow the
Umayyad government and to return the Islamic state to its just regime.


