Chapter Xxiii : To Damascus
===========================

The historians have unanimously agreed that Imam al-Hasan (a.s) came to
Mu’awiya in Damascus. However they have differed over whether he
traveled one time or more than one time. To elaborate on this topic is
useless. The most important thing is to know the reason why he traveled.
I (the author) think that he traveled to propagate the principles of Ahl
al-Bayt and to display the Umayyad reality to those people Mu’awiya
misled and turned away from the straight path. The proof for that is the
Imam’s attitudes and debates with Mu’awiya, which we will mention.
Through them he could expose him, showed his defects and shortcomings,
and destroyed the thrones of his state. Suppose that he traveled to take
the pay from Mu’awiya, as some people maintain.

It was said that how was it permissible for him to take the pay while
most of it was usurped properties? The Muslim jurists have sufficed us
the burden of the research on this problem. They have mentioned that the
donations and gifts of an unjust ruler are permissible unless they
include usurped properties and that the one who has usurped them is
definitely known. Otherwise, it is not permissible to take them. If they
are taken, it is obligatory to return them to their owners.[^1] Most
properties which were taken from Mu’awiya were from the properties of
the land taxes, zakat, and the like from among the properties that the
state collected. Mu’awiya unlawfully controlled them because he was
among the oppressive, tyrannical rulers. However the good Muslims had
the right to save them and to return them to their owners. Besides, the
Imam had a general authority over the Muslims.

As for those who maintain that Imam al-Hasan traveled to take the pay,
they have depended on a fabricated narration, as we think. It was
narrated that he went to Mu’awiya every year, and he gave him a hundred
thousand (dirhams). One year he did not go, so Mu’awiya forgot him and
did not send him the pay. The Imam intended to write to him. However he
saw Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, in his sleep
(and heard him) say to him: “O Hasan, why are you going to write to a
creature to ask him for your need and leave asking your Lord?”

“What shall I do?” asked al-Hasan. Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family, taught him this supplication: “O Allah, I ask you for
every affair toward which my strength is
[^1] Al-Shaykh al-Ansari, al-Makasibin

weak, to which my desire does not come, which does not come to my mind
and does not run through my tongue. That is from among the things You
give to any of the creatures. The first are the Muhajireeen, and the
last are the Ansar.”

Al-Hasan woke up and memorized the supplication. He supplicated with
it. Shortly after that Mu’awiya sent him the pay after one of his
special associates had reminded him that Imam al-Hasan had not come to
him in that year.[^1] None can depend on this narration because the Imam
was famous for glory, sense of honor, and self-esteem. So how did he
yield to Hind’s son (Mu’awiya), intend to write to him to ask for the
pay, and Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, had
prohibited him from that? It is worth mentioning that Imam al-Hasan was
in no need of Mu’awiya’s gifts. That is because he had in Yathrib many
country estates that produced him enormous properties as well as the
good, righteous Muslims who sent him legal dues. As for the properties
he received from Mu’awiya, he did not spend them on himself or on his
family. It has been mentioned that he did not take from them the amount
the riding animal carried with its mouth.[^2] Imam Musa bin Ja’far (a.s)
narrated: “Surely al-Hasan and al-Husayn refused to accept the gifts of
Mu’awiya bin Abi Sufyan.”[^3] Therefore, it was not permissible for Imam
al-Hasan to travel to Mu’awiya to take the pay from him.

**His Debates**

Mu’awiya was unable to stand Imam al-Hasan when he was in Damascus. He
saw the people come and welcome him. He was displeased with that. So he
held meetings and filled them with the forces that deviated from Ahl
al-Bayt and showed enmity toward them such as Amr bin al-‘Aas,
al-Mughira bin Shu‘ba, Marwan bin al-Hakam, al-Waleed bin ‘Aqaba, Ziyad
bin Abeeh, and Abdullah bin al-Zubayr. He ordered them to have the
audacity to Imam al-Hasan. He also ordered them to disparage him, that
he might induce the people to abstain from him and to satisfy himself
for revenge on the (grand) son of the one who conquered Mecca and
destroyed Quraysh’s idols. These rogues met Imam al-Hasan with bitter
speech and obscene words. They went too far in showing recklessness and
aggression toward him. However the Imam gave them strong answers of his
flowing speech. He defeated them, made shame and disgrace follow them.
He made them feel their evil deeds,

[^1] Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarikh. Mashariq al-Anwar. Noor al-Abbsar.
[^2] Jama‘ Asrar al-‘Ulama’. A hand-written book available in the Public
Library of Kashif al-Ghita’.
[^3] Hayat al-Imam Musa bin Ja‘far, vol. 2, p. 332.

the deviation and corruption for which they were famous. He unwillingly
answered them. He refuted their obscenity and said: “By Allah, were it
not for that the Umayyads ascribed me to feebleness of speech, I would
refrain from debating with them as a sign of neglecting them.” Because
of his wonderful speech and his strong proofs, Ibn Abbas kissed him
between his two eyes and said to him: “May I die for you, O cousin! Your
sea is still full, and you assault until you satisfied me (for revenge
on) the children….”

In all these debates the Imam was successful and victorious. His
opponents were weak. Submission, defeat, and astonishment befell them.
Their leader Mu’awiya advised them to refrain from debating with him
after he had seen their defeat.[^1]

Anyway the texts of these debates with eloquent forms and literary
values are worthy of presentation as an Arabic original inheritance
indicating by itself the correctness of its ascription, and give us
through his style and formation a picture of the literature of the
debates at his time. The clubs and assemblies in Damascus were busy
repeating the debates. They admired and respected the Imam. In the
meantime they made light of his opponents and disrespected them. The
following are the texts of the debates:

Mu’awiya came to Imam al-Hasan (a.s) and said to him:

-O Hasan, I am better than you.
-How is that, O Hind’s son.
-Because the people have unanimously agreed on me, and they have not
unanimously agreed on you.

As authority in Islam does not bring about distinction and pride,
rather piety and good deed bring them about, Imam al-Hasan (a.s) refuted
Mu’awiya’s claim, saying: “How far! The thing through which you have
become high is evil, O son of the woman who ate the (Hamza’s) liver.
Those who have unanimously agreed on you are two men. They are either
obedient or forced. The one who is obedient to you is disobedient to
Allah, and the one who is forced is excused according to Allah’s Book.
Allah forbids that I say that I am better than you, for you have no
good. Surely Allah has cleared me from vices as He has cleared you from
virtues.”[^2]

[^1] Al-Zarkali, A‘lam, vol. 2, p. 215.
[^2] Abu Ali al-Nisaburi, Roudat al-Wa‘izeen.

This is the speech of the free who condemn oppression and resist
forbidden things; this is not the speech of the one who wants pay and
properties.

2. Imam al-Hasan came in to Mu’awiya. When Amr bin al-‘Aas saw the
Imam’s great veneration and dignity, he became displeased, burst with
rage, and said: “The feeble one who cannot express himself has come to
you!”

Abdullah bin Ja‘far was present. He was displeased with his speech, so
he shouted at him: “Stop! By Allah, you have meant a solid rock from
which floodwater flows down, of which ibexes fall short, and which the
arrows do not reach. Be careful of al-Hasan! For you are still reveling
in the flesh of a man from Quraysh. You shot, but your arrow did not
leave. You struck, but your flint did not kindle.”

Imam al-Hasan heard the speech. When the assembly of Mu’awiya was full
of people, the Imam (a.s) addressed Mu’awiya, imposed on him the guilt
of his minister Amr bin al-‘Aas. Then he threatened him with declaring
war against him if he did not refrain from his deception and error, and
he mentioned to him the high qualities standing in his noble
personality, saying: “O Mu’awiya, you have a servant who is still
reveling in the fleshes of the people. By Allah, if you willed, there
would be between us something because of which the affairs became
aggravated and the hearts became narrow.”

Then he recited:

O Mu’awiya, you have ordered ‘Abd Sahm to curse me. The people from us
are witnesses.
When Quraysh take their assemblies, they will come to know what you
want.
You will foolishly go on cursing me because of a rancor that does not
end and perish.
You do not have a father like my father, that you may compete with
those who compete or plot.
Nor do you, O son of Harb, have a grandfather like my grandfather,
Allah’s Apostle, when the grandfathers are mentioned.
Nor do you have a mother from Quraysh like my mother when the old
ancestry occurs.
So you, O son of Harb, do not mock at the like of me, nor does the
threat frighten the like of me.
Slowly! Do not move, from us, affairs that make the newborn child
white-haired out of fear of them.[^1]
[^1] Al-Jahiz, al-Mahasin wa al-Azdad, p. 95. Al-Bayqahi, al-Mahasin wa
al-Masawi’,

Imam al-Hasan (a.s) has showed his excellence and achievements, spread
Mu’awiya’s bad deeds and disgraceful acts through this wonderful speech
in which appeared his eloquent, miraculous nature, marvelous brevity,
quick-wittedness, and strong proof. Through it he degraded Mu’awiya’s
immoderation and hit the most prominent of his elements from among his
known ancestry and lineage. Therefore, where is the feebleness and
incapability of expressing himself, O Amr bin al-‘Aas?

3. The Imam’s affair in Sham became great. The people successively came
to visit him and listen to his speech. So he (a.s) possessed the hearts,
the feelings, and the sentiments. The clubs and the assemblies talked
about his great excellence and talents. Mu’awiya’s hirelings were Amr
bin al-‘Aas, al-Waleed bin ‘Aqaba, ‘Utba bin Abi Sufyan, and al-Mughira
bin Shu‘ba. When they saw that, they were afraid that something
dangerous would happen, the authority would escape them, and the thrones
of the Umayyad government would be destroyed. So they held a meeting in
the royal court. They mentioned to Mu’awiya that the people welcomed
Imam al-Hasan, honored him, overcrowded to visit him, and that his (Imam
al-Hasan)existence was dangerous to the Umayyad state. They thought that
the best way to degrade his dignity and to make the people turn away
from him was to summon him, to accuse his father of killing ‘Uthman, and
to curse him because of that. This is the text of their speech: “Surely
al-Hasan has enlivened his father and his name. He said, and the people
believed him. He commanded them, and they obeyed him. They hurried to
him. That will raise him to that which is greater than he is. What
displeases us still reaches us from him.”

So Mu’awiya asked them: “What do you want?”

They said: “Send for him and let him come, that we may curse him, curse
his father, revile and rebuke him, and tell him that his father had
killed ‘Uthman, and make him acknowledge that. He will change nothing of
that.”

It was well known to Mu’awiya that their opinion was silly and their
thinking was far from correctness. That is because he had come to know
that the Imam would defeat and succeed in disgracing them. So he said to
them: “I do not see that and do not do it.” “We have determined, O
Commander of the faithful, to do that.”

“Woe unto you!” retorted Mu’awiya, “Do not do! By Allah, whenever I see
him sitting with me I am afraid of his position.” vol. 1, p. 62. Ibn Abi
al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 2, p.102. Jamharat al-Khutab,
vol. 1, p. 428. “Anyway send for him!” they demanded.

“Surely if I sent for him, I would treat him fairly,” stipulated
Mu’awiya. So Ibn al-‘Aas said: “Are you afraid that his falsehood will
put an end to our right or his speech will exceed ours?” When Mu’awiya
saw that they insisted on him, he said to them: “Surely if I sent for
him, I would command him to speak with the whole of his tongue.”
“Command him to do that,” they said.

Mu’awiya responded to what they wanted. He commanded them to follow a
special plan during their speech with the Imam, saying: “If you
disobeyed me and sent for him and refused (all things) except that, then
do not be weak in speaking with him. Know that he belongs to the members
of a House with whom none can find fault or on whom can fasten shame.
But throw a stone at him through saying to him: ‘Surely your father
killed ‘Uthman and disliked the caliphate of the caliphs before him.’”

Then he sent for Imam al-Hasan. The Imam rose, asked for his clothes,
and put them on. He knew the purpose for this summons. So he went out
supplicating with this supplication: “O Allah, I seek refuge with you
from their evil, repel through You in their throats, and seek help from
You against them! Therefore, suffice me against them however You will
and whenever You will through might and strength from You, O Most
Merciful of the merciful!”

Then Imam al-Hasan (a.s) walked until he reached Mu’awiya. When
Mu’awiya saw him coming towards him, he welcomed and honored him. Then
he turned to him and apologized to him: “O Abu Muhammad, surely these
(people) sent for you and disobeyed me.”

However the Imam explained to him that his apology was not real,
saying: “Glory belongs to Allah! The house belongs to you, and asking
permission to enter it belongs to you. By Allah if you responded to what
they wanted and to that which was in their souls, then I feel shame for
you of the obscenity. If they overcame your opinion, then I feel shame
for you of weakness. Therefore which of them do you acknowledge? And
which of them do you deny? If I had come to know their place, I would
have brought a number equal to them from among the Banu ‘Abd
al-Muttalib, that I might not feel lonely because of you and them.
Surely my guardian is Allah, and He befriends the good.”

Mu’awiya said: “Surely I disliked summoning you. However they urged me
to do that though I disliked it. They and I will treat you fairly. We
have summoned you to make you confess that ‘Uthman was unjustly killed,
and that it was your father who had killed him. Therefore listen to and
answer them. Your loneliness and their gathering should not prevent you
from speaking with the whole of your tongue.”

When Mu’awiya kept silent, Amr bin al-‘Aas began speaking. He cursed
Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful and accused him of cursing Abu
Bakr. He said that he disliked the caliphate, took part in killing ‘Umar
bin al-Khattab and unjustly killed ‘Uthman. He ascribed all bad
qualities to him. Then he turned to Imam al-Hasan and said to him: “O
Banu ‘Abd al-Muttalib, Allah does not give you the dominion for your
killing the caliphs, your regarding as lawful what Allah prohibited from
among the blood, your craving after the dominion, and your doing the
unlawful. Then surely you, O Hasan, say to yourself that the caliphate
will reach you while you have neither mind nor reason. How do you see
that Allah, the Most High, has deprived you of your reason and made you
as the most foolish of Quraysh and (made the people) mock at you? That
is because of your father’s bad deed. We have summoned you to curse you
and your father. As for your father, Allah was alone with him and
sufficed us against him. As for you, you are in our hands, and we will
choose the qualities regarding you. If we killed you, then we would
commit no sin towards Allah, and the people would find no defect with
us. Therefore can you refute us and accuse us of lying? If you thought
that we told a lie regarding a thing, then refute us in respect of what
we have said; otherwise, you should know that you and your father are
unjust!”

There is nothing in this speech except slander and cursing that issued
from a soul full of falsehood and enmity toward Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on
them.

After him, al-Waleed bin ‘Aqaba, a sinful person, said: “Surely you are
‘Uthman’s uncle. He was an excellent child to you. He knew your right.
You are his sons-in-law. He was an excellent father-in-law to you. He
honored you. However you were the first to envy him. Your father
unjustly killed him; he has neither an excuse nor a proof. So how do you
see that Allah avenged his blood and placed you in your position? By
Allah, the Umayyads are better to the Hashimites than the Hashimites to
the Umayyads, and Mu’awiya is better to you than yourself.”

Then he kept silent. After him, ‘Utba bin Abi Sufyan spoke. He showed
his evil inners and enmity toward Ahl al-Bayt, saying: “O Hasan, your
father was the wickedest of Quraysh to Quraysh, for he shed their blood,
severed their blood relations, was long in sword and tongue, killed the
living, and found fault with the dead. You were among those who killed
‘Uthman, and we will kill you because of him. As for your hope for the
caliphate, you have not struck its flint nor are you outweighing in its
inheritance. You, the Hashimites, killed ‘Uthman. It is an act of truth
to kill you and your brother. As for your father, Allah sufficed us
against his affair and killed him for ‘Uthman. As for you, there would
be against us neither sin nor enmity if we killed you because of
‘Uthman.”

After him, al-Mughira bin Shu‘ba spoke. He started with cursing Imam
Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him. Then he said: “By
Allah, I find no fault with him regarding a matter he betrayed, but he
killed ‘Uthman.”

Then they kept silent. Imam al-Hasan faced them. He debated with them.
He spread their defects and their disgraceful acts. He lauded the
excellence of his father Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace
be on him. In the first place he addressed Mu’awiya, saying: “O
Mu’awiya, these (people) have not cursed me. But you have cursed me out
of obscenity with which you are familiar, a bad opinion for which you
are famous, a bad moral to which you have stuck, and aggression against
us because of an enmity from you toward Muhammad, may Allah bless him
and his family. However, listen, O Mu’awiya, and you listen! I will say
regarding you and them something less than you have. I adjure you before
Allah, O people, did you know that the person you cursed today performed
prayers towards both qiblas? As for you, O Mu’awiya, you disbelieved in
them (the two qiblas). You thought that they were misguidance.

You worshipped al-Laat and al-‘Uzzaa[^1] out of error. I adjure you
before Allah, did you know that he pledged two allegiances-the
allegiance of al-fath (the conquest), and the allegiance of al-ridwan
(the good pleasure)? As for you, O Mu’awiya, you disbelieved in one of
them and broke the other. I adjure you before Allah, did you know that
he was the most appropriate for faith? As for you, O Mu’awiya, and your
father, you were among those whose hearts were reconciled (al-mu’alafatu
qulubuhum). You concealed unbelief and showed Islam; and you were
attracted with money. I adjure you before Allah, did you know that he
(Imam Ali) was the bearer of the standard of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family, at the Battle of Badr, and that the standard
of the polytheists was with Mu’awiya and his father? Then he met you at
the Battle of Uhud and of the Allies carrying the standard of Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, while the standard of the
polytheists was with your father. During all of that Allah granted him
conquest, showed his proof, supported his summons, and confirmed his
speech. In all those places Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless

[^1] Al-Laat and al-‘Uzzaa were two idols.

him and his family, was pleased with him and was displeased with you
and your father. I adjure you before Allah, O Mu’awiya, did you remember
the day when your father came riding a red camel that you drove, and
your brother ‘Utba led? Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, saw you and said: ‘O Allah, curse the rider, the leader, and the
driver!’ Did you, O Mu’awiya, forget the poetry you wrote to your father
when he intended to be a Muslim and prohibit him from that? (You
said:)

‘O Sakhr, do not be Muslim one day lest you should expose us after
those who were torn at (the Battle of) Badr.

(They were) my maternal uncle, paternal uncle, granduncle, the third of
them, and Hanzal of good who gifted us with sleeplessness…’ “By Allah
what you have concealed from among your affair is greater than what you
have manifested. I adjure you before Allah, O people, did you know that
Ali abstained from pleasures among the companions of Allah’s Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family? So it has been revealed regarding
him: O you who believe, do not forbid (yourself) the good things which
Allah has made lawful.[^1] And that Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family, sent the leading companions to Bani Qurayza. They
approached their stronghold and were defeated. So he sent Ali with the
standard, and he made them follow Allah’s judgment and that of His
Apostle, and he did the like at Khaybar.

“O Mu’awiya, I think that you do not know that I know what Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said about you when he
wanted to write a letter to Bani Khuzayma. He sent for you, and you did
not come to him. So he invoked (Allah) against you with ‘O Allah,’ until
you die. “And you, O people, I adjure you before Allah, did you not know
that Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, cursed Abu
Sufyan in seven places that you cannot refute: “Firstly, when he met
Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, who was going out
of Mecca to al-Ta’if to summon Thaqif to the religion. He (Abu Sufyan)
attacked, cursed, stultified, abused, accused him of lying, and intended
to assault him (the Prophet). So Allah and His Apostle cursed him and
then the Prophet (a.s) went away.

“Secondly, on the day of the train of beasts of burden (youm al-‘eer)
when Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, interfered
with them [^1] Qur’an, 5, 87.

while they were coming from Sham. However Abu Sufyan drove them away
and made them walk by the coast. So the Muslims did not obtain them.
Allah’s Apostle cursed him and invoked (Allah) against him. Accordingly,
the Battle of Badr took place. “Thirdly, at the Battle of Uhud when he
(Abu Sufyan) stood at the foot of the mountain and Allah’s Apostle was
on the top. He was calling out many times: ‘Exalt Hubal!’ So Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, cursed him ten times; and
the Muslims cursed him. “Fourthly, on the day when he (Abu Sufyan)
brought the allies along with Ghatafan, the Jews, so Allah’s Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family, cursed him and invoked Allah against
him.

“Fifthly, on the day when Abu Sufyan brought Quraysh and prevented
Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, from the Holy
Mosque in Mecca, and the animals for immolation were ready to reach
their place on the day of al-Hudaybiya. So Allah’s Apostle cursed Abu
Sufyan. He cursed the leaders and the followers and said: ‘All of them
are cursed. None of them will believe.’ It was said: ‘O Allah’s Apostle,
is Islam not hoped for any of them? So how is the cursing?’ He said:
‘The cursing will befall none of the followers. As for the leaders, none
of them will succeed.’ “Sixthly, on the day of the red camel.

“Seventhly, on the day when they stood in front of Allah’s Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family, to startle his she-camel. They were
twelve men. Among them was Abu Sufyan. So this belongs to you, O
Mu’awiya.” Through his speech, Imam al-Hasan (a.s) brought down Mu’awiya
from his palace to his grave, from his throne to his coffin. He made
sadness hurt him. Then he turned to Amr bin al-‘Aas and said to him: “As
for you, O bin al-‘Aas, surely your affair is common. Your mother gave
birth to you (while you were) unknown because of adultery. So four (men)
from Quraysh sued one another about you. Her butcher overcame you. He
was the meanest of them in lineage and the wickedest of them in
position. Then your father rose and said: ‘I detest Muhammad, the
childless.’ So Allah revealed regarding him what He revealed.

You fought against Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
at all the battles. You satirized and harmed him in Mecca, and you
plotted against him with all your scheme. You were the worst of all the
people in accusing him of lying and enmity. Then you along with the
owners of the ship went out intending (to go to) al-Nejashi (to ask him)
to repatriate Ja‘far and his companions to the people of Mecca. When
what you hoped escaped you, Allah returned you disappointed and proved
you a lying informer, and you specified your punishment against your
companion ‘Ammarah bin al-Waleed. So you informed al-Najashi against him
as envy for what he committed with his wife. So Allah exposed you and
your companion. Therefore, you are the enemy of the Hashimites during
the pre-Islamic period and Islam. Then you and all these people have
come to know that you satirized Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, with seventy verses of poetry. So Allah’s Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family, said: ‘O Allah, surely I do not say poetry and
I should not (say it). O Allah, curse him a thousand times for each
letter. Therefore, there are countless curses on you from Allah. As for
what you have mentioned regarding ‘Uthman’s affair, it was you who set
the world with fire against him. Then you went to Palestine. When you
heard of his murder, you said: ‘I am Abu Abdullah. When I hurt an ulcer,
I make it bleed.’ Then you devoted yourself to Mu’awiya and sold your
religion for your life in this world. Therefore, we do not blame you for
hatred nor do we admonish you for affection. By Allah, you did not
support ‘Uthman when he was alive nor did you become angry for him when
he was killed. Woe unto you, O bin al-‘Aas! Did you not say regarding
the Hashimites when you left Mecca for al-Najashi?

‘My daughter says: To where is this departure? And my going is not
condemned.
I said: Leave me! Surely I am a man (who) wants (to go to) al-Najashi
as to Ja‘far.
That I may burn him with a burning through which I set right the
chivalry of the wry-necked.
And my affair is Ahmed (Muhammad) from among them, and I will say as to
him with the abominable.
And I will run to ‘Utba diligently even if he was like the red gold.
And I will not turn away from the Hashimites and as far as I can in
absence and presence.
If he accepted my admonition to him; otherwise, I will draw my sword
towards him Therefore, this is the answer to you. Have you heard it.’

Imam al-Hasan (a.s) mentioned what was standing in Amr bin al-‘Aas from
among the vices, the disgraceful acts, the violent malice against Islam
and the Muslims, his taking part in shedding ‘Uthman’s blood, and his
joining Mu’awiya as craving after his world. Then the Imam (a.s) turned
to al-Waleed bin ‘Aqaba and said to him: “As for you, O Waleed, I do not
blame you for detesting Ali. That is because he whipped you eighty times
as to (your drinking) wine and he killed your father before Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family. It is you whom Allah has
called the transgressor and called Ali the believer. That was when you
vied in glory with one another. You said to him: ‘O Ali, keep silent! I
am braver than you in heart and longer than you in tongue.’ So Ali said
to you: ‘Keep silent, O Waleed! I am a believer, and you are a
transgressor.’ So Allah revealed His speech to confirm his speech: Is he
then who is a believer like him who is a transgressor? They are not
equal.[^1] Then He revealed to confirm his speech: If an evil-doer comes
to you with a report, look carefully into it.[^2] Woe unto you, O Walled!
Whatever you forget, do not forget the speech of the poet as to you and
him.”

Then Imam al-Hasan (a.s) mentioned the verses of poetry on them:

“He who is believer, may Allah prolong your life, is not like him who
is transgressor, traitor.
Shortly after, al-Waleed and Ali will be openly summoned to the
reckoning.
Ali will be rewarded with gardens, and al-Waleed will be rewarded with
disgrace.”
There is no relationship between you and Quraysh. You are an infidel
from among the people of Saforiya. I swear by Allah that you are older
in birthday than what you claim.”

The reason behind al-Waleed’s detesting Imam Ali, the Commander of the
faithful (a.s) and showing enmity toward him was that the Imam was the
model of belief and al-Waleed was the model of unbelief. It is well
known that the contradiction between belief and unbelief is self and
natural. Besides, Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful, whipped him
eighty times for his drinking wine. Indeed this brought about in himself
hatred toward Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful. After Imam
al-Hasan (a.s) had disgraced al-Waleed, he turned to Utba bin Abi Sufyan
and said to him: “As for you, O ‘Utba, by Allah, you are not prudent to
answer you nor are you sane to debate with and admonish you. You have no
good to be hoped nor have you evil to be avoided. Your reason and that
of your slave-girl are the same. If you openly curse Ali, that will not
harm him. As for threatening me with killing, why did you not kill
al-Lahyani when you found him in your bed? Do you not feel shame of the
saying of Nasr bin al-Hajjaj as to you:

‘O men, occurring times, and the shame that has disgraced Abu Sufyan.

I have been informed that Utba betrayed him as to his wife. (He belongs
to) a race ignoble in origin from Lahyan.’

[^1] Qur'an, 32, 18.
[^2] Qur'an, 49, 6.

“After this I deem myself as above mentioning it because of its
atrocity. So how can one fear your sword while you had not killed the
one who exposed you? How can I blame you for your detesting Ali while he
killed your uncle during a dueling at the Battle of Badr, helped Hamza
in killing your grandfather Utba, and killed your brother Hanzala in one
place?”

Imam al-Hasan (a.s) has explained that Utba was foolish, had no reason,
and void of honor, that Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful (a.s)
killed with his sword his grandfather, his uncle, and his brother at the
Battle of Badr. For this reason he harbored malice and hatred against
him. Then Imam al-Hasan (a.s) turned to al-Mughira bin Shu‘ba and said
to him: “As for you, O Mughira, you are not worthy of inflicting on me
this and the like of it. You are like the mosquito that said to the
date-palm: ‘Stand firm, for I am flying from you.’ The date palm said:
‘Did I feel that you had been sitting on me, that I might come to know
that you were flying from me?’ We do not feel your enmity toward us nor
do we grieve if we come to know of it. Your speech is not difficult to
us. The punishment prescribed by Allah as to fornication is established
against you. ‘Umar turned away from you a right about which Allah will
ask him.

You asked Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family: ‘Can man
look at the women he wants to marry?’ ‘There is no harm in it, O
Mughira,’ he replied, ‘unless he had intended to fornicate her.’ That is
because he had come to know that you were a fornicator. You are priding
yourself on us through the authority. But Allah, the Most High, says (in
this concern): And when We wish to destroy a town, We send Our
commandment to the people of it who lead easy lives, but they transgress
therein; thus the word proves true against it, so We destroy it with
utter destruction.[^1] ” With this the Imam’s debates with his opponents
came to an end. The Imam (a.s) showed them their defects, their mental
and genealogical vices. He exposed their disgraceful acts. He stripped
them of the garment of pride. He (a.s) made sorrow and sadness hurt
them. When he wanted to go away, Amr bin al-‘Aas clung to his clothes
and said (to Mu’awiya): “O Commander of the faithful, you have witnessed
his speech as to slandering my mother. I demand him of the right of
slandering.”

Mu’awiya shouted at him with rage: “Leave him! May Allah not reward you
with good!”

Then Mu’awiya turned to his retinue. He condemned and blamed them for
their disobeying and opposing him, saying: “I had told you that he was
among those whose opposition was unbearable. I had prohibited you from
cursing
[^1] Qur'an, 17, 16.

him. However you disobeyed me. By Allah, he did not rise until he made
the house dark to me. Go away from me! Indeed Allah has exposed and
disgraced you because of your leaving determination and turning away
from the opinion of the compassionate adviser. And Allah is He Whose
help is sought.”[^1] 4. Mu’awiya met with his retinue. They prided
themselves on each other and had the audacity to one another. Mu’awiya
wanted to mock at them. He said to them: “You have prided yourselves on
each other very much. If al-Hasan bin Ali (a.s) and Abdullah bin Abbas
were present, they would shorten your long reins.”

Ziyad bin Sumayya hurried to say: “How is that, O Commander of the
faithful? They will not challenge Marwan bin al-Hakam because he has a
strong speech, nor will they challenge us because we are proud and
audacious. So send for them tomorrow, that you may hear our speech.”
Mu’awiya turned to his minister Amr bin al-‘Aas to consult with him as
to that: “What do you say?” “Send for them (to come) tomorrow,” replied
Amr.


