The Followers of Imam Ali (a.s)
===============================

Among the most important conditions Imam al-Hasan made against his
opponent Mu’awiya is the general security for his followers (Shia) and
those of his father. He stipulated that Mu’awiya had not to subject them
to evil and detested things. However Ibn Abi Sufyan (Mu’awiya) violated
his covenant and did not fulfill it. He regarded as among his most
important objectives putting an end to this believing class that
believed in the right of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them. He went too far
in terrifying and exhausting them. He killed many of them and threw many
others into dark prisons. The Shia suffered from hard tiredness,
ordeals, and misfortunes. I think that no nation faced harm and
persecution like that which the followers of Ahl al-Bayt had faced. The
most of them in trial, harm, and unhappiness were the people of Kufa,
because that Mu’awiya had appointed Ziyad as a governor over them after
the death of al-Mughira. Ziyad was aware of them. So he spread among
them killing and execution. He killed them everywhere. He cut off their
hands and legs. He knocked out their eyes. He crucified them on the
trunks of the date palms. He drove them away and made them
homeless.[^1]

Mu’awiya sent a note to all his governors. In the note he has
mentioned: “Search for whoever it is proved that he loves Ali and his
household. Omit him from the divan (register). Cancel his pay and his
provision.” Then he sent them another copy in which he has mentioned:
“Punish severely those whom you accuse of love for these people (Ahl
al-Bayt) and demolish their houses.”

Imam al-Baqir (a.s) talked about the persecutions and the harms which
Ahl al-Bayt and their followers suffered during the time of Mu’awiya. He
has said: “Our followers (Shia) were killed in all cities. Their hands
and legs were cut off out of doubt. Those who loved and devoted
themselves to us were imprisoned; their properties were plundered, and
their houses were demolished.”[^2]

When Mu’awiya, Hind’s son, became a ruler, a door to oppression and
tyranny was opened against the followers of Imam Ali (a.s). They faced
political and social problems. They met abasement, torture, and severe
punishments to the extent that none can imagine what horribleness and
bitterness they faced. Showing love toward Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on
them, became as disgrace, shortcoming, sin, and offense. Some Umayyads
decided that showing love for Ahl al-Bayt was unbelief, and apostasy
from the religion. Al-Kumayt, the poet of Islam, has related this to us,
saying:

With their hands, they indicate to me and say: Truly this has become
disappointed. However, the indicators are more disappointed. A group (of
them) has accused me of unbelief because of the love for you. And
another group has said: evil and guilty. They say: His inclination and
opinion is Turabi. By that I am called and surnamed among them.[^3]

[^1] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 3, p.15.
[^2] Ibid., p. 15.
[^3] Al-Hashimiyat.

Abu al-Aswad al-Du’ali has said:

I love very much Muhammad, Abbas, Hamza, and the guardians.[^1]
I have been given this peerless love since the beginning of Islam.
The Prophet’s cousins and his relatives are the most beloved to me.

If love for them is right guidance, then I will get it. If it is error,
then I am not mistaken.[^2] Abdullah bin Katheer refuted those who blamed
him for his love for the family of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family. He said: I am a man whose defect is because of showing love
for the Prophet and not because of any guilt. The children of Abu Hasan
(Imam Ali) and their father were good in the wombs and the backbone. Is
it a guilt that I love them? Rather, love for them is an expiatory
gift.[^3]

After Mu’awiya, the Umayyad and the Abbasid caliphs followed the same
policy in oppressing and disrespecting the Shia. If we wanted to deal
with the ordeals and misfortunes the Shia met, then we would be in need
of a big book. Anyway, the Shia did not pay attention to Mu’awiya’s
terrorism, severe punishment, and torture. They sacrificed their lives
for their holy religious creed. We will mention some of those whom
Mu’awiya unjustly killed, who committed no sin except showing love for
Ahl al-Bayt. They are as follows:

**Hijr Bin Adiy**

Hijr bin Adiy was one the most important Muslim personalities. He was
at the head of the companions of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family, in excellence, knowledge, sacredness, asceticism, and
worship. He was so obedient to Allah that he always performed the ritual
ablution and prayed. He performed one thousand rak’as a day. His
supplication was accepted. When he was taken to Mu’awiya as a captive,
he became impure on his way to there. He said to the man in charge of
him: “Give me the water I drink to purify myself with it.” The man who
was in charge of him said to him: “I fear that you would die of thirst
if I gave it to you and that Mu’awiya would kill me.” It was difficult
for Hijr to be impure. He supplicated Allah to enable him to find some
water. Allah responded to him. A cloud came and heavily rained.

[^1] The guardian is (Imam Ali), the Commander of the faithful.
[^2] Al-Mubarrad, al-Kamil, p. 545.
[^3] Al-Bayan wa al-Tabiyyin, vol. 3, p. 360.

Hijr took his need of the rain.[^1] He had many virtues and glorious
deeds. We have to deal with the reason for his martyrdom:

After Imam al-Hasan (a.s) had made peace with Mu’awiya, Hijr kept on
his creed and set a record in criticizing the Umayyad blind policy; that
policy which threatened the society with serious dangers, revived the
pre-Islamic tribalism that Islam had destroyed, demolished
qualifications and talents, monopolized authorities, plundered
foodstuffs, terrified the people, divided them, made them poor, abased
them, enslaved them, and openly committed sins and errors. Hijr and his
chosen, believing companions came to know that silence and refraining
from criticizing this political policy was nothing but going too far in
practicing falsehood, strengthening the forbidden, and making light of
the truth. They knew well that it was incumbent on the true Muslim to
follow the Sunna of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
that summoned Muslims to fight against the oppressive, the dictators,
and the enemies of peoples.

Indeed Hijr understood Islam, knew its objectives, and was aware of it.
He was a pupil in the school of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family. He graduated from the school of Imam Ali. So he condemned
Mu’awiya’s falsehood, resisted his oppression and that of his governors,
and combated their heresies and their mean desires.

Hijr saw al-Mughira ascending the pulpit in the mosque of Kufa and
heard him cursing Imam Ali (a.s), during his speech. He was unable to
keep silent. He faced him and criticized him, saying: “Be maintainers of
justice, bearers of witness for Allah’s sake. I bear witness that the
one you dispraise and revile is worthier of excellence, and the one you
praise is worthier of dispraise.”

A group of Hijr’s companions said as he said. So al-Mughira turned to
Hijr and said to him: “O Hijr, they have shot me with your arrow (lit.
You have provoked them). If I am the governor over you, O Hijr, then
beware of the Sultan’s anger; beware of his anger and influence. That is
because the Sultan’s anger destroys many people like you.”

Yet Hijr enthusiastically condemned the Umayyad policy. Some
mercenaries and adulators suggested to al-Mughira to kill Hijr. However
he refused to respond to them, saying: “I dislike to start with the good
ones of this city and shed their blood. They will be happy with that,
and I shall be unhappy. Mu’awiya will be mighty in the world, and
al-Mughira will be low on the Day of Resurrection.”

[^1] Al-Isaba, vol. 1, p. 313.

Al-Mughira’s retinue insisted on him as to the affair of Hijr, so he
responded to them with the response of an experienced hypocrite, saying:
“I have killed him.”

“How is that?” they asked. He replied: “A governor will come after me.
The governor will imprison him as I did. He will do to him something
similar to that he does to me. He will take him at first blush and kill
him with an evil killing.” Al-Mughira died. After him Ziyad became a
governor over Kufa. Hijr criticized him for his crooked plans and
intensified his wrath against his terrorist policy. On Friday Ziyad went
up on the pulpit. He made a long speech, to the extent that it was too
late for prayer. Hijr blamed him for delaying the prayer, saying: “The
prayer!”

Ibn Sumayya (Ziyad) did not pay attention to Hijr’s statement nor did
he pay attention to the prayer. He went on speaking. Hijr opposed him
again raising his voice: “The prayer!” Ziyad paid no attention to Hijr’s
blame. He went on making his speech. So Hijr feared that the time of the
prayer would pass. He took a handful of stones, and the people who were
with him revolted (against Ziyad). When Ziyad saw that, he came down the
pulpit and led the people in prayer. He was very angry with Hijr. He
decided to punish him severely. He said during the speech he made in the
mosque: “I am nothing if I not remove Hijr from the yard of al-Kufa and
make him an example for those after him! Woe unto your mother, O Hijr!
The evening has made you come across a wolf!” Then he quoted as an
example the poet’s speech:

Inform Nusayha that the evening has made the driver of her camels come
across a wolf.

Ziyad sent for some eminent, noble Kufans. He ordered them to deter
Hijr from his plan. However Hijr refused to respond to them. At last
Ziyad commanded the police to bring Hijr to him. The police set out to
arrest him. Skirmishes happened between them and Hijr’s companions. The
policemen were unable to arrest him, because groups of believers
surrounded them. They protected him and his companions from handing them
over to Ziyad. Qays bin Fahdan al-Kindi provoked the Kufans. He made
speeches in the assemblies and the clubs. He praised Hijr and his
companions. He summoned the Muslims to protect and support him. He said
to them:

O people of Hijr, defend and assault! Fight on behalf of your brother
for an hour! None of you should desert Hijr. Is a spearman, a bowman, a
knight, a walker, a striker with the sword not still among you?

Hijr and his companions protected themselves. So Ziyad was unable to
arrest them. He was afraid of them, so he gathered the leaders and the
children of the houses that the authority used as a means to achieve its
aims. He said to them: “O people of Kufa, you attack with one hand and
are sorry with another. Your bodies are with me, and your desires are
with Hijr, the foolish. You are with me. Your brothers, your children,
and your tribes are with Hijr. By Allah, this is of your corruption and
deception. By Allah, you should show me your disowning him or I will
bring you some people through whom I will straighten your crookedness
and deviation.”

They showed obedience and loyalty to him, saying: “We seek refuge in
Allah. Glory belongs to Him. We have no opinion other than obedience to
you and to the Commander of the faithful (Mu’awiya) or other than
pleasing you. Command us to do the things that bring about obedience to
you and disobedience to Hijr.”

He said to them: “All of you should rise against this group (of people)
around Hijr. Each man of you should summon his brother, son, relatives,
and those who obey him from among his tribe, that you may move against
him all those you can move.” These rogues spoiled Hijr’s affair and made
the people desert him. Ziyad commanded the commander of his police,
Shaddad bin al-Haytham al-Hilali, to arrest Hijr and his companions.
Then he came to know that the commander of his police was unable to
arrest them. So he summoned Muhammad bin al-Ash‘ath al-Kindi[^1] He said
to him: “O Abu Maytha’, by Allah, you should bring me Hijr; otherwise, I
will uproot your date palms, demolish your house, and cut you into
pieces!”

“Give me a time of three (days) that I may arrest him,” retorted
Muhammad.

Muhammad bin al-Ash‘ath and the commander of the police followed Hijr
and his companions. After some violent encounters that had taken place
between the two parties, Ziyad’s policemen were able to arrest Hijr and
his companions. They brought them to Ziyad, and he ordered them to be
imprisoned. [^1] The mother of Muhammed bin al-Ash‘ath bin Qays al-Kindi
was Farwa, sister of Abu Bakr. It was said that Muhammed bin al-Ash‘ath
al-Kindi was born during the lifetime of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family. This is incorrect because al-Ash‘ath married
Farwa during the caliphate of Abu Bakr. Ibn al-Zubayr appointed Muhammed
as a governor over al-Mousil. Al-Mukhtar killed Muhammed in the year 66
A. H. It was said that he killed him in the year 70. This has been
mentioned in (the book) Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 9, p. 64.

Ziyad asked the people of Kufa to bear witness against Hijr and his
companions. Some of them bore witness that they (Hijr and his
companions) followed Imam Ali, found fault with ‘Uthman, and defamed
Mu’awiya. However, Ziyad was not satisfied with this testimony and said:
“It is not definite.” Abu Burda bin Abu Musa al-Ash‘ari wrote a
testimony whose text is as follows: “This is for which Abu Burda bin Abi
Musa al-Ash‘ari has borne witness, for the sake of Allah, the Lord of
the worlds. I testify that Hijr bin Adiy has broken obedience, parted
with the community, cursed the Caliph, summoned (the people) to war,
gathered for himself groups of people and summoned them to break the
pledge of allegiance, and disbelieved in Allah with clear unbelief.”

Ziyad was content with this. He ordered the people to sign this
testimony. Many people signed it, to the extent that the number of the
witnesses was seventy men, as the historians have said. Then he sent the
document to Mu’awiya. Mu’awiya commanded Ziyad to send to him Hijr and
his companions shackled with iron. Ziyad ordered Hijr and his companions
to be sent to Damascus by night, and they were sent. Lamentation
occurred, and painful crying rose in Hijr’s house. His only daughter
stood on the top of the house. She looked at the people who were walking
to death. She saw them off while she was weeping and shedding bitter and
sad tears. She was addressing the moon and sending it her sorrows and
agony. She was composing out of her ordeal and tribulation some poetry
through which one concludes that sadness melted her heart. She
recited:

O bright moon, go higher that you may see Hijr walking! He is going to
Mu’awiya. Mu’awiya is going to kill him as the governor has claimed. He
is going to crucify him on the gate of Damascus. The birds will eat his
beauties. The tyrants have become haughty after Hijr; al-Khuwarnaq and
al-Sadeer have become good to them.[^1] Truly, O Hijr, Hijr bin Adiy,
safety and happiness have received you. I have fear for you of that
which destroyed Ali and an old man with moaning in Damascus. [^1]
Al-Khuwarnaq and al-Sadeer are two palaces near al-Heera. Al-Nu‘man bin
Umru’ al-Qays ordered them to be built. It was said that the reason for
building them is that the children of Yazdijir bin Sabur died. So he
asked the people about a place with healthy air. They told him that the
place was in the outskirts of al-Hira. So he sent his son Bahram to
al-Nu‘man to order him to build al-Khuwarnaq, and he built it in twenty
years. The builder was a man called Sinmar. This has been mentioned in
(the book) Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 1, p. 372.

Would that Hijr died a natural death and was not slaughtered as a camel
was slaughtered! If you perish, then every head of a people will perish
in the world.[^1] Hijr and his companions arrived at Marjj ‘Adhra’. When
Hijr came to know that he was in this village, he said: “By Allah, I am
the first Muslim at whom the dogs in this village bark, and I am the
first Muslim to exclaim: ‘Allah is great!’”[^2] The postman told Mu’awiya
about them. So Mu’awiya became pleased and comfortable. He sent them a
one-eyed man and commanded him to execute them if they did not disown
and curse Imam Ali (a.s). When the one-eyed man came to them, one of
them saw him and predicted, saying: “If the guess was true, half of us
would be killed, and the rest would be saved!”

“How is that?” they asked.

“Do you not see that the man coming to you is one-eyed?” came the
answer. The executioner came to them. He turned to Hijr and said to him:
“The Commander of the faithful (Mu’awiya) has commanded me to kill you
any your companions if you do not withdraw from your unbelief, curse
your leader and renounce him. You are the head of misguidance, source of
unbelief and tyranny, and follower of Abu Turab (Imam Ali).” Hijr along
with the righteous group who believed in his faith, set an example for
the creed and sacrifice in the way of Allah, said with one tongue:
“Surely to be patient toward the punishment with the sword is easier for
us than that to do what you say. Then going to Allah, His Prophet, and
his (the Prophet’s) guardian is more lovable to us than entering the
Fire.”

Half of Hijr’s companions withdrew from their creed, and the other half
maintained their creed and their following Imam Ali (a.s), peace be on
him. The guess of the one who said that half of them would be killed was
true. Then their graves were dug. The executioner beheaded them. It is
worth mentioning that Hijr had asked the people for a need dear to him
and cheap to them. He said to them: “Let me perform the ritual ablution
and pray, for when I perform the ritual ablution, I pray.”

[^1] Al-Mas‘udi, Murujj al-Dhahab, vol. 2, p. 307. It was said that the
poetry lines belonged to Hind al-Ansariya, daughter of Zayd. She
bewailed Hijr with them. She was a Shi‘ite.
[^2] Al-Kamil, vol. 3, p. 192. In his book al-Isaba, Ibn Hajar has
mentioned: “Hijr conquered Marjj ‘Adhra’ and was martyred in it.”

They allowed him to do that. Hijr prayed for a long time. After
finishing praying, he turned to the people and said to them: “By Allah,
I have never said a prayer lighter than this. Were it not for that you
would think that I was impatient toward death, I would increase it.”
Then Hijr addressed his Lord complaining to Him of this community that
handed him over to his cunning enemy, saying: “O Allah, I ask you for
help against our community! The people of Kufa bore witness against us,
and the people of Sham are going to kill us! By Allah, if you killed me
in it (the village), then I would be the first Muslim knight to perish
in its valley and the first Muslim at whom the dogs in it would bark.”

The wicked, one-eyed person, Hudba bin Fayyad al-Quda‘i, walked towards
Hijr drawing his sword. When Hijr saw him, he shook with fear, and his
strength became weak. So the executioner said to him: “You had claimed
that you were not impatient with death! Therefore, renounce your leader
(Imam Ali), and we will set you free.”

Hijr said to him: “And what reason have I that I should not be
impatient while I can see a dug grave, a spread shroud, and a drawn
sword? By Allah, if I was impatient with death, I would not say anything
to displease the Lord!”[^1] The last words Hijr said were: “Do not remove
the iron and the blood from me, for I will meet Mu’awiya on the straight
path (on the Day of Resurrection)!”[^2]

The executioner beheaded Hijr. Hijr was placed on the ground as a
motionless body and was covered with his blood. He was with six of his
companions, who were righteous martyrs. O Hijr, you and your companions
are in the protection of Allah! You have gone to the immortal world! You
were martyred for the creed and mankind! You are the most wonderful of
the unique heroes who revolted against oppression and tyranny, resisted
the tyranny of the rulers and the despotism of the unjust!

**Hijr’s Companions are martyred for the Creed**

Hijr was unjustly martyred. A group of his ideal companions, who
sacrificed their valuable lives for their creed and sacred doctrine, was
martyred with him and after him. They paid no attention to death.
Beliefs are based on these people and the like of them from among the
immortal heroes and the great ones in the world. Through them the truth
shines, justice spreads, and
[^1] Al-Kamil, vol. 3, p. 192.
[^2] Al-Isti‘ab, vol. 1, p. 256.

injustice disappears. We will mention their names along with brief
accounts on the oppression and torture they met from Mu’awiya and his
governors. They are as follows:

**Abdurrahman**

Abdurrahman bin Hassaan al-‘Anzi was on top of Hijr’s companions. He
was taken with him to Marjj ‘Adhra’. He was shackled with iron. He asked
the policemen to let him meet Mu’awiya that he might pardon him. They
responded to his request. He was brought to him. When he stood before
him, he (Mu’awiya) asked him:

-Say, O brother of Rabee‘a! What do you think of Ali?
-Leave me and do not question me. That is better for you.
-By Allah, I will not leave you.
-I bear witness that he mentioned Allah very much, enjoined the good,
maintained justice, and pardoned men.

After this Mu’awiya could find no means through which he deemed
shedding his blood as lawful. So he asked him about ‘Uthman’s blood,
with which he afflicted the Muslims during his lifetime and after his
death: -What do you think about ‘Uthman? -He was the first to open a
door to oppression and to close doors to the truth. -You have killed
yourself! -Rather you have killed yourself, for (the tribe of) Rabee‘a
is in the valley! Abdurrahman thought that his family would intercede
for him (with Mu’awiya), and set him free. However, none responded to
him. Mu’awiya turned his face away from him. Then he sent to his
governor Ziyad a letter in which he mentioned: “This al-‘Anzi is the
worst of those you sent (to me). Therefore, punish him with the
punishment he deserves and kill him with the worst killing.” When Ziyad
received Mu’awiya’s letter, he sent Abdurrahman to Qas al-Natif.[^1] He
ordered him to be buried alive, and he was buried alive.[^2]

[^1] Qas al-Natif was a place near Kufa.
[^2] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 6, p. 155.

**Sayfi Bin Faseel**

Sayfi bin Faseel al-Shaybani was a genius, ideal Muslim hero. He was
among Hijr’s good companions. Ziyad was informed against him, and he,
the bastard, sent for him. Sayfi stood before Ziyad, and he hurried to
ask him about Imam Ali (a.s) (a.s) that he might use that as a means to
shed his blood lawfully. He asked him with words dripping rage and
anger:

-O enemy of Allah, what do you think of Abu Turab?
-I do not know Abu Turab!
-You know him more (than I)!
-I do not know him!
-Do you not know Ali bin Abi Talib?
-Yes.
-Then that is Abu Turab!

-No, that is Abu al-Hasan and al-Husayn, peace be on them!

The commander of Ziyad’s police turned to Sayfi and criticized him for
his statement, that he might seek nearness to Ibn Sumayya (Ziyad). He
said to him: “The governor says to you that he is Abu Turab, and you say
to him: ‘No’.” Sayfi rebuked him and refuted his speech. He paid no
attention to him and his governor. He said to him: “The governor has
lied. Do you want me to lie and bear witness falsely just as he has
done?”

Ibn Sumayya (Ziyad) became excited and angry, so he said to Sayfi:
“This is also of your guilt!” Then he turned towards his policemen and
angrily said to them: “Bring me the baton!” The baton was brought to
him, and then he turned to Sayfi and asked him: “What do you think of
(Imam Ali)?” Sayfi said to him with bravery and faith: “I have said the
best statement as to one of the believing servants of Allah!” Ziyad
commanded his policemen to strike him on the shoulder so that his
shoulder would reach the ground. They severely struck him until his
shoulder reached the ground. Then Ziyad commanded them to stop striking
him. He (Ziyad) turned to him and asked: “Say, what do you think about
Ali?” The hero of the creed (Sayfi) insisted on his faith and said:

-By Allah, if you cut me into pieces with the knives, I would say
nothing but that which you had heard from me! -You should curse him or I
will behead you! -Therefore, strike my head off, by Allah, before that.
If you refused but striking it, then I would be satisfied with Allah,
and you would be unhappy! -Push him in the neck! Ziyad ordered Sayfi to
be shackled with iron and to be thrown into a dark prison.[^1] Then he
sent him with Hijr to Marjj ‘Adhra’, and he was martyred with him
there.

**Qubaysa Bin Rabee‘a**

Among Hijr’s companions whom Ziyad exhausted was Qubaysa bin Rabee‘a
al-‘Absi. Ziyad sent the commander of his police, Shaddad bin
al-Haytham, to arrest Qubaysa. Shaddad secretly attacked Qubaysa. When
the latter came to know of that, he took his sword and defended himself.
A group of his people helped him. So the commander of the police said to
him with deception: “You are safe as to your blood and your property. So
why are you going to kill yourself?”

When his companions heard of that, they were deceived. So they did not
defend nor did they save him. That is because their fear of Ziyad’s
authority was greater in effect in themselves than the danger of death.
They said to him: “You are safe! So why do you want to kill yourself and
us with you?” Qubaysa did not yield to his companions’ statement. He had
come to know that the Umayyads were treacherous, that they fulfilled
neither a covenant nor a promise. He said to them: “Woe unto you! By
Allah, if fell into the hands of this bastard, son of the prostitute
(Ziyad), I would not escape from his hand, he would kill me!”

“No!” they retorted.

When Qubaysa found no escape from that, he put his hand in their hands,
and they took him as a captive to Ziyad. Qubaysa stood before Ziyad, and
he said to him: “By Allah, I will distract you from making troubles and
attacking the commanders!” “I have not come to you but according to that
you have given me security!” said Qubaysa

[^1] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, , vol. 4, p. 197, Al-Kamil, vol. 3, p. 139.
“Take him to prison!” commanded Ziyad.[^1]

Ziyad violated the security and broke the covenant. Then he ordered him
to be taken with Hijr and his companions to Marjj ‘Adhra’. So Qubaysa
was taken with them. When he arrived in his house at Jabana (‘Urzum), he
looked at it. He saw his daughters standing on the top of the house and
looking at him. They were scratching their faces, weeping and
supplicating. The misfortune controlled them, and sorrow tore their
hearts. When Qubaysa saw that terrible scene, he asked the policemen in
charge of him to let him approach his daughters to advice them to follow
what he wanted. They allowed him to do that. When he approached them,
they cried loudly. He ordered them to keep silent and be patient. He
gave them a piece of advice that represented faith and satisfaction with
Allah’s decree. He said to them: “Fear Allah, the Great and Almighty. Be
patient. During this departure of mine I hope that my Lord will grant me
one of two most excellent things; either martyrdom or the return to you
safely. The One Who provides me and suffices me your provision is Allah,
the Most High. He is living and does not die. I hope that He will not
lose you and that He will protect me for you.”

Then he said farewell to them and went away. When those with him saw
that his daughters were sad and terrified, they felt pity for him. Then
they raised their hands to invoke Allah, the Exalted, for him. They
asked Allah to grant Qubaysa wellbeing and safety. Qubaysa said to them:
“The condition in which I am is equal in danger to the destruction of my
people who did not support me.”[^2]

By that he meant that his people did not support him, they desert him,
and that was greater in effect on him than his death. Qubaysa went with
Hijr to Marjj ‘Adhra and was martyred with him there. As for the rest of
Hijr’s companions who were martyred with him, we have found no enough
information about them. However we will mention their names as
follows:

Shurayk bin Shaddad al-Hadrami.
Kaddam bin Hayyan al-‘Anzi.
Muhriz bin Shihab al-Tamimi.

These protectors, who sacrificed their lives for the creed and the
truth, were good, righteous Muslims. The Umayyad authorities drove them
to the field of execution. They regarded shedding their blood as lawful
not because of a guilt they had committed, but because of their love for
the pure family (of the

[^1] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 6, p. 149.
[^2] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 6, p. 149.

Prophet), who is equal to the Holy Qur’an in that it is obligatory to
take care of them and to show love to them.

**The Echo of the Disaster**

The Muslims were terrified by this dangerous incidence, and displeasure
spread throughout the country, for Hijr was one of the eminent, Muslim
figures and among the good companions of the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family. Through his murder the sacredness of Islam was
violated, for he made no mischief in the land; rather, he saw something
forbidden, and he combated it. He saw injustice, and he resisted it. He
saw that Ziyad delay the prayer, and he demanded him to perform it. He
saw him curse Imam Ali (a.s), and he demanded him to refrain from that.
He was martyred for that. So the remarkable personalities in the Islamic
world hurried to announce their displeasure with Mu’awiya and to condemn
him for that. It is good to mention some of them and listen to their
criticisms. They are as follows:

**Imam al-Husayn**

From Yathrib Imam al-Husayn wrote Mu’awiya a letter in which he
condemned him severely for his killing Hijr and his pious companions.
This is the text of the letter: “Are you not the one who killed Hijr,
brother (a member of the tribe) of Kinda, (and his companions) those who
prayed, the worshipers who condemned oppression, regarded as great the
heresies, and did not fear, in Allah, the censure of any censurer? You
unjustly killed them out of aggression after your giving them a strong
oath and sure covenants that you would not punish them according to an
incident (that had happened) between you and them nor according to
malice you had harbored against them.”[^1]

In his letter Imam al-Husayn condemned Mu’awiya for his regarding as
lawful shedding the blood of Hijr and his ideal companions, who
condemned oppression, combated tyranny, and regarded as great the
heresies. He unjustly killed them out of aggression after putting
himself under obligation and giving covenants to them that he would not
punish them because of an incident and past malice. However Mu’awiya,
son of Hind, broke that promise and did not fulfill it.

**A’isha**

‘A’isha, the Prophet’s wife, was among those who condemned Mu’awiya for
killing Hijr. That was when Mu’awiya came in to here after his
performing the hajj. She said to him: “Do you feel secure that I have
not hidden anyone to kill you?”

[^1] Bihar al-Anwar, vol.10, p.149.

He said to her with cunning: “I have entered the house of security!”
“Did you not fear Allah as to (the murder of) Hijr and his companions?”
asked A’isha.[^1]

She always talked about the murder of Hijr. She narrated what she had
heard from Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
regarding Hijr’s excellence, saying: “I heard Allah’s Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family, say: ‘Some people will be killed in (Marj)
‘Adhra’. Allah and the inhabitants of the heaven will be angry for
them.’”[^2] She condemned the people of Kufa, saying: “By Allah, if
Mu’awiya had come to know that the people had strength, he would not
have dared to take Hijr and his companions from among them to kill them
in Sham. However, Mu’awiya son of the woman who ate Hamza’s liver, came
to know that the people passed away. By Allah, they (Hijr and his
companions) were glory, power, and jurisprudence for the Arabs. How good
Labeed was when he said:

‘Those under whose wings I lived passed away. I have remained among the
successors who are like the skin of the mangy. They do not benefit (me)
nor do I hope for their good. Their sayer is blamed even if he makes no
trouble.’[^3]

**Al-Rabee‘ Bin Ziyad**

Among those who condemned Mu’awiya was al-Rabee‘ bin Ziyad al-Basri[^4]
, his governor over Khurasan. When he heard of the painful news, he lost
his mind. He deeply sighed and said with sadness: “The Arabs are still
killed unjustly after him (after the murder of Hijr). If they had
revolted when he was killed, none of them would have been killed
unjustly. They kept silent, so they became abased.”

[^1] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 6, p. 156.
[^2] Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 8, p. 55. Al-Isaba, vol. 1, p. 314.
[^3] l-Isti‘ab, vol. 1, p. 357.

[^4] Al-Rabee‘ bin Ziyad bin Anas al-Harithi, al-Basri was Mo’awiya’s
governor over Khurasan. His scribe was al-Hasan al-Basri. He (al-Rabee‘)
narrated (traditions) on the authority of Ubay bin Ka‘ab and on the
authority of a group (of traditionists). Some people narrated
(traditions) on his authority. Al-Rabee‘ died in the year 51 A. H. This
has been mentioned in (the book) Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 3, p. 43. In
(the book) al-Isaba, it has been mentioned: “Al-Rabee‘ came to ‘Umar and
said to him: ‘O Commander of the faithful, by Allah, you appointed over
this community nothing except an affliction with which it has been
afflicted. If a ewe got lost on the bank of the Euphrates, you would be
questioned about it on the Day of the Resurrection.’ So ‘Umar wept when
he heard this speech from him.”


