Chapter Iii : Cleverness and Genius
===================================

Without doubt, righteous education plays an important role in forming
the child and in developing his or her mental faculties. Likewise, the
parents’ conduct has a great effect on developing their children’s
cleverness and general behavior. All these vital elements were available
to al-Hasan (a.s) during his childhood. The Prophet (a.s) took great
care of educating his grandson and gave him his noble qualities. Imam
Ali, the Commander of the faithful (a.s) supplied him with his wise
maxims and ideals. Fatima, the principal of all women, planted in her
son virtue and perfection. Accordingly, al-Hasan’s childhood was high
and a model of human perfection, a title of highness and education, a
symbol of cleverness and genius.

Some psychologists believe that the child greatly imitates others in
habits, mental and moral qualities, the general attitude he or she takes
toward others, the general viewpoint through which he or she ponders on
life or work. Sometimes imitation is conscious and deliberate; however,
in most cases, it is unconscious. So when the child imitates educated
people, he or she will follow their ethics and sentiments. In the first
place this effect is an imitation, but it quickly becomes a habit; the
habit is a second nature. The imitation is one of the two ways through
which individual qualities are acquired and the personal manners are
formed.[^1]

According to this viewpoint, Imam al-Hasan (a.s) was the first person
in his mental and moral qualities, for he grew up in the House of the
Revelation and was brought up in the School of the monotheism. Moreover,
he saw his grandfather, who was the most perfect person in the world,
always build an edifice for justice, virtue, and perfection. He
encompassed people with his noble moral traits, gathered them around the
word of Oneness (of Allah). That impressed al-Hasan, the Prophet’s
grandson, and he followed the deeds of his grandfather in advising and
guiding the people. During their childhood, al-Hasan and al-Husayn (a.s)
passed by an old man. The old man could not perform the ritual ablution
well. So their high soul and their kindness did not let them leave the
old man ignorant of performing the ritual ablution well. They made an
informal dispute and they said to each other: “You do not perform the
ritual ablution well!” Then they calmly turned to the old man and
appointed him as an arbitrator between them. They said to him: “O
Sheikh

[^1] Mandir, Psychology in Life.

(i.e., an old man), each of us will perform the ritual ablution before
you, and you decide which of the two ablutions is better.” They
performed the ablution before him, and he carefully considered it.
Accordingly, the old man paid attention to his mistake without any
disdain, and then he said to them: “My masters, you both perform the
ritual ablution well. However, I am an ignorant old man. I do not
perform the ablution well. I have learned it from you and repented at
your hands!”[^1]

This deed clearly shows us that the Prophet (a.s) guided the people
through sound ways and noble moral traits. This way impressed al-Hasan
(a.s) during his childhood, to the extent that it became among his
qualities and natures.

Some psychologists believe that individual manner is inherited, that it
has an important effect on forming man’s ethics, and that it is not less
in importance than imitation. Heksil says: “All effects and qualities of
the organic being belong to heredity or to environment. Hereditary
formation determines the bounds of that which is possible. And the
environment decides that this possibility will be achieved. Therefore,
the hereditary formation is mere the ability to react with any
environment through a special way.”

Jinjiz has confirmed this theory, saying: “Everyone has hidden
hereditary forces, but the appearance of each of them depends on the
circumstances surrounding these forces during their growth.”

The rule of heredity decides that Imam al-Hasan (a.s) was on top of
those who got this phenomenon. He inherited the spiritual forces and the
great, reformative wealth of his grandfather (a.s). Besides, the
righteous environment his family and the good, righteous Muslims created
had an influence on him.

Due to his heredity, Imam al-Hasan (a.s) got cleverness and high
reflection that none had got. The narrators have reported traditions on
his early genius, saying: “Al-Hasan memorized all things he read. He
attended the meetings of his grandfather (a.s) and memorized the
Revelation. Then he went to his mother and told her about it. She told
Imam Ali (a.s) and he admired that and asked her:

“From where have you brought this (revelation)?”
“From your son, al-Hasan!’”

Imam Ali (a.s) hid himself in a corner of the house, that he might
listen to his son. As usual al-Hasan came and told his mother about the
verses of the
[^1] Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 10, p. 89.

revelation he had memorized. He was unable to speak, so his mother
asked him: “O my little son, why are you unable to speak?” “Mother, do
not be astonished at what has befallen me,” replied al-Hasan, “for the
Most High (Allah) looks after me.”[^1] This attitude is a proof of
al-Hasan’s great cleverness through which he saw the distant and unknown
things.

**His Memorizing of Traditions**

Though al-Hasan (a.s) was four years old, he memorized many traditions
he heard from his grandfather (a.s). We will mention some traditions he
narrated from his grandfather:

1. He (a.s) has said: “Allah’s Apostle (a.s) taught me some words to
say during the (prayer of al-Witr): ‘O Allah, guide me through him whom
You guided! Make me well through him You made well! Look after me
through him after whom You looked! Bless that which You have given to
me! Protect me from the evil of that which You have decreed! You decree,
and none decrees against You. (The one) whom You support is not abased,
Blessed and Most High You are, O Lord!”[^2]

2.Umar bin Ma’mun narrated, saying: “I have heard al-Hasan, son of Ali
(a.s) say: ‘Whoever offers the morning prayer and sits in his place of
praying until the sun rises shall have a veil from the Fire.” Or he
said: “A curtain from the Fire.”[^3]

3. A companion of his asked him: “What do you remember of Allah’s
Apostle (a.s)?” He (a.s) replied: “I took one of the dates given as
alms. I put it into my mouth. He (the Prophet) took it out (of my
mouth). So I asked him: ‘What is the matter with this date?’ ‘It is not
lawful for us, Muhammad’s family, to take something given as alms.”[^4]

4. He (a.s) was asked about what he heard from Allah’s Apostle (a.s)
and he replied: “I heard him saying to some man: “Leave that which fills
you with doubt for that which does not fill you with doubt. That is
because evil is

[^1] Ibn Shahrashub, al-Manaqib, vol. 2, p. 148. Bihar al-Anwar, vol.
10, p. 93.
[^2] Al-Turmidhi, Saheeh, vol. 1, p. 93. Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarikh, vol. 1, p.
20. Al-Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 3, p. 172.
[^3] Usd al-Ghaba, vol. 2, p. 11.
[^4] Ibid. It is forbidden for Aal al-Bayt to take the obligatory alms
such as Zakat and Zakat al-Fitra, and not the permissible alms.

suspicion, and good is tranquility.”[^1]

5. He (a.s) related to his companions about the ethics and behavior of
his grandfather, the Prophet (a.s). He said to them: “When someone asked
Allah’s Apostle (a.s) to grant his need, he responded to him with
nothing except through granting it or through some soft words.”

6. He (a.s) has said: “I heard Allah’s Apostle (a.s) saying, “Call out
the master of the Arabs (Imam Ali).” So A’isha asked him: “Are you not
the master of the Arabs?” “I am the master of Adam’s children,” he
replied, “and Ali is the master of the Arabs.” Imam Ali was summoned.
When he was before him, he sent for the Ansar. When they stood before
him, he said to them: “O people of Ansar, shall I show you a thing, if
you keep to it, you will never go astray?” “Yes, O Allah’s Apostle
(a.s)” they replied. So he said: “This is Ali; therefore, love him for
the sake of the love for me, and honor him for the sake of honoring me.
It is Gabriel that has told me from Allah, the great and Almighty, about
what I told you.”[^2]

[^1] Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 20. In his book al-Musnad, vol. 1,
p. 200, Ahmed has mentioned: “He (al-Hasan), peace be on him, said: ‘I
heard Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) say: ‘Leave that which fills you with doubt
for that which does not fill you with doubt. That is because
truthfulness is tranquility; and lying is suspicion.’”

[^2] Sheikh Muhammed Habeebullah al-Shanqeeti, Hayat Ali Bin Abi Talib,
p. 83. In his book al-Tasawuf al-Islami, vol. 1, p. 274, Dr. Zaki
Mubarak has explained the criticisms for the faith of the Sufis in the
master of the prophets, Muhammed (a.s.). He has said: “It is an act of
good to say that the Sufis, in respect of this excess, have depended on
the tradition: ‘I am the master of the prophets.’ The scholars have
doubted the tradition. In his book entitled Kashf al-Khafa’ wa
al-Iltibas ‘amma ishtehra mina al-Ahadith ‘alaa Alsunat al-Naas,
al-‘Ajjluni has mentioned that al-Hasan bin Ali narrated on the
authority of the Prophet (a.s.) who said:

‘Call out the master of the Arabs.’ He meant Ali. So Aa’isha asked him:
‘Are you not the master of the Arabs.’ And he replied: ‘I am the master
of Adam’s children, and Ali is the master of the Arabs.’ Then
al-‘Ajjluni has related to us that al-Dhahabi inclines to say that this
tradition is fabricated.’” I (the author) say that what Dr. Zaki Mubarak
has stated in respect of the faith of the Sufis does not manifest itself
clearly. I (the author) will explain the statement as follows: “The
Sufis are distinguished from the rest of the Islamic sects by their
cleaving to two sides.

The first side is that there is a primary specification, which is the
junction of the specifications; and which is called the first reason and
the first issued, according to the terms of the ancient philosophers. In
respect of that they have depended on the philosophical proofs of which
are is that nothing issues from the One except the one. The second side
is that they have applied the first reason and the first issued on the
Ahmedi, sacred reality. Through this application they have turned away
from the philosophers. Their proofs of that are some traditions such as
I am the master of people. Were it not for me, the worlds were not
created. I am a prophet; and Adam is between the water and the clay.
There are other traditions indicating their purpose in the manner of a
rational proof. The Sufis were Sufis due to their cleaving to the first
viewpoint in which the The jurists and the traditionists have narrated
many traditions al-Hasan (a.s) heard from Allah’s Apostle (a.s) in
respect of the precepts of the Islamic law. All these traditions are
proofs of al-Hasan’s cleverness, genius, and knowledge. If someone
carefully considers al-Hasan’s childhood, he will admire and sanctify
it. That is because it was full of the signs of perfection, virtue,
cleverness, and high education that none had, as we think.

philosophers believed. So Dr. Zaki Mubarak had not to say that the
Sufis had taken their faith from the traditions. It was incumbent on him
to explain that they had depended on the traditions to apply the first
reason and the first issued to the Ahmedi reality. It was appropriate
for him to deal with the Sufis in respect of the first side and to
explain why the (religious) scholars doubted the tradition (I am the
master of people). He had to say that the tradition was weak due to the
weakness of the narrator or due to the fact that the Sufis depended on
it.


