Al-mughira’s Summons
====================

Al-Mughira bin Shu‘ba, the sinful hypocrite, the one-eyed of Thaqif,
the leader of the events and owner of the atrocities in Islam, was the
first to undertake the unlucky summons to the pledge of allegiance to
Yazid.[^1] The reason for that, as historians have narrated, is that
Mu’awiya wanted to remove him from the authority over Kufa. When
al-Mughira heard of that, he thought that he had to travel to Damascus
to be the first person to resign from his office, that Mu’awiya would
not harbor malice against him, and that the people might come to know
that he hated the authority. When he arrived in Damascus, he thought
that he had to meet with Yazid before he meet with Mu’awiya to make him
think favorably of the caliphate, that he might use seducing him as
means to remain in the office, just as he told his companions about
that. When he met with Yazid, he said to him: “The prominent companions
of Muhammad (a.s) and the leaders of Quraysh died. Their children have
remained. You are the most meritorious of them, the best of them in
opinion, and the most knowledgeable of them in the Sunna and policy. I
do not know why the Commander of the faithful (Mu’awiya) does not take
the pledge of allegiance to you.”

When Yazid, the reckless, vainglorious one, heard of that, he lost his
mind out of happiness and delight. So he asked him: “Do you think that
that will be accomplished?”

“Yes,” replied al-Mughira.

Yazid quickly went to his father and told him about al-Mughira’s
statement. As for Mu’awiya, he became happy at that and immediately sent
for al-Mughira. He told him about his statement to Yazid, and he
confirmed that. Then al-Mughira urged Mu’awiya to achieve this idea. He
said to him with the statement of someone hypocrite who does not know
good and does not think of it: “O Commander of the faithful, you have
come to know about the bloodshed and the differences after ‘Uthman.
Yazid is your successor. Then appoint him as a successor after you. If
something happened to you, he would be a cave for the people and your
successor. Blood will not be shed nor will there be a discord.” [^1]
Among the offences of al-Mughira is that he was the first to be bribed
in Islam, as al-Bayqahi and the like have narrated. Among his crimes is
that he was the mediator in adding Ziyad to Mo’awiya. He was the owner
of the summons to the pledge of allegiance to Yazid.

Mu’awiya approved al-Mughira’s opinion, rewarded him for that, and
installed him in his office. Then he commanded him to go to Kufa to
achieve that. When al-Mughira went away from Mu’awiya, he met with his
people. They questioned him about his fate. He answered them about what
he had brought from among the tribulation and the discords to the
Muslims in general for his purpose. He said to them: “I have put
Mu’awiya’s leg into a leather stirrup which is far from the community of
Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his family, in objective. I have
ripped for them a rip which can never be mended.” Then he quoted as an
example: “Through the like of me, the enemies and the angry opponents
have witness the secret conversation and exaggerated.”

Al-Mughira went to Kufa. He negotiated with those who were famous for
allegiance and loyalty about his task. He bribed each one of them with
thirty thousand dirhams. So they responded to what he wanted. He
appointed his son Musa as a head over ten persons and sent them to
Mu’awiya. When they reached him, they made him think favorably of the
affair and asked him to carry it out. So Mu’awiya thanked them for that
and asked them to keep the affair secret. Then he turned to al-Mughira’s
son and asked him secretly:

-How much did your father pay to buy their religion? -Thirty thousand
dirhams.

Mu’awiya laughed and said: “Certainly their religion has become easy to
them!”[^1] Mu’awiya achieved that through buying religions and
consciences, and through the means with which the Muslims were
unfamiliar and which the religion did not confirm.

**Delegations of the Countries**

Mu’awiya officially summoned all the remarkable personalities in the
Islamic world. He invited them to come to Damascus that he might
negotiate with them about the affair of the pledge of allegiance to
Yazid. When they stood before him, he secretly summoned al-Dhahhak bin
Qays al-Fihri and said to him: “When I sit down on the pulpit and finish
some of my sermon and speech, ask me to permit you to stand up. When I
permit you, you praise Allah, the Most High, mention Yazid and say about
him that which is his right against you from among the good laudation
toward him. Then ask me to [^1] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 6, p. 169. Ibn
al-Athir, al-Kamil, vol. 3, p. 214. Al-Mughira came to Mo’awiya in the
year 45 A. H. In this year Mo’awiya made the premises of the pledge of
allegiance to his son.

appoint him as a successor after me. For I have thought and decided to
appoint him as a successor. Then ask Allah to decree well that and other
than it.”

Then Mu’awiya summoned another group of the hirelings to whom their
religion was easy, and they pledged allegiance to Yazid at low prices.
He commanded them to confirm al-Dahhak’s statement and idea. They were
Abdurrahman bin ‘Uthman al-Thaqafi, Abdullah bin Mus‘ida al-Fazari,
Thawr bin Ma‘an al-Salmi, and Abdullah bin ‘Usam al-Ash‘ari.

They responded to his summons. Then Mu’awiya ascended the pulpit. He
spoke to the people about what he wanted to speak. After he had finished
his speech, al-Dahhak arose and asked him to permit him to speak, and he
permitted him. Al-Dahhak praised and glorified Allah. Then he said: “May
Allah set right the Commander of the faithful and make us enjoy him.
Surely we have tested unity, friendliness, difference, and discord. We
have found that it (the caliphate) is greater in uniting us, in security
for our ways, and that it spares our blood, brings about to us the
urgent and the delayed for which we hope, along with the unity for which
the community hopes. It is not good for us that we are left in vain. The
days return in a crookedly manner. Allah says:

‘every moment He is in a state (of glory).’ We do not know that on
which night and day we disagree. You, O Commander of the faithful, will
die as those who had died before you from among the prophets and
vicegerents of Allah. We ask Allah to enjoy us with you. We have seen
the meekness of Yazid, the son of the Commander of the faithful. We have
seen his good faith, moderate conduct, and blessed nature, along with
what Allah has distributed for him love among the Muslims and similarity
to the Commander of the faithful in his reason, policy, and satisfactory
qualities. These things have urged us to be satisfied with him (Yazid)
as to our affairs and to be content with him as to the rule over us.
Therefore, let the Commander of the faithful, may Allah honor him,
appoint him as ruler and make him for us a refuge and resort after him,
that we may resort to him if something happens. That is because none is
worthier of it (the caliphate) than he is. So decide that! May Allah
decide to guide you and to grant you success as to our affairs.”

This speech indicates that its owner was a man of evil and hypocrisy.
That is because he intended to destroy all human values for his
ambitions and interests.

After al-Dahhak had finished speaking, his friends confirmed his
speech. They ascribed to Yazid the virtues of the good, the talents of
the genius, huge attributes, and noble qualities, while he was
distinguished by qualities contrary to that. They told the people that
they had talked for their interests and their happiness, while they,
Allah knows, had come to know that they intended to perish and destroy
them and to put an end to their laws and their sacred beliefs. When
these people had finished their speech, Mu’awiya turned to the Iraqi
delegation, that he might hear its viewpoint. The personality of the
delegation was al-Ahnaf bin Qays, the clement one of the Arabs and the
master of (the tribe of) Tamim. Mu’awiya asked him to express his
viewpoint about the affair. So al-Ahnaf arose and made a speech. He
praised and glorified Allah. Then he turned to Mu’awiya and said: “May
Allah set right the Commander of the faithful! Surely the people have
witnessed the evil of the past time and have witnessed the good of the
present. Yazid is the son of the Commander of the faithful. What an
excellent successor he is! O Commander of the faithful, you are
experienced. Therefore, show one to whom you want to entrust the rule
after you. Then disobey the command of one who commands you. He who
advises you and does not think of you should not deceive you. You are
the greatest in thinking of the community and most knowledgeable in the
straight obedience. Besides, the people of Iraq and those of al-Hijaz
are not satisfied with this (affair) nor will they pledge allegiance to
Yazid as long as al-Hasan is alive.”

Al-Ahnaf gave Mu’awiya a piece of advice and guided him to the truth.
He advised him not to listen to the statements of the mercenaries who
thought of their interests more than they thought of his interest. He
explained to him that the people of Iraq and those of al-Hijaz were not
satisfied at that pledge of allegiance (to Yazid) as long as al-Hasan,
the first grandson of the Apostle, was alive. These words moved the
anger of those opportunists and bribed whom Mu’awiya had used as means
to achieve his objectives. Accordingly, al-Dahhak bin Qays arose, abused
the Iraqis, and condemned their speech.

This is the text of his speech: “May Allah set right the Commander of
the faithful! Surely the men of hypocrisy are from the people of Iraq;
their manhood in their souls is dissension and their unity in their
religion is discord. They see the truth according to their inclinations
as if they look through their backs. They have strutted out of ignorance
and ingratitude. They do not expect from Allah any expectation nor do
they fear an evil result. They have taken Iblis as a lord for them, and
Iblis has taken them as a party.

So whomever they approach they do not delight, and whomever they leave,
they do not harm. Therefore, O Commander of the faithful, refuse their
viewpoint and their speech. There is no relationship between al-Hasan
and his relatives and the supreme authority of Allah over which He has
appointed Mu’awiya as a vicegerent in His earth. How far! The caliphate
is not inherited (except) out of fatigue nor does anything veil the
reputation except the community. Therefore, habituate yourselves, O
people of Iraq, to sincerity to your Imam, the scribe of your Prophet,
and his brother-in-law, that the urgent may be safe for you, and you
take advantage of the delayed.”

I (the author) think that Iraq has not been dispraised with such a
horrible dispraise or branded with such affairs. But it was the Iraqis
who brought about to themselves this tribulation and let this rogue and
the like of him degrade their dignity and have the audacity to them.

Anyway al-Ahnaf did not yield to Mu’awiya nor did he pay attention to
al-Dahhak’s statement. He had threatened Mu’awiya with declaring war if
he had insisted on carrying out his idea, saying: “O Commander of the
faithful, we have carefully considered (the qualities of) Quraysh. So we
have found that you are the most generous of them in giving, the
strongest of them in contract, and the greatest of them in fulfilling
covenant. You have come to know that you did not conquer Iraq by force
nor did you show sudden death against it. But you had given al-Hasan bin
Ali some of Allah’s covenants you have known, that he might undertake
the rule after you. So if you fulfilled (that), then you were worthy of
fulfillment. If you betrayed, you would come to know that, by Allah,
there are behind al-Hasan good horses (horsemen), strong arms, and sharp
swords. If you approached him through a span of the hand of treachery,
you would find behind him a span of the outstretched arms of victory.
You know that the people of Iraq have not loved you since they hated
you, nor have they detested Ali and al-Hasan since they loved them, nor
have come down to them changes from the heaven as to that, that the
swords they drew with Ali against you are still on their shoulders, the
hearts through which they detested you are still among their ribs. By
Allah, al-Hasan is more lovable to the Iraqis than Ali.”

Al-Ahnaf went too far in advising Mu’awiya. He reminded him of that the
Iraqis were the followers of the Prophet’s household, peace be on them,
that they were more loyal to Imam al-Hasan than his father, and that
they had been ready to fight against Mu’awiya if he had carried out the
pledge of allegiance to Yazid. However, Abdurrahman bin ‘Uthman
condemned al-Ahnaf for his statement and urged Mu’awiya to carry out his
task, saying: “May Allah set right the Commander of the faithful! Surely
the people’s opinions are different. Many of the people are devious.
They do not summon anyone to right guidance nor do they respond to the
one who summons them to rightness. They turn away from the opinions of
the caliphs and oppose the caliphs as to the Sunna and decision. You
have entrusted Yazid with the best of affairs and the most satisfactory
of them in leading the subjects. If Allah has chosen the best for you,
then decide and put an end to those who speak (against the pledge of
allegiance to Yazid). That is because Yazid is the greatest of us in
clemency and knowledge, the widest of us in protection, and the best of
us in ancestors. The experiences have made him firm, and the ways of the
doctrines have straightened him out. Therefore, let no one turn you away
from pledging allegiance to him, nor let any one stand in your way as to
it, from among those who are far, disobedient, who prepare all means for
discord, whose tongues are crooked, and in whose hearts there is a
dangerous disease. If they say, they say evil. If they keep silent, then
they are the people of defects. You have come to know who they are. They
want to turn you away from the success and to divide the community. So
remove the grief from us through paying homage to him and unite the
community through him. Do not deviate from him when you are guided to
him. Do not turn away from him if you have supported him. This opinion
belongs to you and us. The right is against you and us. I ask Allah for
help and a good end for you and us.”

These words show us that Abdurrahman bin ‘Uthman had a restless
conscience and a wicked soul. He followed evil and went far from good.
Then Mu’awiya threatened those who did not agree with him on his wish,
that he might force the community to yield to his idea and to be content
with the pledge of allegiance to Yazid. He said: “O people, Iblis has
brothers and companions. Through them he gets ready, from them he gets
help, and through their tongues he utters. If they hope for greediness,
he agitates them. If he is in no need of them, they spread lies. Then
they add discords to licentiousness and split for them the wood of
hypocrisy. They are censurers and doubters. If they undertake the handle
of an affair, they become angry. If they are summoned to an error, they
go too far. They do not desist nor do they refrain nor do they take a
lesson until the bolts of evil disgrace befall them and the calamities
of a great affair descend upon them and uproot them as truffles are
uprooted. Therefore, it is more appropriate for them (to pledge
allegiance to Yazid). That is because we have presented (our idea) and
warned you if the presentation suffices you anything or if the warning
benefits you.”

Mu’awiya used such a kind of horrible matchless terrorism as a means to
achieve his idea. Then he summoned al-Dahhak bin Qays and appointed him
as governor over Kufa as a reward for his speech. That was after the
death of al-Mughira bin Shu‘ba. He also summoned Abdurrahman bin ‘Uthman
and appointed him as governor over al-Jazira. Then Yazid bin al-Muqaffa‘
arose and raised his voice, saying:

“This is the Commander of the faithful!” He pointed with his hand to
Mu’awiya.
Then he said: “If he dies, then this!” He indicated with his hand to
Yazid.

Then he said: “Whoever refuses, then this!) He pointed with his hand to
the sword. So Mu’awiya approved his speech and said to him: “Sit down!
You are the master of the orators and the noblest of them!” With such a
kind of terrorism Mu’awiya imposed his dissolute, sinful son as a caliph
over the Muslims. Had it not for the sword, he would not have found a
way for that. When al-Ahnaf bin Qays came to know that Mu’awiya insisted
on his idea and was not ready to give it up, he said to him: “O
Commander of the faithful, you are the most knowledgeable of us in his
night and day, his secret and openness. If you came to know that he was
good for you, then appoint him as ruler and caliph. If you came to know
that he was evil for you, then do not supply him with the world while
you are going to join the hereafter. That is because you shall have
nothing of the hereafter except the good. Know that you shall have no
proof with Allah if you prefer Yazid to al-Hasan and al-Husayn, while
you know who they are and to whom they belong. We only must say: We hear
and obey, our Lord! Your forgiveness (do we crave), and to You is the
eventual course!”[^1]

Mu’awiya paid no attention to al-Ahnaf’s statement nor did he think of
the Muslims’ fate. He appointed as caliph over them his son (Yazid), who
played with the leopards and was addicted to wine. Then Mu’awiya took
his son and seated him in a red dome and commanded the people to pledge
allegiance to him. A hireling came and greeted them. Then the hireling
turned to Mu’awiya and said to him: “O Commander of the faithful, know
that if you do not entrust this (he indicated with his hand to Yazid)
with the affairs of the Muslims, you will lose them.”

Then Mu’awiya turned to al-Ahnaf and asked him:

-Why do you not speak, O Abu Bahr? -I fear Allah when I tell a lie and
fear you when I say the truth! -May Allah reward you with good for
obedience!

Al-Ahnaf went out. Abdurrahman bin ‘Uthman met him after Mu’awiya had
generously given (money) to him. He apologized to al-Ahnaf for his
statement, saying: “O Abu Bahr, surely I know that the wickedest of
those Allah created is this (Mu’awiya) and his son (Yazid). But they
have made sure of these properties with the doors and the locks. So none
craves after taking them out except through what you have heard.”[^2]
[^1] Al-Imama wa al-Siyasa, vol. 1, pp. 174-180.
[^2] Ibn Khullikan, Tarikh, vol. 1, p. 230. Al-Tamadun al-Islami, vol.
4, pp. 76-77.

Through this ill-omened pledge of allegiance (to Yazid), Mu’awiya
created a crack in Islam. In his wonderful poem, Abdullah bin Hisham
al-Saluli has shown his impatience and that of the good Muslims toward
the caliphate of Yazid, saying:

If you brought Ramla or Hind, we would pledge allegiance to her as a
(female) commander of the faithful. When Khousrow died, another Khousrow
came. We number them as three harmonious (kings) Alas! If we had
thousands (of fighters), but we will not become as we were concerned,
then you will strike until you return to Mecca where you lick the warm
(food). We have feared the rage. We will not quench our thirst even if
we drink the blood of the Banu Umayya.
Your subjects have got lost while you are hunting hares with
inattentiveness.[^1]
Certainly the Muslims throughout the countries were terrorized by this
dangerous event. That is because the caliphate in their viewpoint was
neither caesarian nor Khousrowian, that it might be inherited. Rather
the affair of the caliphate was consultation among the Muslims, who
chose whom they loved to be a caliph over them. That is according to the
viewpoint of the Sunnis. As for the Shia, they maintain that the
caliphate is the lawful right of Imam Ali (a.s), and his good sons, just
as the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, had stated.

Anyway, After Mu’awiya had taken the pledge of allegiance to Yazid from
the people of Damascus, he wrote letters to all his governors and
commanded them to take the pledge of allegiance to Yazid from all the
people. All his governors responded to that except Marwan bin al-Hakam,
who became angry because the rule had been turned away from him while he
was the leader of the Umayyads after Mu’awiya. Immediately he and his
retinue headed for Damascus. When he stood before Mu’awiya, he angrily
said to him: “Set right the affairs, O son of Abi Sufyan, and refrain
from your appointing the boys as commanders. Know that you have equals
from among your people, and that you have helpers who are hostile to
them.”

Mu’awiya hurried to deceive him with soft words, saying: “You are the
equal of the Commander of the faithful, his equipment in his hardship,
his upper arm, and the second after his heir apparent.”
[^1] Al-Mas‘udi, Murujj al-Dhahab, vol. 2, p. 339.

He gave him regency with trick and cunning. He honorably took him out
of his capital. However he removed him from his office when he had
arrived in Yathrib and replaced him by Sa‘eed bin al-‘Aas or al-Waleed
bin ‘Aqaba. Then he wrote to him (the new governor) to take the pledge
of allegiance to his son Yazid from the people of Medina. But he finally
failed in carrying out his task. The people there insisted on refusing
Mu’awiya’s summons and did not obey him as to his new caliph, especially
the remarkable personalities from among the Muhajireen and the Ansar,
for they condemned that and announced their displeasure with Mu’awiya,
because they disrespected Yazid and disdained him, apart from that he
would be a caliph over them.

**Mu’awiya’s first Journey to Yathrib**

The people of Medina refused to pledge allegiance to Yazid and
unanimously agreed on refusing it. So Mu’awiya thought that he himself
had to go to Medina to negotiate with the influential people, to buy the
covenants and consciences for money, and to threaten and terrorize those
who did not yield to money, that his son might win the caliphate. For
this purpose he traveled to Medina in the year 50 A. H. When he arrived
in it, he immediately sent for Abdullah bin Abbas, Abdullah bin Ja‘far,
Abdullah bin ‘Umar, and Abdullah bin al-Zubayr. When they stood before
him, he commanded his chamberlain not to let anyone to come in to him
until these people would leave. Then he turned to them and said: “Praise
belongs to Allah, Who has commanded us to praise Him and promised us His
reward. We praise Him much as He has bestowed much upon us. I bear
witness that there is no god apart from Allah, Who is unique and without
partners. I also bear witness that Muhammad is His servant and His
Prophet.

“I have grown old, my bones have become weak, my appointed time is
close at hand, and I have been summoned and it is nearly the moment for
me to answer. So I have seen that I have to appoint Yazid as successor
after me. I know that he will please you. You are people from Quraysh
with the name of Abdullah, the best of them, and the children of the
best of them. Nothing has prevented me from summoning al-Hasan and
al-Husayn except that they are the sons of their father Ali in spite of
my good opinion as to them and my strong love for them. Therefore,
answer the Commander of the faithful with good, may Allah have mercy on
you!”

His speech contained leniency, praise, and laudation. However these
heroes, who were the best of the Arabs in opinion and precedence in
Islam, did not yield to Mu’awiya, refuted his statement, and made him
know the person who was worthy of the caliphate. Abdullah bin Abbas, the
religious scholar of the community, was the first to speak: “Praise
belongs to Allah, Who has inspired us with praising Him and made it
incumbent on us to thank Him for His trial and boons. I bear witness
that there is no god but Allah, Who is unique and without partners. I
also bear witness that Muhammad is His servant and His Prophet, may
Allah bless Muhammad and his household.

“You talked, and we listened. You said, and we heard. Allah, Majestic
is His eulogy and Holy are His names, chose Muhammad, may Allah bless
him and his family, for His message and His revelation and honored him
over His creatures. Therefore the most honorable of the people is he who
has the honor to him; the most appropriate of them for the rule are the
nearest of them to him. The people should only submit to their Prophet
as long as Allah had chosen him for them. He (Allah) chose Muhammad, may
Allah bless him and his family, according to His knowledge; and He is
Knowledgeable, Aware. I ask Allah’s forgiveness for you and me.”

After him Abdullah bin Ja‘far said: “Praise belongs to Allah, Who is
worthy of praise and the utmost of praise. We praise Him for His
inspiring us with praising Him. We ask Him to help us perform His right
on us. I bear witness that there is no god but Allah, Who is unique, on
Whom all depend, Who has not taken a consort nor a son. I also bear
witness that Muhammad is His servant and His Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family.

“If the Qur’an is taken into consideration as to the caliphate, then
the possessors of relationship have the better claim in the ordinance of
Allah to inheritance, one with respect to another. If the Sunna of
Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, is taken into
consideration as to it, then the kinship of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family, (is more appropriate for it).

If the Sunna of the two Sheikhs, Abu Bakr and Umar, (is taken into
consideration), then which of the people is better, more perfect, and
worthier of the rule than the Apostle’s household? By Allah, if they had
appointed him (Imam Ali) as ruler after their Prophet, they would have
placed the rule in its place due to his right and truthfulness. The Most
Merciful (Allah) would have been obeyed, Satan would have been
disobeyed, and no two swords of the community would have differed.
Therefore, fear Allah, O Mu’awiya, for you have become a guardian, and
we have become subjects. Take care of your subjects, for you will be
asked about them tomorrow. As for that you have mentioned as to my
cousins and that you have left summoning them, by Allah you have not hit
the truth. That is not permissible for you except through them, and that
you have come to know that they are the essence of knowledge and
nobility. Therefore, say or leave! And I ask Allah’s forgiveness for you
and me!”

Abdullah bin Ja‘far has shown that the Prophet’s household, peace be on
them, were the worthiest of people in the caliphate according to all the
sources. If the source to deserve it is the Qur’an, then the possessors
of relationship have the better claim in the ordinance of Allah to
inheritance, one with respect to another. If it is the Sacred Sunna,
then the Household of the Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
are more appropriate for the rule than other than them. If it is the
Sunna of the two Sheikhs (Abu Bakr and ‘Umar), then the Household of the
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, are more appropriate for
the rule, for they have talents and perfect qualities, and that they are
the best of the people in knowledge and excellence. Then he has shown
the damages that resulted from that the community had left and not
followed them.

After him Abdullah bin al-Zubayr said: “Praise belongs to Allah, Who
has made us know His religion and honored us through His Apostle. I
praise Him for His trial and His boons. I bear witness that there is no
god but Allah. I also bear witness that Muhammad is His servant and His
Prophet.

“Surely the caliphate belongs to Quraysh in particular. They take it
according to their sublime achievements and their satisfactory actions,
along with the honor of the fathers and the nobility of the children.
Therefore, fear Allah, O Mu’awiya, and be just to yourself. This is
Abdullah bin Abbas, who is the cousin of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family. This is Abdullah bin Ja‘far, who is adorned
with two wings, and who is the cousin of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family. I am Abdullah bin al-Zubayr, the cousin of
Allah’s Apostle. As for Ali, he appointed al-Hasan and al-Husayn as
successors (after him). You know who they are and what they are.
Therefore, fear Allah, O Mu’awiya! And you are the judge between us and
yourself.”

Abdullah bin al-Zubayr nominated these people for the caliphate and
urged them to oppose Mu’awiya and to spoil his task. After him Abdullah
bin ‘Umar said: “Praise belongs to Allah, Who has honored us through His
religion and ennobled us through His Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family.

“Surely the caliphate is neither Herculean nor caesarian nor
Khousrowian (hereditary). Had it been so, I would have undertaken it
after my father. By Allah, he (my father) did not add me to the six
members of the consultative committee except for that the caliphate is
not a stipulated condition. Rather it belongs to Quraysh in particular.
It belongs to one who is entitled to it, with whom the Muslims are
satisfied, who fears Allah and pleases the people. If you want to
entrust the caliphate to the boys from Quraysh, then, by my life, Yazid
is from their boys. Know that he shall never avail you in the least
against Allah.”

Abdullah bin ‘Umar condemned the pledge of allegiance to Yazid.
However, shortly after that, he listened, obeyed, and pledged allegiance
to Yazid, for Mu’awiya bribed him with a hundred thousand dinars.[^1] For
that he sold him his conscience and religion. Anyway the speech of these
people was difficult to Mu’awiya, for they told him that his son was not
appropriate for the caliphate and that they were more appropriate for it
than him. So Mu’awiya answered them, saying: “Certainly, I have said and
you said. The fathers have died, and the children have remained. My son
is the most lovable to me of their children. If you debated with my son,
he would find a statement. This rule belongs to the Banu ‘Abd Manaf, for
they are the household of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family. When Allah’s Apostle passed away, Abu Bakr and ‘Umar became
caliphs over the people while they did not belong to the rule and the
caliphate. But they followed a good way. Then the rule returned to the
Banu ‘Abd Manaf and they shall have it till the Day of Resurrection. As
for you, O Abdullah bin al-Zubayr and (Abdullah) bin ‘Umar, Allah has
taken you out of it (the rule). As for these two cousins of mine, they
are not outside the opinion, Allah willing.”

Anyhow, Mu’awiya failed in carrying out his task and left Yathrib for
his capital Damascus. He turned away from the pledge of allegiance to
Yazid.[^2] He came to know that Yazid would not be a caliph as long as
Imam al-Hasan was alive. He thought for a long time about how he would
assassinate him, that the affairs might go well with him. At last he
achieved what he had wanted. He assassinated him with poison. We will
explain that in the conclusion of this book.

Having assassinated Imam al-Hasan, Mu’awiya took all the procedures and
depended on all the means to force the Muslims to pledge allegiance to
Yazid and to impose him as a ruler over them. He corresponded with the
great figures from among the children of the Muhajireen and the Ansar
and summoned them to that. The historians have mentioned the texts of
his letters along with their answers to him. Mu’awiya wrote Imam
al-Husayn a letter
[^1] Al-Bayqahi, Sunan, vol. 8, p. 159. Ibn Katheer, Tarikh, vol. 8, p.
137. Fath al-Baari, vol. 13, p. 59.
[^2] Al-Imama wa al-Siyasa, vol. 1, pp. 180-183. Jamharat al-Khutab,
vol. 2, pp. 233-236.

whose text is as follows: “Some affairs from you have come to me. I do
not think that you will turn away from them. The worthiest of the people
in fulfilling the pledge of allegiance he has given is he who is like
you in your importance, honor, and position in which Allah has placed
you. Therefore do not dispute (with me about something that makes me)
boycott you. Fear Allah and do not return this community to the discord.
Take care of yourself and the community of Muhammad. And let not those
who have no certainty hold you in light estimation.”

Imam al-Husayn (a.s) answered him. He reminded him of the horrible
events he (Mu’awiya) had committed. He told him about that with which
the Muslims were afflicted of oppression and tyranny during his reign. I
(the author) have quoted some of it to indicate that Imam al-Husayn
(a.s) had condemned Mu’awiya’s atrocities. At the end of his answer to
Mu’awiya, Imam al-Husayn has said: “You have said in what you said: ‘Do
not return this community to a discord.’ Surely I have come to know that
there is no discord greater than your authority over the nation.

“You have said in what you said: ‘Take care of yourself, your religion,
and the community of Muhammad.’ Surely, by Allah, I do not know that
there is something greater than waging jihad against you. So if I do
that, then it is nearness to my Lord. If I do not do, then I will ask
Allah to forgive me my sin and ask Him to grant me a success to achieve
that which He loves and with which He is satisfied.

“You have said in what you said: ‘When you scheme against me, I will
scheme against you.’ So scheme against me, O Mu’awiya, as you like. By
my life, people schemed against the righteous in the past. I hope that
you will harm none except yourself and ruin nothing except your action.
Therefore, plot against me as you like.

“Fear Allah, O Mu’awiya! Know that Allah has a Book that does not omit
a small one and a great one, but numbers them (all). Know that Allah
will not forget that you killed some people because of a doubt and
punished others because of an accusation, that you have appointed as a
ruler a boy who drinks wine and plays with the dogs. I can not see you
except that you have ruined yourself, destroyed your religion, and
neglected the subjects. With Greetings.”[^1]

Neither this advice nor the warning against Allah’s punishment was
useful to Mu’awiya. He went on practicing his pre-Islamic beliefs to
destroy Islam and to force the Muslims to pay homage to Yazid, who
violated all what Allah had prohibited.
[^1] Al-Imama wa al-Siyasa, vol. 1, pp. 188-190.

**Mu’awiya’s second Journey to Yathrib**

When Mu’awiya came to know that the good companions (of the Prophet),
the children of the Muhajireen and the Ansar did not respond to his
summons and they insisted on refusing to pledge allegiance to Yazid, he
again traveled to Yathrib. He surrounded himself by military forces so
that he might force the opposing front to respond to him. On the second
day of his arrival, he sent for Imam al-Husayn and Abdullah bin Abbas.
Abdullah bin Abbas had come before Imam al-Husayn. Mu’awiya seated him
at his left hand. He made him busy with speaking until Imam al-Husayn
(a.s) came. He seated Imam al-Husayn at his right hand. He asked him
about the Banu al-Hasan and their old people, and he told him about
that. Then Mu’awiya made a speech in which he lauded Yazid, mentioned
his knowledge of the Qur’an and the Sunna, and his good policy. Then he
summoned them to pledge allegiance to him and to respond to his
speech.

**Imam al-Husayn’s Speech**

After Mu’awiya had finished his speech, Imam al-Husayn, the one who
refused oppression, arose and made a speech. He praised Allah and
glorified him. Then he said: “O Mu’awiya, although man elaborates on
mentioning the qualities of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, he cannot express part of them. I have understood that in which
you have clothed the successor after Allah’s Apostle from among briefing
his qualities and keeping away from depicting him. How far! How far, O
Mu’awiya! The morning has removed the darkness of the night. The sun has
dazzled the light of the lamp. You have preferred others to us to the
extent that you have gone too far. You have possessed alone the
properties to the extent that you have become unjust. You have refrained
from giving to the people to the extent that you have become miserly.
You have wronged (the people) to the extent that you have exceeded (the
proper limits). You have not given the possessor of a right a share of
his right until Satan has taken his plentiful luck and his fullest
portion.

“I have understood what you have mentioned as to Yazid from among his
perfection and his policy toward the community of Muhammad. You want to
deceive the people with Yazid. It is as if that you are describing a
veiled one or depicting someone absent or that you are telling about
that which you have contained through special knowledge. Yazid himself
has indicated the situation of his opinion. Therefore, adopt to Yazid
what he himself has adopted from among following the attacking dogs when
they start a brawl with each other, the doves that precede their mates
of the same age, the female singers with musicals, and various kinds of
amusement centers. (Through these actions) you will find him a helper.

“Leave what you attempt! It does not avail you that you meet Allah with
the sins of these people with that which you will meet Him. By Allah,
you still strike falsehood in tyranny and rage in oppression to the
extent that you have filled the water skins. There is only a blink
between you and death, and then you will get to kept actions on the day
that shall be witnessed, and it is too late to escape. I have come to
know that you have referred indirectly after this affair and prevented
us from the inheritance of our forefathers. And certainly, by Allah,
Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, bequeathed us at
our birthday. You brought to us that with which you argued the one who
undertook the caliphate after the death of the Apostle. So, through
that, he yielded to the proof, and the faith returned him to justice.
But you followed the justifications… and you said: ‘It was and it will
be until the rule came to you, O Mu’awiya, through a way leading to
someone other than you. Therefore take a lesson, O you who have eyes!

“And you have mentioned that the man leads the people according to the
covenant of Allah’s Apostle and his investing him with authority. And
certainly that was. ‘Amr bin al-‘Aas had then excellence because he was
a companion of the Apostle and pledged allegiance to him. By Allah, when
the people were sent then, they disdained his being a commander over
them, hated his being preferred (to them), and numbered his actions. So
he (the Prophet), may Allah bless him and his family, said: ‘Without
doubt, O people of the Muhajireen and the Ansar, none other than me will
be a commander over you after this day!’ So how do you use as a proof
the abrogated actions of the Apostle as to the most certain precepts and
the most appropriate of them instead of those on whose authenticity
there is an agreement? Or how have you taken a successor as a companion
while there are around you those who do not believe in his being a
companion (of the Prophet), nor do they depend on his religion and his
relationship, and you have exceeded them to someone excessive and
suffers from an affliction? You want to clothe the people in a vague
error at which one who remains alive in the world becomes happy, and you
become unhappy at it in the hereafter! That is a manifest loss. I ask
Allah’s forgiveness for you and me!”

Mu’awiya became astonished, so he looked at Abdullah bin Abbas and
asked him: “What is this, O Ibn Abbas?”

“By Allah,” replied Ibn Abbas, “he belongs to the progeny of the
Apostle, one of the people who were under the cloak (kisa), and among
the purified house. He said that about what you wanted. That is because
there are some people who convince you until Allah judges with His
command, and He is the best of judges.”[^1]
[^1] Al-Imama wa al-Siyasa, vol. 1, pp. 195-196.

Imam al-Husayn went away and made sadness hurt Mu’awiya’s soul. After
that Mu’awiya depended on all means of violence and terrorism. The
historians have narrated: “When Mu’awiya was in Mecca, he summoned Imam
al-Husayn, Abdullah bin al-Zubayr, and Abdurrahman bin Abi Bakr. He said
to them: ‘I am approaching you. He who warns is excused. While I was
addressing you, some of you arose and openly accused me of lying. I
stood that and pardoned (you). I am going to say a statement. I swear by
Allah that if any of you answered me with a word in this place of mine,
the sword would reach his head before he says another word. Therefore, a
man should keep nothing except his own soul!’

“He summoned the leader of his guards and said to him: ‘Position two
men with swords behind each of these people. If any of them answers me
with a word to believe me or to accuse me of lying, let them strike him
with their swords!’ “He went out and the people went out with him. He
ascended the pulpit. He praised and glorified Allah. Then he said:
‘Surely, these people are the masters of the Muslims and the best of
them. An affair is not extorted without them nor is it decided without
consulting them. They are satisfied and have pledged allegiance to
Yazid. Therefore, pledge allegiance (to him) in the name of Allah.”[^1]

With these terrible means and flagrant lying, Mu’awiya forced the
Muslims to pledge allegiance to Yazid. Through that he violated the
forbidden and threw the Muslims into discords and misfortunes.

**A’isha and the Allegiance to Yazid**

A’isha, the Prophet’s wife, did not oppose this bad pledge of
allegiance nor did she take any positive procedure against this
dangerous disaster through which the Muslims were terrorized and the
sacredness of Islam was violated. She advised Mu’awiya to force his
opponents to obey him. In the meantime she advised him to be kind to
them, that they might respond to him. She said to him: “Be kind to them,
for they will follow what you like, Allah willing!”[^2]

A’isha took this poor attitude toward the pledge of allegiance to
Yazid, the sinful, the dissolute. Without doubt she had come to know
that he was a transgressor, that he played with the leopards and the
dogs, and regarded as lawful what Allah made unlawful. Indeed man stands
perplexed before this attitude of her and her attitude toward the pledge
of allegiance to Imam Ali
[^1] Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil. Some other historians have also narrated
it.
[^2] Al-Imama wa al-Siyasa.

(a.s), who was the brother of the Prophet, the father of his grandsons,
and the gate of the city of his knowledge. That is because when she was
told about the pledge of allegiance to him, she lost mind. She angrily
said while she was looking towards the sky and at the earth: “By Allah,
would this (the sky) fell on this (the earth) if (Ali) bin Abi Talib
became a caliph!”

Then she returned to Mecca to provoke the people to fight against Imam
Ali. She led the armies to battle against him, to the extent that she
filled the land with blood and spread orphanhood, sadness, and mourning
among the Muslims in order to overthrow his government. Anyway A’isha’s
attitude toward the pledge of allegiance to Yazid, the confirmation of
Abdullah bin ‘Umar and of all the opportunist forces to her have brought
for Muslims discords and hardships, brought to them disasters and
misfortunes. That is because the Islamic caliphate passed through
inheritance to the freed (prisoners of war) and to their children, who
spared no effort to scheme against Islam, to spread rebellion and
corruption in the land.

Anyway Mu’awiya intentionally violated all the stipulations of the
peacemaking. He did not fulfill any of them for Imam al-Hasan. Rather he
put them under his feet just as he announced that before the crowded
people shortly after concluding the treaty of peace. Through that he
showed his pre-Islamic beliefs, that he went too far in committing sins,
and that he was void of all noble tendencies. The historians have
unanimously agreed on that he unjustly went too far in shedding the
blood of the Muslims, that he spread terror and fear all over the
Islamic regions. That was when he commanded his governors to punish the
opposing front severely, to deprive them of all the natural rights, and
to practice violence against them. His governors carried that out, as we
have already mentioned.

The most dangerous thing through which Mu’awiya violated the things
made forbidden by Allah was that he empowered his son Yazid over the
Muslims after him. It is worth mentioning that Yazid proved through all
his political practices that he was an apostate from the religion and an
infidel. That was when he killed Imam al-Husayn (a.s) who was the
Prophet’s grandson, and destroyed the pure family of the Prophet. The
historians say that he went too far in killing them because he wanted to
take revenge on the Prophet for the Battle of Badr. This disaster was
the most dangerous thing by which the Muslims were stricken throughout
the times.


