Chapter Xxv : His Wives and Children
====================================

Some people ask about the reason why Imam al-Hasan (a.s) married many
women. Some ignorant people are so spiteful and ill-intentioned that
they say: “He (Imam al-Hasan) married many women in response to the
requirement of inclination and satisfaction of libido.” But they do not
know that the Imam was very far away from yielding to this instinct, for
he is the master of the youth of the Garden and among the people whose
infallibility and purity the Qur’an has mentioned. We will mention the
text of the speech of those who maintain that and we will explain that
their speech is invalid and corrupt. As there are doubts, suspicions,
accusations, and criticism about this matter, there is no escape from
that we should research it and explain its reality even if in brief. I
(the author) say that some men of knowledge maintain that it is correct
and does not contradict the Imam’s behavior and his line of conduct.
Some other people have maintained that it is fabricated and incorrect.
It is good to mention the proofs of both parties. As for those who think
that it is correct, they have indicated it as follows:

1. According to the Islamic sacred law, it is not forbidden for man to
marry many women, for Islam has made it recommended for one to marry
many women. The statement of the great Savior (Prophet Muhammad) as to
urging the Muslims to marry many women is famous. He, may Allah bless
him and his family, has said: “Intermarry and reproduce even if through
a miscarried fetus in order that I may vie in you with the nations on
the Day of Resurrection.” Sufyan al-Thouri has said: “There is no
extravagance in marrying many women.” The Second Caliph Umar bin
al-Khattab has said: “Surely I marry a woman while I have no purpose
toward her. I sleep with her while I have no libido toward her.” He was
asked: “So why do you marry her?” He replied: “That those through whom
the Prophet say ‘I have many followers’ might come out of me.”
Al-Mughira bin Shu‘ba married a thousand women.[^1] Imam Ali (a.s)
married four women and had nineteen children.[^2] This was in Islam. At
the time before Islam Sulayman bin Dawud had seven hundred free women
and three hundred bondmaids. His father Dawud (David) (a.s) married a
hundred free women and three hundred bondmaids. Therefore, according to
the Islamic law and other than it, it is not forbidden to marry many
women. So why is Imam al-Hasan criticized for that?

[^1] Al-Isti‘ab, vol. 4, p. 370.
[^2] Ali al-Qari’, Sharh al-Shafa’, vol. 1, p. 208.

2. Imam al-Hasan married many women to be strong enough to face the
Umayyads, who spared no effort to put an end to the Hashimites, to
destroy their entity, and to efface their name.

3. Surely the fathers of the women asked Imam al-Hasan and insisted on
him to marry their daughters, that they might be honored with and seek
nearness to him, for he was the grandson of the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, and the master of the youths of the Garden. Besides
they came to know that Abu Baker was of a middle honor among Quraysh,
but he occupied a remarkable position in the Islamic world after the
Prophet had married his daughter A’isha. For this reason the people
asked Imam al-Hasan and insisted on him to marry their daughters that
they might enjoy glory and honor through the Imam’s relationship with
them by marriage. These are the proofs of those who maintain that it was
correct that Imam al-Hasan married many women. As for those who maintain
that it was incorrect that he married many women, they have depended on
the following affairs:

1. Divorce is reprehensible according to the Islamic law. Those who
maintained that Imam al-Hasan married many women proved that he always
divorced women and that he parted with them shortly after he had married
them. It is well known that divorce is the most reprehensible of all
things in Islam. Many lines of transmission have ensured the traditions
about its reprehensibility. It has been narrated from the Prophet (a.s)
that he said when Abu Ayyub wanted to divorce his wife: “Surely
divorcing Umm Ayyub is a sin.” Imam Abu Abdullah al-Sadiq (a.s) has
said: “Surely Allah loves the house where there is a wedding and detests
the house where there is a divorce. Nothing is more detestable to Allah,
the Great and Almighty, than divorce.” Abu Abdullah (a.s) has said:
“Nothing of the things made lawful by Allah is more detestable to Him
than divorce. Surely Allah, the Great and Almighty, detests the moody
one who divorces very much.” He (a.s) has said: “Marry and do not
divorce. That is because the Throne (of Allah) shakes because of
divorce.”[^1] As divorce is very reprehensible, how did Imam al-Hasan
(a.s) commit it and go too far in it?

2. Divorce contradicts Imam al-Hasan’s conduct of life. It has been
established that Imam al-Hasan was the most clement of the Muslims and
was a model for noble moral traits. It is well known that divorce
contradicts clemency because it breaks the woman’s heart and humiliates
her. This does not agree with Imam al-Hasan who took great care of
delighting the people, turned away from treating them badly and hurting
their feelings.

[^1] Wasa’il al-Shia, vol. 15, p. 15, pp. 267-268.

3. Imam al-Hasan was distracted from that. He was distracted from such
affairs by serving Allah, clinging to Him, his constant action in the
field of reform, granting the needs of the people, brining good to them,
and driving evil and unhappiness away from them. Therefore he did not
think of anything except the reformative affairs, nor did he have a
leisure time to spend it on such things. These are the proofs of those
who maintained that Imam al-Hasan did not marry many women, though some
of them are weak. As for me ( the author), I think that saying that Imam
al-Hasan had married many women was fabricated and very far from the
reality. This cannot be explained except through showing the narrations
and considering their chain of authorities carefully, which is a
condition for accepting the narration. I say that the traditionists have
greatly differed on the number of Imam al-Hasan’s wives. They have said
that they are:

1. Seventy.
2. Ninety.
3. Two hundred and fifty.
4. Three hundred.

Numbers other than these have also been narrated but they are very
irregular. The most important thing is the research on the chain of the
authorities of the narrations, for it indicates whether the narrations
are correct or not. So I say:

As for the first narration, it has been reported by Ibn Abi al-Haddeed
and the like[^1] . He narrated it on the authority of Ali bin Abdullah
al-Basri, known as al-Mada’ini. The latter died in the year 225 A. H. He
is among the weak narrators on whose narrations none depends. Muslim
refused to narrate on his authority in his book al-Saheeh.[^2] In his
book al-Kamil, Ibn Adiy has regarded him as weak. Concerning him, he has
said: “He is not strong in tradition. He has rare traceable
narrations.”[^3] Al-Asma‘i has said to him: “By Allah, you will leave
Islam behind you.”[^4] He (Ali bin Abdullah al-Mada’ini) was among the
sincere companions of Abu Ishaq al-Mousili. He made friends with him for
his properties and wealth. Ahmed bin Abi Khuthayma has narrated, saying:
“My father, Yahya bin Ma‘een, and Mus‘ab al-Zubayri used to sit down at
the door of Mus‘ab. A man passed by them. The man was riding a mule and
wearing good clothes. He greeted and singled out Yahya with his
[^1] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p.8.
[^2] Mizan al-I‘tidal, vol. 3, p. 138. Printed by Daar Ihya’ al-Kutub
al-‘Arabiya.
[^3] Lisan al-Mizan, vol. 4, p. 252.
[^4] Mizan al-I‘tidal, vol. 3, p. 139.

greeting, who said to him: ‘O Abu al-Hasan, where are you going?’ The
man replied: ‘To the house of Ishaq al-Mousili, the generous one who
fills my sleeve with dinars and dirhams.’ When he went away, Yahya said:
‘He is trustworthy, trustworthy, trustworthy!’ So I asked my father:
‘Who is this man?’ He answered: ‘He is al-Mada’ini.’”[^1] He
(al-Mada’ini) narrated traditions on the authority of ‘Awwana bin
al-Hakam, who died in the year 158 A. H., was a follower of ‘Uthman, and
he fabricated traditions for the Umayyads.[^2] Al-Mada’ini lauded the
Umayyads and went too far in glorifying them. Besides, he was the
retainer of Samra bin Habeeb al-Umawi. [^3] Most likely retainers follow
their masters’ inclinations and tendencies. As for al-Mada’ini, he was
impressed by Samra. So he was an Umayyad in tendency and among those who
deviated from the Prophet’s household. After this, we do not trust his
narrations and traditions.

As for the second narration, it was narrated by al-Shabalanji only.[^4]
He has narrated it as an incompletely transmitted hadith. Therefore, it
is not correct to rely on it because it is an incompletely transmitted
hadith.

As for the third and forth narrations, they were narrated by
al-Majlsi[^5] and Ibn Shahrashub[^6] . Each of them has mentioned that he
has quoted it from the book Qoot al-Quloob by Abu Talib al-Makki, who
died in the year 380 A. H. I have read the book and found that he has
mentioned it (the tradition). This is the text of what he has mentioned
in it: “Al-Hasan bin Ali (a.s) married 250 women; and it was said (that
he married) three hundred women. (Imam) Ali was bored with that and
hated it out of shame of their families when he divorced them. He said:
‘Al-Hasan divorces (your daughters), so do not marry (them to him).’ A
man from Hamadan said to him: ‘By Allah, O Commander of the faithful, we
will marry him (women) whatever he wishes. He can cling to whomever he
loves and can divorce whomever he hates.’ So Ali was pleased with that
and recited: ‘If I was a gatekeeper at the gate of the Garden, I would
say to (the people of) Hamadan : ‘Enter it with peace!’

“This is one of the qualities in which Imam al-Hasan was similar to
Allah’s Apostle, peace be on him. He was similar to him in form and
manner. Allah’s

[^1] Lisan al-Mizan, vol. 4, p. 253. Mu‘jam al-Udaba’, vol. 12, p.
126.
[^2] Lisan al-Mizan, vol. 4, p. 386.
[^3] Mu‘jam al-Udaba’, vol. 14, p. 124. In the book Lisan al-Mizan, vol.
4, p. 253, it has been mentioned: “He (al-Mada‘ini) was the retainer of
‘Abd al-Rahman bin Samra.”
[^4] Noor al-Absar, p. 111.
[^5] Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 10, p. 137.
[^6] Al-Manaqib, vol. 2, p. 246.

Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said to him: ‘You are
similar to me in form and manner.’ He also said: ‘Al-Hasan belongs to
me, and al-Husayn belongs to Ali.’ Perhaps al-Hasan married four (women)
or perhaps he divorced four (women).”[^1]

None relies on the books of Abu Talib al-Mekki. In his biography it has
been mentioned that he ate so much roots of papyrus that his skin became
green. He suffered from hysteria. He went to Baghdad to preach (to its
inhabitants). The people of Baghdad surrounded him but they came to know
that there was in his speech delirium and deviation from the criteria of
straightness; so they left and turned away from him. Among his delirium
and irregularity is his statement: “There is nothing more harmful to the
creatures than the Creator!” He permitted listening to singing. He
invited ‘Abd al-Samad bin Ali. The latter came in to him and blamed him.
So Abu Talib said:

O night, how much enjoyment do you have? O morning, would that you did
not approach!

So ‘Abd al-Samad left him while he was displeased with him. Yet another
example of his abnormality is that when he was about to die, a companion
of his came in to him. Abu Talib said to his companion: “If my end is
good, then scatter almonds and sugar over my corpse.” His companion
asked him: “What is the sign of that?” He replied: “When I held your
hand.” When his death came, he strongly took hold of the hand of his
companion.

Accordingly, his companion carried that out. He scattered over his
corpse almonds and sugar.[^2] Biographers have mentioned that he has
mentioned traditions without chain of authorities.

According to this, how can one rely on his narrations and follow them?
As for those who narrated on his authority, they had no knowledge about
his condition. Anyway the record that Imam al-Hasan married many women
was taken from him. As he had irregularity and deviation, we cannot
depend on what he mentioned. Anyhow we have no proof that Imam al-Hasan
married many women except these reports. It is incorrect to depend on
such narrations because they face many suspicions and criticisms. The
following points indicate that Imam al-Hasan married many women was
fabricated:

[^1] Qoot al-Quloob, vol. 2, p. 246.
[^2] Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 11, p. 319. Lisan al-Mizan, vol. 5, p.
300. Al-Kuna wa al-Alqaab, vol. 1, p. 106. Ibn al-Jawzi, al-Muntazam,
vol. 7, p. 190.

1. If the narrations were correct, then Imam al-Hasan would have many
children suitable to the number of the women he had married, while the
genealogists and the narrators have not mentioned that the Imam had many
children. They have mentioned that Imam al-Hasan had twenty-two children
both male and female. This number does not suit that Imam al-Hasan had
married many women.

2. The thing that clearly indicates that the narrations are fabricated
is the debates that took place between Imam al-Hasan and his opponents
in Damascus and other than that. His opponents spared no effort and
spent a lot of time looking for a thing to disgrace the Imam, that they
might use it as a means to have audacity to him and to defame him.
However, they had found no way to that, just as we have mentioned when
we have shown his debates. If the Imam had married many women and
divorced them, as they said, they would have said to him: “You are not
appropriate for the caliphate because you are busy marrying women.”,
they would have spread that, used it as a means to slander him, and
faced him with it when they met with him. That they kept silent toward
it and did not mention it indicates that the narrations are untrue and
incorrect.

3. Among the things confirming that the narrations are incorrect is
that Abu Ja‘far, died 245 A. H., has mentioned in his book al-Mihbar
that Imam al-Hasan had three sons-in-law. They are Imam Ali bin
al-Husayn (a.s) being married to Umm Abdullah, Abdullah bin al-Zubayr,
being married to Umm al-Hasan, and Amr bin al-Mundhir, being married to
Umm Salama.[^1] He has not mentioned anything more than that. If Imam
al-Hasan had had many wives, then he would have had many sons-in-law
suitable to their numbers. Besides, Abu Ja‘far was among those who took
care of such researches. That is because he has mentioned in his
al-Mihbar many examples of rare marriages. He would have mentioned that
if the Imam had had many wives.

4. Among the things clearly indicating that the narrations are
incorrect and untrue is what has been narrated that Imam Ali (a.s)
ascended the pulpit and said: “Do not marry (your daughters to) al-Hasan
because he divorces (them).” This has been narrated by Abu Talib and
other than him. On the Pulpit, Imam Ali (a.s), prohibited the people
from marrying their daughters to al-Hasan. This means that either he
(a.s) had prohibited his son from that, and he did not respond to him,
so that he (a.s) was forced to say that openly and to prohibit the
people from marrying their daughters to him, or he prohibited him from
that for the first time without making his son al-Hasan (a.s) know that
he had detested and hated that. Both possibilities are untrue.

[^1] Al-Mihbar, p. 57.

As for the first possibility, it is untrue. That is because Imam
al-Hasan was among the Prophet’s household from whom Allah had driven
uncleanness away and was one of those through whom the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, had challenged (the Christians of
Najran) to a contest of prayer to Allah. Therefore, it was impossible
for him to oppose his father and to disobey his command.

As for the second possibility, it is false because Imam Ali (a.s), had
to make his son know that he had detested and hated that and he had not
to say that openly on the pulpit before the crowded people. The affair
is not void of that he had harbored hatred against his son, his
guardian, and his partner in the verse of al-Tatt’heer. Besides, the
affair is either lawfully permissible or not permissible. If it is
permissible, then why did Imam Ali (a.s) prohibit his son from it? If it
was not permissible, then why did Imam al-Hasan commit it? I have no
doubt that this speech is fabricated and that it was the opponents of
the Imam who had fabricated it, for they wanted to defame his excellent
line of conduct, which was similar to that of his grandfather, Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, and similar to that of his
father Imam Ali(a.s).

5. Yet among the fabricated proofs for that Imam al-Hasan married many
women is that when death came to Imam al-Hasan (a.s) many women went out
while they were barefooted and bareheaded behind his coffin and saying:
“We are Imam al-Hasan’s wives!”[^1] It is clear and plain that this
statement is fabricated. I think that there is no justification for that
these women went out in front of the people while they were barefooted
and bareheaded and were saying that they were the Imam’s wives. If they
wanted to show sadness and sorrow (at the death of the Imam), then there
would be no justification for that they introduced themselves and walked
among the procession full of men while they had been commanded to cover
themselves and not to leave their houses. Certainly this statement and
the like were fabricated by the Umayyad and Abbasid opponents of Imam
al-Hasan to degrade his value and to decrease his importance.

Among the fabricated reports similar to these ones is that which
reported by Muhammad bin Sireen, who said: “Imam al-Hasan married a
woman and sent her as a dowry a hundred slave girls with each of them
there was a thousand dirhams.”[^2] I think that it is impossible for the
Imam to give this plentiful a mount of money as a dowry to one of his
wives. That is because this is a kind of wastefulness and extravagance.
Islam has prohibited the Muslims for

[^1] Bihar al-Anwar.
[^2] Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 8, p. 38. Al-Shaheed al-Thani,
al-Masalik.

giving such a kind of dowry. It has ordered them to confine themselves
to the dowry of the Sunna. It regards it as reprehensible to exceed it.
It has been narrated from the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, that he has said: “The best of the women of my community is the
least of them in dowry.” He married his wives according to the dowry of
the Sunna. Imam Ali (a.s), married according to it and did not exceed
it. The reason for that is that Islam wants to make easy the affair of
marriage lest people should find it difficult to get married. Certainly
Imam al-Hasan (a.s) did not turn away from the Sunna of his grandfather
nor did he follow any way opposing his law. Surely this account and the
like of it from among the fabricated ones clearly and plainly confirm
that it is false that Imam al-Hasan had married many women.

Anyway there is no proof showing that Imam al-Hasan married many women
except these narrations. The narrations face much criticism; therefore,
they cannot be used as a proof to establish the subject matter.

**Al-Mansur’s fabricated Lies**

It is most likely that Abu Ja‘far al-Mansur was the first to fabricate
this affair, and then the historians took it from him. The reason behind
that was that the Hasanids (al-Hasan’s progeny) made a revolt, and the
revolt was about to overthrow his government, and because of that he
ordered Abdullah bin al-Hasan to be captured. Then he addressed the
people of Khurasan with a speech in which he cursed and abused Imam Ali
(a.s), and his children and fabricated that al-Hasan had married many
women. This is the text of his speech: “By Him other than Whom there is
no god, we left the children of the family of Abu Talib with the
caliphate. We never interfered in their affairs. Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s)
undertook the caliphate but he did not succeed. Then he appointed two
persons as arbitrators, so the community differed on him and their unity
was divided. Then his followers, supporters, and trustworthy companions
attacked and killed him. Then, after him, al-Hasan bin Ali undertook
(the caliphate). By Allah, he was not a man. Properties were offered to
him and he accepted them. Mu’awiya schemed against him (and said to him
that) he would appoint him as his heir apparent but he deposed him. He
(al-Hasan) withdrew from that which belonged to him and handed it over
to him (Mu’awiya). Then he occupied himself with women. He married a
woman today and divorced another tomorrow. He was so until he died on
his bed.”[^1]

[^1] Al-Mas‘udi, Murujj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 226.

Al-Mansur’s speech is full of fallacies and lies. He has mentioned:

1. Imam Ali (a.s) appointed two persons as arbitrators. This is a pure
fabricated lie. That is because it was the rebels from among the Imam’s
army who appointed the two arbitrators. They insisted on that and forced
the Imam to accept them, and he (a.s) was forced to respond to them, as
we have previously mentioned.

2. In his speech he has mentioned that Imam Ali was attacked and killed
by his followers, supporters, and trustworthy companions. Through that
he contradicted the reality. It was the Kharijites (rebels) who killed
him. They were neither from his followers nor from his supporters.
Rather they were his enemies and opponents.

3. He has mentioned that Imam al-Hasan (a.s) had occupied himself with
women, that he married a woman today and divorced another tomorrow. This
is very untrue. None said that except him. He intentionally fabricated
these lies to strengthen his rule and his authority, to destroy
al-Hasan’s followers, and to degrade them. That is because he had pledge
allegiance to Muhammad Dhu al-Nafs al-Zakiyya twice. He had no hope for
the caliphate and had no position with the people. He was poor and
miserable. He walked through the villages and country-sides. He praised
the Prophet’s pure family, so the Muslims gave him something as alms.
Neither he nor his family had rendered a service to the community so
that he was not worthy of this important office (the caliphate).

Among the fabricated lies of this tyrant (Abu Ja‘far) against the
grandson of Allah’s Apostle (Imam al-Hasan) was what he mentioned in the
letter he sent to Muhammad Dhu al-Nafs al-Zakiyya. This is the text of
the letter: “The rule of your grandfather (Imam Ali) reached al-Hasan
but he sold it to Mu’awiya for some rags and dirhams. Then he joined
al-Hijaz. He handed over his followers to Mu’awiya, handed over the
caliphate to those who were not worthy of it, and took money unlawfully.
If you had had something as to it (the caliphate), then you had sold it
and taken its value.”[^1]

Al-Mansur intentionally spread these fabricated lies and fallacies that
he might justify his usurping the caliphate. It is worth mentioning that
he unjustly took the caliphate, for it was the ‘Alawids who revolted
against the Umayyads and overthrew their government to regain their
usurped right.
As for the Abbasids, they did not take any part in the revolt.
[^1] Subh al-A‘sha, vol. 1, p. 233. Jamharat Rasa’il al-‘Arab, vol. 3,
p. 92.

**Lamens’s Lies**

Lamens often challenged the dignity of Islam. He ascribed accusations
to it, and defamed its men and protectors. In the reasons for the
peacemaking we have mentioned some of his fabricated lies against Imam
al-Hasan. In his researches he has written about the Imam’s wives. This
is the text of what he has written: “When he (Imam al-Hasan) exceeded
youth, he spent the best of his youth marrying and divorcing. It was
counted that he had married about a hundred women. These abandoned
manners were fastened on him and threw Ali into violent disputes. Also
al-Hasan proved that he was wasteful and extravagant. He specified for
each of his wives a house with servants and retinue. In this manner we
see how he wasted the property during the days of Ali’s caliphate when
poverty became intense.”[^1]

In his speech ‘Imam al-Hasan married and divorced too much’, Lamens has
depended on the writings of al-Mada’ini and the like of him from among
those who followed the ruling authority, so they wrote for rulers and
not for history. The orientalists who schemed against Islam in their
researches took their information from those historians who supported
the unjust governments that opposed the Prophet’s Household and spared
no effort to defame their reality and degrade their dignity. As for
Lamens, he has exceeded them. He has said fabricated lies which none has
ever said except him. He has said:

1. He (Imam al-Hasan) threw his father into violent disputes because he
married and divorced too much. However none of those who wrote Imam
al-Hasan’s biography has mentioned these disputes Lamens has claimed.

2. He has mentioned that Imam al-Hasan specified for each of his wives
a house with servants and retinue. Certainly all the historians have not
narrated that. Therefore, this is a flagrant lie and a pure slander.

Surely this has been spread by the Christian missionary committees that
have warred against Islam and transgressed against it. They have
provoked such mercenaries and involved them to damage Islam, defame its
reality, and degrade the value of its men and its great figures who have
lightened the way for mankind and hoisted the flag of civilization in
the world.

With this we will end our speech about the Imam’s many wives together
with the criticisms and doubts about them. Then we have to mention the
names of his wives the historians have mentioned along with explaining
what we have mentioned as to their biographies. That is as follows:

[^1] Da’irat al-Ma‘arif, vol. 7, p. 400.

1. Khawla al-Fazariyya

Khawla al-Fazariyya, daughter of Manzur, was among the great ladies in
her abundant reason and her perfection. Imam al-Hasan married her. On
the night when he married her he spent the night with her on the
housetop. She tied one part of her veil to his leg and tied the other
part to her anklet. When he woke up, he found that. He asked her about
that, and she expressed her loyalty to him and her taking care of his
life, saying: “I feared that you would wake up and fall down, so I would
be the most ill-omened one to the Arabs.”

When he understood that from her, he stayed with her for seven days.[^1]
She stayed with him for a year without putting on make-up or using an
eyeliner until she born him the great Sayyid al-Hasan. Then she used
cosmetics. She stayed with him until he (a.s) passed away. She showed
strong sadness at his death, so her father consoled her, saying:

Yesterday I was informed that Khawla became impatient with that the
misfortunes of the time would befall her. Do not be impatient, O Khawla,
and be patient. Surely the generous have been built on patience.[^2]

Zaynab al-Amiliyya, daughter of Ali, has said in the biography of
Khawla: “When she (Khawla) came of age, some Qurayshi great figures and
notables proposed to her, but her father refused to respond to them
because they were not equal to her. Then he divorced her mother Makkiya,
daughter of Kharija. Talha bin Abdullah married her after him. His son
Muhammad married Khawla, and she born him Ibrahim, Dawud, and Umm
al-Qasim. When her husband Muhammad was killed in the Battle of the
Camel, some men proposed to her, but she entrusted her affair to
al-Hasan, peace be on him. So he married her. When the Imam went to
Yathrib, he took her with him. Her father heard of that. So he came to
the Mosque of Allah’s Apostle. There was a banner in his hand. He
planted the banner in the Mosque, and all the people from the tribe of
Qays joined him. He called out to his people and asked them for help to
take his daughter from the Imam. When Imam al-Hasan heard of that, he
divorced her. Her father took her and went away. Khawla begged him to
return her to Imam al-Hasan, condemned him for his action, and mentioned
to him the Imam’s excellence. He repented of his action and said to her:
‘Stay here! If the man (al-Hasan) was in need of you, he would follow
you.’ Imam al-Hasan, his brother al-Husayn, and Abdullah bin Abbas
followed him. When they reached him, he welcomed and honored them, and
then he returned her to

[^1] Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarikh, vol. 4, p. 216.
[^2] Al-Zajjajj, al-Amali, p. 7.

the Imam.” Then she remained with Imam al-Hasan until she became old.
When the Imam died, she did not get married. It was said that she
married Abdullah bin al-Zubayr. Al-Nawar, al-Farazdaq’s wife, came in to
her and asked her to intercede for her with her husband. Khawla
responded to her and spoke to Abdullah, and he responded to her.

I think that this story is a kind of imagination and has no portion of
the reality, because it is not appropriate for the Imam’s dignity that
he married her without consulting her father. It was impossible for the
Imam to marry her without asking her father for her hand and asking for
his opinion. Therefore, it is impossible that her father had no
knowledge of the murder of her first husband during that long period of
time until the Imam married her. It is also impossible that he went to
Yathrib and asked his people to help him take his daughter from the
Imam, while he intended to be related by marriage to the noble and the
great. He refused some of the noble who proposed to his daughter because
they were not equal to her, so why was he not satisfied at being related
by marriage to Imam al-Hasan, who was the most brilliant personality in
the Islamic world? I have no doubt that this story was fabricated and
was untrue.

2. Ja’dah, daughter of al-Ash‘ath

The historians have differed over her name. It was said that her name
was Sukayna, and was said Sha‘tha’, and was said A’isha. The correct
name is Ja’dah, as most of historians have mentioned.[^1] As for the
reason that Imam al-Hasan married her, it was that Imam Ali (a.s), asked
Sa‘eed bin Qays al-Hamadani for his daughter’s hand (Umm ‘Uran) and
wanted to marry her to his son al-Hasan. Sa‘eed said to him: “O
Commander of the faithful, give me a time that I may consult (her
mother).” Then he left him. Al-Ash‘ath met Sa‘eed and asked him about
his coming, and he told him about the affair. This hypocrite (Ash‘ath)
tried to deceive him saying: “How will you marry (your daughter) to
al-Hasan while he will pride himself on her, will not treat her with
justice and will wrong her? He will say to her: ‘I am the grandson of
Allah’s Apostle and son of the Commander of the faithful (Imam Ali),
while she does not have such excellence.’ Why do you not marry her to
her cousin? She belongs to him, and he belongs to her.”

“Who is he?” asked Sa‘eed? “Muhammad bin al-Ash‘ath,” replied
al-Ash‘ath. So this stupid (Sa‘eed) was deceived by al-Ash‘ath’s
statement and said: “I accept to marry my daughter to him.”
[^1] Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, p. 33. Other sources have mentioned that.

Then al-Ash‘ath quickly went to Imam Ali (a.s), and asked him: -Have
you proposed to Sa‘eed’s daughter (to marry her to) al-Hasan? -Yes. -Do
you want (another woman) more honorable than her in house, nobler than
her in lineage, more beautiful than her, and greater than her in
property? -Who is she? -Ja’dah, daughter of al-Ash‘th bin Qays. -We have
negotiated with a man. (He meant Sa‘eed al-Hamadani). -There is no way
to the man with whom you have negotiated. -He had left me to consult her
mother -He had married her to Muhammad bin al-Ash‘ath. -When? -Before I
came to you.

Accordingly, Imam Ali (a.s), agreed on that. When Sa‘eed came to know
that al-Ash‘ath had seduced and deceived him, he quickly went to him and
said: -O one-eyed, you have deceived me!

-You are one-eyed and wicked! You wanted to consult (your wife) as to
the grandson of Allah’s Apostle, are you not foolish? Then al-Ash‘ath
came quickly to Imam al-Hasan and said to him: “O Abu Muhammad, do you
not want to visit your wife?” He was quick in carrying out the affair
lest he should miss it. Then he spread carpets from the door of his
house to the Imam’s house, and then he carried home his daughter in
procession.[^1]

3. A’isha al-Khath‘amiyya

From Among the wives of Imam al-Hasan was A’isha al-Khath‘amiyya. He
married her during the lifetime of Imam Ali (a.s). When Imam Ali (a.s)
was killed, she went to Imam al-Hasan. She gloated over the death of his
father, saying: “I congratulate on the caliphate!” When Imam al-Hasan
came to know that she gloated over his father death, he said to her:
“Have you gloated over the murder of Ali? Go away for you are divorced!”
She wrapped herself with her clothes until her waiting period was over.
Then Imam al-Hasan sent her

[^1] Ibn al-Jawzi, al-Adhkiya’, p. 27.

the rest of her dowry along with ten thousand dinars, that she might
satisfy her needs with. When the money reached her, she said: “Little
provision from a parting lover!” [^1] History has not mentioned that Imam
al-Hasan had divorced a woman except her, Umm Kulthum, and a woman from
the Banu Shayban. So how did the Imam marry and divorce too many women,
as some historians say? As for the rest of the Imam’s wives whose
biographies we have not found, they are as follows:

4. Umm Kulthoom, daughter of al-Fadhl bin Abbas

Imam al-Hasan (a.s) married her, and then he divorced her. Abu Musa
al-Ash‘ari married her after him.[^2]

5. Umm Ishaq, daughter of Talha bin Abdullah al-Tamimi

She born him a male baby, and he named the baby Talha.

6. Umm Basheer, daughter of Mas‘ud al-Ansari

She born him a male baby, and he named the baby Zayd.

7. Hind, daughter of Abdurrahman bin Abi Bakr

8. A woman from the daughters of Amr bin Ahyam al-Manqari

9. A woman from (the tribe of) Thaqif

She born him a male baby, and he named the baby Umar.

10. A woman from Zarara’s daughters

11. A woman from the Banu Shayban, from the family of Hammam bin
Murra

It was said to Imam al-Hasan (a.s): “She maintains the beliefs of the
Kharijites.” So he divorced her and said: “I dislike marrying a woman
who is a brand of hell.”[^3]

12. Umm Abdullah, daughter of al-Shaleel bin Abdullah, the brother of
Jareer al-Bajali

13. Umm al-Qasim

She was a slave woman. It was said that her name was Nufayla, and said
that it was Ramla. This is the number of the women Imam al-Hasan had
married which is too different from that which some historians had
claimed. With this we will end our speech about Imam al-Hasan’s wives.
Now, we have to mention the number of his children both male and female.
The historians have differed on
[^1] Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarikh, vol. 4, p. 216.
[^2] Al-Isti‘ab, vol. 3, p. 204.
[^3] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p.8.

that very much. They have narrated that there number is:

1. Twelve: eight males and four females.[^1]
2. Fifteen: eleven males and four females.[^2]
3. Sixteen: eleven males and five females. [^3]
4. Nineteen: thirteen males and six females.[^4]
5. Twenty: sixteen males and four females.[^5]
6. Twenty-two: fourteen males and eight females.[^6]

Numbers other than these have also been mentioned. The historians have
unanimously agreed on that none of al-Hasan’s children had children
except al-Hasan and Zayd. As for his prominent sons, they are as
follows:

1. Al-Qasim

Al-Qasim was on top of the children of Imam al-Hasan. He was martyred
with his paternal uncle Imam al-Husayn, the master of martyrs, at the
Battle of Karbala’. He was then in the prime of youth. He looked like
the moon in beauty, and freshness. He took part in the Battle of
Karbala’. That was when he saw that his uncle al-Husayn (a.s) was alone,
the choice of his house had been martyred. The womenfolk of the Prophet
were crying and lamenting loudly. He could not stand that sight. So he
went to his uncle Imam al-Husayn, kissed his hands his feet, and asked
him to permit him to defend him, and the Imam permitted him. As for how
he was martyred, it is very sorrowful. The historians and biographers
have mentioned it in detail.

[^1] Al-Mufid, al-Irshad.
[^2] Al-Nafha al-‘Ambariya.
[^3] Al-‘Abdali, Zaynab wa al-Zaynabiyyat. Al-Maqrizi, Itti‘ad
al-Hunafa’ fi Akhbar al-Khulafa’. Al-Majjdi. He (al-Majdi) has mentioned
their names. The males are Zayd, al-Hasan, al-Hasan al-Athram, Talha,
Isma‘il, Abdullah, Hamza, Ya‘qub, ‘Abd al-Rahman, Abu Bakr, and ‘Umar.
As for the females, they are Umm al-Khayr, Ramla, Umm al-Hasan, Umm
Salama, Umm Abdullah. In the book it has been mentioned that the mother
of Zayd, Umm al-Khayr, and Umm al-Hasan was from the tribe of
al-Khazrajj. The mother of al-Hasan was Khawla al-Fazariya, daughter of
Manzur. His paternal uncle al-Husayn married him to his daughter Fatima.
The mother of ‘Umar was a slave wife. The mother of al-Husayn was a
slave wife. The mother of Talha was from Taym, from Quraysh. He
(al-Majjdi) has mentioned that ‘Abd al-Rahman, Imam al-Hasan’s son, died
at al-Abwa’ while he was in the state of ritual consecration. So his
paternal uncle shrouded him. He did not rub him with camphor nor did he
cover his face.
[^4] Abu Nasr al-Bukhari, Sir al-Silsila al-‘Alawiya.
[^5] Ibn al-Jawzi, Tadhkirat al-Khawas.
[^6] Al-Hada’iq al-Wardiya, p. 107.

2. Abu Bakr

His name was Abdullah. His mother was a bondmaid[^1] whose name was
Ramla.[^2] At the Battle of Karbala’ Abdullah came out against the
enemies to protect the religion of Allah and to defend Imam al-Hasan and
he was martyred in that battle.

3. Abdullah

He was martyred with his uncle Imam al-Husayn in the Battle of
Karbala’. He was then twenty-one years old. He looked at his uncle when
the Umayyad troops surrounded him. So he rushed forward to defend him.
Abjar bin Ka‘ab rushed towards al-Husayn carrying a sword in his hand.
The young lad said to him: “Woe upon you, O son of an impure woman! Are
you trying to kill my uncle?” Abjar struck at him with his sword. The
boy tried to fend off the blow with his arm. The sword cut through his
arm to the skin on the other side. The arm was hanging by the skin. The
boy asked his uncle for help. Imam al-Husayn hurried to him and embraced
him.[^3] While the boy was in his uncle’s lap, Harmala bin Kahil shot an
arrow at him and killed him.[^4] In the past and present history of
mankind there is no one similar to those young lads in their manhood,
nobility, and heroism.

4. Zayd

His mother was from the tribe of al-Khazrajj. He was noble in worth,
generous in character, and great in piety. The people came to him from
far and wide to seek his favor. He was in charge of the (proportion of)
taxes (sadaqat) given to the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and
his family. However, when Sulayman bin ‘Abdul Melik came to authority,
he removed him from that. When he died and ‘Umar bin ‘Abd al-‘Aziz came
to authority, he returned it to him. Muhammad bin Bashir al-Khariji
praised him:

When the son of the chosen one comes down the valley-stream, he drives
away its drought and makes its sticks green with vegetation. Zayd is the
spring of the people in every winter season when their rains and thunder
have come.

(He is) meek before those who seek the blood-price just as if he was a
sun amid darkness as if its stars were joined to him.[^5]

[^1] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 6, p. 269.

[^2] Al-Hada’iq al-Wardiya, p. 107.
[^3] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 6, p. 259.
[^4] Al-Luhuf, p. 68.
[^5] Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 10, p. 180.

He rode (his horse) and came to the market of al-Zahar. He stopped, and
the people crowded to look at him. They admired his manners. They said:
“He is similar to his grandfather, Allah’s Apostle.”[^1] He died in the
year 120 A. H. He was then ninety years of age. A group of poets
composed elegies for him, mentioning their loss of him and his
outstanding merits.

5. Al-Hasan

Al-Hasan was noble leader of high merits and piety. He was the guardian
of his father and was in charge of the charities (zakat and khuma) given
to his father.[^2] He had been present with his uncle, al-Husayn, at the
Battle of Karbala’. He fought beside him until he received a wound and
fell down to the ground. When the rogues from among the people of Kufa
came to the battlefield to cut off the heads of the martyrs, they found
that al-Hasan was still alive. Asma’ bin Kharija, who was an uncle of
his, came and interceded for him with them, and they accepted his
intercession. He took al-Hasan with him to Kufa and treated him. After
al-Hasan had got well, he went to Medina. He was in charge of the
charities of his grandfather Imam Ali, peace be on him. He married the
Fatima, daughter of his uncle al-Husayn. When he died, she showed too
much sorrow at his death. She pitched a tent at his tomb and used to
offer prayers at night and fast during the day.[^3] He died of poison
when he was thirty-five years of age. It was al-Waleed bin ‘Abdul Melik
who gave him poison to drink.[^4]

With this we will end our talk about Imam al-Hasan’s children. We have
mentioned an outline on each of them. I ask Allah to grant me success to
have the honor of writing a research on their manners and the
reformative revolts of their grandsons against the oppressors and
dictators of the Umayyad and Abbasid caliphs.

[^1] Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqat, vol. 10, p. 34.
[^2] Al-Hada’iq al-Wardiya, p. 107.
[^3] Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 10, p. 138. Tanqeeh al-Maqal, vol. 1, p.
272.
[^4] ‘Umdat al-Talib, p. 78.


