Epilog
======

Mu’awiya achieved all what he desired in this life and obtained from
his world all what he wished and wanted. However, he had an idea that
seduced him throughout all his times and deprived him of sleep. If the
idea had gone well with him, then all things would have gone well with
him according to his viewpoint. The idea was that he wanted his children
and progeny to inherit the caliphate and absolute rule. He made every
effort to achieve that. So he brought near those far, spent a lot of
money, and traveled to Yathrib in spite of his old age and weakness.
However, he did not get that as long as Imam al-Hasan was alive. He came
to know that he would not carry out his task but through assassinating
the Imam for whose just rule all the Muslims waited, that justice, good,
and welfare might spread all over the country.

Mu’awiya thought of that for a long time and thought over a means to
achieve his wish. At last his statement he had given as an example for
assassination and treachery, “Surely Allah has soldiers of honey,”
appeared before him. He used that and was successful in assassinating
Sa‘d bin Abi Waqqas and the leader Malik al-Ashtar. His means was
confined to that. More than one time he sent a deadly poison to Imam
al-Hasan when he was in Damascus but he failed in assassinating him. So
he corresponded with the Emperor of the Rome and asked him to send him a
lethal poison quick in effect, but the Emperor refused to respond to him
saying:

“Surely it is not correct in our religion to help someone to kill one
who does not fight against us.” The Emperor of Rome refused to do that
because his religion did not permit him to kill an innocent man, but
Mu’awiya regarded that as lawful and it expressed his unbelief. So he
again corresponded with him and told him that such an action was lawful,
saying: “Surely this man (al-Hasan) was the (grand) son of the One who
went out (in revolt) in the land of Tuhama (Allah’s Apostle).” He has
gone (in revolt) to seek the rule of his father. I want the poison for
him. So relieve the people and the country of him.” Mu’awiya regarded as
lawful the assassination of the Imam because he was the (grand) son of
Allah’s Apostle (a.s) who destroyed the idols of the people who lived
before Islam and put an end to polytheism. Accordingly, the Emperor of
Rome was satisfied with that and sent him a deadly poison.[^1] When the
poison reached Mu’awiya, he thought of a way to send it to Imam
al-Hasan. He thought of the Imam’s relatives and their relatives but he
could find none to help him
[^1] Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 10, p. 173.

commit this crime. Then he thought of the Imam’s wives and concluded
that Ja’dah, daughter of al-Ash‘ath, would meet his request, for her
father had forced Imam Ali (a.s), to accept the arbitration and spoiled
his army. Mu’awiya was sure that al-Ash‘ath’s daughter would help him
achieve his objective and get his wish. At last he sent her the poison
with the sinful one, Marwan bin al-Hakam. He commanded Marwan to make
Ja’dah desire for marrying Yazid and to give her a hundred thousand
dirhams.[^1] It was appropriate for this sinful woman to respond to the
request of Mu’awiya. Ja’dah belonged to a bad family with a black
history and was disposed by nature for responding to all material
motives. Concerning her, Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) has said: “Surely
al-Ash‘ath took part in shedding the blood of Imam Ali. His daughter
Ja’dah poisoned al-Hasan. And his son took part in shedding the blood of
al-Husayn.”[^2] Besides, Ja’dah suffered from complexes because she had
no child from the Imam and was treated ordinarily in her house.

Marwan carried the poison to Ja’dah. He gave her the money and made her
desire for marrying Yazid if she responded to his request. Satan
whispered evil to her, so she became happy with the money and marrying
with Yazid. So she accepted to commit the crime. She took the poison
from Marwan. Imam al-Hasan was fasting during a very hot time. She
served his food and put the poison into the yogurt. The Imam took a
mouthful of it. When the poison reached his bowels, it destroyed them.
When Imam al-Hasan felt bitter pain, he (a.s) said: “To Allah we belong
and to Him is our return! Praise belongs to Allah for meeting Muhammad,
the master of the Apostles, my father, the master of the guardians, my
mother, the principal of the women of the world, my uncle, Ja‘far
al-Tayyar, and Hamza, the master of martyrs.”

Then he turned to Ja’dah and said to her: “O enemy of Allah, you have
killed me! May Allah kill you! By Allah, you will not get a successor
after me. He (Mu’awiya) has deceived and mocked at you. May Allah
disgrace you and him!”[^3]

Certainly Allah disgraced her, for she has been cited as an example of
evil, disgrace, sin, and treason. She brought shame on her progeny and
children from other than the Imam. When an argument occurred between
them and the

[^1] Al-Mas‘udi, Murujj al-Dhahab, vol. 2, p. 353. It was said that
Mo’awiya sent her ten thousand dinars and gave her country estates of
the land of Kufa. This has been mentioned in the book Tuhaf al-‘Uqool,
p. 391.
[^2] A‘yan al-Shia, vol. 4, p. 78.
[^3] Tuhaf al-‘Uqool, p. 391.

clans of Quraysh, they would revile them, saying: “Sons of a women who
poisons her husbands.”[^1] Mu’awiya broke his promise toward her. He did
not marry her to Yazid. He mocked at her when she asked him for that,
saying: “Surely we like the life of Yazid. Were it not for that, we
would fulfill our promise toward you through marrying you to him.”[^2]

Most historians have unanimously agreed on that Imam al-Hasan died of
poison, and that it was Mu’awiya who had (ordered to) put poison into
his food and killed him.[^3] Other historians have maintained that it was
Yazid who poisoned Imam al-Hasan.[^4] If we acknowledged that, then he
did that according to his father’s command, for none believes that he
committed such a dangerous incident without consulting his father and
getting his approval. It is very strange that Ibn Khaldun has tried to
justify this action of Mu’awiya and to declare that he was innocent of
this crime. He has said: “What is narrated that Mu’awiya had poisoned
Imam al-Hasan through the hand of his wife, Ja’dah, daughter of
al-Ash‘ath, is from the traditions of the Shia. Far it be from
Mu’awiya.”[^5]

Ibn Khaldun has said that out of fanaticism. This historian had been
inflicted with this disease. He has written these researches for
nothing, but to satisfy

[^1] A‘yan al-Shia, vol. 4, p. 76.
[^2] Al-Mas‘udi, Murujj al-Dhahab, vol. 2, p. 303.
[^3] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 17, p. 4. Tarikh
al-Duwal al-Islamiya, vol. 1, p. 53. Tadhkirat al-Khawas, p. 222.
Al-Isti‘ab, vol. 1, p. 374. Al-Nasaa’ih al-Kafiya, p. 62. Abu al-Fida’,
Tarikh, vol. 1, p. 194. All these books belong to the Sunni Muslims.
They have ascribed the murder of the Imam to Mo’awiya. They indicate the
corruption of the opinions of some historians who have maintained that
it is only the Shi‘ites who have narrated that Mo’awiya poisoned Imam
al-Hasan. They also show the corruption of the viewpoint of Dr. Philip
Hatti, who has mentioned in his book al-‘Arab, p. 79, saying: “And as
for the Shia, they ascribe his (al-Hasan’s) murder to Mo’awiya. They
regard al-Hasan as a martyr; rather the master of martyrs.” Dr. Philip
Hatti quoted his speech from Ibn Khaldun and did not follow the rest of
the sources, that he might understand the subject matter in general.
This is a proof of that the orientalists lack scientific research and do
not rely on logic and evidence as to their researches.

[^4] Abu al-Fida’, Tarikh, vol. 1, p. 193. Noor al-Abbsar, p. 112. Ibn
al-Wardi, Tarikh, vol. 8, p. 43. As for Ibn Katheer, he thinks it is not
correct that Yazid had done that apart from Mo’awiya. He has not
explained the proof for the incorrectness. There is no reason for that
except reckless fanaticism. Otherwise, what prevented Yazid from that
while it was he who killed Imam al-Husayn, the master of youth of the
Garden and made it lawful for his soldiers to violate the sacred things
in Medina, the capital of the Apostle, for three days. Moreover he
fornicated his aunt.

[^5] Ibn Khaldun, Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 178. In his book al-Tarikh
al-Siyasi, ‘Abd al-Mun‘im has depended on Ibn Khaldun’s statement.
Regarding the murder of the Imam, he has said: “We regard it as unlikely
that Mo’awiya did that.”

his fanaticism, sentiment, and inclination. We want to ask him: What
would prevent Mu’awiya from committing this crime in order that he might
make firm his rule and authority for which he committed ugly atrocities
and dangerous crimes? Mu’awiya warred against the legal Caliph Imam Ali
(a.s), and his son al-Hasan. He killed the Prophet’s companion Hijr bin
Adiy and his believing companions. He poisoned Malik al-Ashtar and Sa‘d
bin Abi Waqqas. He added to himself Ziyad bin Abeeh, and other than that
from among his crimes that none can count. Accordingly, what would
prevent Mu’awiya from assassinating and poisoning Imam al-Hasan while he
had come to know that the rule would not go well with him except through
that?

**Strange Sayings**

There is no harm in mentioning some strange statements that are similar
to those of Ibn Khaldun in that they are incorrect and far from reality.
They are as follows:

1. His Death of Tuberculosis

The orientalist Rewait M. Ronaldson has mentioned that Imam al-Hasan
(a.s) died of tuberculosis when he was forty-five years of age.[^1] This
statement is very strange. None of the historians have mentioned that,
for they have unanimously agreed on that the Imam died of poison, and
that he did not suffer tuberculosis. This orientalist has written all
his researches in this manner void of examination and based on slander
and lying.

2. His Death of a poisoned Stick

Professor Husayn Wa‘iz has mentioned: “Imam al-Husayn left Medina for
Mousil, in Iraq, to seek a cure, for he felt that his health was bad
after the incidents of poison. However, a poor, blind person came to him
and asked him to give him something as alms. He (the Imam) was sitting
on the ground. The blind person put his stick on al-Hasan’s foot and
pressed it against the foot. His stick was poisoned. However he
(al-Hasan) was treated by physicians and he got well.”[^2]

This statement is very far from correctness, for no historian has
mentioned what this man said. It is a pure slander and has no portion of
correctness.

[^1] ‘Aqidat al-Shia, p. 90. A statement with the same meaning has been
mentioned by Lamens in Da’irat al-Ma‘arif al-Islamiya, vol. 7, p. 400.
[^2] Roudat al-Shuhada’, p. 107.

3. He was poisoned while circumambulating the Kaaba

The famous historian Ahmed bin Sahl al-Balakhi, better known as
al-Maqdisi, has mentioned: “While Imam al-Hasan was circumambulating the
Kaaba, a person stabbed him in the upper part of his foot with a
poisoned spearhead. He died because of that.”[^1]

This statement is very strange, for only this historian has mentioned
it. Perhaps he wanted to deem Mu’awiya as far above that and to say that
he was not responsible for this crime. I think that no historian has
maintained that.

4. He died a natural Death

Dr. Hasan Ibrahim has mentioned that some historians have maintained
that Imam al-Hasan died a natural death forty days after he had left
Iraq for Yathrib.[^2] This statement is apparently corrupt, for (firstly)
Imam al-Hasan did not die a natural death, and (secondly) he stayed in
Yathrib for some years before his death, as the historians have
unanimously agreed on.

Now, we have to return to detail the circumstance of the Imam. When the
poison reached his bowels, he suffered deadly pain. He stayed in the bed
of sickness for forty days[^3] , and it was said for two months.[^4] The
activity of the poison in his body increased day by day until his holy
heart, which had love and affection toward all people, melted out of
pain. His brother al-Husayn came to visit him. He saw him pale and
wearing a head cloth. He came to know that the poison had cut his bowels
into pieces. The misfortune terrified him, so he turned to him and
asked:

-Who gave you the poison to drink?

-What do you want for him? -I want to kill him! -If he may remain as he
is, then Allah will avenge on him more terribly than you will. If he may
not remain as he is, then I would like to be free of any blame.[^5]

[^1] Al-Bid’ wa al-Tarikh (Paris Edition), vol. 6, p. 5.
[^2] Tarikh al-Islam al-Siyasi, vol.1, p.398. A statement similar to
that has been mentioned by Muhammed As‘ad Talas in his book Tarikh
al-Umma al-‘Arabiya, vol. 9, p. 16. He has said: “Al-Hasan left for
Medina after the peacemaking. He did not remain (alive) for more than
two months.”
[^3] Al-Bustani, Da’irat al-Ma‘arif, vol.7, p.38. Ibn Abi al-Hadeed,
Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol.4, p.4.
[^4] Al-Dimyari, Hayat al-Hayawan, vol.1, p.53. It was said that he
remained (alive) two days after he had been given the poison to drink.
This has been mentioned in the book Tuhaf al-‘Uqool, p. 391.
[^5] Al-Isti‘ab, vol. 1, p. 374.

Imam al-Hasan (a.s) avoided shedding blood. He did not want blood to be
shed for him even a drop. A physician was brought to him. The physician
carefully examined him, but he had no hope of his recovery, so he turned
to his family and said to them: “Surely the poison has cut his bowels
into pieces!”[^1] Junada bin Abi Umayya, a great companion of the
Prophet, came in to Imam al-Hasan to visit him. He said to the Imam:
“Preach to me, O son of Allah’s Apostle.”

The Imam (a.s) responded to his request though he was in a critical
condition. He gave him these golden words which were more expensive than
jewels and in which he had shown the secrets of his Imamate, saying: “O
Junada, get ready for your journey (to Allah) and get your provisions
before your death comes. Know that you seek the life in this world while
death seeks you. Do not carry the concern of your day that has not come
on your day when you are. You should know that you will not acquire
anything beyond your own sustenance, save as one who looks after things
on behalf of others. You should know that you will be called to account
according to the lawful in the world, punished for the forbidden
wherein, and admonished for the suspicions… Take from it that which
suffices you. If it was licit, then you would renounce it.

If it was forbidden, then there would be no sin in it… If there will be
a punishment, then the punishment will be easy. Act for your present
life as if that you will live forever, and act for your next life as if
you will die tomorrow. If you want glory without a clan and respect
without an authority, then come out of the abasement of disobedience
into the glory of obedience to Allah, the Great and Almighty. If a need
disputes with you over making friends with men, then make friends with
one who adorns you when you make friends with him. He keeps you when you
take from him, helps you when you ask him for help, believes you when
you say, and strengthens your assault when you assault. He stretches out
his hand (to you) when you stretches your hand (to him) to do (him) a
favor, uncovers your defects, counts the good deed when he sees it from
you, and gives you when you ask him. He starts speaking with you when
you keep silent, and helps you when a misfortune befalls you. Calamities
do not come to you from him. Ways from him are not different to you. He
does not desert you during the facts, and prefers you (to himself) when
you dispute with each other over an apportioned thing.”[^2]

[^1] Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 8, p. 43.
[^2] A‘yan al-Shia, vol. 4, p. 85.

Imam al-Hasan (a.s) supplied Junada with these beneficial commandments
containing immortal lessons, valuable, wise sayings, and correct
opinions he had taken from his grandfather the Apostle, may Allah bless
him and his family, and from his father Imam Ali (a.s). He guided him to
the best of the programs that guaranteed his success in this world and
the next world. ‘Umayr bin Ishaq visited Imam al-Hasan. The Imam (a.s)
said to him: “O ‘Umayr, ask me before you will be unable to ask me!”
‘Umayr found it difficult to question him during that critical
condition. He said to him: “No, by Allah, I will not question you until
Allah makes you well!”[^1]

Then Imam al-Hasan turned to the members of his family and told them
about the severe pain from which he suffered, saying: “I have been given
poison several times but I have never been given poison like this. A bit
of my liver[^2] has come out of my mouth and I began to turn it over with
a stick I had.”[^3]

[^1] Safwat al-Safwa, vol.1, p.320. Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 8, p.
42.

[^2] The narration, if it was correct, has mentioned that the poison had
an effect on the liver of the Imam, peace be on him, to the extent that
he spewed a bit of it. Modern medicine has demonstrated that poison does
not make one spew his liver; rather, it gives rise to an infection in
the stomach and disorders in the intestines. That is when the poison is
strong. If the poison is not strong, it gives rise to a low blood
pressure and an infection in the nerves. In some rare conditions it
brings about an inflammation in the liver and some other symptoms
mentioned by those specialists in legal medicine. Man may imagine that
this speech contradicts what has been mentioned in the narration. That
is refused because al-kabad (the liver), in the Arabic usage, is a name
given to the special organ in the right side and which secretes the
bile. The word al-kabad is also applied to the whole of the belly. It
has been mentioned in the books al-Qamoos, vol. 1, p. 332, and Tajj
al-‘Aroos, vol. 2, p. 481: “Perhaps the whole of the belly is named
al-kabad.” Ibn Sayyida has narrated that Kira‘ has mentioned the word
al-kabad in the book al-Munjid and recited: When a youth from among them
wills, he stretches out his hand to a smooth kabad (belly) or a
breast.

He (Ibn Sayyida) has said: “Al-kabad is figuratively used as a name of
al-janb (the waist or side). The tradition, “he put his hand on his
kabad,” means that he put his hand on his side or waist from the
outside. The traceable tradition: “The earth throws out the pieces of
its kabad,” means that it throws out the hidden things in it such as
treasures and minerals. Here the Prophet has figuratively used the word
al-kabad. This has also been mentioned in the book Lisan al-Arab, vol.
4, p. 378. According to that, the meaning of the narration is that Imam
al-Hasan spewed from his stomach some coagulated blood similar to the
liver. I think that through this (explanation) it seems that there is no
contradiction between the narration and what the doctors have mentioned,
and Allah is Knowing.

[^3] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol.4, p.17.

His brother (Imam al-Husayn), visited him. When he saw him suffering
from the pain of the poison, he wept. So al-Hasan looked at him and
asked: -What has made you weep, O Abu Abdullah?

-I am weeping for that which has been done to you! Imam al-Hasan had
come to know of that which his brother would face after him. So his
state was easy to him. He wept and said to him with shaking, sad tones:
“I have been given poison to drink. I will be killed with it. However,
there is no day like your day, O Abu Abdullah. Thirty thousand people
will approach you. They will claim that they belong to the community of
our grandfather Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his family, and follow
the religion of Islam. They will gather together to kill you, shed your
blood, violate your sacredness, take your progeny and your womenfolk as
prisoners of war, and plunder you.”[^1]

Surely all that which the pure family met after the death of the
Prophet (a.s) of sorrows and misfortunes was not similar to the disaster
of Abu Abdullah al-Husayn (a.s). There was no day like his day, for on
that day (the day of Aashura), Islam was abased, the dignity of the
Muslims and the sacredness of the Prophet were violated, while it was
incumbent on people to take care of his sacredness and to be kind to his
household. Imam al-Hasan suffered from a severe pain and no longer could
bear it. One of those who visited him said to him: “O son of Allah’s
Apostle, why have you become impatient? Is your grandfather not Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, your father not Ali, and
your mother not Fatima? Are you not the master of the youths of the
Garden?”

The Imam answered him with a weak voice: “I am weeping out of two
things; the terrible beginning after death and the separation from the
dear ones!”[^2]

**His will to al-Husayn**

When his pain increased and his condition became more critical, he knew
that he was close to the hereafter and far from this world. So he
summoned his brother (Imam al-Husayn), made his will to him and
entrusted him with his covenant. The Shia have mentioned his will in a
manner different from what the Sunnis have narrated. As for the text of
what the Shia have narrated, it is as follows: “This is what al-Hasan
bin Ali has bequeathed to his brother al-Husayn. He has advised him to
bear witness that there is no god but Allah that

[^1] Bihar al-Anwar, vol.10, p.123.
[^2] Al-Saduq, al-Amali, p. 133.

He is unique and without partners, and that he should worship Him with
a true worship. He has no partner in the kingdom and no helper to save
Him… He created everything, then ordained for it a measure. He is the
best of those who are worshiped and worthiest of those who are praised.
Whoever obeys Him is on the right way, whoever disobeys Him goes astray,
and whoever turns to Him in repentance is rightly guided. I have given
my will to you, O Husayn, as to those whom I have left behind from among
my family, my children, and your household. Pardon their wrong-doer, and
accept from their good-doer, that you may be a successor and father for
them, and that you may bury me with Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family, for I am the worthiest of him and his household. If they
prevented you (from doing it), then I adjure you before Allah, by the
relationship through which Allah has made me close to you, and the close
kinship to Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, that you
should not shed even a drop of blood in carrying out my command until
you meet Allah’s Apostle. Then you will bring suit against them (before
him) and tell him about the affair of the people toward us.”[^1]

As for the text of what the Sunnis have narrated, it is as follows: “O
my brother, when Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
passed away, your father looked up to this rule and hoped that he would
be its leader. But Allah turned it away from him to Abu Bakr. When death
was close to Abu Bakr, he also yearned for it, but it was turned away
from him to ‘Umar. When ‘Umar was near to death, he made it consultation
among six persons among whom he was. He had no doubt that he would not
miss it, but it was turned away from him to ‘Uthman. When ‘Uthman died,
the pledge of allegiance was given to him. Then the people disputed with
him to the extent that he drew the sword and sought it (the caliphate),
but nothing of it went well with him. By Allah, I do not think that the
prophethood and the caliphate gather together among us, the household. I
have come to know that the foolish from among the people of Kufa will
make light of you and make you rise. I have asked ‘A’isha to permit me
to be buried in her house with Allah’s Apostle, peace be on him. She has
said: ‘Yes.’ I do not know, perhaps that she said that out of shyness.
When I die, then ask her for that. If she agrees, then bury me in her
house. I do not think but that the people will prevent you if you want
that. If they do, then do not ask them for that and bury me in the
(cemetery) of Baqee‘ al-Gharqad, for I have in those buried in it an
excellent exemplar.”[^2]

[^1] A‘yan al-Shia, vol. 4, p. 79. Al-Saduq, al-Amali. Al-Sayyid
al-Murtada, ‘Uyun al-Mu‘jizat. Mir’at al-‘Uqool, vol. 1, p. 226.
[^2] Al-Isti‘ab, vol. 1, p. 375. Tarikh al-Khamees, vol. 2, p. 227.

These will have contained disgrace to the dignity of Imam Ali (a.s),
and disparaging against him. This speech never suits the manners of Imam
al-Hasan. In history there are many insignificant examples similar to
this one, but they are clear to the intelligent.

**His will to Muhammad**

Death approached Imam al-Hasan (a.s) and he knew well that he was at
the door of the hereafter. So he ordered Qanbar to summon his brother
Muhammad (bin al-Hanafiyyah). Qanbar quickly went to Muhammad. When
Muhammad saw Qanbar, he became afraid and asked him: “Has anything
happened?” “But (I hope) it is something good,” replied Qanbar with a
weak voice, “Come to answer Abu Muhammad (al-Hasan).”

Muhammad became perplexed and astonished. He went out running to the
extent that he was not able to put on his sandals properly. He came in
to Imam al-Hasan (a.s) while his face was yellow and he was shaking with
fear. Imam al-Hasan (a.s) said to him: “Sit down, O Abu Muhammad, for no
one like you should not be here to hear the speech by which the dead
come to life and the living die. You must be vessels of knowledge and
lamps of guidance, for the light during the day is brighter at sometimes
than at others. Do you not know that Allah made the sons of Ibrahim
imams, and made some of them more excellent than others, and he gave
Dawud the Zabur? And you know with what He has marked out Muhammad, may
Allah bless him and his family. O Muhammad bin Ali, I only fear that you
may be envious, for Allah attributes this to unbelievers. He, the Most
High, has said: (Many of the followers of the Book wish that they could
turn you back into unbelievers after your faith, out of envy from
themselves, (even) after the truth has become manifest to them).[^1] But
Allah did not give Satan power over you. O Muhammad bin Ali, shall I
inform you of what I heard from your father concerning you?” “Yes,”
Muhammad replied. Imam al-Hasan went on saying:

“I heard your father say on the day of Basra (the Battle of the Camel):
‘He who wants to behave with goodness toward me in this world and the
next, must behave with goodness toward my son, Muhammad.’ O Muhammad bin
Ali, if you want me to inform you (about yourself) when you were sperm
in your father’s loin, I can tell you. O Muhammad bin Ali, did you not
know that al-Husayn bin Ali is an Imam after me, after the passing away
of my soul and the separation of my soul from my body, and he is an Imam
before Allah in the Book? It is an inheritance from the Prophet (a.s)
which Allah has added to what he inherited from his father and mother,
for Allah knows that you are the choice of the
[^1] Qur’an, 2, 109.

creation, so He has chosen Muhammad from among you, and Muhammad had
chosen Ali, and Ali has chosen me for Imamate, and I have chosen
al-Husayn.” Muhammad showed obedience and submission saying: “You are my
Imam, and you are my means to Muhammad (the Prophet), may Allah bless
him and his family. By Allah, I wish that my soul had departed before I
heard these words from you. Verily, in my head there are words (from a
well) which buckets cannot empty and which (are like pools so clear
that) blowing winds cannot make them cloudy; they are like a book
written with (all the) diacritical points on a decorated parchment. I am
always about to begin speaking them, but I find myself preceded in it by
the Book that was sent down, or what the messengers brought. They are
words by which the tongue of one who speaks becomes tired as well as the
hand of one who writes. (Even then) it does not reach the standard of
your excellence. Thus it is that Allah rewards those who do good, and
there is no power save in Allah. Surely al-Husayn is the most
knowledgeable of us, best of us in clemency, and the nearest of us to
Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, in kinship. He was
endowed with understanding before he was born, and he learnt the
revelation before he could speak. If Allah had known a goodness in
anyone of us, he would not have chosen Muhammad from among us. So when
Muhammad chose Ali as an Imam, Ali chose you (as an Imam) after him, and
you have chosen al-Husayn (as an Imam) after you. We submit and accept
(him) who is the consent.”[^1]

Al-Daynwary has mentioned: “In his last hours, he sent for his brother
Muhammad, who was in a country-estate of his. He (a.s) opened his eyes
while he was unconsciuos when Muhammad stood before him. First he turned
to his brother al-Husayn and said to him: ‘O my brother, I ask you to do
good to Muhammad, for he is very dear.’ Then he turned to Muhammad and
said to him: ‘O Muhammad, I ask you to take care of al-Husayn. Support
and help him!”[^2]

**Toward the Most High Comrade**

The condition of the Imam became more critical. His pain became more
intense. He suffered from the agony of death. He knew that there were
just some moments of his valuable life. He turned to the members of his
family and said to them: “Take me out to the yard of the house that I
may look at the Kingdom of the Heaven.”

[^1] Muhammed bin al-Hanafiya, p. 52.
[^2] Al-Akhbar al-Tuwal, p. 203.

They carried him to the yard of the house. When he was there, he raised
his head towards the heaven, addressed his Lord and besought Him,
saying: “O Allah, surely I have sacrificed my life in anticipation to
Your reward, for it is the most lovable life to me. I have been not
afflicted with something like it. O Allah, care for my death and mercify
my loneliness in the grave!” Then it came to his mind that Mu’awiya had
deserted him, broken his promises, and assassinated his father. So he
said: “His poisonous drink has acted upon me. By Allah, he has not
fulfilled what he promised nor is he truthful in what he said.”[^1] Then
he recited some verses of the Holy Qur’an. He besought and supplicated
Allah until his pure soul departed to the Garden of the Abode. That
noble soul, which had no equal in clemency, generosity, knowledge,
mercifulness, affection, and kindness to all people, rose high to the
Most High Comrade.

Imam al-Hasan, the clement sire, master of the youths of the Garden,
and the Prophet’s darling passed away. The world became dark because of
this great loss, and the hereafter shone to receive.[^2]

The Hashimites and the people of Yathrib wept, cried, and lamented for
him. Abu Hurayra quickly hurried to the Mosque of the Prophet (a.s). He
was weeping with astonishment and shouting at the top of his voice: “The
beloved of the Prophet (a.s) has died today! Weep for him!”[^3]

His words broke the hearts and made sorrow hurt the souls. The people
of Yathrib hurried to the house of Imam al-Hasan. Some of them were
silent, some were crying, some were astonished, and others were wailing.
They showed great sadness at the death of the great Imam, who was their
refuge, shelter, and resort when a disaster or a misfortune befell
them.

[^1] Tadhkirat al-Khawas, p. 23. Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarikh, vol. 4, p. 226.
Hulyat al-Awliya’, vol. 2, p. 38. Safwat al-Safwa, vol. 1, p. 226.
[^2] The historians have differed over the year when Imam al-Hasan died.
It was said that he died in the year 4 9 A. H. This has been said by Ibn
al-Athir and Ibn Hajar in his Tahdhib al-Tahdhibin It was said that he
died in the year 51 A. H. This has been said by al-Khatib al-Baghdadi in
his al-Tarikh and Ibn Qutayba in his al-Imama wa al-Siyasa. Other than
that has also been said. The historians have also differed over the
month when he died. It was said that he died in Rabee‘ al-Awwal 25. It
was said that he died in Safar 28. It was said that he died on Sunday,
in (the month of) al-Muharram 10, in the year 45, as it is in the book
al-Musamarat, p. 23. The famous narration with the Shi‘ites is that he
died on the seventh of Safar when ceremonies are held. In Da‘irat
al-Ma‘arif, p. 23, al-Sayyid Mahdi al-Kazimi has mentioned some details
about his death.
[^3] Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 2, p. 301. Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarikh, vol. 2, p.
227.

**The Imam is prepared for Burial**

Imam al-Husayn (a.s) prepared his brother al-Hasan for burial. Abdullah
bin Abbas, Abdurrahman bin Ja‘far, Ali bin Abdullah bin Abbas, his (Imam
al-Husayn) two brothers Muhammad bin al-Hanafiyya and Abu al-Fadhl
al-Abbas helped him in that. He (Imam al-Husayn) washed, shrouded, and
rubbed him with camphor. After he had prepared him for burial, he
ordered him to be carried to the Mosque of the Prophet, so that the
prayer might be performed over him.[^1]

Processions of Escorting

Many people escorted Imam al-Hasan in a manner that the capital of the
Prophet (Medina) had never witnessed. The Hashimites sent some people to
the outskirts and the neighboring villages to tell the people there
about the death of the Imam. The people from there came to take part in
escorting the great corpse of the Imam.[^2] Tha‘laba bin Malik has
narrated about the great number of those who escorted the Imam, saying:
“I witnessed al-Hasan on the day when he died and was buried in (the
cemetery of) al-Baqee‘. If a needle had been thrown, it would not have
fallen but on a man’s head.”[^3]

The people who escorted the Imam were so many that the cemetery of
al-Baqee‘ did not contain them. It was incumbent on the people to hurry
to escort the grandson of their Prophet because he undertook their
interests, helped their weak, and devoted himself for them.

**The Prayer over the Corpse**

The Sacred Corpse was carried on the heads from the Imam’s house to the
Mosque of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. Prominent and
notable people escorted the imam. The holy corpse of Imam al-Hasan (a.s)
was put in the mosque, and Imam al-Husayn (a.s) led the people in
offering the prayer over him. The rest of the Prophet’s companions and
the people of various classes performed the prayer behind him. Ibn Abi
al-Hadeed has mentioned: “Imam al-Husayn ordered Sa‘eed bin al-‘Aas to
perform the prayer over Imam al-Hasan’s pure corpse and said to him:
‘Were for that it was Sunna, I would not let you lead (us in
prayer).’”[^4] This statement is impossible because there were bad
relationships between the Umayyads and the Hashimites. Therefore, how
did Imam al-Hasan let their leaders pray over

[^1] A‘yan al-Shia, vol. 4, p. 80.
[^2] Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarikh, vol. 8, p. 228.
[^3] Al-Isaba, vol. 1, p .330.
[^4] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p.18.

him? The correct thing is that none of the Umayyads attended the
funerals of Imam al-Hasan except Sa‘eed bin al-‘Aas.[^1]

**Great Sedition**

The escorting processions headed for the Holy Shrine of the Prophet,
that they might let Imam al-Hasan renew his covenant with his
grandfather and that they might bury him beside his grandfather. When
the Umayyads came to know that, they gathered together and armed
themselves. Selfishness and the enmity toward the Hashimites moved them
to make an opposition and a riot as to burring Imam al-Hasan alongside
his grandfather. As they had come to know that their leader ‘Uthman bin
‘Affan had been buried in Hash Kawkab, which was the cemetery of the
Jews, they refused to let Imam al-Hasan to be buried beside his
grandfather. They regarded that as shame and disgrace on them. So they
said with one tongue: “O Lord, battle is better than ease. Should
‘Uthman be buried in the outskirts of Medina and al-Hasan be buried
alongside the Prophet?”

Marwan bin al-Hakam and Sa‘eed bin al-‘Aas went to A’isha. They
provoked her to support them. They knew well she was full of malice,
jealousy, and envy toward the sons of Ali and Fatima. They said to her:
“O mother of the believers, al-Husayn wants to bury his brother al-Hasan
beside the messenger of allah. By Allah, if he buried al-Hasan beside
his grandfather, he would remove the pride of your father and of his
companion ‘Umar until the Day of Resurrection.”

These words moved A’isha, and she enthusiastically rushed to support
them as she had rushed before to war against Imam Ali (a.s). She
supported them not according to a firm reason but out of her personal
tendencies. She asked Marwan: “What shall I do, O Marwan?” “Follow
al-Husayn and prevent him from burring al-Hasan alongside the
Prophet!”

She quickly and with astonishment arose. A mule was brought to her. She
rode the mule and moved towards the crowded escorting processions. She
was shouting at the top of her voice: “Do not let him whom I do not like
enter my house! If al-Hasan was buried in my house, I would cut this
(she pointed to her forelock)!”[^2]

[^1] Tarikh al-Khamees, vol. 2, p. 323.
[^2] Many historians have mentioned that ‘Aa’isha prevented (al-Husayn)
from burying Imam al-Hasan alongside his grandfather. Among they are Ibn
Abi al-Hadeed, in his Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p.18, Sibt bin
al-Jawzi in his Tadhkirat al-Khawas, p.

Through her speech, A’isha did not know that she would shed the blood
of Muslims and divide their unity. Without doubt she paid no attention
to that, for she had shed their blood at the Battle of the Camel in
response to her sentiments full of malice toward Imam Ali (a.s). I
wonder, firstly, how did she own the house where the Prophet (a.s) was
buried? Did her father not claim that the messenger of Allah said: “We,
the prophets, inherit neither gold nor silver nor a house nor a real
estate”? Did this narration concern only Fatima (a.s) who was deprived
of her inheritance and right? If it was general, then why did the mother
of the believers (A’isha) not put it into practice? If we acknowledged
that she had the right to inherit her house, then what was the amount of
her share of it? That is because she deserved nothing but one-ninth of
one-eighth. It was said (to her): “One-ninth of one-eighth belongs to
you while you have owned the whole.”

Besides, a wife inherits nothing of the ground; she inherits some of
the buildings and the rest of the movable properties.

Secondly, why did A’isha not like Imam al-Hasan, who was the Prophets
most beloved son and the fruit of his heart? It is worth mentioning that
he said concerning him: “O Allah, I love him and love whoever loves
him!” Indeed, through that, A’isha turned away from what was narrated
from the Prophet (a.s) concerning his grandson.[^1]

Yes, A’isha responded to the desires of the Umayyads and set out to
take part in their procession. She did not allow Imam al-Hasan, the
Prophet’s grandson, to be buried beside his grandfather. She paid no
attention to the sacredness of the pure family of the Prophet whose love
Allah has made obligatory in His Holy Book. However, we belong to Allah
and to Him is our return!


