Chapter Iv : Honor and Laudation
================================

Allah’s Holy Book has lauded the excellence of the members of the Ahlul
Bayt; and Allah’s Apostle (a.s) honored them. He joined them to the Holy
Qur’an. He has made it incumbent on the community to show affection and
love for them. It is necessary for us to quote some verses and
traditions in respect of the Ahlul Bayt, peace be on them. That is
because they strongly related to our research and show us the great
importance and high position of Imam al-Hasan (a.s). We will mention
that for readers as follows:

**The Holy Qur’an**

Allah’s Great Book that Falsehood shall not come to it from before it
nor from behind it, has mentioned the excellence and position of the
Ahlul Bayt with Allah. It is sufficient for us to mention some verses:

**1. The Verse of Love (al-Mawadda)**

Allah has made it obligatory on Muslims to show love toward Ahlul Bayt,
peace be on them. He has said that in the Qur’an: “I do not ask of you
any reward for it except love for (my) kin.”[^1] Ibn Abbas has narrated,
saying: “When this verse was revealed, a Muslim asked: ‘O Allah’s
Apostle, who are your kin whom you have ordered us to obey?’ He (a.s)
replied: ‘Ali, Fatima, and her two sons.’”[^2] Abu Na‘eem has narrated on
the authority of Jabir, who said: “An Arab of the desert came to the
Prophet (a.s) and said: ‘O Muhammad, show me Islam.’ The Prophet said:
‘Bear witness that there is no god but Allah, the One with out partner,
and that Muhammad is His servant and Apostle.’ The Arab of the desert
asked: ‘Will you ask of me any reward for it?’ ‘No,’ replied the
Prophet, ‘except love for the kin.’ ‘My kin or your kin?’ asked the man.
‘My kin,’ retorted the Prophet. ‘Stretch out (your hand) that I may
pledge allegiance to you,’ said the Arab, ‘Allah’s curse by upon him who
does not love you and your kin.’ ‘Amen!’ said the Prophet (a.s).”[^3]
Imam al-Hasan (a.s) has declared that he was among those meant by the
verse. He (a.s) has mentioned that during one of his sermons: “I am
among Ahlul Bayt whom Allah has made obligatory on Muslims the love to
them. He,

[^1] Qur’an, 42, 23.
[^2] Al-Fakhr al-Razi, Tafseer, vol. 7, p. 406. Al-Durr al-Manthur, vol.
7, p. 7. Al-Nisaburi, Tafseer. Ibn Jareer al-Tabari, Tafseer, vol. 5, p.
16. Al-Kashif. Al-Sawa‘iq al-Muhriqa, p. 102. Dhakha‘ir al-Uqba, p. 25.
Noor al-Absar, p. 100.
[^3] Hulyat al-Awliya, vol. 3, p. 201.

the Blessed and Most High, has said: I do not ask of you any reward for
it except love for (my) kin; and whoever earns good, We will give him
more of good. Therefore, earning good is showing love for us, Ahlul
Bayt.”[^1]

Imam al-Shafi‘i has referred to the meaning of this verse, saying:

O Family of Allah’s Messenger, love for you is a religious duty Allah
has revealed in the Qur’an.

Al-Fakhr al-Razi has said: “If this (verse) has been established (that
it was revealed in respect of Ali, Fatima, and her two sons), then they
must be singled out with great magnification. Many verses are proofs on
that. The first is these words of Him, the Exalted: except love for (my)
kin. The sense of the proof of this is the first part of the verse. It
is that which He has already mentioned that the affair of the family of
Muhammad (a.s) returns to him. So all those whose affair strongly and
perfectly returned to him were the Aal (the family). Without doubt, the
relationship between Fatima, Ali, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn and Allah’s
Apostle (a.s) was the strongest of all relationships. This is well known
through the traditions ensured by many narrations. Therefore, they must
be al-Aal (the family).

The second, without doubt, the Prophet (a.s) showed love for Fatima,
peace be on her. He (a.s) said: ‘Fatima is a part from me. What hurts
her hurts me.’ It has been established through the traditions ensured by
many lines of transmission that Muhammad (a.s) showed love for Ali,
al-Hasan, and al-Husayn, peace be on them. If that has been established,
then it is obligatory on the community to do the same. That is due to
these words of Him, the Exalted: “And follow him so that you may walk in
the right way.[^2]” And due to these words of Him, the exalted:
“Therefore, let those beware who go against his order.”[^3] And due to
these words of Him, the exalted: “Say: If you love me, then follow me,
Allah will love you.”[^4] And due to these words of Him, the exalted:
“Certainly you have in Allah’s Apostle an excellent example.” [^5] The
third is that the supplication for al-Aal (the Prophet’s family) is a
great position. For this reason the supplication is regarded as the end
of al-tashahud in prayer; that is his words: “O Allah, bless Muhammad
and the family of Muhammad, and have mercy on

[^1] Al-Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 3, p. 172. Majjma‘ al-Zawa’id, vol. 9, p.
146. al-Sawa‘iq al-Muhriqa, p. 101. Majjma‘ al-Bayan fi Tafseer Surat
al-Shura, vol. 9, p. 29.
[^2] Qur’an, 7, 158.
[^3] Ibid., 24, 63.
[^4] Ibid., 3, 31.
[^5] Ibid., 33, 21.

Muhammad and the family of Muhammad! None has such magnification except
the Ahlul Bayt (a.s).”[^1]

Most surely, showing love for Ahlul Bayt is among the most important
Islamic and religious duties, for through it one can pay the reward of
the message, make relationship with the Prophet (a.s) and thank him for
the sufferings he met for saving Muslims from polytheism and worshipping
the idols. Therefore, it is incumbent on the community to follow his
family, and to show respect and love for them.

**2. The Verse of Purification (Tattheer)**

Among Allah’s clear verses indicating that Ahlul Bayt were protected
from sins, purified from deviation and offenses is the verse of
Tattheer, in which Allah, the Most High, has said: “Allah only desires
to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of the House and to
purify a (thorough) purifying.”[^2] The verse clearly indicates that
Ahlul Bayt were protected from sins. The research on the verse has many
sides:

**The Verse is a Proof on the Protection from Sins**

To conclude through the verse that Ahlul Bayt are protected from sins
is that Allah, the Most High, has limited the intention of keeping away
the uncleanness (sins) with the word innama (only), which is the
strongest of all the determiners. Besides, there is al (the) in the
predicate, and the repetition of the word tahara (purity). According to
Arabic grammar, this is a proof of the determination and the
specialization. It is well known that it is impossible for the intended
things to oppose the intention of Allah, the Exalted, (due to the
verse): His command, when He intends anything, is only to say to it: Be,
so it is.[^3] So through the verse we can conclude that Ahlul Bayt are
protected from sins and acts of disobedience.

**The People meant by the Verse**

The reliable narrators have unanimously agreed that the verse was
revealed in respect of Allah’s Apostle (a.s) Imam Ali, the Commander of
the faithful (a.s) Fatima, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn, peace be on them.
None associated with them in this excellence.[^4] Al-Hakim has narrated
on the authority of Umm

[^1] Al-Razi, Tafseer.
[^2] Qur’an, 33, 33.
[^3] Ibid., 36, 82.
[^4] al-Fakhr, Tafseer, vol. 6, p. 783. Al-Nisaburi, Tafseer. Muslim,
Saheeh, vol. 2, p. 331. Al-Khasa’is al-Kubra, vol. 2, p. 264. Al-Riyad
al-Nadira, vol. 2, p. 188. Al-Nisa’i, Khasa’is. Ibn Jareer, Tafseer,
vol. 22, p. 5. Imam Ahmed Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 4, p. 107.
Al-Bayqahi, Sunan, vol. 2, p. 150. Mushkil al-Aathaar, vol. 1, p. 334.

Salama, who said: “The verse (Allah only desires to keep away the
uncleanness from you, O people of the House and to purify you a
(thorough) purifying) was revealed in my house. So Allah’s Apostle (a.s)
sent for Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn, peace be on them. Then he
said: ‘O Allah these are my household.’ I (Umm Salama) asked: ‘O Allah’s
Apostle, am I not of the household?’ ‘You are good,’ he replied, ‘these
are my household, O Allah, my household are worthier!’”[^1]

In her other narration, Umm Salama has said: “The verse (Allah only
desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of the House and
to purify you a (thorough) purifying) was revealed in my house. In my
house there were Fatima, Ali, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn. Allah’s Apostle
(a.s) covered them with his cloak. Then he said: ‘These are my family;
therefore, (O Allah), keep away the uncleanness from them, and purify
them a (thorough) purifying.’”[^2]

“Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House and to purify a (thorough) purifying.” In respect of these
words of Him, the Most High Al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi has narrated the
following on the authority of Abu Sa‘eed al-Khidri on the authority of
the Prophet (a.s). He has said: “Allah’s Apostle (a.s) gathered Fatima,
Ali, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn, peace be on them. Then he covered them
with his cloak and said: ‘These are my family; therefore, O Allah, keep
away the uncleanness from them, and purify them a (thorough) purifying.’
Umm Salama was at the door and asked: ‘O Allah’s Apostle (a.s) am I not
among them?’ ‘You are good,’ he replied.’”[^3]

Another example of that the verse concerns them and does not include
other than them is that which Ibn Abbas has narrated. He has said: “For
nine months I saw Allah’s Apostle (a.s) come every day to the door (of
the house) of Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s). He said at the time of each
prayer: ‘Peace be on you, Allah’s mercy and blessings be on you, O Ahlul
Bayt! Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people
of the House and to purify you a (thorough) purifying. (Perform) the
prayer, may Allah have mercy upon you! (He did that) five times a
day.”[^4]

[^1] Al-Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 2, p. 416. Usd al-Ghaba, vol. 5, 521.
[^2] Al-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 5, p. 199.
[^3] Tarikh Baghdad, vol. 10, p 278.
[^4] Al-Durr al-Manthur.

Ibn Jareer and Ibn Mardawayh have reported the following on the
authority of Abu al-Hamra’, who said: “In Medina, for eight months, I
saw Allah’s Apostle (a.s) go out (to perform) the Morning Prayer. He
used to put his hands on both sides of the door and said: ‘(Perform) the
prayer; Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O
people of the House and to purify a (thorough) purifying.’”[^1]

Abu Barzah has narrated, saying: “I performed the prayers with Allah’s
Apostle (a.s) for seven months. When he went out of his house, he went
to the door (of the house) of Fatima, peace be on her, and said: ‘Peace
be on you, Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O
people of the House and to purify you a (thorough) purifying.[^2]

Anas bin Malik has narrated, saying: “The Prophet (a.s) passed by the
door (of the house) of Fatima for six months when he went out to perform
the prayer. He said: ‘(Perform) the prayer, O members of the house!
Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House and to purify you a (thorough) purifying. ’”[^3]

In one of his sermons, Imam al-Hasan has said: “And I am among the
household among whom Gabriel came down and from whom he ascended (to the
heaven). I am among the members of the house from whom Allah has kept
away the uncleanness and whom He thoroughly purified.”[^4] Many ways of
transmission have ensured the authentic traditions. None can doubt their
chain of authorities and their meaning. They all indicate that the
Sacred Verse concerns the five people who were beneath the cloak and
that it does not concern other than them from the family of the Prophet
(a.s).

**The Verse does not include the Prophet’s Wives**

The wives of the Prophet (a.s) have no share in the verse, which
concerns the people who were beneath the cloak. We will mention the
following as proofs on that:

1. They are wide of the subject of the family, for the family is the
subject that includes man’s tribes and relatives, so it does not include
wife. Zayd bin Arqam has emphasized this meaning. He was asked: “Who are
the family of the Prophet (a.s)? (Are they) his wives?” “No,” he
replied, “by Allah, the wife

[^1] Al-Durr al-Manthur.
[^2] Majjma‘ al-Zawa’id, vol. 9, p. 169.
[^3] Dhakha’ir al-Uqba, p. 24.
[^4] Al-Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 3, p. 172.

remains with her husband for a period of time. Then he divorces her,
and she returns to her father and her people. His family are his origin
and his blood relationship who have been deprived of the alms after
him.”[^1]

2. If we approved that the word “family” is generalized to include
wife, then it is necessary to specify it, because of the previous
traditions ensured by many ways of transmission that requires limiting
the generalization.

**Ikrima’s Claims**

Ikrima claimed that the verse was revealed in respect of the wives of
the Prophet (a.s). He announced that at the market place.[^2] He was so
insistent and stubborn that he said: “If someone wants (to discuss the
verse), I will discuss with him that it was revealed in respect of the
wives of the Prophet (a.s).”[^3] None depends on Ikrima’s narration for
the following reasons:

1. He belonged to the Kharijites[^4], who were famous for showing enmity
and trickery toward Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful (a.s).

2. He was known and famous for lying. It has been narrated on the
authority of Ibn al-Musayyab that he said to a retainer of his called
Burd: “Do not tell lies to me as Ikrima told lies to Ibn Abbas.”[^5] It
has been reported that Uthman bin Murrah said to al-Qasim: “Ikrima has
related to us so-and-so.” “My nephew,” replied al-Qasim, “Ikrima is a
liar. He reports a tradition in the early morning and opposes it in the
evening.”[^6] Therefore, how can man rely on Ikrima’s traditions while he
has been accused of telling lies?

3. He was a sinner. He listened to songs, played backgammon, and
neglected the prayers. He was feebleminded.[^7]

4. The Muslims disregarded him, turned away from, and avoided him. They
hated him very much, that none prayed over him when he died, and none
escorted him to his grave. So how can man depend on him while he faces
these criticisms? Besides, these traditions are regarded as among those
called al-Aahaad. Even if they are not afflicted with weakness, they are
not good to oppose the authentic traditions ensured by many ways of
transmission.

[^1] Muslim, Saheeh, vol. 2, p. 238. Ibn Kuthayr, Tafseer, vol. 3, p.
486.
[^2] Al-Wahidi, Asbab al-Nizool, p. 268.
[^3] Al-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 5, p. 198.
[^4] Tabaqat al-Qurra’, vol. 1, p. 15. Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqat, vol. 5, p.
216.
[^5] Imam Sharaf al-Deen, al-Kalima al-Gharra’.
[^6] Mu‘jam al-Udaba’.
[^7] Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 7, p. 263.

**The Verse of Mubahala**

Among the illustrious signs of Allah that laud the excellence of the
Ahlul Bayt, peace be on them, is the verse of al-Mubahala. Allah, the
Exalted, has said: “If anyone disputes with you concerning him, after
knowledge has been given to you, say to him: Come, let us call our sons
and your sons, our women and your women, and ourselves and yourselves.
Then let us call on Allah to witness against each other and let us make
the curse of Allah fall on those who lie.”[^1] The scholars unanimously
has narrated through many ensured ways of transmission that the verse
was revealed in respect of the Ahlul Bayt, peace be on them. The phrase
“Our sons” means al-Hasan and al-Husayn. “Our women” means Fatima, and
“ourselves” means Ali.

The story of al-Mubahala in brief is that the deputation of Christians
from Najran went to Allah’s Apostle (a.s) to debate with him on his
religion. After a long conversation took place between them, they agreed
on al-Mubahala, which is that they besought Allah and made His immortal
curse and His quick punishment fall on those who lied. They appointed a
time for that. Allah’s Apostle (a.s) went out on the day on which they
had agreed. He chose for al-Mubahala the dearest ones to him and the
most honorable with Allah, al-Hasan, al-Husayn, Fatima, the mistress of
the women, and Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful. He (a.s)
embraced al-Husayn and caught al-Hasan by his other hand. Behind him
walked Fatima al-Zahra’, who shone with Allah’s light. Imam Ali, whose
magnificence was manifest, walked behind her. The chief and the deputy
and their two sons went out. They wore dresses and ornaments. With them
were the Christians from Najran, and the horsemen from the Banu al-Harth
were riding their horses. They were in the best appearance and
readiness. Many people overcrowded and watched the important event. They
asked each other: “Will the Christians make the contest of prayer or
refrain from making it?” While they were watching, the chief and the
deputy walked towards Allah’s Apostle (a.s). Stupor and confusion
appeared on their faces, so they asked: “O Abu al-Qasim, through whom
will you make the contest of prayer with us?”

“Through the best ones of the dwellers of the earth and the most
honorable of them with Allah I will make the contest of the prayer,” he
replied. He pointed with his hand to Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan, and
al-Husayn.

They admired that and asked Him: “Why do you not make the contest of
prayer with us through the men of dignity, eminence, and sign from among
those who have believed and followed you?”

[^1] Qur’an, 3, 61.

Allah’s Apostle (a.s) answered: “Yes, I will make the contest of prayer
through these (people), who are the best of the dwellers of the earth
and of the creatures.”

So they were astonished; their hearts melted because of fear and
terror. They went back to the Bishop, their leader, to consult with him
about the affair. They asked him: “O Abu al-Harith, what do you think of
the affair?” The Bishop, who was filled with the veneration of the
family of the Prophet (a.s) replied: “I can see some faces that if
someone asked Allah through them to remove a mountain from its place, he
would remove the mountain.” He was not satisfied with that; rather, he
supported his speech with some proofs and oaths, saying: “Do you not see
Muhammad raising his hands (towards the heaven)? He is waiting for what
are you going to bring. I swear by al-Maseeh (Jesus Christ), if his
mouth said a word, we would not return to a people or to wealth Then he
shouted at them: “Do you not see that the color of the sun has changed,
black clouds have covered the horizon, black, red wind strongly blowing,
and smoke ascending from the mountains? The punishment has towered over
us. Look at the birds spewing their craws, the leaves falling from the
trees, and the ground shaking beneath our feet!”

Allah is great! The greatness of those sacred faces covered the
Christians, and they believed in their dignity and importance with
Allah. So they humbly stood before the Prophet (a.s) and carried out his
requests. Accordingly, the Prophet (a.s) said: “I swear by Him in whose
hand is my soul, most surely the punishment has hanged down upon the
Christians from Najran. If they had made the contest of prayer, they
would have been turned into apes and pigs. The valley where they were
would have been on fire, Allah would have uprooted Najran and its
dwellers even the birds and the trees, and all the Christians would not
have witnessed the end of the year….”[^1] The story of the contest of the
prayer indicates that Ahlul Bayt had a high position, that they were the
best ones of Allah’s creatures, the most lovable to Allah’s Apostle
(a.s) and that none else of the community shared them this merit.

**The Sura of Hal Ata**

One of the blessed Suras (chapters) of the Holy Qur’an was revealed in
respect of the Ahlul Bayt, peace be on them. The Sura is Hal Ata. Most
of commentators (of the Qur’an) and traditionists have narrated that it
was
[^1] Noor al-Absar, p. 100.

revealed in respect of them.[^1] The reason behind revealing this sura
was that once al-Hasan and al-Husayn became ill. So their grandfather
Allah’s Apostle (a.s) along with some of his companions visited them.
They said to Imam Ali: “Make a vow to Allah, that he may make them
well.” The Imam (a.s) made a vow to Allah. He fasted for three days as
giving thanks to Allah for His making them well. Fatima, the truthful,
peace be on her, and her slave girl followed him in this respect. After
al-Hasan and al-Husayn had got well, they all fasted. Imam Ali, the
Commander of the faithful (a.s) had no food to break his fasting. He
borrowed three Saa‘s (a measure of capacity) of barely. On the first
day, Fatima, the truthful, peace be on her, ground a Saa‘ and baked it.
When it was time for them to break the fast, a poor man asked them for
food. Imam Ali gave him his food. Then the rest of the family did just
as the imam did. They gave their food to the poor man. They spent the
night without tasting any kind of food. They rose in the morning while
they were fasting. On the second day, they put the food before them.
When it was time to break their fasting, an orphan complained to them of
painful hunger. They all denoted their food.

They spent the night tasting nothing except pure water. On the third
day Fatima (a.s) ground the rest of the barely and baked it. When it was
time for them to break the fast, a captive knocked the door asking for
food. They drew their hands from food and gave it to the captive. O
Allah, glory belongs to You! Which kindness is better than this? Which
selflessness is greater than this?

On the forth day Allah’s Apostle (a.s) visited them. He saw them in a
terrible condition. He saw their yellow faces and their shaking bodies
because of weakness. So his state changed, and he said: “What a pity!
Muhammad’s household are writhing with hunger!”

Before Allah’s Apostle (a.s) ended his speech, Gabriel had come down to
him. He revealed to him the Sura of Hal Ata, in which Allah has lauded
and praised Ahlul Bayt, saying: Surely the righteous shall drink of a
cup the admixture of which is camphor. A fountain from which the
servants of Allah shall drink; they make it to flow a (goodly) flowing
forth. They fulfill vows and fear a day the evil of which shall be
spreading far and wide. And they give food out of love for Him to the
poor and the orphan and the captive.[^2]

[^1] Al-Fakhr, Tafseer, vol. 8, p. 392. Al-Nisaburi, Ruh al-Bayyan, vol.
6, p. 546. Al-Wahidi, Asbab al-Nizool, p. 331. Al-Durr al-Manthur.
Yanabee‘ al-Mawada, vol. 1, p. 93. Al-Riyad al-Nadira, vol. 2, p. 227.
[^2] Qur’an, 76, 5-8.

Allah thanked them for their selflessness, which had no match in the
world of kindness. He made them inherit Paradise in the next world. He
made their name immortal and their life a model (for others). Moreover,
He has made them Imams until He inherits the earth and those on it. With
this verse we will end our speech about some verses revealed in respect
of the Ahlul Bayt. Without doubt the verses that deal with Imam al-Hasan
(a.s) indicate his important affair and his high position with Allah.


