The Prophet’s Traditions
========================

Some traditions have been narrated from the Prophet (a.s) in respect of
his eldest grandson. The traditions have lauded his great position and
indicated the sincere love the Prophet (a.s) showed toward him. They are
of three groups. The first group is in respect of him. The second group
is in respect of him and his brother, the master of martyrs (a.s). The
third group is in respect of his household. It is well known that
al-Hasan is among their pious ones, so these traditions have included
him. These groups have been mentioned in many authentic traditions
ensured by many ways of transmission, to the extent that they have
become certain and definite. We will mention them to readers as
follows:

**The first Group**

Several traditions have been narrated from the Prophet (a.s) concerning
his grandson al-Hasan. We will mention some of them as follows:

1. Al-Barra’ bin ‘Aazib[^1] has narrated saying: “I saw the Prophet
(a.s) carrying al-Hasan on his shoulder and saying: ‘O Allah, I love
him; and so You love him.’”[^2]

2. A’isha has narrated, saying: “The Prophet (a.s) took al-Hasan and
embraced him, and then he said: ‘O Allah, this is my (grand) son; and I
love him; therefore love him and love those who love him.”[^3]

[^1] Al-Bara’ bin Aazib was given the kunya of Abu Imara. He fought
alongside Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) at the Battle of Badr. The Prophet did
not permit him to wage jihad (against the polytheists) because he was
still young. He fought alongside Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) in fourteen
battles. It was he who conquered al-Ray in the year 24 A. H, according
to the narration of Abu Amr al-Shaybani. He fought alongside Imam Ali,
the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, in the Battles of
al-Jamal, Siffin, and al-Nahrawan. He lived in Kufa and built a house
therein. He died during the days of Mas‘ab bin al-Zubayr. This has been
mentioned in the books Usd al-Ghaba, vol. 1, p. 171, and al-Isti‘abin

[^2] Al-Bukhari, Saheeh, Chapter on the Beginning of Creation.
Al-Turmidhi, Saheeh, vol. 2, p. 307. Muslim, Saheeh, Chapter on the
Merits of the Companions of the Prophet. Ibn Kuthayr, al-Bidaya wa
al-Nihaya, vol. 8, p. 34.

[^3] Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 7, p. 104. Al-Haythemi has mentioned it in his
book al-

3. Zuhayr bin al-Aqmar has narrated, saying: “After the martyrdom of
Ali (al-Hasan’s father), al-Hasan bin Ali delivered a sermon. Meanwhile,
a man from al-Azd rose and said to him: ‘I saw Allah’s Apostle (a.s)
putting you on his knees and saying: ‘Whoever loves me, let him loves
him; therefore let those present tell those absent.’”[^1]

4. Abu Bakra has narrated, saying: “I have seen Allah’s Apostle (a.s)
(sitting) on the pulpit and al-Hasan bin Ali was (sitting) beside him.
He some times looked at the people and sometimes at him. He said: “This
son of mine is a Sayyid (master). Perhaps through him Allah will make
peace between two great groups of the Muslims.”[^2]

5. Ibn Abbas has narrated: “The Prophet (a.s) came carrying al-Hasan on
his neck. A man met him and said: ‘You have ridden the best mount, O
boy!’ So Allah’s Apostle (a.s) said: ‘And he is the best rider.’”[^3]

6. Abdullah bin Abdurrahman bin al-Zubayr has narrated, saying: “The
most similar of the family of the prophet (a.s) to him and the most
lovable to him Majjma‘, vol. 9, p. 176. Many traditions have been
narrated from the Prophet (a.s.). It has been narrated on the authority
of Sa‘eed bin Zayd, who said: “[The Prophet (a.s.) pressed al-Hasan to
his bosom and said:] “O Allah, I love him; therefore, love him.”
Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi has mentioned it in his book Kanz al-‘Ummal. He has
said it has been mentioned by al-Tabarani and Abu Na‘eem. Ibn Hajar has
mentioned it in his book al-Isaba, vol. 7, p. 105. He has said:
[Al-Baghawi has narrated on the authority of Yazid bin Abi Ziyad, on the
authority of Yazid bin Abi al-Hasan, on the authority of Sa‘d bin Yazid
al-Ansari, who said that the Prophet (a.s.) carried al-Hasan, and then
he said:] “O Allah I love him; therefore love him.” He said that twice.
In his book al-Hulya, Abu Na‘eem has narrated on the authority of Abu
Hurayra that the Prophet (a.s.) said: “O Allah, I love him; therefore
love him and those who love him.” He said that three times.

[^1] Tahdhib al- Tahdhib, vol. 2, p. 297. Imam Ahmed bin Hanbel, vol. 5,
p. 366. Al-Sawa‘iq al-Muhriqa, p. 82.

[^2] Al-Isaba, vol. 1, p. 330. In his book al-Saheeh, al-Bukhari has
mentioned it in the Chapter on al-Sulh (Making Peace). In his book
al-Musnad, vol. 5, p. 44, Imam Ahmed bin Hanbal has narrated it on the
authority of al-Mubarak, on the authority of al-Hasan bin Abi Bakra, who
said: “While Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) was praying, al-Hasan rode on his
back when he prostrated. Al-Hasan did that more than one time. So the
people said to the Prophet: ‘By Allah, you are doing al-Hasan something
you have not done to anyone.’ He replied: ‘Most surely, this grand (son)
of mine is a Sayyid (master). Through him Allah will make peace between
two parties of the Muslims.’” Ibn Hajar has mentioned it in his book
al-Sawa‘iq. In the book al-‘Aqd al-Farid, vol. 1, p. 164, it has been
mentioned: “Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) visited his daughter Fatima. He found
al-Hasan, who was then a child, playing before her. He said to her:
‘Most surely, Allah will make peace between two great groups of the
Muslims at the hands of this son of yours.’”

[^3] Al-Sawa‘iq al-Muhriqa, p. 82. Hulyat al-Awliya.

was al-Hasan. I saw al-Hasan (when he) came and rode on the Prophet’s
neck while he was prostrating himself in prayer. He did not make him go
down until he himself went down. I saw him bowing and opening his legs
to let him go to the other side.”[^1]

7. It has been narrated that the Prophet (a.s) led the people in prayer
and prostrated himself in worship for a long time. After he had recited
the taslim, the people asked him about that, and he replied: “This son
of mine had ridden my back, and I hated to make him go down
quickly.”[^2]

8. The Prophet (a.s) went up on the pulpit to deliver a sermon.
Al-Hasan came and went up on the pulpit. The Prophet put him on his
neck. The people at the back of the mosque saw his anklet shining on the
Prophet’s chest. Al-Hasan remained so until the Prophet (a.s) finished
his sermon.[^3]

9. He (a.s) has said: “If someone wants to be delighted at looking at
the master of the youths of the Garden, let him look at al-Hasan.”[^4]

10. He (a.s) has said: “Al-Hasan is my darling…”[^5]

11. Anas bin Malik has narrated: “Al-Hasan came in to the Prophet
(a.s). I wanted to pull him away, and the Prophet (a.s) said to me: ‘Woe
unto you, O Anas! Leave my son and the fruit of my heart. Most surely,
whoever hurts him hurts me, and whoever hurts me hurts Allah.”[^6]

This is a group of the traditions narrated from the Prophet (a.s) in
respect of his eldest grandson. In these traditions we feel the highest
kind of honoring, greeting, and sincere love.

**The Second Group**

As for the traditions narrated from the Prophet (a.s) in respect of his
two grandsons, they are a group of the authentic traditions written by
the trustworthy (narrators) and those whom memorized them by heart. They
clearly indicate that al-Hasan and al-Husayn were the dearest and most
lovable of the people to Allah’s Apostle (a.s). We will mention some of
them as follows:

1. Sa‘eed bin Rashid has reported, saying: “Al-Hasan and al-Husayn came
walking to Allah’s Apostle (a.s). He took one of them and pressed him to
his

[^1] Al-Isaba, vol. 2, p. 11.
[^2] Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 8, p. 33.
[^3] Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 6 p. 58.
[^4] Fada’il al-Ashab, p. 165. Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 8, p. 35.
[^5] Al-Isti‘ab, vol. 2, p. 369.
[^6] Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 6, p. 222.

armpit, and then he took the other and pressed him to his other armpit.
He said: ‘They are my two darlings. Whoever loves me, let him love
them.’”[^1] The Prophet (a.s) always gave them this nickname. Many
traditions have been reported in this respect.[^2]

2. Anas bin Malik has narrated, saying: “Allah’s Apostle (a.s) was
asked: ‘Which of your household is the most lovable to you?’ ‘Al-Hasan
and al-Husayn,’ he (a.s) replied. He said to Fatima: ‘Call out my two
sons. So he kissed them and pressed them to his bosom.’”[^3]

3. Usama bin Zayd has reported, saying: “One night I visited the
Prophet (a.s) for a certain need. So he (a.s) went out. He included
something I did not come to know. When I ended my need, I asked him:
‘What is that you have included?’ He uncovered it. Suddenly it was
al-Hasan and al-Husayn. They were (riding) on his two hips. Then he
said: ‘These are two sons of mine and of my daughter. O Allah, I love
them; therefore, love them and love whoever loves them.’”[^4]

4. Salman al-Farisi has reported, saying: “I have heard Allah’s Apostle
(a.s) say: ‘Al-Hasan and al-Husayn are my two sons. Whoever loves them
loves me, and whoever loves them, Allah loves him, and whomever Allah
loves makes him enter the Garden. Whoever hates them hates me, whoever
hates me, Allah hates him, and whomever Allah hates makes him enter the
Fire.”[^5]

[^1] Dhakha’ir al-Uqba, p. 124.
[^2] In his book Hulyat al-Awliya’, vol. 13, p. 201, Abu Na‘eem has
narrated on the authority of Jabir that Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) said to
Ali bin Abi Talib, peace be on him: “Assalamu ‘alayka, O father of the
two plants of sweet basil. I ask you to do good to my two plants of
sweet basil (to sweeten) the world. In a short time your two pillars
will come to an end. Allah will compensate you on my behalf.” When the
Prophet (a.s.) passed away, Ali, peace be on him, said: “This is one of
the two pillars about whom the Prophet (a.s.) had told me.” When Fatima,
peace be on her, passed away, Ali, peace be on him, said: “This is other
pillar about whom the Prophet (a.s.) had told me.” In the book Kanz
al-‘Ummal, vol. 7, p. 110, it has been mentioned on the authority of
Sa‘d bin Malik who said: “I visited the Prophet (a.s.). Al-Hasan and
al-Husayn were playing on his back. So I said: ‘Allah’s Apostle, do you
love them?’ ‘And what reason have I that I should not love them,’ he
replied, ‘they my two plants of sweet basil (to sweeten) the world.”

[^3] Al-Tirmidhi, Saheeh, vol. 2, p. 306. Fayd al-Qadeer, vol. 1, p.
148.
[^4] Al-Tirmidhi, Saheeh, vol. 2, p. 240. Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 7, p.
110. Ibn Hajar has mentioned the end of the tradition in his book
al-Sawa‘iq al-Muhriqa.
[^5] Al-Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 3, p. 166. Al-Haythemi has been narrated
the tradition in a slight change in his book al-Majjma‘; similarly, it
has been mentioned in Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 6, p. 221.

5. Ibn Umar has reported, saying: “Allah’s Apostle (a.s) said:
‘Al-Hasan and al-Husayn are the two masters of the youths of the Garden,
and their father is better than them.”[^1]

6. The Prophet (a.s) went up on the pulpit and delivered a sermon.
Al-Hasan and al-Husayn came wearing red shirts. They were walking and
stumbling. So he (a.s) came down the pulpit. He carried them and put
them before him, and then he said: “Allah is truthful when He says:
(Your property and children are a temptation). I was looking at these
two boys when they were walking and stumbling. I was impatient (to see
them in a such state), so I stopped my speech and raised them.”[^2]

7. Ibn Abbas has narrated: “One day while we were (walking) with the
Prophet (a.s) Fatima (a.s) came towards us weeping. Allah’s Apostle
(a.s) asked her: ‘May your father be sacrificed for you! What has made
you weep?’ ‘Al-Hasan and al-Husayn has gone out,’ she replied, ‘I do not
know where they have spent the night.’ So Allah’s Apostle (a.s) said,
‘Do not weep, for their Creator is more kind to them than you and I.’
Then he raised his hand and said: ‘O Allah, protect them and make them
safe!’ Gabriel came down and said: ‘O Muhammad, do not grieve! They are
sleeping at the yard of the Banu al-Najjar.

Allah has entrusted an angel to protect them.’ Accordingly, the Prophet
(a.s) and his companions rose and went to the yard. They found al-Hasan
and al-Husayn embracing each other and sleeping. The angel who was
entrusted with them had put one wing beneath them and the other on them
to cover them. So the Prophet (a.s) bent down and kissed them until they
got up. Then he put al-Hasan on his right shoulder and al-Husayn on his
left shoulder. Abu Bakr came towards him and said: ‘O Allah’s Apostle,
give me one of the boys to carry him on behalf of you.’ So, he (a.s)
said: ‘Their mount is the best one, and they are the best riders, and
their father is better than them.’ He reached the mosque and stood while
they were on his shoulders. Then he said: ‘O Communities of the Muslims,
shall I tell you of the best of

[^1] Al-Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 3, p. 167. Ibn Maja, Saheeh. The
traditions reported from the Prophet (a.s.) in respect of that his two
grandsons are the two masters of the youths of the Garden are ensured by
many lines of transmission. In his book al-Saheeh, p. 2, vol. 306,
al-Tirmidhi has narrated on the authority of Abu Sa‘eed al-Khidri, who
said: [Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) said: “Al-Hasan and al-Husayn are the two
masters of the youths of the Garden.” Ahmed bin Hanbal has mentioned the
tradition in his book al-Musnad, vol. 3, p. 3. In his book al-Tarikh,
vol. 1, p. 140, al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi has narrated on the authority of
Ali, peace be on him, who said: [Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) said:] “Al-Hasan
and al-Husayn are the two masters of the youths of the Garden.”

[^2] Al-Turmidhi, Saheeh, vol. 2, p. 306. Al-Nisa’i, Saheeh, vol. 1, p.
209.

the people in grandfather and grandmother?’ ‘Yes, O Allah’s Apostle,’
they replied. ‘(They are) al-Hasan and al-Husayn. Their grandfather is
Allah’s Apostle (a.s), and their grandmother is Khadija, daughter of
Khuwaylid, mistress of the women of the Garden.’ Then he (a.s) said:
‘Shall I show you the best of the people in (paternal) uncle and aunt?’
They said: ‘Yes, O Allah’s Apostle (a.s).’ ‘(They are) al-Hasan and
al-Husayn,’ he explained, ‘their paternal uncle is Ja‘far bin Abi Talib,
and their paternal aunt is Umm Hani, daughter of Abi Talib.’ Then he
said: ‘Shall I show you the best of the people in maternal uncle and
aunt?’ ‘Yes, O Allah’s Apostle (a.s)’ they answered. ‘(They are)
al-Hasan and al-Husayn,’ was the answer, ‘Their maternal uncle is
al-Qasim, son of Allah’s Apostle, and their maternal aunt is Zaynab,
daughter of Allah’s Apostle,’ he said. Then he said: ‘O Allah, You know
that al-Hasan and al-Husayn are in the Garden, their paternal uncle is
in the Garden, their maternal aunt is in the Garden, those who love them
are in the Garden, and those who hate them are in the Fire.’”[^1]

The tradition indicates that the Prophet (a.s) loved his two grandsons,
that they were the most lovable of his household to him, and the most
preferred of them to him. It is well known that the position of the
prophethood is far from behaving due to the sentiment of love. The
Prophet (a.s) granted them such a kind of love because they were the
source of all virtues and origin of all good things.

8. Jabir has reported, saying: “I visited the Prophet (a.s) (and found)
al-Hasan and al-Husayn (sitting) on his back. He said to them: ‘Your
camel is the best one, and you are the best riders.”[^2] Umar has
narrated a tradition similar to this in meaning. He has said: “I have
seen al-Hasan and al-Husayn (sitting) on the shoulders of the Prophet
(a.s) and I said: ‘The best horse is yours.’ And the Prophet (a.s) said:
‘And they are the best horsemen.’”[^3] Al-Sayyid al-Himyari, the poet,
has composed poetry on that, saying:

Al-Hasan and al-Husayn came to the Prophet. They went out to play in
the morning.

He pressed them to the bosom and risked his life for them. They were
with him in that place. They passed; and his two shoulders were beneath
them. Therefore, he was the best mount, and they were the best riders!

[^1] Dhakha’ir al-Uqba, p. 130.
[^2] Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 7, p. 108. Al-Haythemi, Majjma‘, vol. 9, p.
182.
[^3] Al-Haythemi, Majjma‘, vol. 9, p. 181. Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 7, p.
106.

9. Ya‘la bin Murra al-Thaqafi[^1] has reported, saying: “Al-Hasan and
al-Husayn competed with each other for Allah’s Apostle (a.s). So he
pressed them to his bosom and said: ‘The child incites and prompts (man)
to be miserly and coward!’”[^2]

10. The Prophet (a.s) has said: “Al-Hasan and al-Husayn are two of
grandsons.”[^3]

11. He extremely loved his two grandsons and had mercy on them, to the
extent that he invoked the protection of Allah upon them, for he had
fear for them of envy. Abu Na‘eem has narrated on the authority of
Abdullah, who said: “While we were sitting with Allah’s Apostle (a.s),
Al-Hasan and al-Husayn, who were still young, passed by us. The Prophet
(a.s) said: ‘Bring my two sons to invoke the protection of Allah upon
them jus as Ibrahim did upon his sons Isma‘il and Ya‘qub.’ Then he said:
‘I invoke the protection of Allah upon you from all envious eyes, all
(kinds of) Satan and vermin.’”[^4] In the record of human nature there is
no affection more beautiful than this affection, nor there is love more
honorable than this love.

12. Among the traditions famous with the people are these words of him
(a.s): “Al-Hasan and al-Husayn are two Imams whether they rise or
sit.”[^5] The Prophet (a.s) gave his two grandsons the Imamate, which was
the most important quality present in them, for it required the ideals
that none had [^1] The author of al-Mustadrak has narrated the tradition
on the authority of Ya‘li bin Munabbih al-Thaqafi. I (the author) have
read the books of the biographies but have not found Ya‘li bin Munabbih
al-Thaqafi; rather I have (found another narrator) called Ya‘li bin
Murra. Perhaps what has been mentioned in al-Mustadrak is a mistake. In
the books al-Isaba and Usd al-Ghaba it has been mentioned that Ya‘la bin
Murra is among the most meritorious companions (of the Prophet). He has
reported (traditions) on the authority of Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) and on
the authority of (Imam Ali), the Commander of the faithful, peace be on
him. He was present with the Prophet (a.s.) at al-Hudaybiya Peace
Treaty. He made al-Ridwan allegiance (to the Prophet). He fought at the
Battles of Khaybar, al-Fath, Hozan, and al-Ta’if.

[^2] Al-Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 3, p. 168. Imam Ahmed bin Hanbal, Musnad,
vol. 4, p. 172.
[^3] Al-Sawa‘iq al-Muhriqa, p. 114. Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 6, p. 221.
[^4] Hulyat al-Awliya’, vol. 5, p. 44. Al-Fada’il al-Khamsa mina
al-Sihah al-Sitta, vol. 3, p. 177.
[^5] Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 10, p. 78. In the books Nazhat al-Majalis,
vol. 2, p. 184, and al-Ithaf bi Hub al-Ashraf, p. 129, it has been
mentioned that Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) said to al-Hasan and al-Husayn:
“You are two Imams; and your mother has the right of intercession.” In
the book Minhajj al-Sunna, vol. 4, p. 210, it has been mentioned that
Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) said to al-Husayn: “This is an Imam, son of an
Imam, brother of an Imam, and father of nine Imams.”

except those whom Allah had chosen from among His servants. That was
when He singled out His bosom friend (Ibraheem) with it. He, the Most
High, has said: “He said: Surely I will make you an Imam of the people.
Ibraheem said: And of my offspring? My covenant does not include the
unjust, He said.” [^1] We will deal with the Imamate, the Imam’s
qualifications and qualities when we mention Imam al-Hasan’s ideals.

**The Third Group**

The authentic traditions narrated from the Prophet (a.s) have been
ensured by many ways of transmission. In them the Prophet had indicated
that love for his household was required, that he would fight against
whoever fought against them, and make peace with whoever made peace with
them. He had joined them to the Holy Qur’an, regarded them as life-
boats and as security for the community. We will mention to readers some
of these traditions:

1. Zayd bin Arqam has narrated that Allah’s Apostle (a.s) said to Ali,
Fatima, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn, peace be on them: “I fight against one
whom you fight against and make peace with one whom you make peace
with.”[^2]

2. Abu Bakr said: “I have seen Allah’s Apostle (a.s) pitching a tent
and leaning on an Arab bow. Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn were in
the tent. He (the Prophet) said: “O Community of the Muslims, I make
peace with one who makes peace with the people in the tent. I fight
against one who fights against them and support whoever supports them.
None loves them but the one whose grandfather is happy and his birth is
good. And none hates them but the one whose grandfather is unhappy and
whose birth is bad.”[^3]

3. Ahmed bin Hanbal narrated that the Prophet (a.s) took al-Hasan and
al-Husayn by hand and said: “Whoever loves me, and loves these two
(grandsons of mine), their father, and their mother will be with me in
my rank on the Day of Resurrection.”[^4]

4. Jabir narrated: “One day Allah’s Apostle (a.s) was at Arafat and Ali
was facing him. He said to him: ‘Come to me. O Ali, you and I have been
created from one tree. I am its origin and you are its branch. Al-Hasan
and al-Husayn are its twigs. So whoever clings to a twig of it, Allah
makes him enter the Garden.”[^5]

[^1] Qur’an, 1, 124.
[^2] Kanz al-Ummal, vol. 7, p. 102. Ibn Maja, Sunan, p. 14. In his book
al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, Ibn Kuthayr has narrated the tradition on the
authority of Abu Hurayra.
[^3] Al-Riyad al-Nadira, vol. 2, p. 252.
[^4] Ahmed, Musnad, vol. 1, p. 77. Yanabee‘ al-Mawada, p. 164.
al-Tirmidhi, Saheeh, vol. 2, p. 301.
[^5] Ahmed, Musnad, vol. 1, p. 77.


5. Ibn Abbas narrated: “Allah’s Apostle (a.s) has said: ‘The stars are
security for the inhabitants of the earth from drowning, and my
household are security for my community from disagreement. Therefore, if
an Arab tribe opposes them, it will disagree (with them) and become the
party of Iblis.”[^1]

6. Zayd bin Arqam narrated, “Allah’s Apostle (a.s) said: ‘I have left
with you that which if you keep to, you shall never go astray after me;
one is greater than the other; Allah’s Book, a Rope extending from the
heavens to the earth, and my family, my household. These twain shall
never separate from one another till they reach me by the Pool;
therefore, see how you will obey me through them.”[^2]

Most surely the Traddition of al-Thaqalayn is among the most
trustworthy and famous Prophetic traditions. The religious scholars have
taken great care of it, for it has an important part of the Islamic
faith. Besides, it is among the most manifest traditions on which the
Shi‘a depend in respect of confining the Imamate to Ahlul Bayt, their
being protected from errors and inclinations. That is because the
Prophet (a.s) compared them to Allah’s Holy Book that, falsehood shall
not come to it from before it nor from behind it; therefore, they shall
never separate from each other. It is natural that when a dissent issues
(from a person) against the religious precepts, it is regarded as a
separation from the Holy Book. The Prophet (a.s) has declared that they
shall never separate from each other till they reach him by the Pool;
therefore, the tradition clearly indicates the protection from errors.
The Prophet (a.s) repeated the tradition on several occasions, for he
aimed at protecting the community, keeping its straightness, and keeping
it away from deviation in the ideological fields and the like. That is
when the nation clings to the Ahlul Bayt, does not go ahead of them, nor
does it lag behind them.

Writing a complete research on all sides of the tradition requires
writing a special book. The wonderful research the religious scholars
have done in all the sides of the tradition, whether the chain of
authorities or the indication, has sufficed us the burden of doing a
research on it.[^3]

7. Abu Sa‘eed al-Khidri narrated, “I have heard the Prophet (a.s)
saying: ‘The similitude of my household among you is that of the Ark of
Noah: whoever boards it is saved, and whoever lags behind it is drowned.
And the similitude of my household among you is like the Gate of
Salvation of the Israelites: whoever enters it is forgiven.”[^4]

[^1] Al-Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 3, p. 12.
[^2] Al-Turmidhi, Saheeh, vol. 2, p. 308. Usd al-Ghaba, vol. 2, p. 12.
[^3] Al-Muraja‘at, pp. 49-52. Al-Usool al-‘Aama lil Fiqh al-Muqaran, pp.
164-187.
[^4] Majjma‘ al-Zawa’id, vol. 9, p. 168. In his Mustadrak, al-Hakim has
narrated on the In his valuable Muraja‘at, Imam Sharaf al-Deen has
explained the tradition, saying: “You know that likening them with the
Ark of Noah implies that whoever resorts to them in matters related to
the religion, deriving the branches and basics of religion from their
virtuous Imams, will surely be saved from the fire of hell. And whoever
lags behind them is like one who seeks shelter during the flood with a
mountain so that it may save him from Allah’s destiny, but he will
eventually be drowned in water while the first will be hurled in the
inferno, may Allah protect us from it.

“The reason why they, peace be on them, are compared to the Gate of
Salvation (Bab Hitta) is that Allah has made that Gate a symbol of
humility before His Greatness and submission to His Judgment; therefore,
it becomes a reason for forgiveness. This is the reason for the
similitude. After he had mentioned these traditions and the like, Ibn
Hajar accepted the tradition. Then he said: ‘The reason for their
similitude to the Ark is that whoever loves and highly respects them as
means of thanking to the One Who gave them honors, following the
guidance of their learned men, will be saved from the darkness of
dissension, and whoever lags behind it is drowned in the sea of
ingratitude and will perish in the paths of tyranny.’ Then he adds the
following: ‘As to the Gate of Salvation (meaning the reason for their
similitude to it), Allah has made entering that gate, which probably was
the gate of Areeha or of Bayt al-Maqdis, in humility, seeking
forgiveness, a reason for salvation, and He (likewise) has made loving
the Ahlul Bayt a reason for this nation’s salvation.’”[^1]

8. The Prophet (a.s) has said: “The knowledge of the progeny of
Muhammad brings salvation from the Fire, and loving Ahlul Bayt is
walking on the Straight Path. Allegiance to the progeny of Muhammad is a
security against the torture.”[^2]

9. He (a.s) has said: “Whoever dies because of his love for the progeny
of Muhammad dies a martyr. Whoever dies because of loving the progeny of
Muhammad dies as a believer of a perfect faith. Whoever dies for
loving

authority of Hanash al-Kinani, who said: [I have heard Abu Dharr saying
while he was putting his hand on the Gate of the Kaaba:] “O People,
whoever recognizes me; therefore, I am the one you have recognized.
Whoever does not recognize me; therefore, I am Abu Dharr. I have heard
Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) saying: ‘The similitude of my household among you
is that of the Ark of Noah: whoever boards it is saved, and whoever lags
behind it is drowned.’” Many traditions have been mentioned in this
regard.

[^1] Al-Muraja‘at, p. 54.
[^2] Ibid., p. 58, quoted from the book al-Shafa’, p. 40.

Muhammad’s children will be given the glad tiding of entering the
Garden by the angel of death, then by Munkar and Nakeer. Whoever dies
for loving Muhammad’s descendants will be taken to the Garden like a
bride taken to her groom’s house. Whoever dies loving Muhammad’s progeny
will have two doors in his grave overlooking the Garden. Allah will make
the grave of whoever dies for loving Muhammad’s children a visiting
place for the angels of mercy. Whoever dies for loving Muhammad’s
progeny dies adhering to the Sunna and consensus. Whoever dies hating
Muhammad’s progeny will come on the Day of Judgment with this inscribed
between his eyes: ‘He should despair of Allah’s mercy.’”[^1]

10. He (a.s) has said: “Consider my household among you as you consider
the head of the body, and the eyes in the head, for the head is guided
by the eyes.”[^2]

It is incumbent on the Muslims to consider the household of their
Prophet as they consider the head of the body and the eyes in the head.
They should cling to their objectives, and follow their deeds and their
words. If they do that, they will be the masters and guides of nations.
However, they have declared themselves the enemies of them, removed them
from their ranks and their positions. So they have been inflicted with
setbacks, surrounded by misfortunes and dangers; to Allah we belong and
to Him is our return!

11. He (a.s) has said: “The feet of any servant of Allah shall never
move on the Day of Judgment unless he is asked about four things: how he
has spent his life, what he has worn his body out for, how he has made
and spent his wealth, and about loving us, we the Ahlul Bayt.”[^3]

Most surely Muslims are responsible before Allah for loving Ahlul Bayt.
The most manifest kind of love is following their words and imitating
them in all fields.

12. He (a.s) has said: “Let whoever is pleased to live like me and die
like me and inhabit Eden’s Paradise which my Lord has cultivated, take
Ali as his master after me. And let him obey whoever he places in charge
over him, and let him follow the example of my household after me, for
they are my progeny; they are created from my own mould and blessed with
my own

[^1] Al-Muraja‘at, p. 59, quoted from al-Tafseer al-Kabeer by Imam
al-Tha‘labi, commentary on the Verse al-Mawadda.
[^2] Al-Muraja’at., quoted from al-Sharaf al-Mu‘abbad, p. 58.
[^3] Ibid., quoted from Ihya’ al-Mayyat by al-Sayuti, and al-Arba‘eeniya
by al-Nabahani.

comprehension and knowledge. Woe unto those who reject them and
separate me from them! May Allah never permit them to enjoy my
intercession!”[^1]

We are satisfied with these traditions narrated from Allah’s Apostle
(a.s) in respect of his household. Tens of traditions similar to them
have been mentioned in the books of Hadith. They display the merits of
the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) and require Muslims to resort to them in all
cases.

**The Muslims honor al-Hasan**

The Muslims took care of Imam al-Hasan and honored him. The remarkable
companions of the Prophet magnified and respected him. For example,
Abdullah bin Abbas, the religious scholar of the community, prepared the
stirrup for al-Hasan and al-Husayn when they rode (their camels) and
arranged their clothes. Mudarik bin Ziyad blamed Abdullah for that, and
he rebuked him, saying: “O Wicked! Do you know who they are? They are
the grandsons of Allah’s Apostle (a.s). Has Allah not done me a favor
when I hold the stirrup for them and arrange their clothes?”[^2]

Al-Hasan and al-Husayn performed the hajj on foot. When they passed by
riders, they (they riders) dismounted for them. When they circumambulate
the Kaaba, the people overcrowded around them to greet them and to be
blessed by them.[^3] When Abu Hurayra saw Imam al-Hasan (a.s), he kissed
him because he saw Allah’s Apostle (a.s) doing that.[^4] The Muslims had
the right to honor al-Hasan, for the Prophet (a.s) honored him and
raised his position.

[^1] Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 6, p. 217.
[^2] Ibn Asakir, vol. 4, p. 212. Ibn Shahrashub, al-Manaqib, vol. 2, p.
143.
[^3] Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 8, p. 37.
[^4] Imam Ahmed bin Hanbal, al-Musnad, vol. 2, p. 255. Al-Baladhiri,
Ansab al-Ashraf.


