Chapter Vi : At the Time of the Two Caliphs
===========================================

**Part 1**

When the Prophet (a.s) went to the Garden and his soul raised to the
Most High Comrade, successive discords came over the Muslims. Violent
waves of division and disagreement prevailed them, shook their entity,
cracked and torn their unity. Allah, the Exalted had explained the
apostasy and dissension that which would come over the Muslims after the
death of His Prophet. He has said: “And Muhammad is no more than an
apostle; the apostles have already passed away before him; if then he
dies or is killed, will you turn back upon your heals?”[^1]

Accordingly, which misfortune is greater than this misfortune? And
which disaster is severer than apostasy after faith? The people left the
corpse of the Prophet; they did not bury it in its final resting-place.
They rushed upon the government and authority. They decided to turn the
Islamic caliphate away from the Household of Prophethood, the cradle of
the Message, the place where the angels frequented, and the abode of
revelation and inspiration. Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful
(a.s) has talked about people’s evil deeds, saying: “When Allah’s
Apostle (a.s) died, a group of people turned back upon their heels. Ways
deceived them; they depended on the intimate friends, bestowed upon
those other than the relatives, abandoned the means toward which they
had been commanded to show love, moved the structure from its firm and
compact foundation, and built it in a place other than its place. They
were the sources of all sins…”[^2]

The people seized the government and removed it from its men and actual
owners, and placed it in other than its place. They surprised Ahlul
Bayt, peace be on them, while the injury did not heal, and the Messenger
was not buried yet. That was through their turning the authority away
from them (the actual owners), and aggressing against them. They made
them suffer from pain and pillow sleeplessness. They made them lead a
life full of cares and troubles. Therefore, how great their misfortunes
were! And how intense their affliction and tribulation were!

People hurried to pledge allegiance and seized the opportunity. Imam
Ali (a.s) was busy preparing the corpse of the Prophet (a.s) for
burying. The people did not give him time to bury the Prophet (a.s) lest
the authority should escape
[^1] Qur’an, 3, 144.
[^2] Nahjj al-Balagha, (explained by Muhammed ‘Abda), 248.

them, and their wishes and hopes for seizing the reins of government
and authority would be lost. Anyhow, it is necessary for us to talk
briefly about the stages of that great tragedy, for there is a close
relationship between it and the life of Imam al-Hasan (a.s), because
turning the authority away from Ahlul Bayt had bad complications and
dangerous results. The most important of them was that al-Tulaqa’,[^1]
their sons, who were the opponents of Islam and enemies of Allah, craved
after the Islamic caliphate, and warred against the Household of
Prophethood. Al-Hasan, the grandson of the Prophet (a.s), was forced to
make peace with Mu‘awiya and to hand the authority over to him. We will
explain that to readers as follows:

**Al-Saqifa[^2]**

The people left the Prophet (a.s) lying in the bed of death. They paid
no attention to any of his affairs. The Ansar hurried to the Saqifa
(shed) of the Banu Sa‘ida[^3]. They discussed the affairs of the
succession and authority. The chief of al-Khazraj Sa‘d bin Ubada, who
was critically ill, delivered an oration among the people. He could not
make the people hear his speech; rather he spoke, and some of his
relatives conveyed his speech to others. The central idea of his speech
was that gain was according to damages and hardships that the Ansar
suffered heavy casualities during the successive battles and the
movement of jihad carried out by Allah’s Apostle (a.s). Therefore, they
were worthier of authority than the others and more appropriate for it.
This is the text of his oration: “O Community of the Ansar, you have
precedence in religion and excellence in Islam that no one of the Arab
tribe is like you. Most surely, Muhammad (a.s) remained among his

[^1] Al-Tulaqa’ are those who converted to Islam at the time of the
conquest of Mecca.
[^2] Al-Saqifa is a shelter. It was the place where the Ansar held their
meetings and seminars.
[^3] Sa’d bin Ubada was the master of the Khazrajite and leader of the
Ansar. His people admitted his leadership over them. He, his father, his
grandfather, and his son Qays were famous for generosity. It was said
that no house from al-Aws and al-Khazrajj had four successive, generous
people except that of Sa‘d. He was one of the heads. He was present with
Allah’s Apostle (a.s.) at al-‘Aqaba and (the Battle of Badr. He did not
pledge allegiance to Abu Bakr. He angrily went out of Medina. Khalid bin
al-Waleed and a companion of his followed him by night. They stabbed him
and threw him into a well. Khalid deceived some foolish people that it
was the jinn who killed him. They composed two poetry lines on behalf on
the jinn, saying:

We have killed the master of al-Khazrajj, Sa‘d bin Ubada, And we threw
two arrows at him and did not fail to hit his heart. He died at Hawran,
(part) of the land of Sham (Syria) in the year fifteen A. H. It was said
(that he died) in the year fourteen A. H. His biography has been
mentioned in the books al-Isaba, al-Isti‘ab, Usd al-Ghaba, and the
like.

people for several years, summoning them to worship the Merciful
(Allah) and to abandon the partners and the idols. Very few of his
people believed in him. They were not able to protect Allah’s Apostle
(a.s) nor were they able to strengthen his religion, nor were they able
to repel from themselves the oppression that included them. When Allah
wanted you excellence, he drove dignity to you and singled you out with
favor through making you believe in Him and in His Apostle, protecting
him and his companions, supporting him and his religion, and struggling
against his enemies. So you were the strictest of the people in fighting
against his enemy and the heaviest of them against the enemy, to the
extent that the Arabs followed Allah’s command willingly and
unwillingly. Those far handed over the leadership while they were in a
state of subjection and utter abasement, to the extent that Allah
through you leveled the earth for His Apostle and through your swords
the Arabs followed him. Then Allah caused him to die while he was
pleased with you; therefore, seize the government with the exception of
all the people, for it belongs to you, and not to them.” The Ansar
responded to him through showing satisfaction and obedience, saying:
“You are successful in opinion and right in speech. We will not leave
what you have suggested. We will entrust you with this power, for you
are satisfactory to us and you satisfy the interests of the
believers.”[^1]

The Ansar handed over the leadership to the master of al-Khazraj, and
they were ready to obey him. They expressed their urgent wish for
nominating him for the office of the caliphate. Here there are some
affairs that make man wonders at the affairs of the Ansar and make him
question them:

1. The Ansar took care of Islam, supported the creed, and protected the
religion; therefore, why did they hurry in respect of the affair of the
caliphate? Why did they forget the allegiance to Imam Ali (a.s) at
Ghadir Khum? Why did they neglect the commandments of the Prophet (a.s)
concerning his household and his family?

2. Why did they keep the affair (of the caliphate) a secret in a place
isolated from the eyes of the people? Why did they resort to secrecy and
caution in concealing the affair?

3. Why did they not take into considerations the viewpoints of the pure
family of the Prophet in respect of the succession? Why did they seize
authority?

Most likely, they came to know of the dangerous plot schemed by the
remarkable Muhajireen against Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful.
[^1] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 207.

They feared that the Muhajireen would win the caliphate and deprive
them of it; so, they hurried to seize the opportunity through nominating
Sa’d for the office of the caliphate.

**Umar’s Explanatory Speech**

Abu Bakr was not in Yathrib (Medina) when the Prophet (a.s) died.
Rather, he was at al-Sanah.[^1] Umar bin al-Khattab feared that someone
would win the caliphate before Abu Baker’s arrival; so, he made an
explanatory speech indicting his psychological policy and his excellent
experience in the affairs of the society. He stopped the movement of
pledging allegiance to Sa’d. He distracted the people even from their
reflection on affairs. He shook the sword with his own hand and shouted
at the top of his voice: “One of the hypocrites claims that Allah’s
Apostle (a.s) has died! And most surely that he has not died, but he has
gone to his Lord just as Musa bin Imran had already done! By Allah,
Allah’s Apostle shall come back and cut off the hands and legs of those
men who have spread lies about his death!”

He struck with his sword and threatened all those who said that Allah’s
Apostle died.[^2] Some Muslims regarded this deed as strange, while those
simple-minded regarded it as good, for he had brought them beautiful
hopes and dreams. The souls refused to believe the death of the great
Prophet and continued to cling to his life even through some
imaginations. So, Umar drove to them the best wishes and the most
wonderful hopes. He told them that their beloved Savior was still alive,
and that he would manifest his religion and make it prevail over all
religions. He added to his speech the most violent terrorism and threat.
He claimed that Allah’s Apostle (a.s) would cut off the hand and legs of
those who spread rumors against him. Moreover, he went on threatening
the people until Abu Bakr arrived in Medina. Umar welcomed Abu Baker,
and they went to the house of Allah’s Apostle (a.s). Abu Bakr uncovered
the face of the Prophet (a.s). Suddenly, he came to know that his pure
soul had departed his pure body. He went out refuting Umar’s statement.
He turned to the perplexed masses astonished by the event and said to
them: “Whoever worships Muhammad, most surely Muhammad has died. And
whoever worships Allah, most surely Allah is alive and does not die!”
Then he recited this verse: And Muhammad is no more than an apostle; the
apostles have already passed away before him; if then he dies or is
killed, will you turn back upon your heels?

The people yielded to Abu Bakr’s statement and repeated the verse.
Umar

[^1] Al-Sanah is a place one mile from Medina. It was said that it was
among its outskirts, and was three or four miles far from it.
[^2] Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, Sharh Nahjj al-Balagha.

hurried to believe Abu Bakr’s statement and showed no objection toward
it. He accompanied him. He walked with him, supported him, and protected
his side.

It is necessary for us to pause before this strange initiative, for it
urges man to ask about several affairs that are as follows:

1. Was it right to say that Umar did not know about the death of
Allah’s Apostle (a.s)? It is worth mentioning that the Qur’an has
announced that all people will die. Allah, the Most High, says: Every
soul must taste of death; then to Us you shall be brought back.[^1] He
has also said to His Prophet: Surely you shall die and they (too) shall
surely die.[^2] He has also said: If then he dies or is killed, will you
turn back upon your heels? Besides, the Prophet (a.s) announced his
death several times and told the people that he had been summoned and it
was the moment for him to answer. Moreover, Umar himself had said to
Usama before the death of the Prophet (a.s): “Allah’s Apostle has died
while you are a commander over me!”

3. What is the secret behind his treating those who spread rumors about
the death of the Prophet (a.s)? Why did he announce that Allah’s Apostle
would punish those who spread lies? Was their statement apostasy from
religion and because of that their hands and legs had to be cut off?

Whoever carefully considers this event clearly understands Umar’s deed,
which is that he intended to distract the people from pledging
allegiance to anyone before Abu Bakr’s arrival. Indeed Umar was not too
stupid not to know that the Prophet (a.s) would die. His strong
enthusiasm, his threats, and excitement calmed down when Abu Bakr came.
All these things clearly indicate that this event was part of a plan
drawn before the death of the Prophet (a.s) to turn the caliphate from
his household and to seize it for themselves. Lamans, an orientalist,
thought that Abu Bakr, Umar, and Abu Ubayda had planed to turn the
caliphate away from Ahlul Bayt before the death of the Prophet (a.s). He
says: “Indeed the Qurashi party was not a ready made situation, nor did
it result from a surprise or improvisation; rather it resulted from
made, secret plots whose origins were woven and whose parties were
firmly gathered. The heroes of this plot were Abu Bakr, Umar bin
al-Khattab, and Abu Ubayda bin al-Jarrah; and among the members of this
party were A’isha and Hafsa.”

This viewpoint is very trustworthy, for if someone reflects on the
people’s

[^1] Qur’an, 29, 57.
[^2] Qur’an, 39, 30.

steps and carefully considers their deeds concludes that there was an
previously prepared plot, and that the people had woven its threads
since a long time. There are several proofs that the plot was previous
prepared; the people lagged behind the regiment of Usama, some of the
wives of the Prophet (a.s) sent (letters) to their fathers to linger in
going (with Usama). They nominated their fathers for the office of the
Imamate. And besides Umar’s answer to the Prophet (a.s) when he intended
to write a document.

**The Ansar are surprised**

The Ansar decided to appoint the chief of al-Khazraj, Sa’d bin Ubada,
as a caliph. However his cousins Basheer bin Sa‘d bin Tha‘laba
al-Khazraji and Usayd bin Khudayr, the head of al-Aws, competed with him
for leadership. They envied him for this high office. So they harbored
malice and enmity against him. They decided to turn the power away from
him. Uwaym bin Sa‘ida al-Awsi and Ma‘an bin Adi, the ally of the Ansar,
joined them. They belonged to Abu Bakr’s party and followers during the
time of Allah’s Apostle (a.s). Besides, they harbored malice and hatred
against Sa‘d bin Ubada. As a result, they hurried to Abu Bakr and Umar.
They told them about the meeting of the Ansar in al-Saqifa and about
their decision for appointing Sa‘d bin Ubada.[^1] Abu Bakr was
astonished, so he and Umar quickly left. Abu Ubayda bin al-Jarrah[^2] and
Salim, Hudhayfa’s retainer, followed them. Other people from their
party, the party of the Muhajireen, followed them too. They surprised
the Ansar in al-Saqifa. Sa‘d turned pale, and the Ansar became helpless.
Silence and astonishment dominated them. Umar tried to speak, but Abu
Bakr turned to him and whispered in his ear, saying: “Slowly, O Umar,
that I may speak!”

Abu Bakr started his speech with this statement, saying: “We, the
Muhajireen, were the first of the people to believe in Islam. We were
the noblest of them in lineage, the most honored in house, the best in
eminent men, and the nearest of them to Allah’s Apostle (a.s) in
kinship. You are our brethren in Islam and our partners in religion. You
supported and helped (the Prophet), so may Allah reward you with good.
However, we are rulers, and you are helpers. The Arabs follow none
except this tribe from Quraysh. Therefore, do not envy your brethren for
that through which Allah has made them better. I have accepted for you
one of these two men, namely Umar bin al-Khattab and Abu Ubayda bin
al-Jarrah.”[^3]

[^1] Al-‘Aqd al-Fareed, vol. 3, p. 62.
[^2] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 208.
[^3] Al-‘Aqd al-Fareed, vol. 3, p. 62.

Indeed the most reliable proofs Abu Bakr gave for the right of the
Muhajireen in the caliphate and power are as follows:

1. They were the first of the Muslims to believe in Islam.
2. They were the nearest of the people to Allah’s Apostle (a.s) in
kinship.

In his conclusion, Abu Bakr did not make clear who was the first to
believe in Allah, to respond to the summons of His Prophet, to stand
beside him to repel the aggression, and to protect him from the tyrants
of Quraysh. He did not say that such a person was Imam Ali, the
Commander of the faithful (a.s), the cousin of the Prophet (a.s), his
son-in- law, the father of his two grandsons, and the gate of the city
of his knowledge. Abu Bakr forgot Imam Ali and nominated Abu Ubayda and
Umar bin al-Khattab for the office of the caliphate. Did he have an
authority over the Muslims, that he might accept for them and choose one
who would undertake the leadership over them and manage their affairs?
Imam Ali (a.s) has commented on his argument, saying: “They have
advanced the tree as an argument, and lost the fruit!” How eloquent this
statement is! How wonderful this argument is! The Muhajireen clung to
their kinship to the Prophet (a.s) and advanced it as a proof of their
right to power. However, they neglected his family and progeny, who were
his deposit and the equals to Allah’s Book. Imam Ali (a.s) addressed Abu
Bakr in respect of that and advanced as a proof in the same way that Abu
Bakr did in respect of the Ansar. He has said to him:

If you have advanced against their opponents the kinship as an
argument, then those other than you are more appropriate for the Prophet
and nearer to him.

If you have had power over their affairs, then how is that and the
advisers are absent?

In another place, the Imam (a.s) addressed the people and said to them:
“By Allah, I am his brother-namely the brother of Allah’s Apostle
(a.s)-his bosom friend, his cousin, and inheritor of his knowledge.
Therefore, who is worthier of it (the caliphate) than I?[^1] The people
turned away from Abu al-Hasan (Ali) and forgot his excellent qualities,
his achievements, and the commandments of the Prophet (a.s) concerning
him. That is because they craved after the caliphate and rushed upon
power.

**The Pledge of Allegiance to Abu Bakr
**
When Abu Bakr ended his previous speech during which he nominated Umar
and Abu Ubayda for the office of the caliphate, Umar hurried to him and
said:

[^1] Al-Nisa’i, Khasa’is, p. 18. Al-Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 3, p. 126.

“Will this be while you are alive?” None (has the right) to hinder you
from your position where Allah’s Apostle (a.s) had installed you!” We do
not know when Allah’s Apostle (a.s) had installed him in his position
where he had been. But we know that he (a.s) sent him out of Medina
along with the rest of his companions as armed fighters and appointed
Usama over them while he was still young. In such a way the people
pledged allegiance to Abu Bakr. Umar and Basheer competed with each
other to pledge allegiance to him. All the members of their party
competed with each other to pledge allegiance to him. Among those who
did that were Usayd bin Hudayr, ‘Uwaym bin Sa‘ida, Ma‘an bin ‘Adi, Abu
Ubayda bin al-Jarrah, Salim (Abu Hudhayfa’s retainer), and Khalid bin
al-Waleed. These men were strict in forcing the people to pledge
allegiance to Abu Bakr. The greatest of them in enthusiasm was Umar,
whose whip played an important role in forcing those who refused to
pledge allegiance to Abu Bakr. He treated them with severity and
violence. He heard the Ansar saying in respect of Sa‘d: “You have killed
Sa‘d!”

So he rushed to say: “Kill him! May Allah kill him! He is the leader of
a discord!”[^1]

The pledge of allegiance was given to Abu Bakr in such a way
encompassed by terror and threat. Then his party carried him to the
Mosque of the Prophet (a.s) in procession just as a bride[^2], while the
Prophet (a.s) was laid out in the bed of death. Imam Ali, the Commander
of the faithful (a.s) was busy preparing him for burial. When he was
told about that, he quoted as an example: “And some peoples say what
they wish; and they have become tyrannical when Zayd created
calamities!”[^3]

Indeed Abu Bakr was given the pledge of allegiance in such hastiness
and a surprise. Umar came to know that it was illegal. He bitterly
criticized it when he said his famous statement: “Indeed the pledge of
allegiance to Abu Bakr was an error! Allah has protected the Muslims
from its evil! Therefore, whoever summons to the like of it, then kill
him!”[^4]

This statement has the severest kind of criticism and slander. It has
the following:

[^1] Al-‘Aqd al-Fareed, vol. 3, p. 62.
[^2] Ibn Abi al-Haddeed, Sharh Nahjj al-Balagha, vol. 2, p. 8.
[^3] Ibid., vol. 2, p. 5.
[^4] Al-Bukhari, Saheeh, vol. 10, p. 44. Ahmed, Musnad, vol. 1, p. 55.
Tamam al-Mutun, p. 137.

1. Most surely Umar has described the pledge of allegiance to Abu Bakr
as an error (falta). Whether its meaning is evil or sin or slip or
surprise, it is the greatest of all things in the fields of criticism
and dispraise.

2. He has asked Allah to save the Muslims from its evil and to protect
them from its bad complications.

3. He has decided to kill whoever summons (Muslims) to pledge such an
allegiance.

Umar criticized the election of Abu Bakr and paying homage to him
because it did not depend on sound foundations and was not based on firm
logic. It faces the following criticisms:

1. Most surely the people did not consult the pure family of the
Prophet in respect of the caliphate. They seized the power. They forgot
the commandments of the Prophet (a.s) regarding it. They neglected what
the Apostle (a.s) had commanded them in respect of following his progeny
and clinging to them. Imam Sharaf al-Deen, may Allah rest him in peace,
has said: “Suppose that there is no text (tradition) about the
succession of any of the household of Muhammad (a.s). Suppose that they
are not prominent in ancestry, lineage, ethics, jihad, knowledge, deed,
faith or loyalty. And suppose that they have no precedence in the fields
of all virtues, rather they are like the rest of the companions (of the
Prophet). But there was a legal or rational or traditional impediment to
cancel the pledge of allegiance to Abu Bakr. They had to give them time
to prepare Allah’s Apostle (a.s) for burial even through entrusting
security temporarily to the military leadership that the affair of the
caliphate might stabilize.

“Was this amount of patience not kind to those distressed? (While) they
were the deposit of the Prophet with people and his remaining (progeny)
among them. Allah, the Exalted, has said: Certainly an Apostle has come
to you from among yourselves; grievous to him is your falling into
distress, excessively solicitous respecting you; to the believers (he
is) compassionate, merciful.[^1] It was grievous for the Prophet that his
community would fall into a distress. He was careful of their happiness,
compassionate and merciful to them. Therefore, is it not of the right of
this Apostle that his family had not to fall into distress that they
might not be surprised by something like that through which they were
surprised, while the injury did not heal and the Apostle was not buried
yet?”[^2]

[^1] Qur’an, 9, 128.
[^2] Al-Nas wa al-Ijtihad, p. 7.

The Prophet (a.s) was laid out in the bed of death, his grave did not
make him absent from the eyes of the people, while they impatiently and
greedily competed with each other for government and authority. They
neglected the Prophet’s Household. They decided to turn away from them,
to wrong them, and to plunder their wealth. From that day the Prophet’s
family faced different kinds of distress and misfortune. Their blood was
shed, and their womenfolk were taken as prisoners of war. The kinship of
the Prophet (a.s) was not respected, while they were the most
appropriate (of all things) for care and kindness.

2. Among the criticisms the pledge of allegiance faces is that it did
not include the influential people (Ahl al-Hal wa al-Aqd), whom they
regarded as a basic condition in forming the consensus and the legality
of the election. However, the people cancelled the consulting with the
high class in Islam. They paid no attention to their opinions, nor did
they take their agreement on the new caliph. Moreover, the place where
the election took place was much hidden. ‘Abd al-Wahhab al-Najjar says:
“Whoever is acquainted with the way through which the pledge of
allegiance to Abu Bakr took place concludes that it was manifestly
incomplete, for the reasonable thing in such states is that the Muslims
took a place where they met and about which the people had to be
told.”[^1]

Most surely the election of Abu Bakr was very incomplete, for the
remarkable personalities who took part in building the entity of Islam
withdrew from choosing and electing him. On top of these personalities
were Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful (a.s), his Hashimite
relatives, and the leading companions (of the Prophet) such as Salman
al-Farisi, Abu Dharr, Ammar bin Yasir, And Ubay bin Ka‘ab. Among the
Hashimites who did not elect Abu Bakr were al-Zubayr, Utba bin Abi
Lahab, al-Abbas, and the like. All the Ansar or some of them refrained
from pledging allegiance to Abu Bakr saying: “We will pledge allegiance
to none except Ali!”[^2] A great number of the leading personalities from
among the Muhajireen and the Ansar withdrew from electing Abu Bakr;
therefore, how was the pledge of allegiance legal?

3. The Muslims were forced to pay homage to Abu Bakr, for Umar’s whip
played an important role in achieving that, to the extent that the
people became astonished. The people did not stipulate that the Caliph
should follow Allah’s Book and the Sunna of His Prophet just as they
stipulated in respect of the Caliphs after him. Perhaps, for these
reasons Umar decided that the

[^1] Al-Khulafa’ al-Rashidun, p. 16.
[^2] Ibn al-Athir, Tarikh.

pledge of allegiance to Abu Bakr and its ways were illegal; likewise,
he decided that he would kill those who would return to the like of
it.

**Imam Ali refrains from paying Homage to Abu Bakr**

Imam Ali (a.s) refrained from pledging allegiance to Abu Bakr. He
announced his strong displeasure with him due to the fact that he
plundered his wealth and deprived him of his right. That was when he
said: “He (Abu Bakr) certainly knew that my position in relation to it
(the caliphate) was the same as the position of the axis in relation to
the hand mill. The flood water flows down from him and the bird can not
fly up to him.” Abu Bakr came to know these words of the Imam. For this
reason the Imam (a.s) thought that none other than him could go up on
the pulpit of the caliphate. He clearly announced that when his uncle
al-Abbas came to him and asked him to pledge allegiance to him. He said
to him: “My nephew, stretch out your hand to pay homage to you, that the
people may say: ‘The uncle of Allah’s Apostle (a.s) has paid homage to
the cousin of Allah’s Apostle (a.s). Therefore, no two persons will
differ over you.’”

“Who other than I will seek this affair?” asked the Imam.

The Prophet (a.s) had invested him with this high office of the Imamate
on the day of Ghadir Khum. He announced his authority before a group of
people. Besides, he continually ordered his community to follow him and
to hand the leadership over it to him. In this respect Dr. Taha Husayn
has said: “Al-Abbas reflected on the affair; so he thought that his
nephew was worthier of inheriting the authority than he was. That is
because he (Imam Ali) was brought up by the Prophet. He had precedence
in Islam. He showed extreme courage at all the battles. The Prophet
called him: ‘My brother!’ So, one day, Umm Ayman joked with him and said
to him: ‘You call him your brother while you have married him to your
daughter!’ The Prophet said to him: ‘You are to me as Aaron was to Moses
except that there is no prophet after me.’ On another day he said to the
Muslims: ‘Whoever I am his guardian, Ali is to be his guardian.’ Because
of that al-Abbas went after the death of the Prophet to his nephew and
said to him: ‘Stretch out your hand to pay homage to you.’”[^1]

Imam Ali (a.s) refrained from pledging allegiance to Abu Bakr. He did
not make peace with the people, nor did he grant them consent. He showed
his displeasure toward them. He advanced arguments and debated with
them. He showed his strong grumble and his intense displeasure with the
people because they plundered his inheritance, and denied his authority
and his rights.
[^1] Ali wa Banuh, p. 19.


