Mus'ab al-Khair
===============

Mus'ab wore his best clothes, combed his hair, put perfume on his body,
and went out. The perfume spread through the lane. Some women whispered
about that rich young man. They hoped that Mus'ab would marry one of
their daughters.

Mus'ab amused himself with his friends. One day he heard about a new
event happening in Makkah

At that time, our Master Muhammad (s) began inviting people to Islam.

Mus'ab decided to meet our Master Muhammad (s) and to listen to his
words. So, he went to al-Arqam's house. He intended to spend only a few
minutes with our Master Muhammad (s) because he had promised his friends
to go for amusement.

When Mus'ab sat down before our Master Muhammad (s) he realized
something new. He realized mercy, true love and good manners. Thus, he
listened to Muhammad's words. Immediately, he said:

*I confess that there's no god but Allah and that Muhammad is his
Apostle.*

At that moment Mus'ab became a believing man. He began looking at the
sky and feeling the pain of the poor. Then who was Mus'ab?

His full name was Mus'ab bin Umair bin Hashim bin Abd Munaf. He belonged
to Abduldaar, who belonged to the Quraish. His epithet was Abdullah. He
was one of the good companions.

He became a Muslim early. He kept his Islam a secret. When the
polytheists knew about his Islam, they imprisoned him in his house. He
immigrated to Habasha (Ethiopia) and came back to Makkah after the
al-Akaba First Homage.

The Prophet (s) sent him to Madina to teach people the Holy Qur'an. So,
he was the first immigrant. Allah's Apostle (s) named him Mus'ab
al-Khair.

He took part in the Battle of Badr. He became a martyr in the Battle of
Uhud and he was carrying the Prophet's banner.

Mus'ab becomes Muslim
---------------------

In the evening, Mus'ab went home. He had his supper silently. He ate
only one kind of food. His father was looking at him. His mother was
astonished at his new behaviour. She asked him about that. "*Nothing,*"
he answered.

When it was time to sleep, Mus'ab lay on the bed and began looking at
the starry sky. So, he was full of awe for Allah, the Creator of the
skies and of the earth, the Lord of the worlds.

All slept. But Mus'ab stayed up. He got up and performed the ritual
ablution carefully so as no one would see him. He came into his room and
began praying to Allah, the Glorified.

On the following morning, Mus'ab's mother was astonished at his new
behaviour. He did not stop before the mirror to comb his hair. He did
not put perfume on his body. He did not dress up; he wore normal
clothes. Besides, his mother saw him treating his parents politely.

One day, the mother heard about her son's frequent visits to al-Arqam's
house. She got crazy. She waited for his return impatiently.

Mus'ab came back in the evening and greeted his mother. But the mother
strongly slapped his cheek and shouted at him stormily:

*Why have you left your ancestor's religion and followed Muhammad's?*

*Mother, because it's the best religion!*

The mother was about to lose her mind because everyone obeyed her, even
her husband. She did not control herself. Thus, she slapped his cheek
again.

Mus'ab sadly sat down. The mother sat down, too. She began thinking
about a way to return her son to his ancestor's religion.

The mother kindly said to her son:

*Don't you see the Muslims suffering from torture? Islam is slaves
religion! It suits Bilal, Suhaib and Ammar. You belong to the Quraish.*

Mus'ab looked at his mother and said kindly:

*No, mother! Islam is people's religion. There's no difference between a
Quraishi and non-Quraishi, and between the black and the white. The
difference between them is piety. Mother, please follow Allah's religion
and leave the idols because they're useless!*

The mother kept silent. She thought of another way to drive her son away
from Muhammad's religion.

The sun rose in the morning. It filled Makkah's houses and mountains
with its rays. The house was empty. Mus'ab said to himself:

*"Where's my mother gone?"*

Mus'ab wanted to go out. He headed for the door, tried to open it but
found it locked. Mus'ab was waiting for his mother's return. An hour
passed. The door was opened. His mother and a veiled man appeared from
behind the door. The man was carrying a sword in one hand and chains in
the other.

The Prison
----------

The mother said to her son:

*Do you want to go to al-Arqam's house?*

Mus'ab kept silent. The mother went on:

*This room will be your prison till you leave Muhammad's religion.*

Mus'ab firmly said:

*I prefer death to that!*

The man chained Mus'ab, and his mother pushed him towards the room that
became his prison.

Days passed.

Mus'ab suffered from hunger and loneliness in prison. He was always
weeping.

The Prophet (s) and the Muslims heard about Mus'ab's sufferings. They
took pity on him. They were filled with admiration because he preferred
prison to all his amusements.

Freedom
-------

Mus'ab was always worshipping Allah in prison. He was pleased with his
faith. But, he felt that freedom was the most beautiful thing in life
and that faith in Allah was the way to freedom. Mus'ab felt the
sufferings of the slaves of Makkah.

Days and weeks passed. Mus'ab was still in prison. Allah wished to save
him from those sufferings.

There was a just king in al-Habasha. The Prophet (s) told the Muslims to
immigrate there.

A Muslim secretly came into Mus'ab's prison. He told him about the
Muslims immigration.

Mus'ab became happy and was full of hope. The Muslim released him. He
was pleased to go with them. They covered the desert towards the Red
Sea.

To Habasha
----------

The caravan reached Jeddah port. They were fifteen Muslims. They escaped
from the polytheists to save their religion. A ship anchored at the
port. The ship was heading for al-Habasha.

The immigrants went abroad. They were thanking Allah for faith and
safety.

The wind was soft and seat was calm. The ship began heading for Habasha.
After some days and nights, the ship reached Habasha.

Al-Najashy
----------

Al-Najashy, the emperor of Habasha was a just man. He welcomed the
Muslims to his country.

Among the immigrants were Abd al-Rahman bin Auf, al-Zubair bin al-Awam,
Uthman bin Mazun, Abdullah bin Masoud, Uthman bin Affan and his wife
Rukkayah (the Prophet's step-daughter), Um Ayman, Abu Salama and his
wife Um Salama and Mus'ab bin Umair.

The immigrants worshipped Allah safely. They were looking forward to
hearing news about the Prophet (s) and about those who believed in him.
They asked Allah to grant them a victory over the polytheists.

The polytheists planned to bring back the Muslims by force. They went to
Jeddah port. They did not find the ship, for it had left for al-Habasha.
So, they thought of another way to bring back the Muslims.

The Return
----------

The polytheists wanted to make peace with our Master Muhammad (s), for
Islam spread quickly.

For example, Hamza bin Abdul Muttalib became Muslim because Abu Jahal
mistreated the Prophet (s). Then Umar bin al-Khattab, the bitter enemy
of Islam, became Muslim, too. For this reason, the Muslims were certain
of their big power.

During that time, the Emperor welcomed the Muslim immigrants to his
country. So, his people revolted against him.

The Muslims thought of coming back to Makkah so as not to put al-Najashy
in a critical situation. In the meantime, they heard about the truce
between the Muslims and the polytheists.

After three months in Habasha, the Muslims decided to come back to
Makkah. The Muslims were seen off by the Habashian people. They were
pleased with the emperor. So, they wished him victory over his enemies.

![](/sites/default/files/bk4%20p10.jpg)

Before the Muslims reached Makkah, they had heard bad news. The news was
that the Quraish were still unjust. They went on persecuting and
torturing the Muslims.

Thus, the immigrants had two choices - either going back to al-Habasha
or entering Makkah and suffering torture. Some immigrants preferred
going to al-Habasha, and some preferred entering Makkah.

Mus'ab preferred entering Makkah and suffering torture.

Mus'ab went home to know his mother's opinion. His mother was still
stubborn. She tried to imprison him again, but he left the house. His
eyes were filled with tears.

Mus'ab wanted his mother to become a Muslim. He wanted her to open her
eyes to see the light of faith.

But her final answer was:

I don't want the people to say that I've preferred my son's religion to
my father's one.

A Meeting in Makkah
-------------------

Our Master Muhammad (s) was waiting for the time of Hajj (pilgrimage) to
invite the pilgrims to Islam.

Six persons from Yathrib came to Makkah. The Prophet (s) asked them:

*Where are you from?*

They answered:

*We're from Yathrib. We belong to al-Khazraj tribe.*

Our Master Muhammad (s) said to them:

*Are you supporters of the Jew?*

*Yes.*

The Prophet (s) sat down with them. He read them some verses of the
Qur'an and invited them to Islam.

The people of Yathrib heard from the Jews that a prophet would appear
very soon. For this reason, they said to each other:

*By Allah, he's the Prophet whom the Jews have given good news about.*

Immediately, they became Muslims and said:

*The enmity between the tribe of al-Aws and the tribe of al-Khazraj is
very intense - may Allah bring them together through you!*

They went to Yathrib and began inviting its people to Muhammad's
religion.

Al-Akaba First Homage
---------------------

When the time of Hajj started, twelve persons from Yathrib came and met
the Prophet (s) in a place called al-Akaba.

The twelve persons promised him that they would not be polytheists, not
steal, not fornicate, not kill their daughters and not tell lies.

The First Immigrant
-------------------

The Muslims in Habasha asked our Master Muhammad (s) to send them a man
to teach Islam.

Our Master Muhammad (s) found Mus'ab the best man to carry out that
task. Therefore, he ordered him to get ready to immigrate to al-Habasha.

Mus'ab bin Umair obeyed the Prophet (s) and went with his Muslim
brothers to al-Habasha.

Thus, Mus'ab was the first to immigrate to Habasha for Allah. He stayed
with Saad bin Zarara, who was among the earlier Muslims.

Days passed. Mus'ab was with his Muslim brothers teaching them Islam and
reading them the Qur'an.

The Spread of Islam
-------------------

Saad bin Zarara wanted to spread Islam all over Makkah. He asked Mus'ab
to go with him to Bani al-Ashal's and Bani Zafar's houses.

Saad bin Maadh and Usaid bin Khuzair were Bani al-Ashal's leaders. They
were polytheists.

Saad bin Maadh said to Uzair bin Khuzair:

*Go and scold those two men! Then dismiss them from our houses. Saad bin
Zarara is my cousin. I'm shy of him.*

Usaid bin Khuzair took his sword and headed for them. There were a group
of people from Yathrib around them. They were listening to the verses of
the Qur'an.

Saad bin Zarara saw Usaid coming towards them. He said to Mus'ab:

*This is Usaid. He's the chief of the tribe. If he becomes Muslim, his
tribe will become Muslim, too.*

Usaid stopped near them. He said threateningly:

*If you like life, then go away!*

Mus'ab politely answered:

*Please sit down for only a few minutes. Do listen to what we're
reading. If you don't accept it, we'll go away.*

Usaid said:

*You have treated me with justice.*

Usaid rammed his sword into the ground and sat down.

Mus'ab began reading some verses of the Holy Qur'an. Usaid felt faith
began entering his heart.

His expression changed quickly. His anger disappeared. So, he said with
a smile:

*How sweet this is!*

Mus'ab said:

*It's the best religion. The truthful, trustworthy Prophet has brought
it.*

Usaid said:

*What shall I do if I want to be a Muslim.*

Mus'ab said:

*Wash your body, perform the ritual ablution, say I confess that there's
no god but Allah and that Muhammad is His Apostle and His slave. Then
pray two Raka'as.*

Usaid got up and went home. He washed his body, performed the ritual
ablution, came back to them and became Muslim. Then he said:

*There's a man, who is my friend. If he becomes a Muslim, all his tribe
will become Muslims, too. I'll send him to you.*

Saad bin Maadh becomes Muslim
-----------------------------

Usaid came back to his friend Saad. When Saad bin Maadh saw him in the
distance, he said to his friends:

*By Allah, Usaid has come to you with another face.*

Namely, Usaid has changed.

Saad said to Usaid:

*What have you done?*

Usaid said*:*

*I ordered them to go away.* They said:

"We'll do what you like."

Saad said

*Where are they now?*

Usaid said:

*At their place.*

Saad said angrily:

*You haven't done anything!*

Saad stood up, took the sword from Usaid and headed for Mus'ab bin
Umair.

When he arrived there, he cried stormily:

*By whose permission have you come here?*

Mus'ab smiled. He asked him to sit down and to listen. Then he said:

*If our words annoy you, then we'll leave!*

After Saad had rammed the sword into the ground, he sat down.

Mus'ab read him some verses of the Qur'an. Then, he told him about the
Islamic good manners, friendship and brotherhood.

Saad felt that his heart inclined to Islam. So he said:

*I confess that there's no god but Allah and that Muhammad is His
Apostle and His slave.*

Saad kept his Islam a secret for he intended to do something.

Saad was Bani al-Ashal's chief and leader. They were waiting for his
return. He and Mus'ab bin Umair came back to them. When Saad approached
them, he stopped and said:

*Bani al-Ashal, what am I?*

They all answered:

*Our leader and master!*

Saad bin Maadh said:

*I ask you to believe in Allah and His Apostle.*

All Bani al-Ashal believed in Islam. Therefore, Mus'ab bin Umair began
teaching them the principals of Islam.

Al-Akaba Second Homage
----------------------

The time of the new pilgrimage started. Mus'ab bin Umair and a group of
the Muslims went to Makkah. A group of the polytheists went there, too.
The polytheists visited Makkah and had special ceremonies.

Mus'ab wanted to meet the Prophet (s) and tell him about spreading Islam
in Yathrib.

A group of Muslims secretly visited our Master Muhammad (s). They asked
him to meet them at al-Akaba valley at night. They did not want the
Quraish to know about their meeting.

When the polytheists slept, the Muslims went secretly to al-Akaba
valley. The Muslims were seventy-three. Two of them were women. The
first was Naseeba bint Kaab. She belonged to Bani al-Najjar. The second
was Asmaa bint Amru. She belonged to Bani Salama.

Our Master Muhammad (s) came. His uncle al-Abbas, who kept his Islam a
secret because he was afraid of the Quraish, came with him, too.

The Muslims paid homage to our Master Muhammad (s). They assured him
that they would defend Islam. Besides they showed him their stand
against all his enemies. The Muslims said to Allah's Apostle (s):

*We've paid our homage! We'll be loyal to you. Then what will be our
reward?*

Our Master Muhammad (s) said:

*The Paradise!*

Munat, the Idol
---------------

The delegation came back to Madina. Mus'ab bin Umair came back, too. He
was glad at the victory of Islam.

Islam spread. Its light illuminated Yathrib city. Most people of Yathrib
became Muslims, but only a few persons insisted on polytheism and
worshipping idols.

Amru bin al-Jumah made an idol of wood. He named it Munat. He put it in
the house yard. He worshipped it everyday.

Maadh thought about a way to convince his father about the uselessness
of the idols. He agreed with his Muslim brothers about taking the idols.

It was time to sleep. Amru in al-Jamuh went to bed. His son stayed up
waiting for his friends.

At the fixed hour, the friends came. Maadh opened the door carefully.
His friends came into the house. They tied the idols with ropes and drew
it outside the house. They went outside the city. They threw the idol
into a rubbish pit. Maadh came back home calmly. He went to bed.

In the morning, Amru bin al-Jamuh woke. He did not find Munat. He began
looking for his idol through the lanes. He was shouting:

*Who has stolen my god?*

Amru bin al-Jamuh searched everywhere for the idol. Finally he found it
in the rubbish pit. He took it out of the pit and brought it home again.
He gave it a good clean and perfumed it. Then he kneeled and apologised
to it.

At the following night, Maadh's friends came. They drew the idol, took
it outside the city and threw it into the same pit.

Amru bin al-Jamuh woke. He did not find the idol. So, he went outside
the city. He brought it home and gave it a good clean. That time, he was
annoyed. Thus he tied a sword to the neck of Munat. He said to it:

*If you're a real god, then defend yourself!*

It got dark. Maadh's friends came. They took the idol to another place.
They tied it to a dead dog and threw it into a pit.

On the following day, Amru bin al-Jamuh looked for his idol everywhere.
Then he found it tied to the dead dog. So, he took his sword and kicked
the idol with his leg. He said:

*What a bad god you are!*

At that moment, Amru bin al-Jamuh believed in the Muslim Mission. Maadh
was happy when his father became Muslim.

The Prophet's Migration
-----------------------

The polytheists harmed the Muslims intensely. So, the Prophet (s)
ordered his companions to immigrate to Madina.

The Muslims began leaving Makkah secretly. They went there one by one or
group by group. The Quraish knew about the Muslims immigration. Thus,
they began capturing and torturing some of them.

Thirteen years passed after the Prophetic Mission. Abu Jahal urged the
Quraish to kill our Master Muhammad (s). Jibreel came down from the sky
to tell Allah's Apostle (s) about the Quraishi plot. He ordered him to
immigrate to Madina.

The Prophet (s) decided to leave Madina secretly. Therefore, he asked
his cousin Ali to sleep in his bed. Ali accepted the Prophet's request
with pleasure.

The polytheists broke into the Prophet's house. They saw Ali sleeping in
his bed. They admired Ali's bravery and sacrifice.

Our Master Muhammad (s) arrived in Madina. It's people received him with
songs. On that day, Yathrib was named al-Madina al-Munawarra.

Our Master Muhammad (s) began building a new society.

First, our Master Muhammad (s) built a mosque. The mosque was a symbol
for monotheism. Then, he made brotherhood between Muhajireen and Ansar.

The Battle of Badr
------------------

The polytheists in Makkah attacked and robbed the Muslim's houses.

Our Master Muhammad (s) wanted to punish the Quraish. He heard about
their trade caravan coming from Sham. He ordered the Muslims to get
ready to attack the caravan.

Abu Sufyan, the leader of the caravan, heard about the Muslim's plan.
So, he sent a man to the Quraishi leaders to send him urgent supplies.
In the meantime, he changed the direction of the caravan.

The polytheists got ready to face the Muslims. They called up 950
fighters and headed for Madina.

The Prophet (s) formed an army. The number of the army was 313 fighters.
He gave Mus'ab bin Umair the Muhajireen's banner. He gave Saad bin Maadh
the Ansar's banner. And he gave his banner, called al-Ikaab, to Ali bin
Abu Talib (a).

The two armies met near Badr wells.

The battle took place. The Muslims fought bravely. Allah granted them a
victory. The Muslims killed many polytheists. They killed Abu Sufyan and
Umayyah bin Khulaif. Besides, they captured many polytheists such as
al-Nadhar bin al-Harith.

Al-Nadhar bin al-Harith said to Mus'ab bin Umair:

*Tell your friend (our Master Muhammad (s) ) to regard me as a prisoner
of war!*

Mus'ab said to him:

*You tortured his companions.*

Al-Nadhar bin al-Harith tried to remind him of the pre-Islamic
fanaticism, he said to him:

*If the Quraish captured you, I would prevent them from killing you.*

Mus'ab said:

*I'm against your opinion. Islam is against fanaticism.*

Mus'ab thought of nothing but Islam and obeyed none but Allah and his
Messenger (s).

The Battle of Uhud
------------------

The Quraish were getting ready to take revenge on the Muslims. A year
passed after the Battle of Badr. The polytheists formed a big army. The
number of the army was three thousand fighters. Abu Sufyan headed it.

The polytheist army advanced towards Madina.

The Jews in Madina were worried, for the Muslims won victory at the
Battle of Badr. So, they were full of spite. Kaad bin al-Ashraf, a Jew
belonging to Bani al-Nadheer, went to Makkah. He urged the polytheists
to take revenge on the Muslims.

Abu Sufyan said to Kaab:

*Which religion is better - Muhammad's or ours?*

Kaab said with a smile:

*Yours!*

Thus, the Jews succeeded in urging the polytheists. For this reason, the
polytheist army headed for al-Madina al-Munawwara.

The Facing
----------

After many talks in the Prophet's Mosque, the Muslims were agreed on
facing the polytheists near Uhud Mount outside Madina. Our Master
Muhammad (s) formed an army. The number of the army was seven hundred
fighters. The Prophet (s) gave the banner to the brave companion Mus'ab
bin Umair.

Our Master Muhammad (s) ordered the best fifty bow men to stay on
al-Ainain Mount. Their duty was to defend the Muslims against any
surprising attack. Thus, the Prophet (s) ordered them not to leave their
places at any rate - he said to them:

Protect us from the back. Don't leave your places when you see us
collecting booty or when we are killed.

When the fight started, the Muslims won great victory. They began
chasing the polytheists. The bow men on the mountain forgot the
Prophet's order. They saw their Muslim brothers collecting booty. So,
they left their places.

Khalid bin al-Waleed headed the polytheist army. He launches a
surprising attack. The bow men on the mountain could not resist the
attack. So, some of them became martyrs. The attack left the Muslims in
chaos.

Our Master Muhammad (s) and some of his companions such as Ali bin Abu
Talib (a), Hamza bin Abdul Muttalib, and Mus'ab bin Umair faced the
attack.

Mus'ab was carrying the Muslims' banner. He was among those who fought
bravely to protect Allah's Apostle (s).

The polytheists attacked Mus'ab strongly to drop banner, for dropping
the banner meant defeat. For this reason, Mus'ab bin Umair was fighting
bravely. After heroic resistance, he fell to the ground and was
martyred.

Our Master Muhammad (s) ordered Ali bin Abu Talib (a) to raise the
banner high. The fight continued. Then Hamza became a martyr. Some
companions fought bravely. Abu Dajana al-Ansary and Sahal bin Hunaifa
were two of them.

Our Master Muhammad (s) was badly wounded. The polytheists launched
intense attacks against him. Each time, the Prophet (s) said to Ali (a):

*Fight these polytheists!*

Ali was fighting with his sword called Dhul Fiqar. He did not pay
attention to his wounds. Jibreel came down from the sky. He said to our
Master Muhammad (s):

*Muhammad, the angels of the sky have admired your resistance.*

Some companions heard an angel calling the sky:

*There's no sword but Dhul Fiqar and no youth like Ali.*

The Withdrawal
--------------

Although the situation was critical, our Master Muhammad (s) decided to
withdraw his troops to refresh them. He called:

*I'm Allah's Apostle (s). come near to me!*

The Prophet (s) took his companions to Uhud Mount.

Abu Sufyan stood at the foot of the mountain and said:

*A day for a day!*

Then he said:

*Hubal is great!*

The Prophet (s) ordered a companion of his to say:

*Allah is greater!*

Abu Sufyan said:

*The supporter is for us, but you've no supporter!*

The Prophet (s) said:

*Allah is our supporter, but you've no supporter!*

The battle was over. The Muslims took an unforgettable lesson from it.
The lesson was about obeying our Master Muhammad (s) at any rate.

The Muslims lost seventy fighters. The polytheists lost twenty eight
fighters.

Our Master Muhammad (s) arrived in Madina. The Muslims rejoiced at his
return.

Our Master Muhammad (s) condoled Hamna bint Jahash on her uncle's
martyrdom. She said:

*We belong to Allah and we shall come back to Him! May Allah forgive and
have mercy on him!*

He condoled her on her brother Abdullah's martyrdom.

She said:

*We belong to Allah and we shall come back to Him! May Allah forgive and
have mercy on him!*

Then he condoled her on her husband Mus'ab's martyrdom. She burst into
tears and said:

*What great sadness!*

She wept bitter tears. Our Master Muhammad (s) knew that Hamna loved her
brave husband very much. So, he did not tell her directly.

That believing woman went home weeping. For this reason our Master
Muhammad (s) said:

*The woman loves her husband more than others.*

Thus the bright page of jihad was folded. Mus'ab's name was on its first
lines.

The Muslims always remember this brave hero, who suffered persecution
for Islam. Mus'ab al-Khair's name has been in the generations memory!


