Publisher's Preface
===================

This book can best be described as an inquiry of an explorer of the
truth into the delicate yet essential question of: “Who is better
qualified to the claim of being a follower of Islam's Prophet in spirit
and in practice?” Just as it is mandatory to follow the Qur'an, it is
equally essential to follow the Prophet, peace be upon him. While the
Qur'an is the Almighty's revelation, the Prophet's statements and
actions, without any doubt, are also guided by the Almighty, and he
cannot err:

“***Nor does he speak out of desire. It is naught but revelation that is
revealed” (Qur'an, 53:3-4),***

hence the importance of taking the Sunnah (the Prophet's traditions and
statements) very seriously.

Both major schools of Islamic law, the Sunni and the Shi\`a, differed
with regard to the important issue of the spiritual as well as the
temporal succession of the Prophet of Islam. This difference resulted in
the Muslims' ideological division after the Prophet's death. Here is an
interesting fact for your consideration:

Both Sunni and Shi\`a groups agree all along with regard to the
importance of the Qur'an and of the Sunnah, accepting them as the bases
upon which they establish the implementation of their faith. Despite
this fact, however, the Sunnis arrogated to themselves the title of
“Ahlul Sunnah,” or “the people of the Path,” and the rest of the world
passively gave in to this assumption and accepted it as a fact.

In his *Dictionary of Islam*, Thomas Hughes[^1] points out: “... hence
it comes to pass that although the Shi\`as, even to a greater degree
than the Sunnis, rest their claims upon traditional evidence, they have
allowed their opponents to claim the title of traditionists, and
consequently Mr. Sale[^2] and many European writers have stated that the
Shi\`as reject the tradition.”

In our times, the freedom of thought and expression, coupled with a
spirit of independent inquiry, has helped men and women to free
themselves from misbeliefs, whims, and superstitions.

Amazingly, the distinct task of separating the truth from the myth on an
issue of such a great importance, namely the question of who the genuine
followers of the Sunnah of the Prophet are and who followed in his
footsteps\_\_Ali and his friends, or the *sahaba* (the friends of the
Prophet) who opposed the Prophet's cousin after his death\_\_had to be
pioneered by the author of this book who grew up as a Sunni.

After several years of independent inquiry as to who was right\_\_Ali or
his opponents\_\_he gave up the beliefs of his ancestors and accepted
the Twelve Imams of the Shi\`as as his “rightly guided” leaders after
the Prophet. The author of four previously published books (Pyam-e-Aman
had published the English translation of his first book titled *Then I
was Guided*), Dr. Muhammad al-Samawi al-Tijani is a great scholar and
Arabist.

As a student of comparative religion, he has tirelessly pursued his
quest for the truth, and he continues to write what he calls, in the
beginning of his first book, “a story of a journey..., a story of a new
discovery... in the field of religious and philosophical schools.”

The question of who Ahlul Sunnah are and who are not is critical to any
believer, both in the context of history as well as in the practice of
religion today. It is also important because those who labelled
themselves as the “traditionists” viewed all others as “heterodox” in
contrast to their claiming themselves to be the “orthodox.”

This resulted in violence and coercion as the rulers of the time used
such accusations to oppress the masses as they demonstrated their power
and ruthless control over their destiny. Western Islamists picked up the
jargon from the writers of the “majority sect” and divided the Muslim
world in their writings into “Orthodox” and “Heretical,” referring to
the Sunnis and the Shi\`as respectively.[^3]

This hypothetical dichotomy is misleading and completely baseless. It is
also due to the lack of understanding about the world of Islam. Western
writers fail to observe that, other than the belief in the issue of
Imamate, the Sunnis have far greater differences within their own four
sects (or schools of thought) system compared to their differences with
the Shi\`as.

The views of the Hanafis regarding theological questions, for example,
may well coincide with those of the Shi\`as while remaining in an
uncompromising contradiction to many doctrines espoused by, say, the
Hanbalis, the Shafi\`is, or the Malikis.

In sharp contrast to the evidence of “irreconcilable differences”
between the four Imams who had established the afore-mentioned Schools
of Sunni Thought, even with regard to issues of minor as well as major
importance, a total consensus exists among the Twelve Imams of Ahlul
Bayt (People of the Prophet's House) on each and every doctrinal aspect
of the faith.

In his celebrated treatise titled *Kitab al-milal wal nihal* (the book
of religions and religious sects), al-Shahristani,[^4] a Muslim thinker
who lived during the Medieval times, gives an account of the Muslim
sects (*firaq*, singular: *firqa*) and their disagreements on four
fundamental issues: *Tawhid* (Oneness of God and His Divine Attributes),
*Adl* (justice), *Iman* (faith or conviction), and lastly Revelation,
the Prophetic mission, and the right to be the leader (Imam) of the
Muslim community.

A revealing picture that emerges from his work shows that, unlike the
usual European concept of a religious sect, the Muslim *firaq*, with
their different views on issues, allow a dialogue between scholars and
followers of different theological persuasions. This offers hope that in
the new “information era,” with people coming closer to and eager to
communicate with one another and ready to adapt to change, the Muslim
world may achieve its homogeneous synthesis, notwithstanding the minor
variants, in a not too distant future, *Insha-Allah*.

Dr. Tijani's book, written in Arabic, is a voluminous work. We had to
selectively though discreetly omit certain parts of it both to ensure
economy and to make it more palatable to the English speaking readers.
The first two chapters have been rewritten by Br. Yasin T. al-Jibouri in
order to incorporate full accounts of important events that took place
just before the Prophet's death to provide the reader with the context
of the author's comments.

We are grateful to Br. Yasin T. al-Jibouri (P.O. Box 5132, Falls Church,
VA 22044) for translating the original Arabic text of this book into
English. He, by the way, has translated, written, or edited as many as
twenty-three books and is a great asset to our community. Without his
help, the publication of this book may not have become possible. Our
special thanks to Br. Nasir Shamsi who has so far edited fifteen of the
books published by Pyam-e-Aman and persevered in reviewing and editing
this book. May Allah *Ta\`ala* reward them both on behalf of all those
who will *Insha-Allah* benefit from this book, and on our own.

*Pyam-e-Aman*  
 P.O. Box 390  
 Bloomfield, New Jersey 07003, U.S.A.  
 Rabi\` II 1, 1416 A.H./August 27, 1995

[^1]: Born in Berkshire on October 20, 1822 and died in Brighton,
England, on March 22, 1896, Thomas Patrick Hughes was a jurist,
reformer, and novelist. He attained fame following the publication in
1857 of his novel Tom Brown's School Days. His other famous works
include: Tom Brown at Oxford (which he wrote after studying at Oxford
from 1842 to 1845 and which was published in 1861), A Layman's Faith
(1868), and The Manliness of Christ (1879). His Dictionary of Islam was
published by Rupa & Co. of Calcutta, India, in 1885.

[^2]: Rev. George Sale is the British scholar, traveller and Arabist
who, in 1734, produced one of the earliest English translations of the
Holy Qur'an, a translation which remained in circulation for 127 years.
Tr.

[^3]: The Western Islamists misjudged, in fact exploited, the
differences in the Islamic world. They tried to apply the dichotomous
division of Christianity between the “Orthodox” and “Heretical” to the
Muslim world. Needless to say that the Christian sects maintain totally
divergent views in respect of their basic beliefs viz: Oneness of God,
Sonship of Jesus and Divine Trinity. In sharp contrast, the Muslims,
notwithstanding their differences on certain issues, have consensus with
regard to their basic beliefs such as “Tawheed”, Oneness of God, the
Prophethood of Muhammad and the Finality of his Prophethood, and the Day
of Judgment.

[^4]: Nicknamed “Abul-Fath,” Muhammad ibn Abd al-Kareem al-Shahristani
was born in Shahristan, Khurasan, in 469 A.H./1076 A.D. and died in 548
A.H./1153 A.D. He was the most prominent Sunni historian of religions
and philosophical trends in the Middle Ages. His famous book Kitab
al-milal wal nihal was published in Cairo, Egypt, in 1288 A.H./1871 A.D.


