Introducing the Imams of the Shi`as
===================================

Shi\`as have confined their loyalty to the twelve Imams from Ahlul Bayt,
peace be upon them, the first of whom is Ali ibn Abu Talib followed by
his son al-Hasan then his son al-Husayn then the nine infallible ones
among al-Husayn's offspring, peace and blessings of Allah be upon all of
them.

The Messenger of Allah had named all these Imams in many of his
statements either explicitly or implicitly, and he had mentioned them by
name according to some traditions transmitted by the Shi\`as and others
transmitted by “Sunni” scholars.

Some of Ahlul Sunnah may object to these traditions, expressing
astonishment at how the Messenger could have talked about issues related
to the unknown which were enshrouded with non-existence. The Holy Qur'an
states:

***“Had I known the unseen, I would have had much of good and no evil
would have touched me” (Holy Qur'an, 7:188)***.

To counter this argument, we say that this sacred verse does not exclude
the Messenger from knowing the unseen at all; rather, it was revealed in
response to some polytheists who asked him to inform them when the Hour
would come, and the time of the Hour is the sole knowledge of Allah,
Glory to Him, which He shares with nobody. The Holy Qur'an, on the other
hand, clearly states:

***“The One Who knows the unseen! So He does not reveal His secrets to
anyone except to whomsoever He chooses (such) as an apostle” (Holy
Qur'an, 72:26-27)***.

The exception to which this verse refers indicates that He, Glory to
Him, acquaints His messengers whom He chooses with the knowledge of the
unseen. For example, read what Joseph (Yusuf), peace be upon him, said
to his prison inmates:

***“No food shall come to you except that I will inform you of it before
it reaches you; surely this is of what my Lord has taught me” (Holy
Qur'an, 12:37)***.

Another example is this verse:

***“Then they found one of Our servants whom We had granted mercy and
whom We had taught knowledge from Us” (Holy Qur'an, 18:65)***.

This is a reference to the story of al-Khidr who met Moses and whom he
taught of the knowledge of the unseen, the knowledge which he could not
wait to know in time.

Muslims, be they Shi\`as or Sunnis, did not dispute the fact that the
Messenger of Allah used to know the unseen, and many incidents have been
recorded in this regard such as his statement to Ammar: “O Ammar! The
oppressive party shall kill you,” and his statement to Ali: “The worst
wretch among the generations to come is a man who will strike you (with
the sword) on your head, so he will drench your beard (with your
blood).”

He had also said to Ali, “My son al-Hasan will be the one through whom
Allah will bring peace between two large parties.” Another is his
statement to Abu Dharr al-Ghifari in which he told him that he would die
alone in banishment, and the list of such numerous incidents goes on and
on. Among them is the famous tradition which al-Bukhari and Muslim and
all those who succeeded them states: “The Imams after me are twelve: all
of them will belong to Quraysh,” and according to another narration,
“all of them will be the offspring of Hashim.”

In both our previous books *With the Truthful* [*Ma\`a al-Sadiqin*] and
*Ask Those Who Know* [*Fas'aloo Ahlul Dhikr*], we proved that Sunni
scholars themselves have referred in their *Sahih* and *Musnad* books to
the traditions relevant to the Imamate of the Twelve Imams, admitting
their authenticity.

Someone may ask, “Why did they, then, set those traditions aside and
followed the Imams of the four sects if they actually admitted the
existence and the authenticity of those traditions?” The answer is: All
the “good predecessors” were supporters of the three caliphs who reached
caliphate through the *saqeefa* (the shed of Banu Sa\`ida), namely Abu
Bakr, Umar, and Uthman, so it was only natural that they should turn
away from Ahlul Bayt and become enemies of Imam Ali and his offspring.

They, therefore, tried very hard to obliterate the Prophetic Sunnah and
substitute it with their own *ijtihad*, personal viewpoints. This caused
the division of the nation into two groups immediately following the
death of the Messenger of Allah. Those among the “good predecessors” and
those who followed them and adopted their attitudes represented “Ahlul
Sunnah wal Jama\`ah,” who are the vast majority of the Muslim *Ummah*. A
small minority which included Ali and his Shi\`as boycotted the
allegiance (to Abu Bakr) and rejected it, becoming the outcasts and the
condemned. They were called Rafidis, rejectionists.

Due to the fact that “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” were the ones who
controlled the destiny of the Ummah across the centuries, the rulers
from Banu Umayyah as well as those from Banu al-Abbas were all
supporters and followers of the school of caliphate founded by Abu Bakr,
Umar, Uthman, Mu\`awiyah[^1] and Yazid.

When that caliphate failed, its dignity was lost, ending in the hands of
the Mamlukes and non-Arabs, and there were those who were heard calling
for the documenting of the Prophetic Sunnah..., it was only then that
such traditions, which former generations tried very energetically to
obliterate and hide but could not do so, in addition to those particular
traditions persisted as puzzles mystifying them: they contradicted their
beliefs at that time.

Some of them tried to reconcile those traditions with their beliefs, so
they pretended to love Ahlul Bayt; therefore, whenever the name of Imam
Ali is mentioned, they would say, “May Allah be pleased with him,” or
“Allah glorified his countenance,” so that people might get the
impression that they were not the enemies of the House of Prophethood.

None among the Muslims, not even the hypocrites among them, can
demonstrate his enmity towards the Prophet's family because the enemies
of Ahlul Bayt are the enemies of the Messenger of Allah, and such enmity
will eject them from the Islamic fold altogether as is obvious.

What we can understand from all of this is that they, in reality, are,
indeed, enemies of the Prophet's family, and by “they” we mean the “good
predecessors” who adopted the label of, or who were labelled by their
supporters as, “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a.” Another proof is that you can
find all of them following the four sects which were created by the
ruling authority (as we will soon prove), and they have nothing in their
religious injunctions to which they can refer such as the *fiqh* of
Ahlul Bayt, or of any of the Twelve Imams.

The truth mandates that Imamite Shi\`as are actually the followers of
the Sunnah of Muhammad because they upheld in all their juristic
injunctions the teachings of the Imams of Ahlul Bayt who inherited the
authentic Sunnah from their grandfather the Messenger of Allah without
mixing it with their own personal views, opinions, or the statements of
the caliphs.

Shi\`as remained across the centuries upholding these texts and
rejecting the concept of *ijtihad* in the presence of clear traditions,
believing in the caliphate of Ali and his offspring because the Prophet
had clearly indicated so.

They, therefore, call them the caliphs of the Messenger of Allah
although only Ali had the chance to be the actual caliph. They reject
and refuse to recognize the rulers who held the caliphate from the
beginning to the end because such caliphate was [in the words of Umar
ibn al-Khattab himself] based on “a grave mistake from the evil of which
Allah protected us,” and because it came as a rejection and a
renunciation of the texts stated by Allah and His Messenger. All those
who came after that made such caliphate hereditary; each caliph ruled
only because he was nominated by his predecessor or by fighting and
winning the battle.[^2]

Because of all this, “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” were obligated to say
that obedience was obligatory to both a good and a bad Imam; they
accepted the caliphate of all their rulers, including the sinners among
them.

Imamite Shi\`as are characterized by preaching the necessity of the
infallibility of the Imam; so, no major Imamate nor the leadership of
the nation can be right except to an infallible Imam, and there is no
human being in this nation who is infallible except those from whom
Allah removed all abomination and whom He purified with a perfect
purification [according to verse 33, Chapter 33, of the Holy Qur'an].

[^1]: We have deliberately made no reference to the caliphate of Ali ibn
Abu Talib because “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” did not recognize it except
during the time of Ahmad ibn Hanbal, as we have already indicated above;
so, refer to the chapter with the heading “Ahlul Sunnah Are Not Familiar
with the Prophetic Sunnah” in this book.

[^2]: The only exception is the caliphate of Ali ibn Abu Talib . Only he
was not appointed by his predecessor, nor did he achieve it by fighting
others and subduing them. Rather, Muslims chose him out of their free
will to be their caliph, and they insisted on it when they invited him
to rule.


