The Secret Why Sunni Sects are in the Majority
==============================================

One who researches history books and what is recorded by the
predecessors will discover beyond any doubt that the reason why the four
“Sunni” sects prevailed during those times is that it was due to the
will and the management of the ruling authorities; it is for this reason
that their followers are numerous, for people follow the creed of their
rulers.

Such researchers will also find out that scores of sects came and
disappeared because the rulers were not pleased with them, so they
melted. Among them is the Awza\`i sect, the sects founded by Hasan
al-Basri, Abu Ayeenah and Ibn Abu Thuayb, Sufyan al-Thawri, Ibn Abu
Dawood, Layth ibn Sa\`d, and many others.

For example, Layth ibn Sa\`d was a friend of Malik ibn Anas and was more
knowledgeable and a better jurist than the latter according to the
admission of Imam al-Shafi\`i himself.[^1] Yet his sect eroded, and his
*fiqh* melted and went into oblivion because his contemporary government
was not pleased with him. Ahmad ibn Hanbal has said, “Ibn Abu Thuayb is
better than Malik ibn Anas except that Malik was more selective when
choosing his friends.”[^2]

If we refer to history, we will find Malik, the one who established a
sect bearing his name, sought to be close to the government and its
rulers, making peace with them and following them. He, therefore, became
the highly respected man and the famous scholar, and his sect was
disseminated through the methods of both terrorizing and attracting
people particularly in Andalusia where his student Yahya ibn Yahya went
to lengths in befriending the ruler of Andalus. Because of that, he
became one of the latter's favorite men. The said ruler rewarded him
with the position of judge, since he never appointed anybody as a judge
except one of his Maliki friends.

We also find out the fact that the reason why Abu Hanifah's sect was
propagated after its founder's death because Abu Yusuf and al-Shaybani,
who were followers of Abu Hanifah and among his most faithful students,
were at the same time very close to Haroun “al-Rasheed,” the Abbaside
caliph.

They played a major role in strengthening the latter's government and
supporting and helping it, hence Haroun of the concubines and
promiscuity did not permit anyone to be appointed as judge or *mufti*
except with the consent of both of these men who never appointed any
judge except if he was a follower of Abu Hanifah's sect.

Abu Hanifah, therefore, came to be regarded as the greatest scholar, and
his sect as the greatest sect of *fiqh* implemented, despite the fact
that his contemporary scholars went as far as calling him *kafir* and
atheist. Among such scholars were both Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal and Imam
Abul-Hasan al-Ash\`ari.

Likewise, the Shafi\`i sect could not have spread nor gained any
momentum had it not been for the support of Abbaside authorities during
the time of al-Mu\`tasim when Ibn Hanbal retracted his theory that the
Holy Qur'an was created, so his star shone during the Nasibi caliph
al-Mutawakkil. His sect gained strength and was disseminated when
colonial authorities supported Shaykh Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab during
the past century, and when the latter cooperated with Al Saud who
immediately lent him their support and assisted him and worked
diligently to propagate his sect in Hijaz and the Arabian peninsula.

The Hanbali sect, thus, became the sect attributed to three Imams the
first of whom was Ahmad ibn Hanbal, who never claimed that he was a
*faqih* but only a scholar of *hadith*, then to Ibn Taymiyyah whom they
called “Shaykh al-Islam,” mentor of Islam, and “Mujaddid al-Sunnah,” the
one who revived the Sunnah, and whom his contemporary scholars regarded
as *kafir* because he decreed that all Muslims who sought nearness to
Allah through the Prophet were polytheists.

Then came in the past century Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab, henchman of
British colonialism in the Middle East, who also tried to “revive” the
Hanbali sect through verdicts which he borrowed from Ibn Taymiyyah.
Ahmad ibn Hanbal became a thing of the past because now they call their
sect Wahhabism.

There is no room to doubt the fact that the dissemination, fame and
prominence of all these sects was through the support and with the
blessing of various rulers. And there is also no room to doubt the fact
that all those rulers, without any exception, were enemies of the Imams
of Ahlul Bayt due to their continuous fear that those Imams threatened
their very existence and the abolishment of their authority. They,
therefore, were always trying to isolate them from the nation,
belittling them and killing anyone who followed their creed.

It goes without saying that those same rulers were always appointing the
scholars who were flattering them and who were issuing verdicts
conducive to their government and authority, since people always need
solutions for their legislative problems.

Since the rulers in all times did not know anything about the
*Shari\`a*, nor did they comprehend anything about *fiqh*, it was only
natural that they appointed scholars to issue verdicts on their behalf
and to mislead the public into thinking that politics and religion did
not mix.

The ruler, therefore, was a man of politics, whereas the *faqih* was
always a theologian as is the case with the president of any Muslim
republic: you always find him appointing the scholars who are close to
him, calling them the “republic's *muftis*,” or any such title, who are
asked to look into issues related to religious verdicts, tenets, and
rituals.

Yet in reality such a person does not issue any verdict or a ruling
except according to the directives which he receives from the ruling
authority and in agreement with the ruler or, at least, not in
opposition to the government's policy or the execution of its programs.

This phenomenon came to exist since the time of the first three caliphs,
namely Abu Bakr, Umar, and Uthman, for although they did not make a
distinction between religion and politics, they granted themselves the
right to be the legislators in order to legislate whatever served the
interests of their caliphate and whatever secured its prestige and
continuation.

Since those three caliphs used to meet with the Prophet and be in his
company, they learned from him some traditions which were not in
contradiction with their policies.

Mu\`awiyah, for example, did not embrace Islam except in 9 A.H./630 A.D.
according to the most famous and authentic narrative, so he did not
accompany the Prophet except for a very short period of time and did not
know anything worth mentioning about his Sunnah; therefore, he felt
forced to appoint Abu Hurayra and Amr ibn al-As and some of the
companions to issue verdicts according to his own liking.

The Umayyads and the Abbasides after him followed such “praiseworthy
Sunnah,” or what they labelled *al-bid\`a al-hasana*, the good
innovation. Each ruler, thus, seated the high judge beside him to
appoint the judges whom he regarded as good for the state and who would
strengthen and support its authority. You do not need to know, beyond
that, except the nature of those judges who preferred to displease their
God in order to please their masters and benefactors who had appointed
them in their positions.

Having come to know all of that, you can understand the secret why the
Infallible Imams from the Progeny of the Prophet were deliberately
excluded from public life, and why not even one of them, across the
centuries, was appointed as judge or *mufti*.

If we wish to document more facts relevant to the methods whereby the
four “Sunni” sects were promoted by the rulers, we need to cite only one
example by removing the curtains from the sect established by Imam
Malik, a sect which is regarded as one of their greatest, most
prestigious, and whose *fiqh* is the broadest. Malik gained fame
particularly because of writing his book *Al-Mawta* which, according to
“Ahlul Sunnah,” is the most authentic book after the Book of Allah, and
there are many scholars who regard it as superior to, and they prefer it
over, al-Bukhari's *Sahih*.

Malik's fame was extra-ordinary, so much so that this query came to be a
household word: “Can anyone dare to issue a verdict while Malik is in
town?” We must also not forget that Malik had issued a verdict
prohibiting the transaction of a sale through the use of force, and it
was for this reason that Ja\`far ibn Sulayman, Medina's governor,
whipped him seventy lashes.

Malikis always use this incident to illustrate their man's opposition to
the government, a conclusion which is quite erroneous, for those who
narrated this incident are the same ones who narrated its sequel, and
here are the details:

Ibn Qutaybah has said, “They have indicated that during Abu Ja\`far
al-Mansour's reign, Malik ibn Anas was whipped by [al-Mansour's governor
over Medina] Ja\`far ibn Sulayman. Al-Mansour was enraged when he came
to know about it; he resented it and was very displeased with it, so he
wrote an order expelling Ja\`far ibn Sulayman from his position as
governor of Medina, ordering him to be brought to Baghdad on a bare
hump.

Then he wrote another letter to Malik ibn Anas inviting him to come to
meet him in Baghdad, but Malik refused and wrote Abu Ja\`far al-Mansour
back asking him to excuse him, providing him with some sort of excuse.
Abu Ja\`far al-Mansour wrote him again saying, “Meet me, then, during
the next *hajj* season next year, for I will then be, *Insha-Allah*,
performing the rite.”

So if the “commander of the faithful” Abu Ja\`far al-Mansour, the
Abbaside ruler, deposes his cousin Ja\`far ibn Sulayman ibn al-Abbas
from his post as governor of Medina because of beating Malik, this
really makes one quite skeptical and forces him to contemplate.

The reason why Ja\`far ibn Sulayman whipped Malik was only to support
the caliphate and authority of his cousin the caliph; so, Abu Ja\`far
al-Mansour ought to have rewarded and promoted his governor rather than
deposing and insulting him in such a manner. Instead, he deposed him and
ordered him to meet him in the worst manner, chained and riding a bare
hump. Then the caliph personally apologized to Malik in order to please
him. This is truly strange.

This incident gives the impression that the governor of Medina Ja\`far
ibn Sulayman behaved like a fool who knew nothing about politics and
their intricacies and schemes, and it does not give the impression at
all that Malik was the caliph's reliable supporter and the bearer of his
standard in both holy shrines; otherwise, he would not have deposed his
cousin from the post of governor simply because he had whipped Malik who
deserved to be whipped on account of issuing a verdict prohibiting a
forced allegiance.

Such incidents happen to us and before our very eyes when some rulers
resort to insulting someone or jailing him in order to enhance the
prestige and security of the government. Then the same individual
reveals his identity to be the relative of a cabinet minister, or one of
the friends of the wife's president; the result: the governor is excused
from his job and is ordered to take other responsibilities the nature of
which is not known even to the governor himself!

This reminds me of an incident which took place during the French
occupation of Tunisia. The shaykh of the Eisawi [sufi] *tareeqa* and his
men were carrying their banners and raising their voices with their
praise-offering chants at night. They passed by some streets before
reaching the neighborhood where their shrine was located as was their
custom. Upon passing by the residence of the French commander of the
police force, they were met by the latter who went out of his residence
and was steaming with anger.

He broke their banners and dispersed them because they did not honor the
law of respecting one's neighbor and resorting to calm after 10:00 p.m.
When the civil inspector, whom the Tunisians regarded as the equivalent
of governor, came to know about this incident, he became very angry with
the police officer whom he expelled from his job, giving him three days
to leave the city of Qafsa.

Then he invited the shaykh of the Eisawi *tareeqa* to meet him, and he
apologized to him on behalf of the French government and sought to
please him by giving him generous amounts of money to buy new banners
and furniture as a compensation for the broken items. When one of those
who were close to him asked him why he had done that, he said, “It is
much better for us to keep these savage people busy with carrying
banners, senseless escapades, and with eating scorpions; otherwise, they
would direct their attention to us and make a morsel out of us because
we have usurped their rights.”

Let us now go back to Imam Malik to hear him personally detailing the
story of his meeting with the caliph Abu Ja\`far al-Mansour.

[^1]: Such admission is recorded on p. 524 of al-Shafi\`i's Manaqib.

[^2]: Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, Vol. 1, p. 176.


