Malik Meets Abu Ja`far al-Mansour
=================================

This narrative, provided by the great historian Ibn Qutaybah in his book
*Tarikh al-Khulafaa* (history of the caliphs), is a quotation of what
Malik himself had said; so, we have to first and foremost point out to
this fact and take it into consideration.

Malik has said:

“When I arrived at Mina [during the next pilgrimage season], I came to
the pavilions and sought permission [to meet al-Mansour], and permission
was granted to me. The doorman came out to escort me after having
obtained permission to let me in. I said to him, \`Let me know when you
reach the dome in which the commander of the faithful is.'

He kept passing by one dome after another. Each dome contained different
men with swords unsheathed and knives raised. Then he said to me, \`He
is inside that dome,' leaving me after having said so. He kept watching
me from a distance.

I walked till I reached the dome where he [al-Mansour] was, and I saw
how he descended from his seat to the rug underneath it. He was wearing
very simple clothes which did not suit people of his stature out of his
own humbleness because of my visiting him, and nobody was in that dome
except one guard standing with a raised unsheathed sword.

“When I came near him, he welcomed me and kept pointing to me to come
closer and closer to him till my knees touched his. The first thing he
said was, \`By Allah Who is the One and only God, O father of Abdullah!
What happened was something which I never ordered. I never knew about it
before it actually happened, nor did I ever accept it after it had
happened.'“

Then Malik continued to say:

“So I praised Allah with regard to every condition and blessed the
Messenger, then I told him that he was far from doing any such sort of
thing or be pleased with it. Then he said to me, \`O father of Abdullah!
The people of the two holy shrines will continue to be blessed so long
as you are among them. And I think you are for them a security against
Allah's torment and might. Allah did, indeed, shun through your own
person a momentous calamity, for they are, as far as I know, the most
swift people to dissenting and the weakest to bear the consequences; may
Allah fight them whenever they plan a scheme. And I have already issued
an order to bring the enemy of Allah[^1] from Medina on a bare hump, and
I have ordered him to be humiliated and insulted to the extremes, and I
shall most certainly afflict many times as much pain as he had inflicted
upon you.' I said to him, \`May Allah grant good health to the commander
of the faithful and be generous to him! I have forgiven him due to his
kinship to the Messenger of Allah and to you.' Abu Ja\`far said, \`And
may He forgive you, too, and reward you.'“

Malik went on to say, “Then he discussed with me what happened to the
predecessors and the scholars, and I found him to be the most
knowledgeable person of them. Then he discussed knowledge and
jurisprudence with me, and I found him the most knowledgeable of all
people about what they agreed upon and the most informed of their
disagreements. He had learned by heart many narrations and was fully
comprehending all what he had heard. Then he said to me, \`O father of
Abdullah!

Organize your knowledge and write it down, and arrange what you write in
book form, and avoid the extremism of Abdullah ibn Umar and the
tolerance of Abdullah ibn Abbas and the oddities of Abdullah ibn
Mas\`ud, then seek common grounds, and record whatever the Imams and the
*sahaba*, may Allah be pleased with them, had all agreed upon, so that
we may oblige people, *Insha-Allah*, to follow your knowledge, and we
will disseminate your books in all lands and make sure that nobody
disagrees with their contents nor judge except according to them.'

I said to him, \`May Allah keep the *ameer* (ruler) on the path of
righteousness, but the people of Iraq disagree with our knowledge, and
they do not feel obligated to do what we do.' Abu Ja\`far al-Mansour
said, \`The people of Iraq will be made to do it, and we will strike
their heads with the sword and split their spines with our whips; so,
hurry to do it, for Muhammad al-Mahdi, my son, will meet you next year,
*Insha-Allah*, and I hope he will find out that you have finished this
task, *Insha-Allah*.'“

Malik said after that, “While we were thus sitting, a small child came
out from the back side of the dome underneath which we were, and when he
saw him, he was frightened and went back. Abu Ja\`far said to him,
\`Come, my loved one! This is the father of Abdullah, the *faqih* of the
people of Hijaz!' Then he turned to me and said, \`O Abu Abdullah! Do
you know why the child was frightened and did not come here?' I said,
\`No.' He said, \`By Allah, he was shocked to see how closely you have
been sitting to me, for he has never seen anyone besides you doing so;
this is why he retreated.'“

Malik went on to say, “Then he ordered for me a thousand gold dinars, a
great outfit, and another thousand for my son. I sought his permission
to depart, which he granted. I stood up, whereupon he bade me farewell
and prayed for me, then I hurried out.

The eunuch caught up with me, bringing me the outfit which he put on my
shoulder as was their custom upon gaving someone of great importance a
present so that he might be seen by people carrying it then handing it
over to his servant. When the eunuch put that outfit on my shoulder, I
leaned to avoid it, trying to disclaim it, whereupon Abu Ja\`far ordered
him to carry it to where my camel was tied.”[^2]

[^1]: He is referring to his cousin Ja\`far ibn Sulayman ibn al-Abbas,
then his governor over Medina.

[^2]: Ibn Qutaybah, Tarikh al-Khulafa, Vol. 2, p. 150.


