Unavoidable Commentary Serving the Research
===========================================

Anyone who examines this cordial meeting between Imam Malik and the
oppressive caliph Abu Ja\`far al-Mansour, and who studies their
dialogue, will deduct the following conclusions:

**FIRST:** We notice that the Abbaside caliph deposed his governor over
Medina, cousin and closest of kin, insulting him after having deposed
him, then apologized to Imam Malik because of his governor's conduct,
swearing by Allah that it was not ordered by him, nor did he know about
it beforehand, nor was he pleased when he came to know about it.

All this underscores the harmony between both men and the status enjoyed
by Imam Malik with Abu Ja\`far al-Mansour to the extent that he met him
alone wearing casual clothes and seated him in a way in which he never
seated anyone else, so much so that even his son was frightened, and he
retreated, upon seeing Malik's knees touching his father's.

**SECOND:** We can draw another conclusion from al-Mansour's statement
to Malik: “The people of the two holy shrines will continue to be
blessed so long as you are among them, and I think you are for them a
security against Allah's torment and might, and Allah did, indeed, shun
through your own person a momentous calamity” that might have befallen
them had they contemplated staging a rebellion against the caliph and
his oppressive authority.

Imam Malik had, in fact, calmed them, quelling their revolution, issuing
a number of verdicts such as his saying that they were obligated to obey
Allah, His Messenger, and the *waliyy al-amr*, the governor in this
instance. Thus were people reluctant to rise against their caliph, and
thus did Allah, through such a verdict, shun a genocide involving the
caliph.[^1] For this reason, al-Mansour said to Malik, “They are, as far
as I know, the most swift people to dissenting and the weakest to bear
the consequences; may Allah fight them whenever they plan a scheme.”

**THIRD:** The caliph was recommending Malik to be the scholar looked up
to in all Islamic lands then forcing his sect on people and obliging
them to follow it through the carrot and the stick. A reference to his
enticing methods was his statement, “... so that we may oblige people,
*Insha-Allah*, to follow your knowledge, and we will disseminate your
books in all lands and make sure that nobody disagrees with their
contents nor judge except according to them,” and that they should send
their envoys and messengers to him during the pilgrimage.

A clue referring to his methods of intimidating people to follow him is
his statement: “The people of Iraq will be made to do it, and we will
strike their heads with the sword and split their spines with our
whips.” This statement indicates the extent of persecution meted to the
poor Shi\`as then at the hands of oppressive rulers who were persecuting
and killing them in order to force them to abandon their allegiance to
the Imams from Ahlul Bayt and to follow Malik and his likes.

**FOURTH:** We notice that Imam Malik and Abu Ja\`far al-Mansour were
subscribing to the same tenets and biases towards certain *sahaba*
rather than others, and to their allegiance to the caliphs who had taken
control of the caliphate by intimidation and persecution. Malik has said
in this regard, “Then he discussed knowledge and jurisprudence with me,
and I found him to be the most knowledgeable of all people about what is
agreed upon and the most informed of their disagreements, etc.”

There is no doubt that Abu Ja\`far al-Mansour reciprocated the same
views held by Malik whom he complimented in a statement he had
previously made to him during a meeting between both of them which took
place before this one; said he then, “By Allah! I do not find anyone
more knowledgeable than the commander of the faithful or more acquainted
with *fiqh*.” By the “commander of the faithful” he meant, of course,
himself.

From the above text we can understand that Imam Malik was a Nasibi: He
never recognized the caliphate of the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn
Abu Talib at all. We have proven from the above that they all objected
when Ahmad ibn Hanbal added the name of Ali to the list of the
“righteous caliphs,” making him the fourth. It is quite obvious that
Malik died many years before the birth of Ahmad ibn Hanbal.

Add to the above the fact that Malik relied, while transmitting
*hadith*, on Abdullah ibn Umar, the Nasibi who used to say that they
never regarded anyone during the lifetime of the Prophet as being equal
to Abu Bakr, then Umar, then, Uthman, and that the *sahaba* beyond that
were all alike! Abdullah ibn Umar ranks as the most prominent among the
narrators of *hadith* whom Malik quotes. Most traditions quoted in
Malik's *Al-Mawta* are actually his. So is Malik's jurisprudence.

**FIFTH:** We notice that the politics which were based on oppression
and injustice sought the support of the public through verdicts
favorable to them written without any support from Qur'anic texts the
texts of the Prophet's Sunnah. For example, al-Mansour, as indicated
above, said to Malik, “Organize your knowledge and write it down, and
arrange what you write in book form, and avoid the extremism of Abdullah
ibn Umar and the tolerance of Abdullah ibn Abbas and the oddities of
Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud, and seek common grounds, and whatever the Imams
and the *sahaba*, may Allah be pleased with them, had all agreed upon,
so that we may oblige people, *Insha-Allah*, to follow your knowledge,
and we will disseminate your books..., etc.”

This clearly shows that the sect followed by “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a”
is but a mixture of “the extremism of Abdullah ibn Umar, the tolerance
of Abdullah ibn Abbas, and the oddities of Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud” in
addition to whatever Malik recommended as “common grounds” among the
“Imams,” namely Abu Bakr, Umar, and Uthman, and what was agreed upon by
the *sahaba* with whom caliph Abu Ja\`far al-Mansour was pleased... It
has none of the Sunnah of the Prophet which is derived from the
traditions narrated by the Purified Imams of the Progeny of the Prophet
some of whom were contemporaries to al-Mansour and Malik, and whom the
said caliph isolated and murdered.

**SIXTH:** It is noticeable that the first book documenting the Sunnah
as excerpted from selected traditions narrated by the Prophet's
companions, and by those who learned from the latter, is *Al-Mawta* by
Imam Malik, and it was written according to the order issued by the
caliph himself so that the latter might force people to accept it and to
strike their heads with the swords if need be, according to al-Mansour.

Such traditions, in this case, were bound to be among the ones
manufactured by the Umayyads and Abbasides to serve their interests and
strengthen their influence and authority, and to distance people from
Islamic facts conveyed by the Prophet of Mercy.

**SEVENTH:** We also notice that Imam Malik was apprehensive ONLY of the
people of Iraq because they were avowed supporters of Ali ibn Abu Talib,
people whose minds had absorbed his knowledge and *fiqh*, people who
dedicated their religious following to the Purified Imams from his
offspring, affording no face value whatsoever to Malik and his likes
because they knew that these men were Nasibis who used to flatter the
rulers and sell their religion for a dirham or a dinar.

This is why Malik said to the caliph, “... but the people of Iraq
disagree with our knowledge and they do not feel obligated to do what we
do,” and al-Mansour, with his typical arrogance, responded by saying,
“The people of Iraq will be made to do it, and we will strike their
heads with the sword and split their spines with our whips.”

This tells us how those sects, which the ruling authorities had invented
and on which they placed the label of “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a,” came
to be. What is really strange is that you see Abu Hanifah in
disagreement with Malik, and Malik in disagreement with Abu Hanifah, and
both men in disagreement with both al-Shafi\`i and al-Hanbali, while the
latter is in disagreement with one another and with the other two!

There is hardly one single issue upon which all four men agree except
very rarely, yet they all are regarded as “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a,”
followers of the Sunnah and the consensus! What consensus is it?! Is it
Maliki consensus, or is it Hanafi, Shafi\`i, or Hanbali?! It actually is
neither this nor that; rather, it is the consensus of Mu\`awiyah ibn Abu
Sufyan, for they are the ones who agreed with the latter when he made
the cursing of Ali ibn Abu Talib from the pulpits a “Sunnah” followed
for more than eighty years...

And why do they accept their disagreements, while their *fatwa* views
are so diverse with regard to one and the same issue, yet they call
their disagreement “a mercy” so long as it was confined to the four
sects, but when another *mujtahid* disagrees with them, they charge him
with *kufr* and excommunicate him from Islam?!

Why do they not regard their disagreement with the Shi\`as in the same
light whereby they see the differences among themselves, had they only
been fair and wise? But the Shi\`as' crime cannot be forgiven because
they prefer Ali ibn Abu Talib over all other *sahaba*, and this is the
basis of the disagreement which “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” cannot
tolerate. It cannot be tolerated by those who agree on one single issue:
the exclusion of Ali from the caliphate, and the hiding of his merits
and the facts related thereto.

**EIGHTH:** We notice how the rulers who confiscated the Muslims' wealth
by force and oppression distribute such wealth generously to evil
scholars who seek to be close to them in order to win their support and
to barter their conscience and creed for the life of this world. Malik
has said, “Then he [al-Mansour] ordered a thousand dinars in gold to be
given to me in addition to a great outfit and another thousand for my
son, etc.”

Such an admission by Malik is self-indicting, and there may be many
similar incidents which are not discussed in public because Malik used
to feel embarrassed of receiving gifts in public and hated to see people
noticing him accepting them; this is clear from his statement: “When the
eunuch put that outfit on my shoulder, I leaned to avoid it, trying to
disclaim it;” so, when al-Mansour noticed that, he ordered the eunuch to
carry it for Malik to where the latter's camel was tied so that people
might not know about it.

[^1]: There is no contradiction between his verdict prohibiting the
securing of allegiance by force and his mandating obedience to the
ruler, and they have, indeed, narrated many “traditions” supporting
their viewpoint such as: “Whoever disobeys the ruler and dies disobeying
him, his death will be the death of the days of jahiliyya.” Another
tradition they narrate says: “You are required to hear and obey even if
the ruler takes your wealth and whips your back.”


