Introduction and Foreword
=========================

All Praise is due to Allah, Lord of the Worlds, and peace be upon the
greatest among the prophets and messengers, our master and leader
Muhammad, and upon his righteous and pure progeny.

The Messenger has said, “To Allah, the ink of the scholars is superior
to the blood of the martyr.” It is, therefore, incumbent upon every
scholar or writer to write for people what he sees as beneficial for
their guidance, what socially binds them together, and what unites them
for a common cause and takes them out of the darkness into the light. A
martyr seeking Allah's Pleasure invites to the truth and sets the
foundations of justice.

Yet he may not bear any impact except on his contemporaries. A reader,
however, may be influenced by his contemporary scholar whose book
remains a beacon of guidance, generation after generation, till Allah
sends His Guardian for the earth and of everyone on it. Everything
diminishes through spending except knowledge: it multiplies by giving.

The Messenger of Allah has also said, “If Allah were to guide through
you even one man, it surely is better for you than everything upon which
the sun and the moon shine,” or “better than the life of this world and
everything in it.” How many writers died centuries ago, and whose bones
turned into ashes, yet their thoughts and knowledge survived through
their books which are printed hundreds of times across the centuries,
guiding people to success?!

Since a martyr is alive with his Lord, receiving sustenance, a scholar
who causes people to receive guidance is likewise alive with his Lord
and with the servants of the Lord who think well of him, praying and
seeking Allah's forgiveness for him. As far as I am concerned, I am not
among the scholars, nor do I put forth such a claim, and I seek refuge
with Allah against being conceited. Rather, I am a servant of the
scholars, relishing their legacy, savoring it, following in their
footsteps like a servant following his master.

Since Allah inspired me to write my book *Then I Was Guided*, I received
a great deal of encouragement from many readers and researchers, so I
followed it with my second book *With the Truthful*, which was also well
received. I was, hence, encouraged to continue my research and
investigation; therefore, I wrote the third volume, namely *Ask Those
Who Know*[^1]*,* in defense of Islam and the prophet of Islam to dispel
the allegations against him, and to uncover the plot against him and his
pure progeny.

I received many letters from the Arab and Islamic world carrying the
readers' affection, loyalty, love and expressions of brotherhood. I was
invited to attend many intellectual conferences throughout the world
organized by Islamic establishments in the United States of America, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Britain, India, Pakistan, Kenya, West Africa
and Sweden.

Whenever I met a group of educated youths and intellectuals, I found
them appreciating my works and seeking more knowledge. They asked me,
“Do you have anything new forthcoming? Are you writing any new book?” I
praised Allah, therefore, and thanked Him for this success. I implored
to Him to grant me more of His Attention and Guidance. I solicited His
help to write this book which I now place before Muslim researchers and
which revolves in the same orbit circled by the three previous books.

I hope it will benefit some educated people and those who seek the
truth: perhaps they will come to know that the party being targeted for
attacks, the one referred to as “Imamite Shi\`ites,” is the one that
will attain salvation, and that they, i.e. the Shi\`as, are followers of
the true and authentic Sunnah, that is, the Sunnah with which Muhammad
was entrusted to convey according to the revelation of the Lord of the
Worlds.

He surely does not say anything out of his own desire; rather, his is
only a revelation. I will explain to the readers the fact that the
identification label used by those who oppose and disagree with the
Shi\`as, that of “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a,” i.e. followers of the
Sunnah and consensus, has little to do with the Sunnah of Prophet
Muhammad.

How often have people lied and attributed their lies to the Messenger of
Allah ? How often were his traditions, statements, and actions
prohibited from reaching the Muslims on the pretext it may not be taken
as Allah's speech\_\_a pretext more feeble than a spider's cobweb?! And
how many authentic traditions were discarded, disregarded, and
neglected?

How many fantasies and hoaxes made to appear as injunctions were wrongly
attributed to the Prophet after his demise? How many of the noble
personalities, whose nobility are testified by history were after him
ignored, neglected, unheeded, even accused of apostasy and punished for
their noble stands?! How many are the shiny and attractive labels that
hide behind them apostasy and misguidance?!

The Lord of Honors and Dignity has described the above in the very best
way when He said,

***“And among men is one whose speech about the life of this world
causes you to wonder, and he (even) calls upon Allah to testify to what
is in his heart, yet he is the most violent of adversaries.*** ***And
when he turns back, he runs along in the land in order to cause mischief
and to destroy the tilth and the stock, and Allah does not love
mischief-making. And when it is said to him: Guard (your soul) against
(the punishment of) Allah, pride carries him off to sinning; so, hell
suffices him, and it certainly is an evil abode”*** (Holy Qur'an,
2:204-206).

I may not exaggerate if I act upon the axiom saying, “If you reverse (an
equation), you will then be right***.*** ‘An investigative researcher
must not take anything for granted; rather, he has to reverse and remain
most of the time skeptical in order to reach the hidden truth. It was in
such politics that all dirty roles were played. He must not be deceived
by appearances or numerical superiority, for Allah, the Most Exalted,
has said in His great Book,

***“And if you obey most of those on earth, they will surely cause you
to stray from Allah's Path; they only follow conjecture, and they only
lie”*** (Holy Qur'an, 6:116).

Falsehood may appear in the garb of truth to falsify and mislead, and
this may often succeed either due to the naivete of the general public,
or because of the worldly position or influence of the scheming
individual(s). Falsehood may at times also appear to prevail because of
the number of those who support it. The truth is patient and waits for
Allah to fulfill His promise by making falsehood appear as false. Surely
falsehood is often defeated in the long run.

The best testimony to the above is the Qur'anic narrative relevant to
the story of Jacob and his sons. The latter

***“came to their father in the early part of the night weeping; they
said: \`O father! We went racing with one another and left Joseph with
our belongings, so the wolf devoured him, but you will never believe us
even though we tell the truth'“*** (Holy Qur'an, 12:16-17).

Had they indeed been truthful, they ought to have said, “And you will
never believe us because we are liars.” Our master Jacob, who was a
prophet of Allah receiving His revelation, had no choice except to give
in to their falsehood, seeking help from Allah through patience, despite
his knowledge that they were liars. Said he***,***

***“Rather, your minds have made up a tale; so, patience is most fitting
(for me); it is Allah (alone) Whose help can be sought (against your
scheme)”*** (Holy Qur'an, 12: 18).

What more could he have done especially since he was facing eleven men
who unanimously agreed to say the same thing and who performed the hoax
of the shirt and the false blood, weeping over their “missing” brother?
Could Jacob reveal their lies, refute their falsehood, and rush to the
well to get his beloved young son out then penalize them for their
abhorrent action? No; such will be the doing of the ignorant who are not
guided by Allah's wisdom. As for Jacob, he is a prophet who behaves as a
wise man of knowledge about whom Allah has said:

***“He was, by Our instruction, full of knowledge, but most men do not
know” (Holy Qur'an, 12:68)***.

He was bound by his knowledge and wisdom to distance himself from them
and say,

***“How great my grief for Joseph is! And his eyes became white with
sorrow, and he fell into silent melancholy” (Holy Qur'an, 12: 84)***.

Had Jacob behaved otherwise, that is, by getting his son out of the
well, rebuking the others for their lies, and penalizing them for their
crime, their hatred towards their brother would have intensified, and
they might have even gone as far as assassinating their father, too.
They might have implied the same when they said to their father,

***“By Allah! You will never cease remembering Joseph till you reach the
last extremity of illness, or till you die!” (Holy Qur'an, 12:85)***.

From this we may deduct that at times silence is commendable when
confronting falsehood that may result in harm or an imminent peril, or
when keeping quiet rather than revealing the truth serves the public's
interest, even if such a service is deferred. This helps in
understanding the *hadith* of the Prophet saying:

**“One who keeps silent rather than say the truth is a silent Satan.”**

Such understanding conforms to reason and Allah's Book. And if we probe
the biography of the Messenger of Allah, we will find out that there
were times when he took to silence in the interest of Islam and Muslims
as Sahih books narrate to us with regard, for example, to the peaceful
treaty of Hudaybiya, and to other such instances.

May Allah be Merciful to the Commander of the Faithful Ali who kept
silent after the death of his cousin. Referring to the same, he made
this famous statement: “I kept pondering whether I should fight with an
amputated hand, or take to patience regarding a blind calamity wherein
the adult ages and the child grows gray hair and a believer struggles
till he meets his Lord; I saw that patience regarding both options was
wiser; therefore, I took to patience though the eye was sore and the
mouth was choking with grief.”

Had the father of al-Hasan not taken to silence rather than demanding
his right of caliphate, thus advancing the cause of Islam and Muslims
rather than that of his own, Islam, as Allah and His Messenger had
outlined it, would not have survived after the demise of Muhammad.

This is the fact with which most people, who always argue with us that
the caliphate of Abu Bakr and Umar was right, are not familiar. They say
that Ali kept silent about such caliphs, adding, as they always enjoy
doing, “Had the Messenger of Allah appointed Ali as his successor in
leading the Muslim masses, he would not have been right in remaining
silent, since doing so would not have been appropriate at all, and one
who takes to silence rather than saying the truth is a silent Satan.”
Such is their argument, and such is their often-played record.

This clearly is an error in comprehension. Such is one who recognizes
only the truth with which his whims and desires agree. Such is one who
fails to realize the wisdom resulting from the outcome of that silence
and its invaluable deferred benefits, were one to compare the latter
with the temporal interest resulting from a revolt against falsehood
supported by a great many supporters and promoters.

During the incident of the Hudaybiya, the Messenger of Allah remained
silent and accepted the terms of the Quraysh and the Pagans of Mecca, so
much so that Umar ibn al-Khattab could not control his outrage; he asked
the Messenger of Allah, “Are you not truly the Messenger of Allah?! Are
we not right while they are wrong? If so, then why should we sell our
religion so cheap?”

Had the silence of the Prophet been negative, as it was conceived by
Umar ibn al-Khattab and most sahaba who were present there and then, the
truth of the matter would not have proven beyond any doubt that it was,
in fact, positively in the best interest of Islam and Muslims even when
such interest was not immediately served.

Its positive outcomes surfaced one year later when the Messenger of
Allah conquered Mecca without fighting any war or meeting any
resistance: it was then that people joined the ranks of the Muslims in
large numbers. It was then that the Messenger of Allah called upon Umar
ibn al-Khattab and showed him the result of his having remained silent
rather than demanding what was right; he showed him the underlying
wisdom of his silence at the Hudaybiya.

We provide such arguments only to highlight the truth which cannot be
avoided: Assisted by supporters and helpers, falsehood will triumph over
truth. Although Ali was with the truth, and the truth was inseparably on
his side, he found neither supporters nor helpers to oppose Mu\`awiyah
and his lies, and because the latter had found a great many supporters
to defeat the truth and subdue it. People, Imam Husayn said, are slaves
of the life of this world; they give religion only their lip-service.
They do not love the truth, and they incline to falsehood; the taste of
the truth is bitter and hard, whereas falsehood is easy and accessible.
Allah has surely said the truth when He said,

***“Rather; he brought the truth, but most of them hate the truth” (Holy
Qur'an, 23:70)***.

Yazid's falsehood won an apparent “victory” over Husayn's truth for the
same reason. Likewise, the falsehood of Umayyad and Abbaside rulers
trampled upon the truth regarding the Imams from among Ahlul Bayt who
were all martyred while remaining silent, preferring the interest of
Islam and Muslims to that of their own. And Allah made the Twelfth Imam
disappear go into occultation to protect him from the mischief of the
promoters of falsehood.

He took to silence and will continue to do so till the truth finds
helpers and supporters. It is only then that Allah will permit him to
come out to the open so that the revolution of the truth against
falsehood may become universal; it will then, and only then, fill the
world with justice and equity just as it is being constantly filled with
injustice and iniquity. In other words, he will fill it with the truth
after its being filled with falsehood.

Since most people hate the truth, they become the natural supporters of
falsehood. Only a small number of people remain faithful to the truth.
They cannot overcome the supporters of falsehood without Allah's help
manifested through divine miracles. This is recorded in the Glorious
Book of Allah during all wars and battles where the supporters of the
truth had to fight those who supported falsehood:

***“How often has a small force, by Allah's will, vanquished a big one?”
(Holy Qur'an, 2:249)***.

Those who, despite their small number, persevere while supporting the
truth will be assisted by Allah, Glory to Him, with miracles. He will
send them powerful angels to fight on their side. Without such a direct
interference from Allah, the truth can never subdue falsehood.

We nowadays are living through this painful reality: Truthful believers,
those who support the truth wherein they believe, are helpless,
vanquished, exiled, victimized, while the supporters of falsehood, those
who disbelieve in Allah, are the rulers who hold in their hands the
reins of government, wreaking havoc with the destiny, with the life and
death, of their subjects.

The downtrodden among the believers can never score victory in their
battle against the arrogant disbelievers except with the help of Allah,
the most Exalted One. This is why many traditions indicate that miracles
will take place upon the reappearance of al-Mahdi.

Yet this is not an invitation to apathy or idle anticipation: how can it
be so while I have already indicated saying that he will not appear
except when he has supporters and helpers? Suffices the truthful
believers to uphold the true Islamic ideology embodied in the *wilaya*
(authority) of Ahlul Bayt, I mean their upholding the Two Weighty
Things: the Book of Allah and the Progeny of the Prophet, so that they
may be the supporters and helpers of the Awaited al-Mahdi, the best of
peace and salutations be upon him and his forefathers.

My success relies only on Allah; upon Him do I rely, and to Him shall I
return.

**Muhammad al-Tijani al-Samawi (of Tunisia)**

[^1]: The translation of Tijani's book Fas'aloo Ahlul Dhikr (so ask
those who have with them the knowledge of the Qur'an) has been published
under the title Ask Those Who Know by Ansariyan Publications, P.O. Box
37185/187, Qum, Islamic Republic of Iran. \_\_ Tr.


