Is it “the Book of Allah and my Progeny” or “the Book of Allah and my Sunnah”?
==============================================================================

I have thoroughly dealt with this subject in my book *Ma\`al Sadiqeen*
([so let us be] with the truthful). I said briefly that both traditions
do not contradict one another because the authentic Sunnah is preserved
with the pure Progeny of Ahlul Bayt, peace be upon them, and that the
residents of the house know best what their house contains. Ali ibn Abu
Talib is the gateway to the Prophet's Sunnah, and he is more worthy of
being regarded as Islam's narrator of *hadith* than Abu Hurayra, Ka\`b
al-Ahbar[^1], or Wahab ibn Munabbih.

Despite all of that, we have to provide more explanations and
clarifications even if doing so will be at the cost of being
repetitious, for there is always a benefit in repetition, perhaps some
of them did not read it there, so they will be exposed to it here with
additional explanations and clarifications.

The kind readers may find in this research what convinces them that the
hadith reading “... the Book of Allah and my *\`Itrat* (Progeny)” is the
original one, and the caliphs deliberately altered its wording to read
“... the Book of Allah and my Sunnah” so that they might thus be able to
exclude Ahlul Bayt from life's stage.

We have to note here that the tradition reading “... the Book of Allah
and my Sunnah” is not held as authentic even by “Ahlul Sunnah wal
Jama\`a” because they themselves have narrated in their *Sahih* books
that the Prophet prohibited them from writing his Sunnah down! So, if
such a prohibition is proved to be true, how is it possible to imagine
the Prophet saying, “I have left among you my Sunnah” while such Sunnah
is neither recorded nor known to anyone?!

Moreover, were the tradition worded “... the Book of Allah and my
Sunnah” authentic, how was Umar ibn al-Khattab justified in responding
to the Messenger of Allah by saying, “The Book of Allah suffices us”?!
Had the Messenger of Allah left a written Sunnah, how did Abu Bakr and
Umar justify their burning of it and their prohibiting people from
learning it?!

Were the tradition reading “... the Book of Allah and my Sunnah”
authentic, why did Abu Bakr deliver a sermon following the demise of the
Prophet in which he said, “Do not narrate anything about the Messenger
of Allah; whoever asks you, say: \`Between us and you is the Book of
Allah, so follow what it permits and abstain from what it
prohibits.'“?[^2]

Had the tradition reading “... the Book of Allah and my Sunnah” been
authentic, why did Abu Bakr violate it when he fought those who refused
to pay *zakat* while the Messenger of Allah had said, “Whoever
articulates: *La ilaha illa-Allah*, his life and wealth are to be
protected, and his judgment will be on Allah”?!

Had the tradition worded “... the Book of Allah and my Sunnah” been
authentic, how did Abu Bakr and Umar, and those who agreed with them
from the *sahaba*, justify their violation of the sanctity of Fatima
al-Zahra and their attack on her house and threat to burn it down and
everyone inside it? Did they not hear the Prophet say about her, “Fatima
is part of me; whoever angers her angers me, and whoever harms her harms
me”? Yes, by Allah, they did hear and understand it... Did they not hear
the verse saying,

***“Say: I do not ask you for any reward for it except kindness to my
kin” (Holy Qur'an, 42:23)***

which was revealed in honor of Fatima's husband and sons? Did they
regard kindness to Ahlul Bayt to be terrorizing them, threatening to
burn them alive, and crushing Fatima's stomach till she miscarried?!

Had the tradition worded “... the Book of Allah and my Sunnah” been
authentic, how did Mu\`awiyah and the *sahaba* who swore the oath of
allegiance to him and followed him permit themselves to curse Ali and
condemn him from the pulpits during the entire Umayyad reign? Did they
not hear Allah's commandment that they should bless him just as they
bless the Prophet ? Did they not hear the Prophet saying, “Whoever
curses Ali curses me, and whoever curses me curses Allah”?[^3]

Had the tradition reading “... the Book of Allah and my Sunnah” been
authentic, why was such Sunnah unknown by most companions, so they were
unfamiliar with it, hence they issued religious verdicts based on their
own personal views, and so did the four Imams who resorted to analogy
and *ijtihad*, to “consensus” and to closing the door of pretexts and
those of public interests taken for granted, supporting their views by
quoting certain companions, a number of rulers whom they liked, opting
to choose the “lesser evil,” etc.?!

Since the Messenger of Allah left “the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of
His Prophet “ in order to protect people against misguidance, there is
no need for any of these things invented by “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a”
especially since every innovation is misguidance, and every misguidance
is in the fire of Hell, according to the sacred *hadith*.

Rational people and the people of knowledge blame the Prophet for
neglecting his Sunnah and not ordering others to record and safeguard it
against distortion, variation, invention and innovation, then saying to
people, “I am leaving among you the Two Weighty Things, so long as you
uphold them, you shall never stray after me: the Book of Allah and my
Sunnah”!

But if these rational folks are told that he prohibited them from
writing it down, it will be the greatest joke, for this is not the doing
of the wise: How can he prohibit the Muslims from writing his Sunnah
down then tell them that he is leaving his Sunnah among them?!

Add to the above the fact that the Glorious Book of Allah, when we add
to it the Prophet's Sunnah which the Muslims wrote during many
centuries, contains what abrogates and what is abrogated, and it has the
specific and the general, and the fixed and what is similar to something
else, for it is the sister of the Holy Qur'an.

But all the text of the Holy Qur'an is correct because Allah, Glory to
Him, took upon Himself to protect it, and because it is recorded. As for
the Sunnah, it contains more inaccuracies than accuracies. The Prophet's
Sunnah is, first and foremost, in need of someone who is divinely
protected against sinning to point out to its accuracies and to reveal
all the changes made to it. Anyone who is not divinely protected against
sinning can never do anything of this sort even if he were the scholar
of scholars.

Both the Holy Qur'an and the Sunnah, moreover, need a very highly
knowledgeable scholar who is deeply immersed in their injunctions and
familiar with their secrets in order to show people, after the death of
the Prophet, all the issues in which they differed and the ones with
which they are familiar.

Have you not seen how Allah, the Most Praised One, pointed to the fact
that the Holy Qur'an needs someone to explain it, saying,

***“We have revealed the Reminder (Qur'an) so that you may clarify to
men what has been revealed to them and so that perhaps they may reflect”
(Holy Qur'an, 16:44)***?

Had the Prophet not been present among the people to explain the
revelation to them, the Holy Qur'an would not have been revealed to
them. They surely would not have come to know Allah's commandments even
if the Holy Qur'an had been revealed in their language. This is simple
common sense about which nobody contends, one which everyone knows.

Despite the revelation of the Holy Qur'an and its imposition of prayers,
*zakat*, fast, and pilgrimage, the Muslims need the explanations of the
Prophet especially since he was the one who showed them how to perform
the prayers, how much *zakat* should be paid, what the injunctions
related to the fast are, what rites the pilgrimage includes..., etc. Had
it not been for him, people would never have come to know any of that.

If the Holy Qur'an, which contains no contradictions, and which no
falsehood can approach from before it or from behind, needs someone to
explain it, the Sunnah is in a greater need than the Holy Qur'an for
someone to explain it due to the abundance of its contradictions which
resulted from all the insinuations and lies that crept into it.

Such a need is quite natural, even a rational necessity, that each
Messenger should look after the Message with which he is sent, so he
appoints someone to succeed him in doing so. Such an appointment of a
successor and care-taker is done only through divine revelation so that
the Message may not die when he dies; it is for this reason that each
and every prophet had a successor.

It is to meet such a pressing need that the Messenger of Allah appointed
his vizier and successor over his nation to be Ali ibn Abu Talib whom he
raised since his childhood to be adorned with the conduct of
prophethood. He taught him as he grew up the knowledge of the early
generations and the last, acquainting him and only him with secrets
which nobody else knows, guiding the nation to him time and over again,
advising them in his regard repeatedly.

He, for example, told them once, “This is my Brother, Successor, and
Caliph over you,” and once, “I am the best of the prophets, while Ali is
the best of the successors of the prophets and the best man whom I leave
behind (after my demise).” He also said, “Ali is with the truth and the
truth is with him,” and “Ali is with the Qur'an and the [knowledge of
the] Qur'an is with him,” and “I fought for the sake of the revelation
of the Qur'an while Ali will fight for [safeguarding] its
interpretation, and he is the one who will explain to my nation whatever
they differ about after me,” and “Nobody pays my dues except Ali, and he
is the *wali* of every believer after me,” and “Ali to me is like Aaron
was to Moses,” and “Ali is of me and I am of him, and he is the gate of
my knowledge.”[^4]

It has been scholarly and historically proven, as supported by the
writings of biographers, that Ali was, indeed, the only authority upon
whom the *sahaba*, be they the learned or the ignorant, depended.
Suffices for that the admission of Ahlul Sunnah that Abdullah ibn Abbas,
whom they call “the nation's scholar,” is Ali's student who graduated
from his school, and suffices for a proof the fact that all branches of
knowledge with which Muslims are familiar were attributed to him, peace
be upon him.[^5]

Let us suppose that the tradition of “... the Book of Allah and my
Sunnah” contradicted the one whose wording has “... the Book of Allah
and my *\`Itrat*,” the second should be preferred over the first so that
a rational Muslim may refer to the pure Imams of Ahlul Bayt for
explanations of the concepts embedded in the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah.

But if one accepts only the tradition containing the wording “... the
Book of Allah and my Sunnah,” he will be puzzled about both the Qur'an
and the Sunnah and not find the reliable authority who can explain for
him the injunctions which he could not understand, or the ones in which
scholars differ a great deal, and about which the Imams of those sects
said many different or contradictory statements.

There is no doubt that if one were to take what this scholar or that
says, or were he to follow the views of this sect or that, he will be
following and accepting without a proof the accuracy or the lack thereof
of this jurist or that. To accept this sect and reject that is blind
fanaticism, a baseless imitation. Allah, the most Exalted, has said the
following in this regard,

***“And most of them follow only conjecture; surely conjecture will not
avail anything against the truth; surely Allah is cognizant of what they
do” (Holy Qur'an, 10:36)***.

Let me bring you one example so that the dear reader may get to know the
authenticity of this tradition, and so that the truth may become
distinct from falsehood:

If we take the Holy Qur'an and read the verse in it which refers to the
*wudu* (ablution), we will read what Allah, the most Exalted, has said
to be the following:

***“... and rub (therewith) your heads and feet to the ankles” (Holy
Qur'an, 5:6)***;

we will immediately understand that it implies that rubbing the feet is
done in the same way the heads are rubbed. Yet if we look at what
Muslims are actually doing, we will see them differing from one another:
all “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah” *wash* them, whereas all Shi\`as *rub*
them! Thus we will be puzzled and become skeptical: which party is
right?

If we refer to the scholars among “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah,” and to
the scientists of exegesis, we will find them differing from one another
with regard to such ruling, each according to the traditions upon which
he depends.

They say that there are two ways to read the original Arabic word, the
object of rubbing or washing: one way suggests it should be pronounced
*arjulakum*, and the other suggests its pronunciation should be
*arjulikum*.

Then they argue saying that both methods are accurate, that whoever
reads it *arjulakum* should wash his feet, and whoever reads it
*arjulikum* should wipe them! A third scholar, one who is deeply
acquainted with the Arabic language from Sunni scholars[^6] says, “Both
methods of reading this word obligate rubbing,” adding that the Holy
Qur'an indicates rubbing whereas the Sunnah has been to wash them!

As you can see, dear reader, the scholars of “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah”
did not remove our confusion because of all the contradictions in their
statements. Rather, they even increased our doubts when they said that
the Sunnah has contradicted the Holy Qur'an, while the Prophet is
cleared from being accused of doing anything contrary to the
commandments stated in the Holy Qur'an; he could never have washed his
feet when performing his ablution.

Had the Prophet washed his feet during his ablution, no highly respected
*sahabi* would have ever contradicted him, knowing that the *sahaba*
were men of knowledge and scholarship, and they were close to him and
saw what he did. Among such *sahaba* was Ali ibn Abu Talib, Ibn Abbas,
al-Hasan and al-Husayn, Huthayfah of Yemen, and Anas ibn Malik.

All the *sahaba* who read that word as *arjulikum*, who constitute most
*qaris*, in addition to all Shi\`as who emulate the Imams from the pure
Progeny of the Prophet, have instituted that the feet must be rubbed,
not washed, during the ablution.

So what is the solution?!

Have you not seen, dear reader, that any Muslim remains confused
regarding his skepticism if he cannot refer to someone upon whom he can
rely? He, otherwise, will not find what is right and how to distinguish
what is the correct commandment of Allah and what is falsely attributed
to Him.

I have deliberately brought you, dear reader, this example from the Holy
Qur'an so that you may get to know the extent of differences of views
and the contradictions in which Muslim scholars from “Ahlul Sunnah wal
Jama\`ah” are wandering about regarding something which the Prophet used
to do so many times each and every single day, and for twenty-three
years...

This is something with which all people, the commoners and the elite,
among the companions of the Prophet, should have been familiar. Yet we
find the scholars of Ahlul Sunnah differing among themselves: some read
one word [of the Holy Qur'an] this way, while others read it
differently, deriving contradictory religious rulings, each party
according to the way it reads it.

And such scholars have in their exegesis of the Book of Allah and the
organization of its injunctions, according to the way they read it,
numerous differences which are not foreign to the researchers. If their
differences with regard to interpreting the Book of Allah are so
obvious, more obvious are their differences with regard to the Prophet's
Sunnah..., so what then is the solution?

If you say that we have to refer to someone who can be relied upon to
explain and clarify the accurate injunctions derived from the Holy
Qur'an and Sunnah, we will then demand that you name such a wise
speaker, for the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah do not [by themselves] protect
anyone from straying; they both are silent; they do not speak, and they
permit many interpretations, as we have stated above with regard to the
verse relevant to the ablution. We have already agreed, dear reader,
that we must follow the scholars who are knowledgeable of the facts
relevant to the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah, and the disagreement between us
remains in getting to know who such scholars are.

If you say that they are the nation's scholars headed by the respected
*sahaba*, we have already come to know about their differences regarding
the verse relevant to the ablution, and about many other issues, and we
have also come to know that they fought one another and called one
another *kafir*; therefore, we cannot depend on all of them; rather,
only the righteous among them should be relied upon, and the problem
still lingers.

And if you say that we should refer to the Imams of the four [Sunni]
sects, you have also come to know that they have differed among
themselves in most issues, so much so that some of them regarded the
articulation of the Basmaleh as abominable, whereas others have decided
that without it, the prayers are void. You have also come to know how
these sects came about, that they were manufactured by the oppressive
rulers, and that they are far from the time of the Message and did not
know the *sahaba*, let alone the Prophet, in person.

We have at hand only one single solution which is: to refer to the Imams
of the pure *\`Itrat*, the Progeny of the Prophet, of Ahlul Bayt from
whom Allah removed all abomination and whom He purified with a perfect
purification, the doers of good, the scholars whom nobody could surpass
in their knowledge or asceticism, in safeguarding the creed and piety.
They, and only they, are the ones protected by Allah against lying or
erring as the Holy Qur'an testifies[^7] and according to the testimony
of the great Prophet.[^8]

Allah has permitted them to inherit the knowledge of His Book after
having chosen them for this task, and the Messenger of Allah taught them
all what people need, recommending them to the nation, saying, “The
similitude of my Ahlul Bayt among you is like the ark of Noah: whoever
boards it is saved, and whoever lags behind it is drowned.” Ibn Hajar,
one of the scholars of “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah,” has said the
following while explaining this tradition and admitting its
authenticity:

The reason why he compared them to the ark is that whoever loves and
venerates them as means to thank the One Who bestows His blessings upon
them, following the guidance of their scholars, will be saved from the
darkness of transgression, whereas whoever lags behind them will be
drowned in the sea of ingratitude to Allah's blessings and will perish
in the paths of oppression.[^9]

Add to the above the fact that you cannot find even one scholar in the
past or present Islamic nation, since the time of the *sahaba* and till
today, who claimed that he was more knowledgeable or better than the
Imams of the Prophet's pure Progeny, nor can you find anyone at all in
this nation who claimed that he taught any of the Imams from Ahlul Bayt
or guided them in anything at all. If you, dear reader, wish to review
more proofs and explanations thereto, you ought to read *Al-Muraja\`at*
and *Al-Ghadeer*.[^10]

Yet what I have offered you ought to be sufficient if you are fair,
especially since the tradition that starts with “I have left among you
the Two Weighty Things..., etc.” is the truth which reason and feeling
endorse and which is supported by both the Sunnah and the Holy Qur'an.

Thus does it become clear to us once again, through clear proofs which
cannot be refuted, that Imamite Shi\`as are the followers of the true
Prophetic Sunnah, whereas “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah” have obeyed their
rulers and dignitaries who misled them and left them groping in the
dark.

All Praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds, for having guided
those whom He has chosen from His servants.

[^1]: His full name is Abu Ishaq Ka\`b ibn Mati\` (d. 32 A.H./652 A.D.).
He was a Jew from Yemen who pretended to have embraced Islam then went
to Medina during the reign of Umar ibn al-Khattab. Then he went to Syria
to be one of Mu\`awiyah's advisers. He die in Hims. He is believed to
have succeeded in injecting a great deal of Judaicas into the Islamic
beliefs. \_\_ Tr.

[^2]: Al-Dhahabi Tadhkirat al-Huffaz., Vol. 1, p. 3.

[^3]: Al-Hakim, Mustadrak , Vol. 3, p. 121, quotes this tradition and
says, “It is authentic according to the methods of verification followed
by both Shaykhs [Bukhari and Muslim] who did not (!) record it.” It is
also recorded on p. 73 of al-Suyuti's book Tarikh al-Khulafa, on p. 24
of al-Nisai's Khasais, and on p. 82 of al-Khawarizmi's book Al-Manaqib.

[^4]: All these traditions are regarded by “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” as
authentic, and they are recorded by many of their scholars who admit
their authenticity. We have discussed them in our previous books. Anyone
who wants to review their references ought to read Al-Muraja\`at which
is verified by Husayn al-Radi.

[^5]: Refer for more information to the Introduction to Sharh
Nahjul-Balagha by the Mu\`tazilite scholar Ibn Abul-Hadid.

[^6]: Al-Fakhr al-Razi states these views on p. 161, Vol. 11, of his
book Al-Tafsir al-Kabir, the grand exegesis.

[^7]: One such testimony is in verse 33 of Surat al-Ahzab (Chapter 33)
which reads, “Surely Allah wills to remove from you, O Ahlul Bayt, all
abomination, and to purify you with a perfect purification.”

[^8]: Among such testimonies is his statement, peace and blessings be
upon him and his progeny, “Uphold the Book of Allah and my \`Itrat
(Progeny); so long as you uphold them both (simultaneously), you shall
never stray after me.” Just as the Book of Allah is protected by Allah
from any error, so is the case with the pure Progeny . Anyone who is not
infallible cannot be relied upon to guide others. One who himself is
liable to err is in need of guidance.

[^9]: This is stated on p. 151 of Al-Sawa\`iq al-Muhriqa by the Shafi\`i
scholar Ibn Hajar.

[^10]: To the best of my knowledge, no English translation of the
11-Volume encyclopedia titled Al-Ghadeer fil Kitab wal Sunnah wal Adab
by Abd al-Husayn Ahmad al-Amini al-Najafi is available yet. Its fourth
edition was published in 1397 A.H./1977 A.D. by Dar al-Kitab al-Arabi of
Beirut, Lebanon. This book needs a book all by itself to describe its
literary value, the knowledge it contains, and the data with which it is
filled. \_\_ Tr.


