Taqlid and Maraji` According to Shi`as
======================================

Every Muslim adult, as long as he is not a *mujtahid*, that is, one
capable of deriving religious rulings from the Book of Allah and the
Sunnah, is obligated to follow a religious authority who combines in him
the requirements of knowledge, justice, piety, asceticism and the fear
of Allah in accordance with the verse saying,

***“So ask the followers of the Reminder if you do not know” (Holy
Qur'an, 16:43)***.

If we research this subject, we will find out that Imamite Shi\`as have
kept up with the sequence of events, with no interruption in their chain
of *maraji\`* (religious authorities), since the demise of the Prophet
and till our time.

Shi\`as continue to follow the Twelve Imams from Ahlul Bayt, peace be
upon them. The actual presence of these Imams continued for more than
three centuries uninterruptedly without anyone of them contradicting the
other in anything he said.

This is due to the fact that the texts related to the *Shari\`a* are
always derived from the Book of Allah and the Sunnah. These have always
been their reference. They followed neither analogy nor their own views.
Had they done so, the disagreement among them would have become obvious
to everyone as is the case with the followers of “Ahlul Sunnah wal
Jama\`a.”

We conclude from the above that any sect of “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a,”
be it Hanafi, Maliki, Shafi\`i, or Hanbali, is based on the views of one
man who was distant from the time when the Message was revealed; he had
no direct link with the Prophet at all.

As for the sect of Imamite Shi\`as, it is consecutive from the Twelve
Imams who descended from the Prophet: the son quotes his father, and so
on. One of them, namely Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq, says, “The *hadith* I
narrate is that of my father and grandfather, and the hadith of my
grandfather is the hadith of the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abu
Talib who quotes the Messenger of Allah, and the hadith of the Messenger
of Messenger of Allah is that of Gabriel, peace be upon him, which is
the speech of the Almighty.”

***“Had it not been from anyone other than Allah, they would have found
in it a great deal of discrepancy.” (Holy Qur'an, 4:82)***

Then came the post-occultation period of the Infallible Imam. This
period has referred people to follow the learned *faqih* among them who
combines in him all the conditions listed above.

Then the chain of *mujtahid faqihs* started since then, and it has
continued till our present time uninterruptedly. During each period, one
or more *marji\`* rises to distinction among the nation whom the Shi\`as
follow in their actions.

This is done in accordance with the scholarly books of instruction
(*risalas*) which each *marji\`* derives from the Book of Allah and the
Sunnah without expressing any personal views except in reference to
issues related to modern times. Such views are relevant to modern
scientific and technological progress such as heart or organ
transplantation operations, artificial insemination, banking
transactions, etc.

One particular *mujtahid* may be distinguished with prominence over all
the rest through the degree of his knowledge. Shi\`as refer to such a
*mujtahid* as *al-marji\` al-a\`la*, the supreme religious authority, or
the head of the sect or of *al-hawza al-\`ilmiyya*, the university-type
circle of top scholars. This wins him the regard and respect of all
other authorities.

Across the centuries, Shi\`as follow their contemporary *faqih* who
undergoes whateverever problems other people undergo and is concerned
about whatever concerns them, so they ask him and he provides them with
the answers.

Thus have the Shi\`as in all ages maintained the two basic sources of
Islamic *Shari\`a*: the Book of Allah and the Sunnah, in addition to the
texts transmitted by the Twelve Imams from the pure Progeny of the
Prophet.

Hence, their scholars feel no need at all to resort to analogy, or to
express a personal viewpoint, because Shi\`as have taken pains to record
and safeguard the Prophet's Sunnah since the time of Ali ibn Abu Talib
and will continue to do so till the Day of Judgment. The Imams from his
offspring have been inheriting the same: son from father, and so on,
treasuring such texts as people treasure their gold and silver.

We have already quoted the statement of the Martyr Ayatullah Muhammad
Baqir al-Sadr which he records in his own *risala* indicating that he
does not rely except on the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah. Mentioning Martyr
al-Sadr is only an example; all Shi\`a authorities without any exception
do the same.

This brief research about the issue of religious following with regard
to the *Shari\`a* and religious authorities makes it clear for us that
Imamite Shi\`as are the ones who follow the Holy Qur'an and the
Prophet's Sunnah as transmitted directly by Ali, the gate of the
Prophet's knowledge, the divinely guided scholar and the nation's
adviser after the Prophet and who, according to the Holy Qur'an, was
created of the Prophet's soul.[^1]

So whoever comes to the city and enters through its gate will reach the
pure fountainhead; he will take his fill and be fully refreshed. He will
also have upheld the niche which shall never be untied because the
Almighty says,

***“Enter the houses through their doors” (Holy Qur'an, 2:189)***.

Whoever enters the houses anywhere other than through their doors will
be called a burglar and will not be able to enter, nor will he come to
know the Sunnah of the Prophet, and Allah will surely apprehend and
penalize him for having thus transgressed.

[^1]: This is a reference to the verse saying, “Say: Come let us call
our sons and your sons, and our women and your women, and our near
people and your near people, then let us be earnest in prayer and pray
to Allah to curse the liars” (Holy Qur'an, 3:61), whereupon he invited
Ali ibn Abu Talib, as Muslim records in his Sahih in a chapter dedicated
to the virtues of Ali, peace be upon him.


