The Righteous Caliphs According to Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama`ah
===========================================================

These, according to them, are the four caliphs who ascended the seat of
caliphate following the demise of the Messenger of Allah. “Ahlul Sunnah
wal Jama\`ah” advocate these caliphs' superiority over all other people
with the exception of the Prophet in the same chronological order of
their caliphate. This is what we hear even these days.

We have, however, come to know from previous researches that Imam Ali
ibn Abu Talib, peace be upon him, was not counted among them as one of
the caliphs, much less a righteous one; rather, Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal
added his name at a much later time to the list. Prior to that, he used
to be cursed from the pulpits in all Muslim lands and throughout the
Umayyad empire.

In order to shed more light on this subject, and so that the reader may
feel comfortable about the truth regarding this regretful fact, his
attention is invited to the following:

We have already said that Abdullah ibn Umar is regarded by “Ahlul Sunnah
wal Jama\`ah” as one of the most prominent *faqihs*, and Malik makes him
his major authority upon whom he depends in his book *Al-Muwatta'*. He
is also relied upon by both al-Bukhari and Muslim in the *Sahih* written
by each of them. All other transmitters of *hadith*, without any
exception, rely on him.

This man was famous for his open hatred of the Commander of the Faithful
Ali ibn Abu Talib. History tells us that he refused to swear the oath of
allegiance to Ali, yet he rushed to swear his oath of allegiance to the
cursed al-Hajjaj, the enemy of Allah and His Messenger.[^1]

Abdullah ibn Umar revealed what he was hiding in his chest and disclosed
his best kept secret when he said that he could not count even one
single favor or merit or good quality of Ali that warranted placing him
in the fourth place after Uthman ibn Affan.

We have already come to know that he favored only Abu Bakr and Umar; as
for Ali, peace be upon him, he, in his assessment, was among the
commoners, if not the very least important among them. Let me provide
you with another fact which narrators of *hadith* and historians have
recorded, and which openly expresses the hateful and antagonistic nature
of Ibn Umar towards Ali and all Imams from the pure Progeny of the
Prophet:

Abdullah ibn Umar has said the following while trying to explain the
tradition of the Prophet in which he said, “The caliphs after me shall
be twelve; all of them are from Quraysh”:

This nation shall have twelve caliphs who are: Abu Bakr al-Siddeeq,
*Umar al-Farooq, Uthman Thul Noorain, Mu\`awiyah and his son as the
kings of the holy lands (Mecca and Medina), al-Saffah, Salam, Mansour,
Jabir, al-Mahdi, al-Ameen, Ameer al-Asab, who all are from Banu Ka\`b
ibn Luayy, and they are righteous and peerless*.[^2]

So read this statement, dear reader, again and wonder about such *faqih*
who is so highly respected by “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah” and notice how
he distorts the facts and turns them upside down, making Mu\`awiyah and
his son Yazid as well as al-Saffah [a title meaning: the blood-shedder]
the best of Allah's servants, further stating that they are peerless!

Surely grudge and ignorance have blinded his eye sight just as envy and
animosity have blinded his mind[^3] to the extent that he cannot see any
merit or favor for the Commander of the Faithful Ali over whom he
prefers Mu\`awiyah, the morally depraved man, and his atheist, criminal,
and blood-thirsty son Yazid.

Abdullah ibn Umar is the son of his father. Whatever comes from its
source surprises nobody, and every pot drips of its contents. His father
used all possible means to exclude Ali, peace be upon him, from the
caliphate, and to make him look insignificant in the eyes of the public.

And here we see his [Umar ibn al-Khattab's] spiteful and hateful son,
despite Ali's ascension to the caliphate after Uthman's murder and after
having received the oath of allegiance from the Muhajirun and Ansar,
refusing to swear the oath of allegiance to Ali and trying his best to
put his light out and stir people against him in order to cause his
downfall. He, therefore, kept making statements and fooling people into
thinking that Ali, peace be upon him, had no merits, and that he was
like any other ordinary man.

Abdullah ibn Umar served the Umayyad dynasty and crowned both Mu\`awiyah
and his son Yazid with the crown of caliphate, telling lies and
fabrications about the Prophet, recognizing the caliphate of al-Saffah
and al-Mansour and all promiscuous rulers of Banu Umayyah, preferring
them over the master of the Muslims and the *wali* of the believers
according to the text of the Holy Qur'an and the Sunnah. Yet he did not
recognize Ali's caliphate even when it actually took place! How strange!

[^1]: Al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf al-Thaqafi is the one who is very well known
for his promiscuity, apostasy, crimes, and total lack of respect for the
faith. Al-Hakim has recorded on p. 556, Vol. 3, of his Al-Mustadrak, and
Ibn Asakir has also recorded on p. 69, Vol. 4, of his book, the fact
that al-Hajjaj used to say, “Ibn Mas\`ud claims that he recited a Qur'an
revealed from Allah, and Allah is nothing more than a filth of the
Arabs.” He also used to say, “Fear Allah as much as you want, for doing
so is completely futile, and listen to and obey the commander of the
faithful Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan for you will then be generously
rewarded.” Also Ibn Aqeel records on p. 81 of his book Al-Nasaih
al-Kafiya saying that al-Hajjaj delivered a speech once in Kufa and
referred to those who were visiting the grave site of the Prophet at
Medina thus: “May they perish! They go around sticks and decaying
cadaver; why don't they go round the mansion of the commander of the
faithful Abd al-Malik? Don't they know that someone's successor is
better than his messenger?”

[^2]: This is stated on p. 140 of al-Suyuti's book Tarikh al-Khualfa, p.
140. Kanz al-Ummal, Vol. 6, p. 67, and also in the history books of Ibn
Asakir and al-Dhahabi.

[^3]: Read it and do not forget the statement of the Prophet which
al-Bukhari and Muslim recorded and which says: “Loving Ali ibn Abu Talib
is a sign of iman (conviction), and hating him is a sign of hypocrisy,”
and the hypocrites during the time of the Prophet used to be identified
by their hatred towards Ali .


