Enmity of Ahlul Sunnah Towards Ahlul Bayt Reveals their Identity
================================================================

Any researcher stands dumbfounded when he collides with the reality
about “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah” and comes to know that they were the
enemies of the pure Progeny of the Prophet, following those who fought
Ahlul Bayt and cursed them and spared no means to murder them and
obliterate their legacy.

This is why you find “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah” placing the label of
“reliable” on all traditionists if they are Kharijites or Nasibi
followers of Uthman. They charge and accuse all the traditionists who
are loyal to Ahlul Bayt of being “weak.”

You do not find such matters recorded openly in their books. But when
they try to challenge the authenticity of accurate traditions recounting
the merits of Ali ibn Abu Talib, they label them as “weak,” saying,
“Among the chain of its narrators is so-and-so who is a Rafidi.”[^1] And
they label as “*sahih*,” authentic, false traditions which were
fabricated in order to raise the status of and glorify the other caliphs
even if their narrators were Nasibis. Being a Nasibi, according to them,
is indicative of one's zeal about the Sunnah.

Ibn Hajar, for example, says the following about Abdullah ibn Idris
al-Azdi, a very well known Nasibi, “He was a man who followed the Sunnah
and Jama\`ah, a zealot with regard to the Sunnah, and a follower of
Uthman.”[^2] About Abdullah ibn Awn al-Basri he says, “He is held as
reliable, and he is a man of piety and zeal about the Sunnah and
toughness against the people of innovations. Ibn Sa\`d has said that
Abdullah ibn Awn al-Basri was a follower of Uthman.”[^3]

And about Ibrahim ibn Ya\`qub al-Jawzjani, who was famous for hating
Ali, peace be upon him, he says that his sect was Hareezi, i.e. a
follower of Hareez ibn Uthman of Damascus, the sect known as
Nasibism.[^4] Ibn Hayyan describes Ibrahim as being zealous about the
Sunnah, a man who memorized *hadith*.

It is noteworthy that this same Nasibi whom they praise by saying that
he is zealous about the Sunnah and that he memorized *hadith* used to
take the opportunity of other traditionists gathering at his door
[asking permission to enter] to send one of his slave-girls with a hen
in her hand to tour the town then to go back to her master, Ibrahim ibn
Ya\`qub al-Jawzjani, to tell him that she could not find anyone to
slaughter it for her; he would then cry out: “*Subhan-Allah!* There is
none to slaughter a hen whereas Ali in broad day light slaughters twenty
thousand Muslims!”

Through such cunning and conniving, the Nasibis, enemies of Ahlul Bayt,
try to dissuade people from following the truth and mislead them through
such false accusations in order to fill the Muslims' hearts, especially
those of traditionists [such as the ones who used to meet al-Jawzjani to
learn *hadith* from him] with hatred and animosity towards Ali ibn Abu
Talib, peace be upon him, and thus permit cursing, taunting, and
condemning him.

You can find such phenomenon even in our time. Despite the claim of
contemporary “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah” that they love Ahlul Bayt and
seek Allah's Pleasure with our master Ali, *karrama-Allahu wajhahu*
(Allah glorified his countenance), as they say, if you narrate one
*hadith* containing one of the virtues of Ali, peace be upon him, they
ridicule you, charge you with Shi\`ism, with being an innovator, and
with being “extremist.”

When you, however, discuss the caliphs Abu Bakr and Umar, and other
*sahaba* they feel very comfortable talking to you.

This is exactly the doctrine of their “good predecessors.” Historians
have transmitted saying that Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal used to label as
“weak” any traditionist who belittled Abu Bakr, Umar, or Uthman, while
holding in high esteem Ibrahim al-Jawzjani, the afore-mentioned Nasibi,
praising him a great deal. Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal corresponded with him,
recited his books from the pulpit, and used his works in support of his
arguments.

If this is the case with regard to Ahmad ibn Hanbal who forced his
contemporaries to recognize the caliphate of Ali, whom he ranked as
their fourth, do not ask me about the others who did not admit even one
single merit for Ali, or about those who cursed and condemned him from
the pulpits during Fridays and Eids.

Al-Dar Qutni, for example, says, “Ibn Qutaybah, spokesman of Ahlul
Sunnah, inclines to ascribing human characteristics (to Allah) and
deviates from the line of the Prophet's *\`Itrat*.”[^5] This proves that
most “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” deviated from the path of the Progeny of
the Messenger of Allah.

Al-Mutawakkil, whom traditionists called *muhyi al-Sunnah*, the person
who revived the Sunnah, and whom Ahmad ibn Hanbal used to respect and
hold in high regards and whose orders he endorsed in appointing judges,
was one of the most notorious Nasibis who were antagonistic towards Ali
and his Ahlul Bayt, so much so that his grudge prompted him to desecrate
the graves of both Ali and his son Husayn, peace be upon them. He used
to forbid anyone from visiting their sites and would kill anyone named
“Ali.”

In his dissertation, al-Khawarizmi quotes him saying that he used to
generously reward with money only those who cursed the descendants of
Abu Talib, peace be upon them, and support the sect of Nasibism.[^6]

Needless to say, Nasibism is one of the sects of “Ahlul Sunnah wal
Jama\`a;” therefore, the promoter of Nasibism, namely al-Mutawakkil, is
the same one labelled as *muhyi al-Sunnah*, the person who revived the
Sunnah; so, consider.

Ibn Kathir, in his *Al-Bidaya wal Nihaya*, tells us that when “Ahlul
Sunnah wal Jama\`a” heard al-A\`mash narrating the tradition of the
roasted bird, which contains a praise of Ali ibn Abu Talib (peace be
upon him), they took him out of the mosque then washed the place where
he used to sit.[^7]

They also opposed the burial of Imam Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari,
author of *Al-Tafsir al-Kabir* (the great exegesis) and the great
historian, for no reason other than his admission of the authenticity of
*hadith* al-Ghadeer in which the Prophet is quoted saying, “Whoever
regards me as his/her *mawla* (master), this Ali is (henceforth) his/her
master.” He collected its sources from various avenues. Those sources
were quite numerous, so they came to be referred to as *mutawatir*,
consecutively reported.

Ibn Kathir has said, “I have seen one of his books wherein he compiled
the traditions relevant to the Ghadeer incident, and it was in two huge
volumes, in addition to another book in which he compiles the incidents
relevant to the tradition of the roasted bird.”[^8]

Ibn Hajar, too, has discussed him in his book *Lisan al-Mizan*, saying,
“He is the great Imam and the highly respected interpreter of the
Qur'an; he is trustworthy, truthful, and there is a good deal of
Shi\`ism in him and support (for Ahlul Bayt, as) which is not
detrimental (to his reliability).”[^9]

When Imam al-Nasa'i, the great traditionist and one of the authors of
*Al-Sihah al-Sittah* (the six books of traditions which the Sunnis
regard as *sahih*, authentic), wrote a book dealing with the merits of
the Commander of the Faithful Ali, he was asked about Mu\`awiyah's
“merits,” whereupon he answered: “I do not know of any except that the
Messenger of Allah said to him once: \`May Allah never satisfy your
stomach.'“ He was, therefore, beaten on his genitals till he lost
consciousness. His body was carried to some place to die of such
beating.

Ibn Kathir tells us the following in his *Tarikh* where he describes the
violent confrontations that took place in Baghdad in 363 A.H./954 A.D.
between the Shi\`as and “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” on the anniversary of
Ashura:

A group from Ahlul Sunnah seated a woman on an animal to play the role
of Ayesha and brought some of their men to play Talha and al-Zubayr.
They expressed their objective thus: “We want to fight the followers of
Ali.” A large number of people were killed.[^10]

This is what goes on nowadays, too: “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” attack
Shi\`as on Ashura in order to prohibit them from participating in the
commemorative procession, killing many innocent Muslims.

After having conducted such an expose, it becomes clear to us that the
Nasibis who antagonized Ali, peace be upon him, and who fought Ahlul
Bayt, peace be upon them, are the ones who labelled themselves “Ahlul
Sunnah,” and we have already come to know what “Sunnah” they mean and to
what “consensus” they refer.

It is self-evident that whoever antagonizes the Progeny of the Messenger
of Allah is an enemy of their grandfather the Prophet, and whoever
antagonizes the Messenger of Allah is an enemy of Allah.

It is likewise self-evident that anyone who is an opponent of Allah, His
Messenger and Ahlul Bayt cannot be among the true servants of the
Merciful One, nor can he be among the followers of the Sunnah except
when such a “Sunnah” is meant to be the “sunnah” of the devil. As for
the Sunnah of the Merciful One, it is loving Allah and His Messenger and
Ahlul Bayt, following them and following in their footsteps. The most
Exalted One has said,

***“Say: I do not ask you for any reward for it except to love my near
relatives” (Holy Qur'an, 42:23)***.

So how can one compare Mu\`awiyah with Ali, or the “imams” of
misguidance with the Imams of guidance?

***“This is a clear statement for people, and guidance, and admonition,
to those who fear their Lord.” (Holy Qur'an, 3:138)***

[^1]: What they mean by “Rafidi” [literally: rejectionist] is someone
who follows Ali and rejects the caliphate of those who preceded him in
ruling over the Muslims.

[^2]: Ibn Hajar, Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, Vol. 5, p. 145 and Vol. 1, p. 82.

[^3]: It is well known that the followers of Uthman are the Nasibis who
accused Ali of being kafir, apostate, and they accused him of killing
Uthman ibn Affan. They are headed by Mu\`awiyah ibn Abu Sufyan, Uthman's
cousin; so, he is their chief and leader.

[^4]: The Nasibis are Ali's enemies and the enemies of his Ahlul Bayt
from among the Kharijites, the Qasitis, and the renegades who
antagonized him and fought him. After his martyrdom, they took to
cursing and condemning him.

[^5]: Al-Dhahabi, Lisan al-Mizan, Vol. 3, p. 357.

[^6]: Refer to p. 135 of al-Khawarizmi's Rasaail (Letters).

[^7]: [As an act of purification from najasa, uncleanness or filth.]
This incident is narrated on p. 147, Vol. 11, of Ibn Kathir's book Al
Bidaya wal Nihaya.

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: This is mentioned when Ibn Hajar, author of Lisan al-Mizan,
discusses the biography of Ibn Jarir al-Tabari.

[^10]: Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wal Nihaya fil Fitan wal Malahim, Vol. 11,
p. 275.


