How Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama`a Distort the Blessing of Muhammad and His Progeny
============================================================================

Carefully discern this chapter, may Allah look after you, for you will
come to know what “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” conceal, and to what extent
they have gone in hating the Progeny of the Prophet, leaving no virtue
of Ahlul Bayt without distorting it.

Among such distortions is the sending of blessings unto Muhammad and his
Progeny as ordained in the Holy Qur'an. Al-Bukhari and Muslim, as well
as all Sunni scholars who came after them, indicate that the *sahaba*
once came to meet with the Prophet when the following verse was
revealed:

***“Surely Allah and His angels bless the Prophet; O you who believe!
Invoke (Divine) blessings unto him and salute him with a becoming
salutation.” (Holy Qur'an, 33:56)***

They said, “O Messenger of Allah! We know how to salute you, but we do
not know who to bless you!” The Prophet said, “You should say: \`O
Allah! Bless Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad (Aali Muhammad) just
as You blessed Ibrahim and the progeny of Ibrahim, surely You are often
Praised, Glorified.'“[^1]

Other traditionists have added to the above saying that the Prophet said
(furthermore) to them: “Do not bless me with a curtailed blessing.” They
asked him, “And what is a curtailed blessing, O Messenger of Allah?” He
said, “It is your saying: \`O Allah! Bless Muhammad,' then you stop.
Allah is Perfect and accepts nothing less than perfection.” This is why
Imam al-Shafi\`i was prompted to openly advocate that if anyone does not
bless Ahlul Bayt, his prayers are not accepted by Allah.

Relying on the authority of Ibn Mas\`ud al-Ansari, al-Dar Qutni
indicates the following in his *Musnad*:

The Messenger of Allah has said: “Whoever prays without blessing me and
my Ahlul Bayt, his prayers will never be accepted.”[^2]

In his book *Al-Sawa\`iq al-Muhriqa*, Ibn Hajar says, “Al-Daylami has
quoted the Prophet saying that everyone's supplication is withheld till
he invokes Allah's blessings unto Muhammad and the Progeny of
Muhammad.”[^3] Likewise, al-Tabrani in his *Al-Awsat* has quoted Ali,
peace be upon him, saying that everyone's supplication is withheld till
he invokes divine blessings unto Muhammad and his Progeny.[^4]

Thus do we come to know how the *Sahih* books of “Ahlul Sunnah wal
Jama\`a” describe the correct way of invoking Allah's blessings unto
Muhammad and his Progeny, that Allah does not accept the prayers of
anyone unless he blesses Muhammad and and his Progeny, and that the
supplication of every Muslim is withheld till he invokes Allah's
blessings unto Muhammad and his Progeny. It is, by my life, a great
virtue and a sublime feat whereby Ahlul Bayt are favored over all other
humans; through them does a Muslim seek nearness to his Lord.

But “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” were angered by leaving this feat of
Ahlul Bayt alone. They realized the dire consequences of doing so. No
matter how many false “merits” and alleged “feats” can one attribute to
Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, and all the *sahaba*, such “merits” and “feats”
can never reach the lofty status of Ahlul Bayt, nor can they reach its
zenith simply because the prayers of all those who thus attribute and
allege can never be accepted by Allah so long as they do not seek
nearness to Him by invoking His blessings unto Ali ibn Abu Talib next to
Muhammad, since he is the master of the *\`Itrat*, as everyone knows.

It is for this reason that they resorted to its adulteration by adding
something from their own selves which the Messenger of Allah never
mandated in the hope of enhancing the status of their masters among the
*sahaba*, deliberately curtailing this invocation from the very first
century. Notice how whenever they wrote a book, they left it without
stating the complete blessing unto Muhammad and his Progeny, and
whenever they mention “Muhammad”, or “the Prophet”, or “the Messenger of
Allah”, they say: *Salla Allahu alaihi was sallam* (Allah blessed and
saluted him), removing any reference to the Progeny of Muhammad. And if
you converse with one of them and ask him to bless Muhammad, he will
answer you by saying: *Salla Allahu alaihi wa sallam*, without referring
to his Progeny. Some of them go as far as circumventing it even more,
saying only: *Salli wa sallim* (bless and salute).

But if you ask any Shi\`a, be he from Arabia or Persia, etc., to bless
Muhammad, he would say: *Allahomma Salli ala Muhammadin wa Aali
Muhammad* (O Allah! I invoke You to bless Muhammad and the Progeny of
Muhammad).

The books written by “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” quote the Messenger of
Allah mandating to “Say: *Allahomma Salli ala Muhammadin wa Aali
Muhammad*,” applying the present and future tense in the form of a
supplication, an invocation, directed to the most Glorified One. Despite
all of that, they are satisfied with the phrase “Salla Allahu Alaihi wa
sallam,” applying the past tense and in the narrative mode without
making any reference to the Prophet's Progeny.

Indeed, the leader of “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a,” namely Mu\`awiyah ibn
Abu Sufyan, tried to remove any reference whatsoever to Muhammad in the
*athan*.[^5] No wonder, then, to find those who follow and emulate him
deliberately circumventing and distorting sending blessings unto him.
Had they been able to eliminate it altogether, they would have done just
that, but there is no way they could\_\_or can\_\_ever do so. No way!

You may nowadays hear those who ascend the pulpits, especially Wahhabi
pulpits, offering nothing but the adulterated invocation of Allah's
blessings unto him and his progeny. They may either use the curtailed
supplication or, if they feel obligated to complete it, they will then
add to it the phrase: “... and unto all his *sahaba*,” or they may say,
“... and unto his good and pure *sahaba*,” thus changing the Qur'anic
verse referring to the purification of Ahlul Bayt to make it sound as
though it was revealed in honor not of Ahlul Bayt but of the *sahaba*.
They do so in order to mislead the general public into thinking that the
*sahaba* enjoy the same merits enjoyed by Ahlul Bayt.

They have, in fact, learned the art of adulterating and distorting from
their very first *faqih* and “great leader” Abdullah ibn Umar of whose
hatred towards Ahlul Bayt we are already fully aware. In his *Al-Mawta*,
Malik indicates that Abdullah ibn Umar used to stand at the grave of the
Prophet, blessing him, Abu Bakr, and Umar.[^6]

if you, dear researcher, contemplate on the *status quo*, you will find
such an addition, that is, the blessing of the *sahaba* in addition to
blessing the Prophet and his Progeny, has no basis neither in the Holy
Qur'an nor in the Prophet's Sunnah.

Rather, both the Holy Qur'an and the Sunnah have enjoined blessing
Muhammad and his Progeny, and the command is directed to the *sahaba*
before anyone else. You do not see such an addition except with “Ahlul
Sunnah wal Jama\`a.” How many are the innovations in the creed which
they have invented, calling them “Sunnah,” aiming thereby to cover
someone's merit or to hide a fact?

***“They wish to put out the Light of Allah with their mouths, while
Allah insists upon completing His Light though the unbelievers are
averse thereto.” (Holy Qur'an, 61:8)***

[^1]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih., Vol. 4, p. 118.

[^2]: This is recorded on p. 136 of al-Dar Qutni's Sunan.

[^3]: This is recorded on p. 88 of Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalani's book
Al-Sawa\`iq al-Muhriqa.

[^4]: Fayd al-Qadeer, Vol. 5, p. 19. Kanz al-Ummal, Vol. 6, p. 173.

[^5]: For documentation of this claim, refer to p. 46 of my book Ask
Those Who Know.

[^6]: Explanation to Malik, Al-Muwatta', Vol. 6, p. 180, the chapter
titled “Tanweer al-Hawalik” (enlightening the dark areas).


