Imams and Pillars of Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama`a
============================================

These are:

1. Abu Bakr ibn Abu Quhafa, the first caliph

2. Umar ibn al-Khattab, the second caliph

3. Uthman ibn Affan, the third caliph

4. Talhah ibn Ubaydullah

5. al-Zubayr ibn al-Awwam

6. Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas

7. Abdul-Rahman ibn Awf

8. Ayesha daughter of Abu Bakr, Mother of the Faithful

9. Khalid ibn al-Waleed

10. Abu Hurayra al-Dawsi

11. Abdullah ibn Umar

12. Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr

These are twelve personalities whom I have selected from many pillars of
“Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” due to the fact that they are quite often
referred to and praised, or to the abundance of their narrations and the
proliferation of their knowledge, as they claim.

We will briefly discuss each one of them and highlight how they violated
the Prophet's Sunnah either deliberately or due to ignorance, so that it
will become evident to the researcher that “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a”
claim what is not theirs, following their own inclinations, alleging
that they are right whereas all others are wrong.

1. Abu Bakr “al-Siddeeq” ibn Abu Quhafa
---------------------------------------

In some of our previously published researches, we proved how he
collected five hundred *ahadith* of the Prophet, burnt them, then
delivered a sermon in which he said, “Do not quote any *hadith* of the
Messenger of Allah; whoever asks you, say: \`Between us and you is the
Book of Allah; so, act upon what it permits and stay away from what it
prohibits.'“ We also indicated that he violated the Sunnah of the
Prophet in recording the Book, supporting Umar in his statement in which
he said, “The Messenger of Allah is hallucinating, and the Book of Allah
suffices us.”

He also discarded all the *ahadith* mandating the caliphate of Ali, thus
usurping the caliphate for himself.

And he abandoned the Sunnah of the Prophet with regard to the
appointment of Usamah as his [military] leader, refusing to participate
in his campaign.

And he abandoned the Sunnah of the Prophet by hurting the feelings of
the Prophet's daughter al-Zahra, earning her anger.

And he abandoned the Sunnah of the Prophet by fighting and killing the
Muslims who refused to pay him their *zakat*.

And he abandoned the Sunnah of the Prophet by using burning to death as
a form of cold blooded execution even though the Prophet prohibited such
an action.

And he abandoned the Sunnah of the Prophet when he stopped giving money
to those whose hearts could have been won and inclined to Islam,
following Umar's view in their regard.

And he abandoned the Sunnah of the Prophet when he appointed Umar as the
caliph over the Muslims without even consulting with them.

Yes; all these and other actions are violations of the Sunnah of the
Prophet recorded by the authors of the Sahih books of “Ahlul Sunnah wal
Jama\`a” and by their historians. They are violations filling their
biography books.

So, if the Prophet's Sunnah is what the scholars have defined as “every
statement or action of or endorsement by the Messenger of Allah,” Abu
Bakr has violated the Sunnah through his statements, actions, or
decisions.

Among the Prophet's statements which he violated is this one: “Fatima is
part of me; whoever angers her angers me.” Fatima died angry with Abu
Bakr according to al-Bukhari. Another is the Prophet's statement saying:
“The curse of Allah be upon anyone who lags behind Usamah's army.” He
said so when they challenged his appointment of Usamah over them and
refused to go to war with him and under his military command. Abu Bakr,
despite such admonition, lagged behind Usamah's army under the pretext
of taking care of the issue of caliphate.

Among his actions in violation of the Sunnah is what the Messenger of
Allah used to do with those whose hearts could be won towards Islam; he
was very kind to them and even gave them a portion of the *zakat* as
commanded by Allah, the Most Exalted One. But Abu Bakr deprived them of
that right which the Holy Qur'an had already mandated, and which was
carried out by the Prophet, only to please Umar ibn al-Khattab who said
to them, “We have no need for you.”

Among the decisions whereby he violated the Sunnah was a decree made by
the Prophet to write his *ahadith* down and to disseminate them among
the public: Abu Bakr burnt them instead and prohibited everyone from
disseminating or quoting them.

Add to all the above the fact that he was ignorant about many Qur'anic
injunctions. He was, for instance, asked once about the rule with regard
to one who dies leaving some wealth but neither a will nor dependents.
He answered by saying, “I shall state my own view in its regard; if it
is correct, it is by the Grace of Allah; but if it is wrong, it is my
own error and that of Satan.”[^1]

How can you help being amazed about the caliph of the Muslims who is
asked about an injunction which Allah explains in His Book and which the
Messenger of Allah has clarified in his Sunnah, so he sets aside both
the Book and the Sunnah to state his own personal view, then he admits
that Satan may over-power his mind?!

All this comes in the light of the fact that Muslim scholars had already
decided that anyone who expresses his own view with regard to the Book
of Allah commits apostasy. We have also come to know that the Prophet
never stated his own personal view, nor did he ever employ *qiyas*. Add
to all this the fact that Abu Bakr used to say, “Do not force me to act
upon the Sunnah of your Prophet, for I can not bear it.” If Abu Bakr
could not bear the Sunnah of the Prophet, how can his followers and
supporters claim to be the followers of the same Sunnah?

He may be unable to tolerate it because it reminds him of his own
deviation therefrom and his distance from the Messenger; otherwise, how
can you interpret the verses saying,

***“He (Allah) has not laid upon you any hardship in the religion” (Holy
Qur'an, 22:78)***,

***“Allah desires ease for you, and He does not desire for you any
hardship” (Holy Qur'an, 2:185)***,

***“Allah does not overburden any soul with more than what it can bear”
(Holy Qur'an, 2:286)***,

and

***“Whatever the Messenger brings you, accept it, and keep back from
whatever he forbids you” (Holy Qur'an, 59:7)***?

Abu Bakr's statement that he cannot bear the Prophet's Sunnah is his
response to the above verses. If Abu Bakr, the first caliph after the
Prophet, was unable to bear his Sunnah, during that time and age, how
can Muslims of our time be asked to uphold Allah's injunctions as
embedded in His Book and act upon the Sunnah of His Messenger?! But we
have found Abu Bakr violating the Prophet's Sunnah even in easy matters
which can be undertaken by poor and ignorant people:

Abu Bakr abandoned the offering of sacrifices which the Messenger of
Allah used to do and stress, and all Muslims came to know that to offer
such sacrifices was a highly recommended and emphasized Sunnah; so, how
could the caliph of Muslims abandon them?!

In his chapter on the mother, al-Shafi\`i, as well as others, has said:

Abu Bakr and Umar, may Allah be pleased with them, never offered
sacrifices because they hated others to follow their example and
consider doing so as being obligatory.

This is an erroneous and a groundless justification; all the *sahaba*
had by then come to know that offering sacrifices was a Sunnah, a
commendable act, not an obligation. Even if we suppose that people
thought that they were obligatory, what harm could have resulted
especially after having seen how Umar invented the Taraweeh prayers
which were neither a Sunnah nor an obligation; rather, the Prophet had
prohibited them, yet most “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” nowadays think that
they are obligatory?

By abandoning the Prophet's Sunnah with regard to offering sacrifices,
Abu Bakr and Umar may have desired to mislead the people into thinking
that not all what the Messenger of Allah had done was obligatory, and
that it could be abandoned and ignored. This may explain their
statement: “The Book of Allah suffices us,” and so will the statement
made by Abu Bakr wherein he said, “Do not quote any of the Prophet's
*ahadith* and say: \`Between us and you is the Book of Allah; so, act
upon what it permits and stay away from what it prohibits.'“ Thereupon,
had someone argued with Abu Bakr about the Prophet's Sunnah relevant,
for example, to offering sacrifices, Abu Bakr would probably have
answered him by saying, “Do not talk to me about anything relevant to
the Prophet, and show me where the Book of Allah refers to offering
sacrifices.”

Thus can a researcher understand why the Prophet's Sunnah remained
unknown to them, forsaken, and why they altered the injunctions of Allah
and His Messenger to fit their own views and *qiyas* and whatever they
liked of matters agreeing with their own inclinations.

The examples which we have put forth here are only a drop in the bucket
compared to what Abu Bakr had done to the revered Sunnah of the Prophet
and to the insults, burning, negligence with which he meted it. If we
wished, we could write a separate book discussing them.

How can any Muslim feel comfortable about a person the extent of whose
knowledge is this much, whose relationship to the revered Sunnah of the
Prophet is like that, and how can his followers call themselves Ahlul
Sunnah?! Followers of the Sunnah do not forsake the Sunnah, nor do they
burn it. Nay! Ahlul Sunnah are those who follow and revere it.

***“Say: If you love Allah, follow me so that Allah may love you and
forgive your sins, and Allah is oft-Forgiving, Merciful. Say: Obey Allah
and the Messenger, but if they turn away, Allah does not love those who
disbelieve.” (Holy Qur'an, 3:31-32)***

2. Umar ibn al-Khattab “al-Farooq”
----------------------------------

We have come to know from our previously published researches that he
was the hero of the opposition to the honored Sunnah of the Prophet and
the one who defied the Prophet's last order, saying: “The Messenger of
Allah is hallucinating, and the Book of Allah suffices us.” According to
the statements of the Messenger who never uttered anything out of his
own inclination, Umar is behind the misguidance of those who strayed in
this nation.[^2]

We also came to know that he insulted, hurt the feelings of and
terrorized Fatima al-Zahar, frightening her and her children when he
assaulted her house and threatened to burn it.

We also came to know that he collected the books recording the Prophet's
Sunnah then burnt them, forbidding people from quoting the Prophet.

Umar violated the Prophet's Sunnah as long as he lived, even when the
Prophet was still alive, and he violated the Sunnah of the Prophet who
required him to be among those recruited for Usamah's army. But he did
not go with Usamah on the pretext of assisting Abu Bakr with the matters
relevant to the caliphate.

And he violated the Qur'an and the Sunnah when he stopped the
distribution of the share of *zakat* due to those whose hearts could be
won for Islam.

And he violated the Qur'an and the Sunnah with regard to *mut\`at
al-hajj* and also to *mut\`at al-nisaa*.

And he violated the Qur'an and the Sunnah which required the
pronouncement of the divorce statement thrice, making such a requirement
only once.

And he violated the Qur'an and the Sunnah with regard to the obligation
of *tayammum*, invalidating the prayers in the absence of water.

And he violated the Qur'an and the Sunnah which prohibited people from
spying on one another, inventing espionage.

And he violated the Qur'an and the Sunnah when he eliminated a part of
the *athan* and substituted it with something from his own.

And he violated the Qur'an and the Sunnah when he failed to penalize
Khalid ibn al-Waleed whom he used to threaten of penalizing.

And he violated the Qur'an and the Sunnah which prohibit the *nafl*
prayers being prayed in congregation, inventing the Taraweeh.

And he violated the Qur'an and the Sunnah with regard to the
distribution of public money, inventing discrimination and creating
class distinction in Islam.

And he violated the Qur'an and the Sunnah when he set up *majlis
al-shura*, entrusting Ibn Awf to be in charge of it.

Is not all of this indicative of Banu Umayyah's ridicule and mockery of
Islam and Muslims when they attribute such “merits” to a man who was
very well known of being rough and heavy handed and continuously
opposing the Prophet?[^3] It is as though those Umayyads were saying to
the Muslims, “Muhammad's time and whatever it contained has passed away,
while our own time has come to issue whatever religious rules we like
and prefer. Now you have become our slaves even against your wish and
against the will of the Prophet in whom you believe.”

Is this not a sort of reaction and an attempt to seek revenge so that
Quraysh's leadership would be rendered back to Banu Umayyah who fought
Islam and the Prophet of Islam?

If Umar ibn al-Khattab tried very hard to obliterate the Prophet's
*ahadith*, ridiculing them and acting to their contrary them even during
the lifetime of the Prophet himself, it is no wonder that Quraysh handed
the reins of its leadership to him, making him its supreme leader.

This is so due to the fact that after the dawn of Islam, Umar became its
articulate spokesman and the hero of its opposition. After the demise of
the Prophet, he became the symbol of its wielding might and great hope
in realizing its dreams and ambitions to ascend to authority.

It is not a mere coincident to find Umar ibn al-Khattab acting in
contradiction to the Prophet's Sunnah and trying to relocate Ibrahim's
standing place at the House of Allah and place it where it used to be
during the days of ignorance (Jahiliyya). Ibn Sa\`d has said the
following in his *Tabaqat* just as other historians have:

When the Prophet conquered Mecca, he attached Ibrahim's standing place
(*maqam*) to the House just as it used to be during the time of Ibrahim
and Isma\`eel, peace be upon them, because the Arabs during the period
of Jahiliyya had separated it and relocated it where it is now. During
the lifetime of the Prophet and that of Abu Bakr, it used to be attached
to the House.[^4]

Can you, by your Lord, find a justification for Umar ibn al-Khattab
deliberately killing a Sunnah of the Prophet who did what both Ibrahim
and Isma\`eel had done. He revived the traditions of *jahiliyya* by
rebuilding the *maqam* as it used to be during that time?

How could Quraysh not have preferred him over others and narrate in his
praise what goes beyond one's imagination, so much so that even his
friend Abu Bakr, who had preceded him in being the caliph, never
acquired such a praise? According to al-Bukhari, “Abu Bakr's temper was
tainted with some weakness, but Umar took it (caliphate) from him, and
no genius could have ever committed such a calumny.”

This is only a small portion of the innovations which he introduced in
Islam. They all contradict the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His
Messenger. If we wish to compile all the innovations and injunctions
wherein he followed his own personal views and which he forced people to
adopt, a separate book will be needed, but we only desired here to be
brief.

One may say, ***“How could Umar ibn al-Khattab have contradicted the
Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Prophet while Allah, the Exalted
One, says, \`It does not behove any believing man or woman to make any
choice in their matter once Allah and His Apostle have decided it, and
whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger surely strays off a manifest
straying?” (Holy Qur'an, 33:36)***

Actually, this question is often repeated by most people nowadays as
though they are in disbelief, not accepting the fact that Umar ibn
al-Khattab did any such things.

To these folks we would like to say: “This is confirmed by his own
friends and followers from \`Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a' who unknowingly
prefer him over the Prophet.” If what is said about him (above) is
falsehood, then their Sahih books would be rendered unworthy of any
consideration, and they will have no argument beyond that to support
their own beliefs! Yet most historical events were recorded during the
government of “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” whose love, respect, and regard
for the son of al-Khattab can never be doubted.

But if they are authentic, which is the unavoidable truth, then the
Muslims nowadays are bound to rethink their stands and reconsider all
their beliefs if they truly are followers of the Sunnah and the
consensus.

You can find most researchers these days, having been too dumbfounded to
refute these narratives and historical events which are recorded by all
scholars and traditionists, being unable to disprove them. You can find
them interpreting and seeking weak pretexts which cannot be based on any
scholarly argument. Some of them took to enumerating his (Umar's)
innovations, turning them into merits to his credit for which he should
be thanked! It is as though Allah and His Messenger did not know what
the best interest of the Muslims is, so they overlooked such
innovations\_\_we seek Allah's forgiveness\_\_so Umar discovered them
and enacted the rules for them following the demise of the Messenger of
Allah!

Since Umar is the leader and Imam of “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a,” then I
clear myself before Allah from such Sunnah and Jama\`a, pleading to Him,
the Most Glorified One, to take my soul away at the moment of death as a
follower of the Sunnah of the last of His Prophets and the master of all
Messengers, our master Muhammad, and a follower of the path of his good
Progeny, the purified ones.

3. Uthman ibn Affan “Dhul-Noorayn”
----------------------------------

He is the third caliph who reached caliphate through the schemes of Umar
ibn al-Khattab and Abdullah ibn Awf who made him swear to rule the
Muslims according to the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of both caliphs
(who had preceded him). I personally doubt his having acted upon the
second condition, that is, to follow (by implication) the Sunnah of the
Messenger of Allah.

It is so because Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf knew, more than anyone else, that
both caliphs, Abu Bakr and Umar, did not rule according to the Sunnah of
the Prophet, that they, instead, ruled according to their own *ijtihad*
and personal views, and that the Prophet's Sunnah would have been
rendered completely non-existent during the reign of both Shaykhs had
not Imam Ali stood to revive it whenever the circumstances permitted him
to do so.

Most likely, he preconditioned the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abu
Talib to rule among them according to the Book of Allah and the Sunnah
of both Shaykhs, but Ali refused this condition saying, “I do not rule
except according to the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Messenger.”
Ali, therefore, lost his chance then to become the caliph because he
wanted to revive the Sunnah of the Prophet, whereas Uthman won it
because he agreed to continue the march in the footsteps of Abu Bakr and
Umar who had stated more than once that, “We have no need for the
Prophet's Sunnah; rather, the Qur'an suffices us; so, let them act
according to what it permits and stay away from what it prohibits.”

What increases our conviction with regard to this assumption is that
Uthman ibn Affan understood this condition as implying following his own
views in as far as the [Islamic] injunctions are concerned, as did both
of his friends; such is the “Sunnah” enacted by both Shaykhs following
the demise of the Prophet.

This is why we find out that Uthman gave way to his own views and
followed *ijtihad* more than his predecessors had ever done, so much so
that the *sahaba* resented it and went to Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf to blame
him saying, “This is the doing of your own self!” When opposition to and
resentment towards Uthman intensified, the latter stood to deliver a
sermon to the *sahaba* in which he said, “Why did you not express your
resentment to Umar ibn al-Khattab who (too) followed his own views? Was
it so because he used to scare you with his cane?!”

Ibn Qutaybah narrates the following:

Uthman stood on the pulpit to deliver a sermon when people expressed
their resentment to him. He said: “By Allah, O fellow Muhajirs and
Ansars! You have found fault with many things I have done and condemned
many others though you had endorsed similar actions done by the son of
al-Khattab, but he shut your mouths and subdued you, and none of you
dared to look him in the eyes nor point a finger at him. By Allah! My
kinsfolk number more than those of the son of al-Khattab, and they are
more ready to come to my aid.”[^5]

I personally think that the *sahaba* who belonged to the Muhajirun and
Ansar did not oppose Uthman's *ijtihad*, for they had by then become
used to it and even blessed it from day one, but they resented his
deposing them from their government posts to replace them with the
promiscuous ones from his cousins and relatives who had only recently
been fighting Islam and Muslims.

The Muhajirs and the Ansars did not voice their objection to Abu Bakr or
to Umar simply because they did share authority with both of them. Both
caliphs gave the Ansars and the Muhajirun the posts which paid very well
and which made them powerful.

As for Uthman, he deposed most of them and doled out huge sums of money
to Banu Umayyah without a measure. It was then that they denounced him,
cast doubts about his authority, till in the end they killed him. This
is the truth which the Messenger of Allah had predicted when he said to
them, “I do not fear lest you should commit *shirk* after me, but I do
fear lest you should fiercely compete with one another (to obtain wealth
and political power).”

Imam Ali had said, ***“It is as though they had never heard the verse of
the Most Exalted One saying, \`Such is the last abode: We assign it for
those who have no desire to exalt themselves on earth, nor to cause
mischief, and the good end is for the righteous.” (Holy Qur'an,
28:83)***

Yes, by Allah, they had heard and comprehended that verse, but the life
of this world appeared very sweet in their eyes, and they liked its
glitter.

This is the truth. If we presume that they condemned his distortion of
the Sunnah of the Prophet, this cannot be proven. Since they had not
condemned the same when done by Abu Bakr and Umar, how can they condemn
his (Uthman's) doing it? The assumption is that Uthman ibn Affan had
indeed a larger number of relatives and supporters than Abu Bakr and
Umar, as he himself had stated, because he was the chief of Banu
Umayyah, and Banu Umayyah were closer in kinship to the Prophet than
Taym or Adiyy, the tribes to which Abu Bakr and Umar belonged
respectively, more powerful, more influential, more prestigious, and
more distinguished in descent.

Because the *sahaba* did not denounce what Abu Bakr and Umar did, rather
they emulated these men's Sunnah and knowingly abandoned the Sunnah of
the Prophet, they could not have denounced something which Uthman did
and which they had already endorsed when done by someone else.

The proof testifying to this fact is that they were present on many
occasions during which Uthman altered the Sunnah of the Prophet such as
performing the complete prayers when he was travelling, his prohibition
of *talbiya*, his leaving out the *takbir* from the prayers, his
prohibition of *mut\`at al-hajj*..., etc., without anyone expressing his
objection other than Ali ibn Abu Talib, as we will come to clarify by
the will of Allah.

The *sahaba* knew the Prophet's Sunnah very well, yet they deliberately
contradicted it for the sake of pleasing caliph Uthman.

In his book *Al-Sunan al-Kubra*, al-Bayhaqi quotes Abd al-Rahman ibn
Yazid saying, “We were in the company of Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud once when
he entered Mina's mosque. \`How many *rek\`as* did the commander of the
faithful (meaning Uthman) pray?' asked he. He was told that he had
prayed four *rek\`as*.

We, therefore, asked him, \`Did you not narrate one *hadith* to us
telling us that the Prophet had prayed only two *rek\`as*, and so did
Abu Bakr?' He answered by saying, \`Yes, I did. And I can now repeat the
same, but Uthman is now the Imam, and I shall not dissent from anything
he does, since dissension is evil.'“[^6]

So read such a statement and wonder about this *sahabi*, Abdullah ibn
Mas\`ud, who was one of the most distinguished *sahaba*, labelling
dissenting with Uthman as evil while contradicting the Messenger of
Allah as goodness all of it! Can anyone say beyond this that they
resented his forsaking the Prophet's Sunnah?!

Sufyan ibn Ayeenah has quoted Ja\`far ibn Muhammad saying:

While staying at Mina, Uthman fell sick, whereupon Ali came. Ali was
asked by people to lead the prayers. Ali, therefore, said, “If you wish,
but I shall perform the prayers according to the way the Messenger of
Allah used to pray, I mean two *rek\`as*.” They said: “No, we insist on
four *rek\`as* prayers performed by commander of the faithful Uthman.”
Ali refused to lead their prayers.[^7]

So read and wonder about these companions, who were thousands in number,
and who were at Mina during the *hajj* season, how they openly refused
to follow the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah and did not accept
anything other than the *bid\`a* invented by Uthman!

If Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud regarded dissenting from Uthman as evil, so he
performed four *rek\`as* despite the fact that he narrated about the
Prophet praying only two, he might have done so out of his fear of those
who were counted in the thousands, and who accepted nothing other than
what Uthman used to do, discarding the Prophet's Sunnah.

Do not forget, having come to know this much, to salute and greet the
Prophet and the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abu Talib who refused
to lead their prayers in any way other than that performed by the
Messenger of Allah, desiring to revive the Sunnah which those folks had
violated, fearing nobody's blame, showing no apprehension of their
multitudes or schemes.

It is noteworthy in this regard to point out to the fact that Abdullah
ibn Umar had said, “Prayers of a traveller are in two *rek\`as*; whoever
violates the Sunnah commits *kufr* (apostasy).”[^8] Thus, Abdullah ibn
Umar [implicitly] labels as *kafir* caliph Uthman ibn Affan and all the
*sahaba* who followed his *bid\`a* by performing a complete prayer while
travelling. Despite all of this, we shall return to this *faqih*, namely
Abdullah ibn Umar [ibn al-Khattab] in order to judge him according to
what he himself had judged others.

Al-Bukhari has stated the following in his *Sahih*:

I heard Uthman and Ali, may Allah be pleased with both of them, when
they were in the area between Mecca and Medina, while Uthman was banning
the mut\`a and the combination of both *hajj* and *\`umra*.

When Ali saw that, he [contradicted him and] said, after shouting
“Allahu Akbar,” *Labbayka \`umratan wa hajjan ma\`a*! (“At your service,
O Lord, do I perform both the *\`umra* and the *hajj* *together*”).
Uthman, therefore, said, “You see me forbidding people from doing
something, yet you do it yourself?!” Ali said, “Never shall I abandon
the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah because of what someone else
says.”[^9]

Can you help being amazed at seeing the caliph of the Muslims openly
violating the Sunnah and going beyond that to forbid people from
following it, yet none opposes him except Ali ibn Abu Talib who would
never abandon the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah even if he were to
pay for his life for it?

Tell me, by your Lord, do you find among the companions of Muhammad
anyone other than the father of al-Husayn truly acting upon the
Prophet's Sunnah?

Despite the ruler's might and toughness, and despite the support meted
to him by the *sahaba*, Ali never abandoned the Sunnah, and here are
their books and Sahihs testifying to the truth of our conclusion that
he, greeting from Allah be upon him, tried his best to revive the
Prophet's Sunnah and bring people back to it, but “No value is there for
the view of anyone who is not obeyed,” as he himself had said. In that
time and age, none was there to obey him and follow his instructions
except the Shi\`as who accepted him as their leader, who followed in his
footsteps, and who referred to him in every regard.

Thus does it becomes very clear to us that the *sahaba* did not find
anything wrong with Uthman altering the Prophet's Sunnah. We have come
to know from reviewing their Sahih books how they contradict the Sunnah
of the Prophet, but they do not contradict Uthman in his innovation.

They, nevertheless, revolted against him out of their pursuit of the
good things in this insignificant life, running after wealth, power, and
authority. They are the ones who were unrelenting in their fight against
Ali because he did not give them government posts but demanded their
returning the money which they had wrongfully amassed to *bayt al-mal*
of the Muslims so that the indigent might benefit from it.

May Allah support you, O father of al-Hasan ! O you who safeguarded the
Book of your Lord and the Sunnah of your cousin the Messenger of Allah
and were an Imam for the righteous, the supporter of the downtrodden!
Your Shi\`as are the ones who shall attain victory, for they upheld the
Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Messenger by rallying around you and
referring to you.

Can you believe, dear reader and discreet researcher, after all the
researches which you have come across, that the followers of Uthman ibn
Affan can be regarded as the followers of the Sunnah while the followers
of Ali are the “rejectionists” and the inventors of *bid\`as*?! So pass
your judgment in the light of what Allah has shown you if your are fair.

***“Surely Allah commands you to return the trusts to their rightful
owners, and that when you judge among the people, you should judge
justly; surely Allah admonishes you with what is excellent; surely Allah
is hears and sees.” (Holy Qur'an, 4:58)***

4. Talhah ibn Ubaydullah
------------------------

He is one of the most prominent and renowned companions of the Prophet
and one of the six persons recommended by Umar ibn al-Khattab to be
caliphs. About him, Umar had said that “He is a believer when pleased,
an apostate when angry; one day he acts as a human being, another as a
devil,” and he is one of the ten men who received the glad tidings of
going to Paradise as “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” claim.

When we research the books of history trying to define his personality,
it becomes obvious to us that he was one of those who loved this world,
who were deceived and dragged by it, who sold their creed for its sake,
thus losing their souls; their trade was in vain, and on the Day of
Judgment, they will be among those who will deeply regret.

He is Talhah who, whenever he used to say, “Once the Messenger of Allah
dies, I shall marry Ayesha, for she is my cousin,” he hurt the feelings
of the Messenger of Allah. When the Messenger of Allah heard this
statement, he felt deeply hurt. And when the verse referring to the veil
and to the Prophet's women being required to be veiled from the public,
Talhah said, “Is Muhammad prohibiting us from seeing our cousins and
preferring to marry them himself? Should anything happen to him, I shall
most certainly marry his wives after that.”[^10] When the feelings of
the Messenger of Allah were hurt, this verse was revealed:

***“It does not behove you to hurt [the feelings of] the Messenger of
Allah, nor should you marry his wives after him at all; this surely is
grievous in the sight of Allah.” (Holy Qur'an, 33:53)***

This is the same Talhah who came to see Abu Bakr before the latter's
demise and after his putting his promise of caliphate to Umar ibn
al-Khattab in writing and said to him, “What will you say to your Lord
after having installed over us a ruler who is rough and heavy handed?”
Abu Bakr then taunted him with profane language.[^11]

Yet we find him taking to silence and endorsing the new caliph, even
becoming one of his supporters, working hard to amass wealth and buy
slaves especially after having coveted the post of caliph following his
being recommended by Umar to be the caliph after him.

Talhah is the same man who betrayed Imam Ali and joined the ranks of
Uthman ibn Affan due to his prior knowledge that were the caliphate to
be vested upon Ali, he would have no reason after that to be hopeful of
attaining it himself. In this regard, Ali said, “So one of their men
listened to his grudge, while another supported his son-in-law, despite
weakness in this and in that...”

Shaykh Muhammad Abdoh says the following in his *Sharh*:

Talhah was inclined towards Uthman due to the kinship between them
according to what is recorded by the biographers. His mere inclination
towards Uthman rather than Ali may be rendered to his being a man of
Taym, for both Banu Hashim and Banu Taym had objected to the appointment
of Abu Bakr to the caliphate.[^12]

Undoubtedly, Talhah is one of those who attended the swearing of
allegiance to Ali at Ghadeer Khumm and who had heard the Prophet saying,
“To whomsoever I have been the master, this Ali is his master.” And
there is no doubt that he heard the Messenger of Allah saying, “Ali is
with the truth and the truth is with Ali.” He was present on Khaybar day
when he gave the standard to Ali saying that Ali loved Allah and His
Messenger and they both loved him. He also knew that Ali was to the
Prophet like Aaron to Moses. And he knew more and more...

But deeply rooted grudge and spite had filled his heart, so much so that
he could see nothing except fanaticism to his tribe and bias to his
cousin Ayesha daughter of Abu Bakr whom he aspired to marry after the
demise of the Prophet, but the Qur'an made it impossible.

Yes, Talhah joined Uthman and swore to be loyal to him because Uthman
used to give him many grants and gifts. When Uthman ascended the seat of
caliphate, he showered Talhah without a measure with the wealth which
belonged to the Muslims.[^13] His wealth, therefore, and his cattle and
slaves increased till his income from his property in Iraq alone reached
one thousand dinars a day.

In his *Tabaqat*, Ibn Sa\`d says, “At the time of his death, Talhah had
left thirty million dirhams. The cash was two hundred thousand dinars,
two million and two hundred thousand dirhams, and the rest was in the
form of hamlets and real estate.”[^14] This is why Talhah was turned
into an oppressor. He became arrogant and started instigating people
against his close friend Uthman in order to depose him and take his
place.

Mother of the faithful Ayesha may have tempted him with the promise of
caliphate because she, too, tried her best to undermine Uthman, and she
had no doubt that caliphate would be the lot of her cousin Talhah.

When the news of Uthman's murder reached her, and when she was told that
people had sworn the oath of allegiance to Talhah, she was very
delighted and said, “Away with Na\`thal[^15] and may he be crushed!
Congratulations to you, man of the finger, father of lion cubs!
Congratulations to you, cousin! Allah bless your father! By Allah, they
have found Talhah worthy of it!”

Yes, such was the way how Talhah rewarded Uthman, the man who made him
wealthy. He betrayed him because of his own desire to succeed him as the
caliph. He instigated people to revolt against him and was the most
zealous in encouraging them to kill him, so much so that he even
prohibited drinking water from reaching Uthman when the latter's house
was under siege.

Ibn Abul-Hadid quotes Uthman saying the following when his house was
besieged: “Woe unto me from the son of the woman of Hadramaut (meaning
Talhah)! I gave him such-and-such in pure gold, and now he is seeking to
shed my blood, encouraging others to kill me! O Allah! Do not permit him
to enjoy it (caliphate), and let him face the evil ends of his
mischief!”

Yes; such is Talhah who [first] sided with Uthman and selected him for
the caliphate in order to distance Ali from it, and because Uthman had
given him gold and silver, he now is instigating people against him,
ordering them to kill him, prohibiting drinking water from reaching his
house! And when they brought Uthman's corpse to be buried, he forbade
them from burying it at the Muslims' cemetery, so Uthman had to be
buried at Hish Kawkab where the Jews used to bury their dead![^16]

Yet after all of that, we see Talhah as the very first person to swear
the oath of allegiance to Imam Ali following Uthman's assassination,
then he reneged from his oath and joined his cousin Ayesha at Mecca and
suddenly started seeking revenge for Uthman! Praise be to Allah! Is
there any calumny greater than this?!

Some historians justify this conduct by saying that Ali had refused to
appoint him as the governor of Kufa and surrounding areas, so he reneged
from his oath of allegiance to him and went out to fight the same Imam
to whom he only yesterday had sworn to follow! Such is the nature of
those who sink in their love for this world up to their summit, those
who sell their hereafter and whose concern is nothing more than
authority, power, and wealth.

Taha Husayn writes the following:

Talhah, then, used to represent a special type of opposition: He
accepted whatever was secured for him of wealth and prestige, but when
he coveted more, he joined the opposition till he caused many people to
perish before he, too, finally perished.[^17]

Such is Talhah who only yesterday swore the oath of allegiance to Imam
Ali: He comes out only a few days later dragging the wife of the
Messenger of Allah Ayesha to Basra, killing innocent people, plundering
their wealth, and terrorizing them in order to force them to disobey
Ali. Then he shamelessly stood to fight the Imam of his time to whom he
had willingly and out of his own choice promised to obey and support.

Despite all of that, Imam Ali sought him shortly before the battle
started, found him in the midst of the ranks of dissidents, and asked
him, “Did you not swear the oath of allegiance to me? What caused you to
dissent, O Talhah?” He said, “Seeking revenge for Uthman's murder.” Ali
said, “May Allah kill the foremost person responsible for Uthman's
murder.”

According to Ibn Asakir's narration, Imam Ali asked Talhah, “I ask you
in the Name of Allah, O Talhah, did you hear the Messenger of Allah
saying, \`To whomsoever I have been the master, this Ali is his master;
O Allah! Befriend whoever befriends him and be the enemy of whoever
antagonizes him!'?” Talhah said, “Yes.” Ali then asked him, “Why do you
then fight me?” His answer was, “To seek revenge for Uthman's murder.”
Ali's answer was, “May Allah kill the foremost person responsible for
Uthman's murder.”

Allah did, indeed, favorably respond to Ali's supplication: Talhah was
killed on that same day at the hands of Marwan ibn al-Hakam whom Talhah
had brought there to fight Ali !

He is the Talhah of dissension, falsehood, and the turning of facts
upside down without any regard for the call of conscience or for a sworn
oath or for a promise made. Nor did he hear the call for justice. Imam
Ali reminded him of his oath, thus driving his argument against him
home, but he persisted, became puffed up with pride, and went to
extremes in his misguidance, straying from the right path and causing
others to stray with him.

Because of him, a great multitude of innocent people were killed, people
who did not have anything to do with Uthman's assassination, nor did
they even know him as long as they lived, nor did they even leave
Basra...

Ibn Abul-Hadid has transmitted saying that when Talhah reached Basra,
Abdullah ibn al-Hakeem al-Tameemi came to him to ask him about letters
which he had received from him. He asked him, “*Ya Abu Muhammad!* (O
father of Muhammad)! Are these the letters which you had sent us?” He
answered in the affirmative. “But you had written us only yesterday,”

Abdullah went on, “urging us to depose Uthman and kill him; now you have
killed him, you come to us seeking revenge for him! By my life! This is
not what you have in mind; you only seek this world. Wait for a moment!
If this is your view, why did you agree when Ali invited you to swear
the oath of allegiance to him, so you willingly and obediently swore the
oath of allegiance to him, then you reneged from your oath of
allegiance, then you came to us to get us to join you in your
dissension?!”[^18]

Yes; this is the naked truth about Talhah ibn Ubaydullah as narrated by
the authors of the books of Sunnah and by the historians belonging to
“Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a.” Yet they say that he is one of the ten men
who received the glad tidings of going to Paradise...!

***“Does every man among them covet to enter Paradise?” (Holy Qur'an,
70:38)***

***“Or shall We make those who belief and do good deeds like those who
cause corruption in the land, or shall We make the righteous like the
debauchees?” (Holy Qur'an, 38:28)***

***“Is one who believes like one who disbelieves? Surely they are not
equal.” (Holy Qur'an, 32:18)***

***“As for those who believe and do good deeds, for them are the gardens
of refuge as their homes because of what they did. As for those who
disbelieved, their abode is the fire: whenever they want to get out of
it, they are returned into it, and it is said to them: Taste the torture
of the fire in which you disbelieved.”*** ***(Holy Qur'an , Surat
al-Sajda, verses 19-20)***

5. Al-Zubayr ibn al-Awwam
-------------------------

He, too, is among the most distinguished *sahaba* and one of the
foremost in migrating to Medina. He enjoyed kinship with the Messenger
of Allah: Safiyya daughter of Abd al-Muttalib, the Prophet's aunt, was
his mother. He was also husband of Asmaa daughter of Abu Bakr and sister
of Ayesha. He is also one of the six men recommended by Umar ibn
al-Khattab to become caliphs.[^19]

He is also one of those who received “the glad tidings of going to
Paradise,” according to “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a.” No wonder, then,
when we find him always in the company of his like Talhah: whenever
Talha's name is mentioned, it is always followed by al-Zubayr's and vice
versa.

He is also one of those who competed with others for the riches of this
world, filling their stomachs therewith. According to al-Tabari, his
heritage amounted to fifty thousand dinars, one thousand horses, one
thousand slaves, and many hamlets in Basra, Kufa, Egypt, and elsewhere.

In this regard, Taha Husayn says, “People vary with regard to the
distribution of al-Zubayr's legacy. Those who mention the least say that
his heirs divided thirty-five million [dinars] among them, whereas those
who provide the maximum figure say that they divided fifty-two million.
Moderates say that they divided forty million among them.

This should not surprise us. Al-Zubayr used to own real estate in Basra
and Kufa, eleven houses in Medina, and property and real estate
elsewhere.[^20] Yet al-Bukhari narrates saying that al-Zubayr had left
fifty million two hundred dinars.[^21]

We do not intend by stating this expose to audit the *sahaba* with
regard to their earnings of goods, or to the wealth they amassed, which
may all be *halal*, but when we see how both Talhah and al-Zubayr
expressed so much interest in worldly gains and come to know that they
reneged from their oath of allegiance to the Commander of the Faithful
Ali ibn Abu Talib simply because he decided to retrieve the money which
Uthman had given away in order to return it to the Muslims' *bayt
al-mal*, it is then that we entertain doubts about these men. Add to the
above the fact that upon becoming caliph, Imam Ali immediately took to
bringing people back to the Sunnah of the Prophet which he started by
the distribution of the wealth in *bayt al-mal*, giving each and every
Muslim three dinars, be he an Arab or a non-Arab, and this is exactly
what the Prophet used to do as long as he lived. Thus, Ali put an end to
the *bid\`a* invented by Umar ibn al-Khattab who favored the Arabs over
the non-Arabs, giving each Arab twice the share he gave the non-Arab.

Ali's efforts to bring people back to the Sunnah of the Prophet was
sufficient reason for the *sahaba* to revolt against him since they
liked what Umar had invented. This is something which we overlooked
while analyzing Quraysh who loved and sanctified Umar. He had favored
Quraysh over all other Muslims, thus encouraging nationalistic Arab
fanaticism, Qurayshi tribalism, and bourgeois class distinction.

How could Ali come a quarter of a century after the demise of the
Prophet to bring Quraysh back to the way they used to be during the time
of the Prophet who gave everyone the same, giving Bilal the Ethiopian as
much as he gave his uncle al-Abbas? Quraysh, indeed, had resented the
Messenger of Allah establishing such equality, and by sifting the
biography of the Prophet, we can find how Qurayshites used to oppose him
most of the time only for this reason.

It is also for this reason that Talhah and al-Zubayr were angry with the
Commander of the Faithful Ali who gave all of them equally, and who
deprived them of ruling the Muslims then decided to hold them
accountable for the wealth which they had amassed in order to return
stolen money to the indigent.

What is important, however, is that we should bear in mind that when he
lost all hope of Ali appointing him as the governor of Basra and
preferring him over others and fearing lest the new caliph should hold
him accountable for amassing his legendary wealth, al-Zubayr came
accompanied by his friend Talhah to seek Ali's permission to perform the
*\`umra*. It is then that Ali realized these men's hidden evil
intentions. He then said about them, “By Allah! They do not seek to
perform the *\`umra*! Rather, they seek to carry out their treacherous
scheme!”

Al-Zubayr joined his sister-in-law Ayesha daughter of Abu Bakr, took her
and Talhah out heading in the direction of Basra. When the dogs at Hawba
barked at her, Ayesha wanted to go back; therefore, they brought her
fifty persons who were introduced to her as men of truth and integrity
to swear falsely in order the mother of the faithful might continue
disobeying her Lord and husband and keep marching to Basra.

They knew, the shrewd men that they were, that her influence over people
was greater than theirs. For quarter of a century, they publicized for
her and misled people into thinking that was the one whom the Messenger
of Allah loved most, describing her as the “humayraa”[^22] daughter of
al-Siddeeq who had half the creed with her.

What is really odd with regard to al-Zubayr is that he, too, had sought
revenge for Uthman, as he claimed, whereas the righteous among the
*sahaba* accused him of being the very same person who worked hard to
kill Uthman. For example, Imam Ali said the following to him when he met
him on the battle-field: “Are you holding me responsible for Uthman's
blood and seeking revenge against me while you yourself had killed
him?”[^23]

In his *Mustadrak*, al-Hakim writes the following: “Talhah and al-Zubayr
came to Basra where people asked them: \`What brought you here?'
\`Seeking revenge for Uthman's murder,' they answered. Al-Husayn said,
\`Glory to Allah! Do you think that people are brainless so they will
not say that nobody killed Uthman other than you yourselves?!'“

Al-Zubayr, like his friend Talhah, had done likewise: he betrayed Uthman
and instigated people to kill him, then he willingly swore the oath of
allegiance to Imam Ali, then he violated his oath and came to Basra
seeking revenge for Uthman! Having entered Basra, he took part in many
crimes, killing seventy of the city's guards and stealing everything its
*bayt al-mal* had contained. Historians say that they signed a truce
with Uthman ibn Haneef, Basra's governor, pledging to treat him
respectfully till Ali's arrival.

Then they violated their truce agreement and pledge and attacked Uthman
ibn Haneef as he was leading the evening prayers. They tied a number of
people then killed them, and they even attempted to kill Uthman ibn
Haneef whom Ali had appointed as the governor of Basra, but they were
afraid his brother Sahl ibn Haneef, governor of Medina, might hear about
it and seek to avenge his murder from their own people; so, they beat
him severely, shaved his beard and moustaches, then attacked *bayt
al-mal*, killing forty of its guards. They jailed Uthman and subjected
him to severe torture.

Commenting on this treachery, Taha Husayn writes the following about
Talhah and al-Zubayr:

These folks were not satisfied with violating their oath of allegiance
to Ali but added to it their violation of the truce which they had
signed with Uthman ibn Haneef, killing a number of the people of Basra
who voiced their denunciation of such violation of the truce, the
jailing of the *amir*, the robbing of all what *bayt al-mal* had
contained, and the killing of a number of its guards.[^24]

When Ali reached Basra, he did not fight the rebels; rather, he invited
them to accept the arbitration of the Book of Allah, which they refused.
They went as far as killing those who had carried the Holy Qur'an to
them. Despite all of this, the Imam called him, too, and did as he had
done with Talhah, saying:

O Zubayr! Do you remember when you, while in the company of the
Messenger of Allah, passed by Banu Ghanam and smiled in the face of the
Prophet immediately after he had looked at me, smiled, then said, “The
son of Abu Talib never abandons his vanity,” whereupon the Messenger of
Allah said to you, “Hold your tongue; there is no vanity in him, and you
will fight him while you yourself will be the unjust one”?[^25]

Ibn Abul-Hadid quotes in his book a sermon delivered by the Commander of
the Faithful Ali ibn Abu Talib in which the Imam says:

Lord! Al-Zubayr had severed my ties of kinship, reneged from his oath of
allegiance to me, and supported my foe against me! O Lord! I implore You
to spare me his evil with whatever means You will.[^26]

In *Nahjul-Balagha* of Imam Ali, the Imam writes the following about
Talhah and al-Zubayr:

Lord! They both boycotted and were unjust to me, then they reneged from
their oath of obedience to me and instigated people against me; so, I
implore You to untie what they had tied, to foil the scheme which they
plotted, and to make them see the evil of what they aspired to do and
for which they strove hard! I sought their repentance before the battle,
and I solicited their patience before the clamor, but they despised Your
bounty and rejected my offer to spare their lives.[^27]

In a letter he sent them before the fighting had begun, he said, “Go, O
*shaykhs*, back to your senses, for now the greatest of your affair is
shame, before shame is combined with the fire of hell, and peace be with
you.”[^28]

This is the painful truth, and this is how al-Zubayr was finished. No
matter how hard some historians try to convince us that he (al-Zubayr)
had, indeed, recalled to memory the *hadith* of the Prophet of which Ali
reminded him, so he repented and retired from fighting and went to the
lions' ravine where he was killed by Ibn Jarmooz..., all this does not
hold water when compared with the prophecy of the Messenger of Allah who
had predicted that, “You will fight him (Ali) while you yourself will be
the unjust one.”

Some historians say that he wanted to retire when Imam Ali reminded him
of the said *hadith*, but his son Abdullah taunted him of being a
coward, so he was overwhelmed with zeal and returned to fight till he
was killed.

This is closer to the truth and to the sacred tradition containing some
knowledge of the unknown provided by one who never speaks out of his own
inclination.

Had he truly regretted, repented, and renounced his error and injustice,
why did he not act upon the statement of the Messenger of Allah saying:
“To whomsoever I have been the master, this Ali is his master; O Allah!
Befriend whoever befriends him and be the enemy of whoever antagonizes
him; support whoever supports him, and betray whoever betrays him”?

Why did he not support, accept the authority of, and seek to please, Ali
? Suppose he cannot do any of that, why did he not address the people
whom he had brought for the battle to tell them that he saw the light of
the truth and recalled to memory what he had forgotten and ask them to
stop the war in order to safeguard the lives of innocent Muslims?

But none of this ever took place. We, hence, get to know that the myth
of his repentance and retirement is the brainchild of the imagination of
fabricators who were dazzled by Ali's light and al-Zubay'r falsehood.
Since his friend Talhah was killed by Marwan ibn al-Hakam, they selected
Ibn Jarmooz to assassinate al-Zubayr in order to be able to provide
their own interpretation of the fate of Talhah and al-Zubayr so that
they may not deprive them of entering Paradise, especially since
Paradise is one of their possessions: they permit into it whoever they
like and prohibit whoever they wish.

Suffices us to prove the fallacy of their tale what is stated in Imam
Ali's letter where he invited them to renounce the war: “Now the
greatest of your affair is shame..., before shame is combined with the
fire of hell.”

Nobody narrates saying that they responded to his invitation, or
submitted to his order, or even answered his letter. Add to this the
fact that before the war had started, the Imam invited them to accept
the arbitration of the Book of Allah, as we indicated above, but they
refused and even killed the young messenger who had carried the Qur'an
to them. It was then that Ali made fighting them permissible.

You may read some ludicrous accounts of historians which tell you that
some of them are not familiar with the truth, nor do they comprehend it.
One account says that when al-Zubayr came to know that Ammar ibn Yasir
came in the company of Ali ibn Abu Talib, he said, “Oh! May my nose be
cut off! May my spine be split!”

Then he snatched a weapon which shook in his hand. Having seen all of
this, one of his companions said, “May my mother lose me! Is this the
same al-Zubayr with whom I wanted to die or live?! By the One Who holds
my life, whatever afflicted this man must be something which he had seen
or heard from the Messenger of Allah!”[^29]

By fabricating such stories, they intend to claim that al-Zubayr
remembered the Prophet's *hadith* saying, “Ammar shall be killed by the
oppressive gang,” so he became afraid, and he was shaken for fear of
being among such gangsters!

Those who despise our power of reason wish to ridicule us, but we have
sound minds, praise to Allah, and what they tell us is unacceptable. How
can al-Zubayr become afraid and shake upon remembering the tradition
saying, “Ammar shall be killed by the oppressive gang,” and not fear nor
shake on account of numerous statements made by the Prophet in praise of
Ali ibn Abu Talib ? Was Ammar according to al-Zubayr better and greater
than Ali?! Did not al-Zubayr hear these traditions:

-- “O Ali! Nobody loves you except a true believer, and nobody hates you
except a hypocrite.”

-- “Ali is with the truth, and the truth is with Ali, revolving with him
wherever he revolves.”

-- “To whomsoever I have been the master, this Ali is his master; O
Allah! Befriend whoever befriends him, and be the enemy of whoever
antagonizes him! Support whoever supports him, and betray whoever
betrays him.”

-- “O Ali! I fight whoever fights you and am peaceful unto whoever seeks
peace with you.”

-- “I shall give the standard tomorrow to a man who loves Allah and His
Messenger and who is loved by Allah and His Messenger.”

-- “I fight them with regard to the revelation of the Qur'an, whereas
you (Ali) will fight them with regard to its interpretation.”

-- “O Ali! I promise you that you will fight the renegades, the unjust,
and the apostates.”

... in addition to many, many such traditions? The last of such
traditions is a statement made by the Prophet to al-Zubayr himself: “You
will fight him (Ali) while you yourself will be the unjust one.” Where
does al-Zubayr stand with regard to these facts which are know to
people, those directly concerned as well as the outsiders, the son of
the Prophet's aunt, and the son of Ali's aunt, that he is?!

Blockheads which could not confront historical events and the facts they
contain in vain try, with all their might and means, to find some feeble
pretexts in order to mislead the people and deceive them into believing
that Talhah and al-Zubayr are among the residents of Paradise.

***“Such are their hopes. Say: Bring your proof, if you are truthful.”
(Holy Qur'an, 2:111)***

***“Those who disbelieve in Our Signs, haughtily rejecting them, the
gates of the heaves shall not be opened for them, nor shall they enter
Paradise till the camel passes through the needle's hole, and thus do We
reward the criminals.” (Holy Qur'an, 7:40)***

6. Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas
-----------------------

He, too, is one of the most distinguished companions of the Prophet and
among the foremost to embrace Islam. He was one of the earliest to
migrate with the Prophet to Medina. He was among those who participated
in the Battle of Badr. He was one of the six men recommended by Umar ibn
al-Khattab to be caliphs, and one of the ten men who, as “Ahlul Sunnah
wal Jama\`a” claim, received the glad tidings of going to Paradise.

He is also the hero of the Battle of al-Qadisiyya which took place
during the caliphate of Umar ibn al-Khattab. It is said that some
*sahaba* cast doubts about and questioned his descent, thus hurting his
feelings, yet they narrate saying that the Prophet confirmed his
descent, tracing it to Banu Zuhra.

In his book *Al-Imama wal-Siyasa*, Ibn Qutaybah transmits saying that
following the demise of the Prophet, Banu Zuhra gathered to meet with
Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas and Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf at the sacred mosque
(Masjid al-Nabi). When Abu Bakr and Abu Ubaydah came to them, Umar said
to them, “Why do I see you thus forming circles? Stand up and swear the
oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr, for I and the Ansar have already done
so.” Sa\`d and Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf, as well as all those who were then
present with them from Banu Zuhra, stood and swore.[^30]

It is narrated that Umar ibn al-Khattab deposed him from his post as
governor, but he recommended the caliph who would succeed him to
reinstall him, since he had not deposed him due to any treachery. Uthman
ibn Affan, therefore, carried out Umar's recommendation and appointed
him as governor of Kufa.

It is noteworthy that Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas did not leave a huge wealth
behind him compared to his friends. His legacy, as narrators tell us,
amounted to three hundred thousand dinars. Also, he neither participated
nor encouraged the assassination of Uthman as did Talhah and al-Zubayr.
Ibn Qutaybah, in his history book (quoted above), narrates saying that
Amr ibn al-As wrote Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas asking him about who had killed
Uthman. In his answer, Sa\`d wrote saying,

You asked me about who killed Uthman. I am telling you that he was
killed by a sword unsheathed by Ayesha, polished by Talhah, and poisoned
by Abu Tali's son. Al-Zubayr remained silent and made a hand signal,
whereas we did nothing. Had we willed, we would have defended him, but
Uthman made many changes, and he himself changed, doing good and bad
things. If what we did was good, then that was good indeed, but if what
we did was wrong, we seek Allah's forgiveness.

I also am telling you that al-Zubayr is subdued by the overwhelming
number of his kinsfolk, and by his sin. Had Talhah wished to rend his
stomach, due to his love for authority, he would have rent it.[^31]

But what is strange in as far as Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas is concerned is
that he did not swear the oath of allegiance to the Commander of the
Faithful Ali, nor did he support him while he knew the Imam fully well
and realized his merits. He himself narrated several of Ali's merits
which both Imam al-Nasa'i and Imam Muslim record in their respective
*Sahih* books. Here are a couple of examples:

Sa\`d has said, “I heard the Messenger of Allah stating three of Ali's
merits; had I had one of them, it would have been better for me than red
camels. I heard him saying, \`He (Ali) to me is like Aaron to Moses
except there will be no prophet after me.' And I heard him saying, \`I
shall give the standard tomorrow to a man who loves Allah and His
Messenger and who is loved by Allah and His Messenger.'

And I heard him saying, \`O people! Who is your master?' They thrice
said that Allah and His Messenger were their master, whereupon he took
Ali's hand, made him stand up, then said, \`Whoever has accepted Allah
and His Messenger as his master, this Ali is his master; O Allah!
Befriend whoever befriends him, and be the enemy of whoever antagonizes
him.'“[^32]

In Muslim's *Sahih*, Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas is quoted as having said, “I
heard the Messenger of Allah saying to Ali, \`Are you not pleased to be
to me what Aaron used to be to Moses, except there will be no prophet
after me?'

During the Battle of Khaybar, I heard him saying, \`I shall give the
standard tomorrow to a man who loves Allah and His Messenger and who is
loved by Allah and His Messenger,' so we were very anxious and hopeful
about it. He said, \`Bring Ali here.' And when the verse saying

***“... say: Come: let us call our sons and your sons, and our women and
your women, and our near people and your near people, then let us be
earnest in prayer and pray for the curse of Allah on the liars” (Holy
Qur'an, 3:61)***,

the Messenger of Allah brought Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husayn and said,
\`O Allah! These are my Ahlul Bayt'.”[^33]

How could Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas know all these facts yet refuse to swear
the oath of allegiance to Ali ? How could Sa\`d hear the Messenger of
Allah saying, “Whoever has accepted Allah and His Messenger to be his
master, this Ali is his master; O Allah! Befriend whoever befriends him,
and be the enemy of whoever antagonizes him,” which he himself narrates,
then refuse to accept his mastership or to support him?

How could Sa\`d have been ignorant of the *hadith* of the Messenger of
Allah in which he said, “One who dies without having sworn the oath of
allegiance dies the death of *jahiliyya*,” a tradition which was
narrated by Abdullah ibn Umar, so Sa\`d would die the death of
*jahiliyya* on account of his reluctance to swear the oath of allegiance
to the Commander of the Faithful, the master of all *wasis*, the leader
of the peerless men of virtue?

Historians indicate that Sa\`d came to Imam Ali to apologize and said,
“O Commander of the Faithful! There is no doubt in my mind that you are
the most worthy among people of the caliphate, and that you are the
custodian of the creed as well as of worldly affairs, but some people
will dispute with you in this regard; so, if you desire my oath of
allegiance, give me a sword whose tongue tells me to take this and leave
that.”

Ali said to him, “Have you seen anyone who has contradicted the Qur'an
in word or in deed [because of swearing the oath of allegiance to me]?
The Muhajirun and the Ansar have sworn the oath of allegiance to me on
the condition that I deal with them according to the Book of Allah and
the Sunnah of His Prophet; so, if you yourself wish, you may swear;
otherwise, you may stay at home, for I am not going to force you to do
it.”[^34]

Is not such a stand by Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas odd?! While he testifies
that no doubts entertain him about Ali, that he is the most worthy
person of being the caliph, that he is the custodian over religious as
well secular affairs, yet despite all of that he demands a sword with a
tongue as a condition for swearing the oath of allegiance so that he
would thus be able to distinguish truth from falsehood?! Is this not a
contradiction rejected by rational people?

Is this not demanding the impossible, a demand put forth by a haughty
person who had already come to know the truth from the bearer of the
message embedded in traditions five of which he himself used to
narrate?!

Was not Sa\`d present when Abu Bakr, Umar, and Uthman received the oath
of allegiance, an occasion from which anyone who lagged behind was
killed for fear of dissension?

Yet Sa\`d did swear the oath of allegiance to Uthman, unconditionally
giving his support to him. He also heard Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf
threatening Ali with a sword which he raised over his head, saying, “So
do not harm your own self, for it will then be the sword and nothing
else.” He was also present when Ali refused to swear the oath of
allegiance to Abu Bakr, invoking a threat against him by Umar ibn
al-Khattab who then said to him, “Swear...; otherwise, by Allah Who is
the One and Only God, we shall strike your neck with the sword.”[^35]

Did anything embolden those who did not swear the oath of allegiance to
Ali, and who dared to behave arrogantly towards the successor of the
Prophet such as Umar, Usamah ibn Zayd, and Muhammad ibn Maslamah, other
than the reluctance of Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas to swear it?

You can easily notice how the five men who were appointed by Umar ibn
al-Khattab to compete with Ali in becoming caliphs played the exact role
outlined for them by Umar ibn al-Khattab, namely prohibiting Ali from
becoming caliph. Abd al-Rahman, for example, chose his son-in-law Uthman
and threatened to kill Ali if he refused to swear the oath of allegiance
to him. This is all due to the fact that Umar gave Abd al-Rahman the
upper hand over the rest.

After the death of Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf and the assassination of Uthman
ibn Affan, the only remaining contenders for Ali's caliphate were three:
Talhah, al-Zubayr, and Sa\`d. When these men saw that al-Muhajirun and
the Ansar rushed to Imam Ali and swore the oath of allegiance to him and
did not pay attention to anyone among them, they then entertained evil
thoughts against him and sought to kill him. Talhah and al-Zubayr fought
him, whereas Sa\`d betrayed him.

Do not forget that Uthman ibn Affan did not die before creating a new
contender for Ali who was more dangerous than all of them, more cunning
and more shrewd, one whose party was larger in number and better in
equipment: Uthman paved the way for him to take control over the
caliphate by adding to his authority, which lasted for twenty years, the
most important states from which two-thirds the entire revenue for the
Islamic government came; this contender was Mu\`awiyah who had no creed,
nor ethics, nor concern except reaching the caliphate at any price, and
by any means whatsoever.

Despite all of this, Commander of the Faithful Ali did not force people
to swear the oath of allegiance to him as was done by the caliphs who
preceded him. Rather, he upheld, peace of Allah be upon him, the
injunctions of the Qur'an and the Sunnah, neither altering nor
substituting anything for them in the least.

Have you noticed how he said to Sa\`d, “The Muhajirun and the Ansar have
sworn the oath of allegiance to me on the condition that I deal with
them in accordance to the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Prophet;
so, if you yourself wish, you may swear; otherwise, you may stay at
home, for I am not going to force you to do it”?

Congratulations to you, O son of Abu Talib, O you who revived the Qur'an
and the Sunnah after being laid to rest by others before you! Here is
the Book of Allah calling:

***“Those who swear the allegiance to you swear it to Allah; the hand of
Allah is above theirs; so whoever reneges (from his faith), he reneges
to the detriment of his own soul, and whoever*** ***fulfills the promise
which he made to Allah, He shall grant him a great reward.” (Holy
Qur'an, 48: 10)***

***“... will you then force people to believe?” (Holy Qur'an, 10:99)***

There is no compulsion in the religion, nor is there any Islamic
provision for forcing anyone to swear the oath of allegiance to anyone,
nor did Allah ever order His Prophet to fight people to force them to
swear the oath of allegiance to him.

Such is the Sunnah of the Prophet and his honorable conduct: It tells us
that he never forced anyone to pay him homage. But the caliphs and the
*sahaba* were the ones who established such an innovation, threatening
people to kill them if they refused to swear the oath of allegiance to
them.

Fatima herself was threatened to be burned if those at her house, who
did not swear the oath of allegiance [to Abu Bakr], refused to come out
to swear it. Ali himself, the man whom the Messenger of Allah appointed
as the caliph, was threatened to be killed. They swore by Allah to kill
him if he refused to swear the oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr. If such
is the case, do not ask about the condition of the other *sahaba* who
were deemed weak in their eyes such as Ammar, Salman, Bilal, and others.

What is important is that Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas refused to swear the oath
of allegiance to, or to curse, him when Mu\`awiyah ordered him,
according to Muslim's *Sahih*. But this is not enough, nor does it
secure Paradise for him, since the sect of the Mu\`tazilites which he
founded under the banner of “I am neither with you nor against you” is
neither accepted in, nor endorsed by, Islam.

This is so due to the fact that Islam says that there is nothing beyond
the truth except falsehood. It is so because the Book of Allah and the
Sunnah of His Messenger outlined the characteristics of dissension,
forewarned of it, and put limits for it so that those who perish do so
according to a clear proof, and those saved are saved according to a
clear proof.

The Messenger of Allah had clarified everything when he said with
reference to Ali, “O Allah! Befriend whoever befriends him, and be the
enemy of whoever antagonizes him! Support whoever supports him, and
betray whoever betrays him! And make right revolve with him wherever he
revolves!”

Imam Ali had clarified the motives which prohibited Sa\`d from siding
with him when he said in his *shaqshaqi* sermon, “... so a man among
them listened to his hidden grudge.”

Commenting on the above statement, Shaykh Muhammad Abdoh says,

Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas used to conceal something against Ali, may Allah
glorify his countenance, something which originated from his uncles on
the mother's side: his mother is Hamna daughter of Sufyan ibn Umayyah
ibn Abd Shams, and Ali's killing of their most courageous men is a well
known fact.[^36]

Deeply rooted grudge and envy blinded Sa\`d, so much so that he could
not see Ali's virtues as he could those of Ali's opponents. It is stated
that when Uthman installed him governor of Kufa, he delivered a sermon
in which he said, “Obey the best of all people: Uthman, the commander of
the faithful.”

Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas was inclined towards Uthman during the latter's
lifetime and even after his assassination. Thus do we understand the
reason why he accused Ali of participating in the assassination of
Uthman when he wrote Amr ibn al-As saying, “Uthman was killed by a sword
unsheathed by Ayesha, poisoned by the son of Abu Talib..., etc.” It is a
false accusation to whose falsehood history testifies. In fact, nobody
offered more counsel nor more solace to Uthman during his calamity than
Ali, if only his views were heeded.

What we deduct from Sa\`d's languid stands is exactly what the Imam had
described: he was a spiteful person. Despite his knowledge of Ali's
right, grudge and spite stood between him and the truth, so much so that
he remained puzzled, confused, torn by a conscience that rebuked him and
stirred in him the torch of conviction and a sick mentality crippled by
the customs of the days of ignorance. Sa\`d listened to the voice of his
grudge, and his evil self subdued his conscience, dragging it down,
holding him from supporting the right course.

What proves the above is the testimony given by many historians who
recorded his puzzling stands. Ibn Kathir, for example, says the
following in his book of history,

Sa\`d came once to visit Mu\`awiyah ibn Abu Sufyan. Mu\`awiyah asked
him, “Why didn't you fight Ali?” Sa\`d said, “A dark storm passed by me,
so I alighted from my camel till it was over. Having come to know the
way, I carried on.” Mu\`awiyah said, “The Book of Allah does not tell
you to alight; rather, Allah has said, \`If two groups from the
believers fight one another, you should make peace between them, but if
one of them oppresses the other, you should fight the one that oppresses
till it returns to obeying the commands of Allah' (Surat al-Hujurat, 9).

By Allah! You did not side with the oppressive party against the
oppressed one, nor were you with the just one against the unjust.” Sa\`d
said, “I would not fight a man to whom the Messenger of Allah said,
\`You are to me like Aaron to Moses, except there will be no prophet
after me.'“ Mu\`awiyah asked him, “Who else besides you heard it?” He
said, “So-and-so..., and Ummu Salamah, too,” whereupon Mu\`awiyah stood
up, went to Ummu Salamah and asked her about it. She repeated the same
*hadith* quoted by Sa\`d. Mu\`awiyah then said, “Had I heard this
*hadith* before today, I wold have become a servant of Ali till the
death of either one of us.”[^37]

Al-Mas\`udi has transmitted in his *Tarikh* a conversation like this one
between Mu\`awiyah and Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas, adding that Mu\`awiyah said
to Sa\`d after what happened following the status *hadith*, “Now I
regard none as more mean than you; why did you not support him? Why did
you hesitate to swear the oath of allegiance to him? Had I heard the
Prophet say the like of what I heard you quoting him, I would have spent
the rest of my life as a servant of Ali.”[^38]

What Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas narrated to Mu\`awiyah with regard to Ali's
virtues is one of hundreds of such *ahadith* which carry the same theme
and aim at the same goal: Ali ibn Abu Talib is the only individual who
represented the Islamic message after the demise of the Messenger of
Allah, and none can do so besides him. Since the matter is as such, all
righteous Muslims ought to serve him as long as they live.

Mu\`awiyah's statement in which he said that had he heard that
tradition, he would have served Ali as long as he lived is a privilege
of which every believing man and woman prides himself/herself. But
Mu\`awiyah did not say so except out of his desire to ridicule and
slight Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas in order to charge him with meanness and to
insult him simply because he had refused to curse Ali and condemn him,
thus going against Mu\`awiyah's wish; otherwise, Mu\`awiyah knows more
than one status *hadith* in praise of Ali ibn Abu Talib. He also knows
that he was the most meritorious person after the Messenger, and this is
exactly what he admitted in a letter he sent to Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr
which we will mention later, *Insha-Allah*.

Did that stop Mu\`awiyah from cursing and condemning the Commander of
the Faithful after having come to know that *hadith* from Sa\`d ibn Abu
Waqqas and verified its authenticity with Ummu Salamah whom he asked
about it?

No, indeed; rather, he went to extremes in his misguidance and was
overcome with insistence on being wrong to the extent that he started
cursing Ali and all his Ahlul Bayt and forced people to do likewise till
the youngsters grew up doing the same, and the youth grew old doing
likewise, for eighty years or more.

***“But whoever disputes with you in this matter after what has come to
you of the knowledge, say: Come: let us call our sons and your sons, and
our women and your women, and our near people and your near people, then
let us be earnest in prayer and pray for the curse of Allah on the
liars” (Holy Qur'an, 3:61)***

7. Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf
------------------------

His name during the period of *jahiliyya* used to be Abd Amr, so the
Prophet renamed him “Abd al-Rahman.” He belonged to Banu Zuhra, and he
was a cousin of Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas.

He was one of the most prominent *sahaba* and among the first to migrate
with the Prophet to Medina. He was in the company of the Prophet during
all his battles. He was one of the six persons recommended by Umar ibn
al-Khattab to be caliphs; rather, the latter gave him the upper hand
over the rest, saying, “If you dispute among yourselves, be in the party
where Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf is.” He, as “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a”
believe, is also one of those who received the glad tiding of going to
Paradise.

Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf, as is well known, is one of the leading
businessmen of Quraysh, a man who left behind him a huge wealth which,
according to historians, included one thousand camels, one hundred
horses, ten thousand she-camels, and arable lands growing twenty
different types of crops. The inheritance of each one of his four wives
amounted to eighty-four thousand dinars.[^39]

Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf was the brother-in-law of Uthman ibn Affan: he
married Ummu Kulthoom daughter of Uqbah ibn Abu Mu\`eet, Uthman's half
sister (his sister from the mother's side).

We have come to know from reviewing history books that he played a
significant role in keeping Ali away from the post of caliph when he
introduced his condition of following in the footsteps of caliphs Abu
Bakr and Umar, knowing beforehand that Ali would never accept such a
condition simply because the “Sunnah” of both of these men contradicted
the Book of Allah and the pristine Sunnah of the Prophet.

This alone suffices us as a proof testifying to the fanaticism of Abd
al-Rahman ibn Awf in upholding the *bid\`as* of the days of ignorance,
to his being distant from Muhammad's Sunnah, and to his practically
participating in a great plot to eradicate the Progeny of the Prophet in
order to keep the caliphate as Quraysh's sole property to fare with as
it pleased.

In his “Book of *Ahkam*” in his *Sahih*, al-Bukhari has a chapter
dealing with how an Imam receives people's oath of allegiance. In it, he
quotes al-Masoor saying,

Abd al-Rahman knocked at my house door in the heart of the night and
kept knocking till I woke up. He said to me, “I see you are sleeping! By
Allah! My eyes have not enjoyed much sleep tonight; so, go and invite
al-Zubayr and Sa\`d [ibn Abu Waqqas] to come here.” So I brought them
in, whereupon he consulted with them for a while then called me to come
close to him and told me to invite Ali whom I accordingly invited to
meet with us. He remained talking to him till most of the night had
passed.

Then Ali stood up to leave, feeling hopeful, and Abd al-Rahman used to
always be apprehensive of Ali. Then he told me to invite Uthman [ibn
Affan] whom I accordingly invited. He kept consulting with him till the
call to prayers forced them to part from one another to perform the
*fajr* prayers. When people prayed the *fajr* prayers, and as these same
men assembled near the pulpit, he sent for those of the Muhajirun and
Ansar who were then in town.

Then he sent for the military commanders who were present that year with
Umar. Once they all assembled, Abd al-Rahman pronounced the *shahada*
then said, “O Ali! I have looked in the people's matter and I found them
equalling none with Uthman; so, do not bring about your own harm.” Then
he addressed Uthman thus, “I swear the oath of allegiance to you
according to the Sunnah of Allah and of His Messenger and of both
caliphs after him.” Abd al-Rahman swore the oath of allegiance to him,
then the Muhajirun and the Ansar did so followed by military commanders
and the rest of Muslims.[^40]

The researcher can easily understand from this narration recorded by
al-Bukhari the fact that the plot was planned during the night, and he
can appreciate the shrewdness of Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf, and the fact
that Umar did not hand pick him at random.

Reflect on the statement of the narrator, al-Masoor, saying, “... told
me to invite Ali whom I accordingly invited to meet with us. He remained
talking to him till most of the night had passed. Then Ali stood up to
leave, feeling hopeful,” that is, Ali felt optimistic about becoming the
next caliph.

This proves to us that Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf is the one who made Ali
hopeful with regard to becoming caliph so that he might not boycott this
fake *shura* and be the cause of the nation falling again in dissension
as happened at the *saqeefa* following the inauguration of Abu Bakr as
the caliph. What confirms the accuracy of this probability is the
narrator's statement: “... and Abd al-Rahman used to always be
apprehensive of Ali.”

Accordingly, Abd al-Rahman played the role of an evasive and cunning
person who gave Ali assurances of being the next caliph, and even
congratulated him on it, but when the morning approached, and the
commanders of the army, as well as tribal chiefs and leaders of Quraysh
assembled, it was then that Abd al-Rahman reversed his tactic and
surprised Ali by telling him that people did not regard anyone as equal
to Uthman, and that he had either to accept his scheme or allow himself
to perish; that is, that he would be killed if he refused to swear the
oath of allegiance to the man of their choice, namely Uthman ibn Affan.

The researcher clearly understands from reading the last paragraph of
the narration how al-Masoor said, “Once they all assembled, Abd
al-Rahman pronounced the *shahada* then said, “O Ali! I have looked in
the people's matter and found them equalling none with Uthman; so, do
not harm your own self.”

Why, then, did Abd al-Rahman direct his statement only at Ali from all
those present then and there? Why did he not say something like, “O Ali,
Talhah, al-Zubayr..., etc.”? This is why we concluded that the plot was
hatched during the night, and that the folks had from the beginning
decided to select Uthman and exclude Ali.

We have to underscore the fact that they all used to be apprehensive of
Ali if he became caliph lest he should revert to justice and equity and
revive the Sunnah of the Prophet and put to rest the *bid\`a* of the son
of al-Khattab with regard to favoring one person over another. This is
particularly so in the light of the fact that Umar ibn al-Khattab had
pointed out before his death to the same, warning them against Ali's
danger, saying, “If they hand it [caliphate] over to the bald-headed man
[meaning Ali, peace be upon him], he will surely force them to follow
the tracks,” meaning the Prophet's Sunnah which neither Umar nor the
general body of Quraysh liked. Had they liked the Sunnah of the Prophet,
they would have selected Ali instead, and he would certainly have forced
them to follow the right tracks. He would have brought things back to
the way they used to be [during the Prophet's time], for he is the one
charged with it; he is the custodian of the Sunnah...

As we indicated above while discussing Talhah, al-Zubayr, and Sa\`d,
they planted the thorn spikes and harvested loss and remorse.

Let us, therefore, take a close look at Abd al-Rahman and at the outcome
of his scheming. Historians say that Abd al-Rahman suffered from his
intense regret upon seeing how Uthman contradicted the path followed by
both his predecessors, giving the high official posts of governors to
his own relatives to whom he doled out huge sums of money.

He, therefore, went once to meet with Uthman; he said to him, “I
preferred you over all others[^41] on the condition that you lead us on
the path of Abu Bakr and Umar, but you have acted contrarily to them and
sought to please your own relatives, granting them authority over the
fate of the Muslims.”

Uthman said, “Umar used to severe his ties with his kinfolks, while I
maintain them.” Abd al-Rahman said, “I have vowed to Allah never to talk
to you again,” and he, indeed, never did till he died angry with Uthman.
While he was ill prior to his death, he was visited by Uthman. He turned
his face away from Uthman to face the wall, insisting on saying nothing
to him.[^42]

Thus did Allah, Glory to Him, respond favorably to Imam Ali's
supplication with regard to Abd al-Rahman just as He had responded to
his supplication with regard to Talhah and al-Zubayr who were both by
then killed.

The Mu\`tazilite author Ibn Abul-Hadid says in his book *Sharh
Nahjul-Balagha* that Ali was very angry on account of that “shura,” and
he knew what Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf had schemed, so he said to him:

By Allah! You have not done it except because you expect of him to do
for you what each one of you expects his friend to do for him! May Allah
wring between you both Mansham's[^43] perfume.[^44]

What the Imam meant to say is that Abd al-Rahman hoped that Uthman would
nominate him as his successor in the post of caliph just as Abu Bakr had
done to Umar. Ali had also said to him, “Milk some milk in which there
is a portion for you, and tie his knot today so that tomorrow he may
return the favor to you.”

As for Mansham's perfume which Ali, peace be upon him, invokes here, it
is a saying common among people who would say, “This is more ominous
than Mansham's perfume,” a reference to discord and infighting.

Allah did, indeed, favorably respond to the Imam's supplication. Hardly
a few years passed before He afflicted them with enmity. Abd al-Rahman
became an opponent of his son-in-law; he did not speak to him till
death. Nobody at all was permitted to perform the funeral prayers for
him...

This brief research clearly demonstrates to us the fact that Abd
al-Rahman ibn Awf is one of the heads of Quraysh who obliterated the
Prophet's Sunnah and substituted it with the *bid\`as* of both caliphs.
It also becomes clear to us that Imam Ali is the only person who
sacrificed his post of caliph, as well as everything related thereto, in
order to safeguard Muhammad's Sunnah which his Brother and cousin
Muhammad ibn Abdullah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him and his
good and pure Progeny, had introduced.

You have, dear reader, no doubt come to know “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a”
as they really are. You have personally come to know who the adherents
to the Sunnah are. A believer is noble and is never bitten twice from
the same hole.

8. Ayesha daughter of Abu Bakr “Mother of the Faithful”
-------------------------------------------------------

She is wife of the Prophet and the mother of the faithful. The Prophet
married her in the second or third year after the Hijra and, according
to the most famous accounts, she was eighteen years old when the Prophet
died.

Allah prohibited the believers to marry the Prophet's wives after his
demise; He says, ***“It does not behove you to hurt [the feelings of]
the Messenger of Allah, nor should you marry his wives after him at all;
this surely is grievous in the sight of Allah.” (Holy Qur'an, 33:53)***,

and also,

***“The Prophet has a greater authority over the faithful than they have
over their own selves, and his wives are (like) their mothers” (Holy
Qur'an, 33:6)***.

We have already pointed out to the fact that the Prophet was annoyed
when he heard that Talhah had said, “When Muhammad dies, I shall marry
my cousin Ayesha.” Allah, Glory to Him, wanted to tell the faithful that
they were prohibited from marrying the Prophet's wives just as they are
prohibited from marrying their own mothers. Ayesha did not bear any
children.

She was one of the greatest personalities known to Muslims, for she
played a major role in bringing certain people closer to the post of
caliph while distancing others therefrom. She endorsed some people while
ignoring others. She participated in the wars, leading the battles and
the men in war, sending letters to the heads of tribes, ordering them to
do or not to do, appointing or deposing military leaders. She led the
Battle of the Camel, and both Talhah and al-Zubayr served under her
military command.

We do not wish to go into detail in narrating the role she had played
during her lifetime, for we have discussed her extensively in our book
*Ask Those Who Know*; so, researchers may review it if they want to know
the same. What concerns us in this research, however, is her own
*ijtihad*, her altering the Sunnah of the Prophet.

A few examples have to be highlighted so that we may understand from
discussing those “great” personalities of whom the people of “Ahlul
Sunnah wal Jama\`a” are proud and whom they regard as their role models,
preferring them over the pure Imams from the Progeny of the Prophet.

This, in fact, is nothing but a tribal fanaticism which effaced the
Prophet's Sunnah, buried its saline features, and put its light out. Had
it not been for Ali and the Imams from his offspring, we would not have
found today anything left of the Sunnah of the Prophet.

We have also come to know that Ayesha did not act upon the Sunnah of the
Messenger of Allah, nor did she have the least regard for it. Although
she had heard numerous *ahadith* in praise of Ali, she denied them and
acted to their contrary.

She defied the command of Allah, as well as the order of His Messenger
which he had directed personally to her, so she came out to lead the
infamous Battle of the Camel wherein sanctities were violated and
innocent people were killed. She betrayed her written pledge to Uthman
ibn Haneef, and when they brought her his men tied up, she ordered them
to be beheaded.[^45]

Leave aside the fires of war and dissension which the mother of the
faithful ignited, causing the land and those on it to be burned thereby,
and let us discuss her own interpretations, and the following of her own
views, in as far as Allah's creed is concerned. If the view of the
*sahabi* is taken for granted and his statement is held as an argument,
what would you say about one from whom half the creed is supposedly
derived?!

Al-Bukhari in his *Sahih*, in a chapter on praying *qasr* prayers,
al-Zuhri quotes Urwah quoting Ayesha, may Allah be pleased with her,
saying, “The first obligatory of the prayers are two *rek\`as*, so the
traveller's prayers were thus fixed, then the prayers of one who is not
on a journey were to be prayed in full.” Al-Zuhri said, “I asked Urwah,
“Why is Ayesha then saying her prayers [while travelling] in full?” He
said, “She is following the same interpretation as that made by
Uthman.”[^46]

Are you not surprised how the mother of the faithful and wife of the
Prophet abandoned the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah, which she
herself had narrated and to whose authenticity she testified, just to
follow the *bid\`a* of Uthman ibn Affan, whom she was encouraging people
to kill, claiming that he altered the Sunnah of the Prophet and who wore
it out before his own shirt was worn out?!

Yes, this is exactly what happened during Uthman's caliphate, but she
changed her mind again during the reign of Mu\`awiyah ibn Abu Sufyan.
She urged people to kill Uthman, but once she came to know that they did
kill him, and that they swore the oath of allegiance to Ali, she changed
her mind and came out demanding revenge for him!

We deduct from the narrative stated above is that she prayed, while
travelling, the full number of *rek\`as*, four in number, instead of
two. She did so during the reign of Mu\`awiyah who took pains to revive
all the innovations of his cousin and benefactor Uthman ibn Affan.

People follow the creed of their rulers. Ayesha was among those who
reconciled with Mu\`awiyah after their hostility; he is the one who had
killed her brother Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr and mutilated his corpse in the
worst manner. Despite all of that, mutual worldly interests bring
enemies together and create brotherhood among antagonists; so,
Mu\`awiyah sought to please her, and she sought to please him, and he
started sending her presents and huge sums of money.

Historians say that when Mu\`awiyah reached Medina, he went to visit
Ayesha. Having sat down, she said to him, “O Mu\`awiyah! Do you feel
secure against my hiding someone to kill you in revenge for your killing
my brother Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr?” Mu\`awiyah said, “Rather, I have
entered a house of security.” “Did you fear Allah,” she continued, “when
you killed Hujr b. \`Adi and his followers?” He said, “Rather, those who
testified against them killed them.”[^47]

They also narrate saying that Mu\`awiyah used to send her gifts,
clothes, and other encased items, and that he sent her once one hundred
thousand dinars in one lump sum.[^48] He also sent her once when she was
in Mecca a necklace worth one hundred thousand dinars and paid all her
debts which amounted to eighteen thousand dinars in addition to whatever
she used to give to others.[^49]

In my book titled *Ask Those Who Know*, I indicated that in one single
day, she set free forty-one slaves as atonement for breaking her
oath.[^50]

Rulers and governors belonging to Banu Umayyah used also to seek her
pleasure and send her presents and money.[^51]

Remember that Abu Bakr is the one who shared the authority with
Mu\`awiyah whom he appointed as *wali* of Syria after the death of his
brother, and Mu\`awiyah used to always appreciate Abu Bakr's favors on
him; without Abu Bakr, Mu\`awiyah would never have even dreamed of
becoming caliph.

Mu\`awiyah, moreover, used to meet with the group when they were
plotting their great plot to obliterate the Sunnah and annihilate the
Progeny of the Prophet. There was no enmity between Mu\`awiyah and
Ayesha. Even her asking him, “Do you feel secure against my hiding
someone to kill you in revenge for your killing my brother Muhammad ibn
Abu Bakr?” was no more than teasing him; she never loved the son of the
woman from the tribe of Khath\`am, namely Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr, who
fought her after having sided with Ali and who regarded killing her as
*halal*.

She also shares Mu\`awiyah's hatred towards “Abu Turab” to the extreme
limit and with more animosity than anyone can imagine. In all of this, I
do not know which one of them earned higher marks: Was it not he who
fought, cursed, and condemned him [Imam Ali] and put out his light for
good?

Or was it she who worked hard to exclude him from the caliphate, fought
him and tried her best to obliterate his name from existence and went
out riding a mule urging Banu Umayyah to fight him, seeking their
assistance against Banu Hashim saying, “Do not permit anyone I do not
like to enter my house”? She even tried to wage another war, so much so
that some of her relatives asked her, “Is not sufficient [shame] for us
what you did on the \`Day of the red Camel' so that people may have
another \`Day of the Gray Mule'?!”

She undoubtedly was contemporary to an extended period of Banu Umayyah's
reign and had heard them cursing Ali and Ahlul Bayt from the pulpits
without expressing her resentment of it, nor did she prohibit it; she
may even have indirectly encouraged it.

Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, for example, writes the following in his
*Musnad*:

A man came to Ayesha and spoke ill of both of Ali ibn Abu Talib and
Ammar ibn Yasir. Ayesha said, “As for Ammar, I have heard the Prophet
saying that whenever he [Ammar] had to opt between one of two matters,
he always opted for the most rational one.”[^52]

We are not surprised, then, to see Ayesha laying the Sunnah of the
Prophet to rest while reviving Uthman's *bid\`a* with regard to praying
the full number of *rek\`as* while on a journey in order to please
Mu\`awiyah and other Umayyad rulers who followed her wherever she went,
glorifying her and deriving their creed from her.

It becomes clear to us that “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” worship Allah in
the light of texts which Allah never revealed, without thoroughly
examining or verifying them. Had they verified such *bid\`as*, they
would surely have found them repugnant, and they would have willingly
abandoned them. This is what I personally experienced with some
open-minded Sunni scholars. When they came across the tradition relevant
to grown-ups suckling, they were very surprised and dumbfounded, and
they assured me that they had never heard it before.

This is a common phenomenon among “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a.” A great
number of *ahadith* which the Shi\`as cite to argue with them are
recorded in Sunni *Sahihs* while the Sunnis are unaware of them and
regard anyone who narrates them as an apostate.

***“Allah sets forth an example to those who disbelieve: the wife of
Noah and the wife of Lot; they were under two of Our righteous servants,
but they betrayed them, so they (their husbands) could not protect them
against Allah in the least, and it was said to them: Enter both into the
fire with those who enter”. (Holy Qur'an, 66:10)***

9. Khalid ibn al-Waleed
-----------------------

Khalid ibn al-Waleed ibn al-Mugheerah belonged to Banu Makhzum, and he
is given by “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” the title of “The Sword of
Allah.”

His father was one of the wealthiest men whose wealth was immeasurable.
Abbas Mahmud al-Aqqad says, “He was the wealthiest man alive according
to their commonly known wealth criteria: gold, silver, orchards,
vineyards, merchandise, real estate, servants, concubines, slaves, etc.
This is why he was called the peerless.”[^53] His father is none other
than al-Waleed ibn al-Mugheerah who was forewarned of being burned in
the fire of hell and of a very mean resort by the Holy Qur'an in the
following verses:

***“Leave Me and him whom I created alone and gave him vast riches, and
sons dwelling in his presence, and I adjusted his affairs for him most
appropriately, yet he desires that I should add even more! By no means!
Surely he opposes Our Signs. I will make a distressing punishment
overtake him. Surely he reflected and guessed, but may he be cursed how
he guessed! Again may he be cursed how he guessed; then he looked, then
he frowned and scowled, then he turned back and was big with pride, then
he said: This is naught but an enchantment narrated (by others); this is
naught but the word of a mortal. I will cast him into hell. And what
will make you realize what hell is? It leaves naught nor does it spare
aught. It scorches the mortal. Over it are nineteen.” (Holy Qur'an,
74:11-30)***

It is said that al-Waleed came to see the Prophet once to lure him with
wealth so that he might abandon the religion he was preaching, whereupon
Allah revealed these verses in that regard:

***“And do not yield to any mean one who swears, defames, going about
with slander, forbidding goodness, out-stepping the limits, sinful,
ignoble, (and) besides all that, base-born, (only) because he possesses
wealth and sons. When Our Signs are recited to him, he says: Tales of
those of yore. We shall brand him on the nose...” (Holy Qur'an, 68:
10-16)***

Al-Waleed thought that he deserved to be prophet more than Muhammad; he
used to say, “Should the Qur'an and Prophethood be revealed unto
Muhammad the indigent while I, the master of and the greatest among
Quraysh, be left out?”

On such a doctrine did Khalid ibn al-Waleed grow up bearing animosity
towards Islam and the Prophet of Islam who ridiculed his father's dreams
and undermined his power base. Khalid, therefore, participated in all
the wars waged against the Messenger of Allah.

Khalid undoubtedly used to share his father's belief that the latter was
more worthy of Prophethood than Muhammad, the indigent orphan. Since
Khalid, like his father, was one of the most prominent figures in
Quraysh, if not the very most prominent one, he felt he should have had
the lion's share of the Qur'an and prophethood had they only been his
father's lot, and he would have inherited prophethood and authority just
as Solomon had inherited David. It is to refer to such belief that
Allah, Glory to Him, says,

***“When the truth came to them, they said: This is sorcery, and in it
are we disbelievers. And they said: Why was this Qur'an not revealed to
a man of importance in both towns?” (Holy Qur'an, 43:30-31)***

No wonder, then, to see how he tried all he could to put an end to
Muhammad and his mission. We find him raising a huge army financed from
his wealth during the Battle of Uhud, lying in ambush for the Prophet in
an attempt to put an end to him. During the year of the Hudaybiya
treaty, he also tried to assassinate the Prophet, but Allah, Glory to
Him, foiled all his schemes, rendering them a failure, while supporting
His Prophet on all occasions.

When Khalid came to know, as did other prominent members of Quraysh,
that the Messenger of Allah was invincible, seeing how people were
accepting the religion of Allah in large numbers, it was then that he
surrendered to reality while suppressing his sighs. His acceptance of
Islam, therefore, came as late as the eighth year after the Hijra, only
four months before the conquest of Mecca.

Khalid inaugurated his acceptance of Islam by behaving contrarily to the
orders issued by the Messenger of Allah not to kill anyone. Khalid
entered Mecca on the conquest day after having killed more than thirty
men who belonged mostly to Quraysh although the Prophet had clearly
instructed them not to kill anyone.

No matter how many excuses some people may find for Khalid by saying,
for example, that he was banned from entering Mecca, and that they faced
him with their weapons, he was not justified in killing anyone after
having been prohibited by the Prophet from doing so; he could have gone
to another gate to enter the city without a fight as others did, or to
send a message to the Prophet seeking his advice with regard to those
who were prohibiting him from entering. But none of that happened.
Rather, Khalid followed his own opinion, challenging what he had clearly
heard from the Messenger of Allah.

Since we are talking about those who follow their own opinions at the
expense of contradicting the available text, something which gained many
supporters and enthusiasts, or say it acquired a school of its own from
which many great *sahaba* and legislators graduated, a school which was
later called the school of the caliphs, we cannot avoid pointing out
here to the fact that *ijtihad* in such sense is nothing other than
disobedience to Allah and His Messenger.

We have become accustomed to seeing references made to *ijtihad* versus
the available texts, so much so that it appears as though it is
perfectly legitimate. In fact, we have to say that Khalid disobeyed the
Prophet's order instead of saying that he followed his own view in the
face of an existing text. This is what the Qur'an teaches us to do;
Allah says,

***“Adam disobeyed his Lord, so his life became evil to him....” (Holy
Qur'an, 20:121)***.

This is so because Allah had prohibited him from eating of the forbidden
tree. Since Adam did eat of it, we must not say: “Adam followed his own
*ijtihad* as opposed to the available text.”

Each and every Muslim has to keep himself at his limit rather than
transgress and voice his own view in an issue regarding which an order
permitting or prohibiting it had already been issued by Allah or His
Messenger, for that will be obvious apostasy. Allah said to the angels,
“Prostrate to Adam.” This is an order.

***“So they prostrated” (Holy Qur'an, 20:116)***;

this is a positive response, an act of submission, an expression of
obedience. The exception was Eblis: he followed his own view, so he
said, “I am better than him; why, then, should I prostrate to him?” Here
we encounter a rebellion, a mutiny, regardless of who is better than
who: Adam or Eblis. This is why the most Glorified One says,

***“It does not behove any believing man or woman to make any choice in
their matter once Allah and His Apostle have decided it, and whoever
disobeys Allah and His Messenger surely strays off a manifest straying”
(Holy Qur'an, 33:36)***.

***It is to this fact that Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq referred when he said
once to Abu Hanifah, “Do not apply qiyas (analogy), for if it is applied
to the Shari\`a, it will be obliterated, and the first person to apply
qiyas was Eblis when he said, \`I am better than him; You created me of
fire while creating him of dust'” (Holy Qur'an, 7:12 and 38:76).***

His statement that “... if it is applied to the Shari\`a, it will be
obliterated” is the best expression of the invalidity of *qiyas*. If
people follow their own diverse views in the face of available texts,
there will be no Shari\`a at all.

***“Had the truth followed their own (low) desires, the heavens and the
earth and all those therein would then have perished” (Holy Qur'an,
23:71)***.

Having made this brief expose of the principle of *ijtihad*, let us see
how Khalid ibn al-Waleed disobeyed the order issued by the Messenger of
Allah on another occasion when he was sent by the Prophet to Banu
Juthaymah to invite them to Islam. The Prophet did not order Khalid to
fight anyone.

Yet Khalid went there and afflicted them with treachery even after their
declaration of acceptance of Islam, killing some of them in cold blood,
so much so that Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf, who was an eye witness to that
incident, said that Khalid had killed them only out of his desire to
seek revenge for both of his uncles whom Banu Juthaymah had killed.[^54]

When the Messenger of Allah heard about that shameful treachery, he
thrice dissociated himself before Allah from what Khalid ibn al-Waleed
had done. Then he sent them Ali ibn Abu Talib bearing a great deal of
wealth to them to pay their blood money, the blood spilled by Khalid.

No matter how many excuses “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” may find for
Khalid ibn al-Waleed, the pages of history are full of the tragedies
which he inflicted and of his violating the Book of Allah and the Sunnah
of His Messenger.

Suffices the researcher to read his biography and what he did in the
Yamama during the time of Abu Bakr, how he betrayed Malik ibn Nuwayrah
and executed his men in cold blood although they were Muslims then
married Malik's wife and cohabited with her on the same night of her
husband's murder, discarding Islam's Shari\`a and the Arabs' principles
of valor.

Even Umar ibn al-Khattab, despite his being laxing in enforcing Islam's
injunctions, exposed him and called him the enemy of Allah, promising to
stone him to death.

Researchers are obligated to review history with keen eyes and from the
stand of constructive criticism which leads them to the truth without
any abstraction or bias. Nor should they be overtaken by sectarian
fanaticism so they evaluate the individuals basing their evaluation on
fabricated *ahadith* of the Prophet. “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a,” who, in
fact, are Banu Umayyah, wipe out all historical events with one single
tradition which they themselves fabricate in order to thus stop the
researchers short of reaching the truth.

How easy it is for one of them to say, “The Messenger of Allah said to
Khalid ibn al-Waleed, \`Welcome, O Sword of Allah!'“ so this false
tradition takes control of the hearts of innocent Muslims who think well
of others and who do not know what others hide and what schemes the
Umayyads plot. Based on this fabricated tradition, they, therefore,
interpret everything said about Khalid of facts and find excuses for
him. This is called the psychological effect on people, and it is the
acute ailment obstructing one from reaching the truth, turning the facts
upside down.

Let me give you an example:

Abu Talib, uncle of the Prophet is said to have died as an apostate, and
that the Prophet said about him, “Abu Talib is inside a lake of fire
from which his brains boil.” Because of this fabricated “tradition,”
“Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” believe that Abu Talib is an apostate, and
that he is in the fire. They, therefore, do not accept any rational
analysis which leads them to the truth. Through this “tradition,” the
biography of Abu Talib, his struggle in defense of Islam because of
which his own people became antagonistic towards him, and he towards
them, so much so that he accepted to endure the boycott at Mecca's
ravine for three years for the sake of his nephew, a boycott during
which he had to eat leaves to survive, and his heroic stands as well as
doctrinal poetry in defense of the Prophet's call..., all this is
undermined.

Because of it, they ignore all what the Prophet had done in praise of
his uncle, how he washed his corpse and shrouded it in his own shirt and
personally laid it to rest in his grave, naming the year when he lost
him as *\`aam al-huzn*, the year of grief, saying, “By Allah! Quraysh
was unable to harm me except after the death of Abu Talib. Allah sent me
the *wahi* saying: \`Get out of it [Mecca], for your supporter has
died,'“ whereupon he migrated from Mecca instantly.

Take another example:

Sufyan ibn Harb, Mu\`awiyah's father, is said to have accepted Islam
after the conquest of Mecca, and that the Prophet said about him,
“Whoever entered Abu Sufyan's house will be safe.” Based on this
tradition which contains no virtue whatsoever nor any merit for him,
“Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” believe that Abu Sufyan became Muslim, that
his acceptance of Islam was very good, and that he is in Paradise
because Islam cancels his past deeds.

They do not accept, beyond this, the rational analysis which enables
them to reach the truth. And it is through this “hadith” that all what
Abu Sufyan had done towards the Messenger and his Message is forgiven,
and forgotten are all the wars which he had led and financed in order to
put an end to Muhammad. And his animosity and grudge towards the Prophet
is forgotten.

When they came to him and said, “Accept Islam or else we should strike
your neck with the sword,” he said, “I testify that there is no god but
Allah.” They said to him, “Testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of
Allah.” He responded by saying, “As for this one, I have within myself
something against it.”

Whenever he met the Prophet after having accepted Islam, he would
silently say to himself, “By what did this person overcome me?” It is
then that the Prophet would audibly respond to him by saying, “Through
Allah have I overcome you, O father of Sufyan!”

These are only two examples I have brought from our Islamic history so
that the researchers may clearly observe some people's psychological
effect on others, and how such an effect veils them from the truth. Thus
do we come to understand that “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” surrounded the
*sahaba* with a halo of false traditions which provided them with
immunity and sanctity in the hearts of simple-minded people who can no
longer accept any criticism or blame.

If a Muslim is convinced that these men had been given by the Messenger
of Allah the glad tidings of going to Paradise, he will never accept any
criticism of them, and everything they did will then be underestimated;
he will find excuses and interpretations for them provided the door is
closed in his face from the very beginning.

This is why they attached for each of their chief men a title which they
claimed to have been given by the Messenger of Allah: This person is
“al-Siddeeq,” whereas this one is “al-Farooq;” this was the beloved one
of the Messenger of Allah, and those are his *huris*, while this
particular woman is his beloved wife. This man is the “nation's trust,”
while that is the “narrator of Islam.”

This one is the “*wahi's* recorder,” whereas this man is the one with
the two sandals; this is the cupper of the Prophet, while that is “The
Sword of Allah,” and this is this, and that is that... All these titles,
in fact, neither fatten nor satisfy when it comes to the balance of
truth with Allah;

***“... names which you yourselves, and your fathers, named; Allah has
not sent down any authority for them” (Holy Qur'an, 12:40)***.

What counts with Allah is one's own good needs.

History is the best witness of deeds through which we evaluate anyone;
we do not hold in high esteem anyone about whom falsehood is uttered.
This, in fact, is exactly what Imam Ali has said: “If you get to know
the truth, you will get to know who follows it.” Since we have studied
history and come to know what Khalid ibn al-Waleed had done and come to
distinguish the truth from falsehood, we cannot call him “The Sword of
Allah.”

We have also the right to ask when the Messenger of Allah ever named him
so. Did he name him Allah's sword when he killed the people of Mecca on
the conquest day, having come to know that he had prohibited him from
fighting anyone?

Or was it when he sent him with the army commanded by Zayd ibn
al-Haritha and dispatched to Mu'ta, saying, “If Zayd is killed, then
Ja\`far ibn Abu Talib (should take the command), and if Ja\`far is
killed, then Abdullah ibn Ruwahah [should lead],” without nominating him
except in the fourth position to lead the army, yet after all these
three men were killed, Khalid fled from the battle field accompanied by
the remnant of that army...?

Or did he give him that title when he accompanied him to attack Hunayn
in twelve thousand warriors. There, too, he fled, leaving behind him on
the battle grounds the Messenger of Allah who had no more than twelve
men who stood steadfastly with him?

Since Allah says,

***“And whoever turns his back to them that day, neither maneuvering nor
supporting one company, he will then incur the wrath of Allah, and his
abode will be hell, and what an evil abode it is” (Holy Qur'an,
8:16)***,

how could he permit himself to flee? It truly is amazing!

I personally think that Khalid, in the first place, never knew this
title as long as the Prophet lived, nor did the Messenger of Allah ever
call him so. Rather, Abu Bakr was the one who bestowed this badge of
courage on him when he sent him to silence those who revolted against
him and opposed his caliphate, so he did to them what he did, so much so
that Umar ibn al-Khattab (because of what Khalid had done) said to Abu
Bakr, “Khalid's sword is quite excessive,” and he surely knew him best.
It was then that Abu Bakr responded to Umar by saying, “Khalid is one of
the swords of Allah which He unsheathed against His foes,” which is a
totally erroneous way of looking at things*\_\_*hence the title.

In his book *Al-Riyad al-Nadira*, al-Tabari indicates that Banu Saleem
had reneged, whereupon Abu Bakr sent them Khalid ibn al-Waleed who
gathered some of their men inside animal sheds then set them to fire.
When Umar ibn al-Khattab came to know about this incident, he went to
see Abu Bakr and said, “Why do you let a man employ the same method of
torture employed by Allah, the Most Exalted One, the Great?” Abu Bakr
answered him by saying, “By Allah! I shall not shame a sword which Allah
unsheathed against His foes till He Himself shames it,” then he ordered
him to leave, whereupon he instantly went out to see Musaylamah.[^55]

This is how “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” came to call Khalid “The Sword of
Allah” even though he had disobeyed the order of the Messenger of Allah
and burnt people with the fire, thus totally discarding the Sunnah.

In his *Sahih*, al-Bukhari indicates that the Messenger of Allah had
said, “Nobody employs the fire for torture except Allah,” and also,
“None torments with the fire except the fire's God.”[^56] And we have
already indicated how Abu Bakr used to say before his death, “I wish I
never burnt al-Salami!”

We say: We wish there had been someone to ask Umar ibn al-Khattab,
“Since you already knew that none torments with the fire except Allah,
why did you swear after the death of the Prophet to burn the house of
Fatima al-Zahra and everyone inside it if they refused to swear the oath
of allegiance [to Abu Bakr]? Had Ali not surrendered and ordered
everyone to go out to swear it, you would certainly have carried your
threat out.”

Sometimes I doubt whether Umar opposed Abu Bakr and whether the latter
did not heed his opposition, for this would be quite unusual. We have
already seen how Abu Bakr did not stand in the face of Umar, nor did he
maintain his stand in the face of his opposition. More than once did he
say to him, “I had already told you that you are stronger than me in
handling this matter, but you subdued me.”

On another occasion, when he complained to him about those whose hearts
could be won towards Islam and what Umar did to the covenant which he
had written for them, how he spitted on it and tore it to pieces, he was
asked, “Are you the caliph or is it Umar?” He answered by saying, “He,
Allah willing, is.”

For this reason, I say that the one who opposed Khalid's ugly deeds may
have been none other than Ali ibn Abu Talib, but the early historians
and narrators used to quite often avoid mentioning his name, so they
substituted it with that of Umar as testified by several narrations
traced back to “Zaynab's father”[^57] or to “a man,” meaning thereby Ali
but not openly revealing his name.

Actually, this is not a mere probability, or we may accept what is
stated by some historians who write saying that Umar ibn al-Khattab used
to hate Khalid and could not stand looking at him in the face because he
was jealous of him: Khalid had won people's hearts because of his
victories. It is also said that Khalid had wrestled with Umar during the
days of *jahiliyya*, winning the match and breaking Umar's leg.

What is important is that once he became caliph, Umar deposed Khalid but
did not carry out his threat of stoning him as he had threatened. The
result: Khalid and Umar ibn al-Khattab vied with one another in their
toughness and arrogance; each one of them was stone-hearted, and each
deliberately violated the Prophet's Sunnah and disobeyed the Prophet
during his life and after his death.

Moreover, both hated the Prophet's *wasi* and tried very hard to
distance him from public life. Khalid plotted with both Umar and Abu
Bakr to assassinate Ali shortly after the death of the Prophet[^58] but
Allah, Glorified and Exalted is He, saved him from their mischief so
that he might carry out something which He had decreed.

Once again it becomes clear to us, having briefly studied the
personality of Khalid ibn al-Waleed whose praise is sung by “Ahlul
Sunnah wal Jama\`a,” that the latter are quite distant from the
Prophet's Sunnah, and that they emulate those who acted to its contrary
and abandoned it behind their backs and had no respect at all for it nor
for the Book of Allah.

10. Abu Hurayra al-Dawsi
------------------------

One of the *sahaba* of the latter period of Islam's dawn and, according
to the sequence employed by Ibn Sa\`d in his *Tabaqat*, Abu Hurayra
ranks in the ninth or tenth class.

He came to the Messenger of Allah near the end of the seventh Hijri
year. Hence, historians say that he accompanied the Prophet no more than
three years[^59] according to the best estimates, while other historians
say it was no more than two years if we take into consideration the fact
that the Prophet sent him to accompany Ibn al-Hadrami to Bahrain, then
the Messenger of Allah died while he was still in Bahrain.

Abu Hurayra was not known for his *jihad* or valor, nor was he among
those who were regarded as brilliant thinkers, nor among the jurists who
knew the Qur'an by heart, nor did he even know how to read and write. He
came to the Messenger of Allah in order to satisfy his hunger as he
himself said, and as the Prophet came to understand from him, so he
lodged him among the people of the Saffa to whom the Prophet used to
send some food.

Yet he became famous for the abundance of *ahadith* which he used to
narrate about the Messenger of Allah. The number of these *ahadith*
reached almost six thousand. This fact attracted the attention of
verifiers of hadith especially since he had not remained in the company
of the Prophet for any length of time and to the fact that he narrated
traditions regarding battles which he had never attended.

Some verifiers of hadith gathered all what was narrated by the
“righteous caliphs” as well as by the ten men given the glad tidings of
going to Paradise in addition to what the mothers of the faithful and
the purified Ahlul Bayt, and they did not total one tenth of what Abu
Hurayra had narrated all alone. This came despite the fact that among
the latter was Ali ibn Abu Talib who remained in the company of the
Prophet for thirty years.

Then fingers were pointed to Abu Hurayra charging him with telling lies
and with fabricating *and forging hadith*. Some went as far as labelling
him as the first narrator in the history of Islam thus charged. Yet
“Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” bestow upon him the title of “Islam's
narrator,” surrounding him with a great deal of respect, totally relying
on him.

Some of them may even regard him as being more knowledgeable than Ali
due to one particular tradition which he narrates about himself and in
which he says, “I said, \`O Messenger of Allah! I hear a great deal of
your *hadith* which I have been forgetting!' He said, \`Stretch your
mantle,' so I stretched it, whereupon he made a handful then said,
\`Close upon it,' whereupon I closed upon it and never forgot of it a
thing ever since.”[^60]

Abu Hurayra kept narrating so many *ahadith* that Umar ibn al-Khattab
beat him with his cane and said to him, “You have quoted too many
*ahadith*, and it seems that you have been telling lies about the
Messenger of Allah.” This was due to one particular narration which he
reported in which he quoted the Prophet saying that Allah had created
the heavens, the earth, and all creation in seven days.

When Umar heard about it, he called him in and asked him to repeat that
*hadith*. Having heard him repeating it, Umar struck him and said to
him, “How so when Allah Himself says it was done in six days, while you
yourself now say it was done in seven?” Abu Hurayra said, “Maybe I heard
it from Ka\`b al-Ahbar...” Umar said, “Since you cannot distinguish
between the Prophet's *ahadith* and what Ka\`b al-Ahbar says, you must
not narrate anything at all.”[^61]

It is also narrated that Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib has said, “Among all the
living, the person who has told the most lies about the Messenger of
Allah is Abu Hurayra al-Dawsi.”[^62] Mother of the faithful Ayesha, too,
testified to his being a liar several times in reference to many
*ahadith* which he used to attribute to the Messenger of Allah.

For example, she resented something which he had once said so she asked
him, “When did you hear the Messenger of Allah say so?” He said to her,
“The mirror, the kohl, and the dyestuff have all diverted you from the
*hadith* of the Messenger of Allah,” but when she insisted that he was
lying and scandalized him, Marwan ibn al-Hakam interfered and took upon
himself to verify the authenticity of the *hadith* in question.

It was then that Abu Hurayra admitted, “I did not hear it from the
Messenger of Allah; rather, I heard it from al-Fadl ibn al-Abbas.”[^63]
It is because of this particular narration that Ibn Qutaybah charged him
with lying saying, “Abu Hurayra claimed that al-Fadl ibn al-Abbas, who
had by then died, testified to the authenticity of that tradition which
he attributed to him in order to mislead people into thinking that he
had heard it from him.”[^64]

In his book *Ta'weel al-Ahadith*, Ibn Qutaybah says, “Abu Hurayra used
to say: \`The Messenger of Allah said such-and-such, but I heard it from
someone else.” In his book *A\`lam al-Nubala*, al-Dhahabi says that
Yazid ibn Ibrahim once cited Shu\`bah ibn al-Hajjaj saying that Abu
Hurayra used to commit forgery.

In his book [Siyar] *A\`lam al-Nubala*, Ibn Kathir [Ed. this should be
al-Dhahabi] indicates that Yazid ibn Ibrahim heard Ibn al-Hajjaj saying
that Abu Hurayra used to forge hadith.

In his book *Al-Bidaya wal Nihaya*, Ibn Kathir states that Yazid ibn
Haroun heard Shu\`bah ibn al-Hajjaj accusing him of the same, that his,
that he forges hadith, and that he used to narrate what he used to hear
from Ka\`b al-Ahbar as well as from the Messenger of Allah without
distinguishing one from the other.

Ja\`far al-Iskafi has said, “Abu Hurayra is doubted by our mentors; his
narrations are not acceptable.”[^65]

During his lifetime, Abu Hurayra was famous among the *sahaba* of lying
and forgery and of narrating too many fabricated *ahadith* to the extent
that some of the *sahaba* used to deride him and ask him to fabricate
*ahadith* agreeable with their own taste.

For example, a man belonging to Quraysh put on once a new *jubbah* (a
long outer garment) and started showing off. He passed by Abu Hurayra
and [sarcastically] said to him, “O Abu Hurayra! You narrate quite a few
traditions about the Messenger of Allah; so, did you hear him say
anything about my *jubbah*?!”

Abu Hurayra said, “I have heard the father of al-Qasim saying, \`A man
before your time was showing off his outfit when Allah caused the earth
to cave in over him; so he has been rattling in it and will continue to
do so till the Hour.' By Allah! I do not know whether he was one of your
people or not.”[^66]

How can people help doubting Abu Hurayra's traditions since they are so
self-contradictory? He narrates one “hadith” then he narrates its
antithesis, and if he is opposed or his previously narrated traditions
are used against him, he becomes angry or starts babbling in the
Ethiopian language.[^67]

How could they help accusing him of telling lies and of forgery after he
himself had admitted that he got traditions out of his own pouch then
attributed them to the Prophet ?

Al-Bukhari, in his *Sahih*, states the following:

Abu Hurayra said once, “The Prophet said, \`The best charity is
willingly given; the higher hand is better than the lower one, and start
with your own dependents. A woman says: \`Either feed me or divorce me.'
A slave says, \`Feed me and use me.' A son says, \`Feed me for the woman
who will forsake me.'“ He was asked, “O Abu Hurayra! Did you really hear
the Messenger of Allah say so?” He said, “No, this one is from Abu
Hurayra's pouch.”[^68]

Notice how he starts this “tradition” by saying, “The Prophet said,”
then when they refuse to believe what he tells them, he admits by
saying, “... this one is from Abu Hurayra's pouch”! So congratulations
for Abu Hurayra for possessing this pouch which is full of lies and
myths, and for which Mu\`awiyah and Banu Umayyah provided a great deal
of publicity, and because of which he acquired position, authority,
wealth, and mansions. Mu\`awiyah made him the governor of Medina and
built him the Aqeeq mansion then married him off to a woman of honorable
descent for whom he used to work as a servant...

Since Abu Hurayra was the close vizier of Mu\`awiyah, it is not due to
his own merits, honor, or knowledge; rather, it is because Abu Hurayra
used to provide him with whatever traditions he needed to circulate. If
some *sahaba* used to hesitate in cursing “Abu Turab,” finding doing
that as embarrassing, Abu Hurayra cursed Ali in his own house and as his
Shi\`as heard:

Ibn Abul-Hadid says,

When Abu Hurayra came to Iraq in the company of Mu\`awiyah in the Year
of the Jama\`a, he came to Kufa's mosque. Having seen the huge number of
those who welcomed him, he knelt down then beat his bald head and said,
“O people of Iraq! Do you claim that I tell lies about the Messenger of
Allah and thus burn myself in the fire?! By Allah! I heard the Messenger
of Allah saying, \`Each prophet has a sanctuary, and my sanctuary is in
Medina from Eer to [the mountain of] Thawr; so, anyone who makes it
unclean will be cursed by Allah, the angels, and all people, and I bear
witness that Ali had done so.” When Mu\`awiyah came to hear this
statement, he gave him a present, showered him with his generosity, and
made him the governor of Medina.[^69]

Suffices us to prove the above the fact that he was created governor of
Medina by none other than Mu\`awiyah. There is no doubt that verifiers
and researchers who are free from prejudice will doubt anyone who
befriended the enemy of Allah and His Messenger and who was antagonistic
towards the friend of Allah and His Messenger...

There is no doubt that Abu Hurayra did not reach that lofty position of
authority, namely the governor of Medina, the then capital of the
Islamic domains, except by virtue of the services which he had rendered
to Mu\`awiyah and other authoritative Umayyads. Praise to the One Who
changes the conditions!

Abu Hurayra had come to Medina with nothing to cover his private parts
other than a tiny striped piece of cloth, begging passers-by to feed
him. Then he suddenly became ruler of the sacred precincts of Medina,
residing in the Aqeeq mansion, enjoying wealth, servants and slaves, and
nobody could say a word without his permission. All of this was from the
blessings of his pouch!

Do not forget, nor should you be amazed, that nowadays we see the same
plays being repeatedly enacted, and history certainly repeats itself.
How many ignorant indigent persons sought nearness to a ruler and joined
his party till they became feared masters who do and undo, issuing
orders as they please, having a direct access to wealth without being
accounted for it, riding in automobiles without being watched, eating
foods not sold on the market...?

One such person may not even know how to speak his own language, nor
does he know a meaning for life except satisfying his stomach and sexual
appetite. The whole matter is simply his having a pouch like the one Abu
Hurayra used to have with some exception, of course, yet the aim is one
and the same: pleasing the ruler and publicizing for him in order to
strengthen his authority, firm his throne, and finish his foes.

Abu Hurayra loved the Umayyads and they loved him since the days of
Uthman ibn Affan, their leader. His view with regard to Uthman was
contrary to that of all the *sahaba* who belonged to the Muhajirun and
the Ansar; he regarded all the *sahaba* who participated in or
encouraged the killing of Uthman as apostates.

Undoubtedly, Abu Hurayra used to accuse Ali ibn Abu Talib of killing
Uthman. We can derive this conclusion from the statement he made at
Kufa's mosque and his saying that Ali made Medina unclean and that he,
therefore, was cursed by the Prophet, the angels, and everyone else. For
this reason, Ibn Sa\`d indicates in his *Tabaqat* that when Abu Hurayra
died in 59 A.H./679 A.D., Uthman's descendants carried his coffin and
brought it to the Baqee\` to bury it as an expression of their
appreciation of his having had high regards for Uthman.[^70]

Surely Allah has his own wisdom in faring with His creation. Uthman ibn
Affan, the master of Quraysh and their greatest, was killed although he
was the Muslims' caliph bearing the title of “Dhul-Noorayn” and of whom,
according to their claim, the angels feel shy. His corpse did not
receive the ceremonial burial bath nor was it shrouded; moreover, it was
not buried for full three days after which it was buried at the Jewish
cemetery.

Yet Abu Hurayra died after having enjoyed pomp and power. He was an
indigent man whose lineage and tribal origins were not known to anybody.
He had no kinship to Quraysh. Despite all of this, the caliph's sons,
who were in charge of running the affairs during Mu\`awiyah's reign,
took to bearing his corpse and to bury it at the Baqee\` where the
Messenger of Allah was buried...! But let us go back to Abu Hurayra to
examine his attitude towards the Prophet's Sunnah.

In his *Sahih*, al-Bukhari quotes Abu Hurayra saying, “I learned the
fill of two receptacles [of *ahadith*] from the Messenger of Allah: I
have disseminated only one of them; as for the other, if I disseminate
it, this throat will be slit.”[^71]

Since we indicated in our previous researches that Abu Bakr and Umar had
burnt the recorded Prophet's Sunnah and prohibited traditionists from
conveying it to others, here is Abu Hurayra revealing what erstwhile is
hidden, testifying to our own conclusion, admitting that the only
traditions he quoted were the ones that pleased the ruling authorities.

Building upon this premise, Abu Hurayra used to have two pouches, or two
receptacles, as he called them. He used to disseminate the contents of
one of them, the one which we have discussed here that contains whatever
the rulers desired.

As for the other, which Abu Hurayra kept to himself and whose *ahadith*
he did not narrate for fear his throat would be slit, it is the one
containing the authentic traditions of the Prophet. Had Abu Hurayra been
a reliable authority, he would have never hidden true *ahadith* while
disseminating illusions and lies only to support the oppressor, knowing
that Allah curses whoever hides the clear evidence.

Al-Bukhari quotes him saying once,

***“People say that Abu Hurayra narrates too many ahadith. Had it not
been for two [particular] verses in the Book of Allah, I would not have
narrated a single hadith: \`Those who conceal what We have revealed of
clear proofs and the guidance, after Our having clarified [everything]
for*** ***people in the Book, these it is whom Allah shall curse, and
those who curse shall curse them, too” (Holy Qur'an, 2:159)***.

Our brethren from the Muhajirun used to be busy consigning transactions
at the market-place, while our brethren from the Ansar used to be busy
doing business with their own money, while Abu Hurayra kept in the
shadow of the Prophet in order to satisfy his hunger, attending what
they did not attend, learning what they did not learn.”[^72]

How can Abu Hurayra say that had it not been for a couple of verses in
the Book of Allah, he would not have narrated a single hadith, then he
says, “I learned two receptacles [of *ahadith*] from the Messenger of
Allah: I have disseminated one of them; as for the other, if I
disseminate it, this throat will be slit”?! Is this not his admission of
having concealed the truth despite both verses in the Book of Allah?!

Had the Prophet not said to his companions, “Go back to your people and
teach them”?[^73] Had he not also said, “One who conveys is more aware
than one who hears”? Al-Bukhari states that the Prophet urged the
deputation of Abd Qays to learn belief and scholarship “... then convey
what you learn to those whom you have left behind.”[^74]

Can we help wondering why should the throat of a *sahabi* be slit if he
quotes the Prophet ?! There must be a secret here which the caliphs do
not wish others to know. We actually pointed out to this very secret in
our past researches embedded in our book *Ask Those Who Know*. Here, we
would like to briefly say that “the people of the remembrance” was [a
phrase in] a Qur'anic verse revealed to refer to Ali's successorship of
the Prophet.

Abu Hurayra is not to blame; he knew his own worth and testified against
his own soul that Allah cursed him, and so did those who curse, for
having hidden the Prophet's hadith. But the blame is on “Ahlul Sunnah
wal Jama\`a” who call Abu Hurayra the narrator of the Sunnah while he
himself testifies that he hid it then testifies that he fabricated it
and told lies in its regard, then he further goes on to testify that it
became confused for him, so he could not tell which one was the
statement of the Prophet and which one was made by others. All of these
*ahadith* and correct admissions are recorded in al-Bukhari's *Sahih*
and in other authentic books of hadith of “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a”.

How can “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” feel comfortable about a man whose
justice was doubted by the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abu Talib
who charged him with lying, saying that among the living, nobody told
more lies about the Prophet than Abu Hurayra. Umar ibn al-Khattab, too,
charged him of the same, beat him and threatened to expel him.

Ayesha doubted his integrity and many times called him a liar, and many
other *sahaba* cast doubts about his accuracy and rejected his
contradictory *ahadith*, so he would once admit his error and would
sometimes prattle in Ethiopian.[^75] A large number of Muslim scholars
refuted his traditions and charged him with lying, fabricating, and
throwing himself at Mu\`awiyah's dinner tables, at his coffers of gold
and silver.

Is it right, then, for Abu Hurayra to become “Islam's narrator” from
whom the religion's injunctions are learned?

Judaica and Jewish doctrines have filled the books of hadith. Ka\`b
al-Ahbar, a Jew, may have succeeded in getting such doctrines and
beliefs included into the books of hadith, hence we find traditions
likening or personifying Allah, as well as the theory of incarnation, in
addition to many abominable statements about the prophets and messengers
of Allah: all of these are cited through Abu Hurayra.

So, are “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” now going to repent and go back to
their senses in order to know who they should learn the true Sunnah
from? If they ask us, we would say, “Come to the Gate of Knowledge and
the Imams from his offspring, for they are the custodians of the Sunnah,
the security of the nation, the ark of salvation, the Imams of guidance,
the lanterns that shatter the dark, the mighty niche, and the strong
Rope of Allah.”

11. Abdullah ibn Umar
---------------------

He is one of the famous *sahaba* who played a major role in shaping the
events that took place during the reign of the third caliph as well as
that of Banu Umayyah. Suffices him the fact that his father was Umar ibn
al-Khattab to be glorified and loved by “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” who
consider him as one of the greatest *faqihs* and of all those who
learned the “Prophet's *ahadith*.”

Even Imam Malik relies on him in deducting most of his *ahkam*, filling
his book *Al-Muwatta'* with his traditions. And if we turn the pages of
the books of “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a,” we will find them referring to
him quite often, full of his praise.

Yet if we read the same that with researchers' discerning eyes, it will
become clear to us that he was far from being just or truthful; rather,
he was distant from the Prophet's Sunnah, from *fiqh,* and from the
*Shari\`a*.

Our first observation will be his extreme enmity and hatred towards the
master of the Prophet's Progeny, Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abu
Talib: he went as far as instigating others against him and regarded as
a commoner.

We have already indicated that he circulated many false *ahadith* the
gist of which is that the *sahaba* during the lifetime of the Prophet
used to compare each one of them with the other in the presence of the
Prophet heard, saying that the best of people was Abu Bakr then Umar
then Uthman, then people after the latter were all alike, and that the
Prophet used to hear all of thais comparison without denying it. This is
a blatant lie derided by any rational person.

We researched the life of Abdullah ibn Umar during the Prophet's
lifetime, and we found out that he was too young to reach adolescence.
He had no influence whatsoever among those who had a say, nor was his
view taken into consideration. The Messenger of Allah died when Abdullah
ibn Umar was, according to the best estimates, nineteen years old; so,
how could he have said that they (the *sahaba*) used to compare each one
of them with the other?

This could only be children gossiping among themselves, the children of
Abu Bakr, Uthman, in addition to his own brothers. Nevertheless, it
cannot be right to say that the Prophet was listening to such comparison
without voicing his objection to it. This proves that this “tradition”
is false and is indicative of ill intentions.

Add to the above the fact that the Prophet never permitted Abdullah ibn
Umar to accompany him during his battles with the exception of the
Battle of the Moat (*khandaq*) and the other campaigns that followed it,
when Abdullah was fifteen years old.[^76]

There is no doubt that he was present at the Battle of Khaybar which
took place in 7 A.H./628 A.D. and saw with his own eyes how both Abu
Bakr and his father fled from the battle field. He undoubtedly heard the
Messenger of Allah saying, “I shall give the standard tomorrow to a man
who loves Allah and His Messenger and who is loved by Allah and His
Messenger, a brave one who attacks and never flees, a man the conviction
of whose heart Allah has ascertained.” When it was morning, he gave it
to the one who terminated the pleasure of those who indulged therein,
who dispersed the groups, who dispelled the clouds of calamities, who
was adorned with graces, the ever-victorious Lion of Allah Ali ibn Abu
Talib.[^77]

The tradition of the standard referred to above clearly highlights Ali's
merits and superiority over all other *sahaba*. It demonstrates his
status with Allah and His Messenger and his having won the love of Allah
and His Messenger. Because of his hatred towards Ali, Abdullah ibn Umar
regarded Ali as one of the commoners!

We have already indicated that “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” acted upon
this tradition which their master Abdullah ibn Umar inspired to them, so
they did not rank Ali ibn Abu Talib among the righteous caliphs. No,
they did not do that, nor did they even recognize his caliphate except
during the time of Ahmad ibn Hanbal as we proved above.

They were exposed when traditions and traditionists became quite
numerous, and when fingers were pointed at them accusing them of being
Nasibis and of hating the Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet, and when all
Muslims came to know that hating Ali was one of the most obvious signs
of hypocrisy. It was then that they felt compelled to recognize Ali's
caliphate. It was only then that they added his name to the list of the
“righteous caliphs.” It was only then that they pretended, being
pretentious and perfidious, to love Ahlul Bayt.

We wish there had been someone to ask Ibn Umar the following question:
“Why did all, or most of, Muslims after the demise of the Prophet
dispute about who deserved most to be the caliph and narrowed their
dispute to only Ali and Abu Bakr, and why neither your father [Umar ibn
al-Khattab] nor Uthman ibn Affan had any popularity at that time?”

Was there anyone to ask the son of Umar ibn al-Khattab, “If the Prophet
agreed with your view that nobody was the peer of Abu Bakr then Umar
then Uthman, then why did he two days before his death choose a young
man who grew no beard nor a moustache to be their leader, ordering them
to march under his order and command? Was he then hallucinating, as your
father described him of doing?”

We wish someone had asked Abdullah ibn Umar this question: “Why did the
Muhajirun and the Ansars, having witnessed Abu Bakr swearing his oath of
loyalty to Fatima al-Zahra, say to her: \`By Allah! Had your husband and
cousin come to us before Abu Bakr, we would not have equated him with
any man at all,' which is an admission from the most prominent of the
*sahaba* that they did not equate Ali with anyone else, had they not
already sworn their oath of allegiance to him, an oath which they later
called a mistake?” What is the value of the view of Abdullah ibn Umar,
the conceited teenager who did not know how to divorce his wife,
compared to that of such prominent *sahaba*?

Finally, was there anyone to ask Abdullah ibn Umar, “Why did not the
*sahaba* choose Ali ibn Abu Talib to be their caliph after Umar's murder
and prefer him over Uthman, had it not been for his own refusal of the
condition put forth by Abel-Rahman ibn Awf that he had to rule them
according to the “Sunnah” of both shaykhs?”[^78]

But Abdullah ibn Umar was influenced by his father. He lived during the
caliphate of Abu Bakr, Umar, and Uthman, and he noticed how Ali ibn Abu
Talib was kept at bay, having no place among the ruling group nor any
government post, with the people turning away from him after the death
of his cousin and wife, the Leader of all Women, having had no material
gains to attract people thereby.

Undoubtedly, Abdullah ibn Umar was the closest person to his father. He
used to listen to his views, and he knew his friends and foes; hence, he
grew up nurtured in hatred, grudge and animosity towards Ali in
particular and Ahlul Bayt in general. Once he saw Ali receiving the oath
of allegiance from the Muhajirun and Ansar following Uthman's murder,
and he could not tolerate it.

He, then, revealed his hidden animosity and refused to swear the oath of
allegiance to the Imam of the righteous and the *wali* of the faithful.
He could no longer tolerate living in Medina, so he left it for Mecca
pretending to perform the *\`umra*.

Then we see Abdullah ibn Umar doing all he could do to discourage people
and dissuade them from supporting the truth or fighting the oppressive
group the fighting of which was ordered by Allah Himself till it
reverted to His command. He, therefore, was among the earliest to betray
the Imam of his time whom he was required to obey.

Once Imam Ali was killed, and Mu\`awiyah attained victory over Imam
al-Hasan ibn Ali, thus usurping the caliphate from him, Mu\`awiyah
delivered a speech to people in which he said, “I did not fight you so
that you may pray or fast or perform the pilgrimage; rather, I fought
you in order to take charge of you, and Allah has given me just that.”

We then see Abdullah ibn Umar racing to swear the oath of allegiance to
Mu\`awiyah under the pretext that people were united in accepting his
leadership after their disunity! I think it was he who named that year
“Am al-jama\`ah,” year of the group, for he and his group of Banu
Umayyah became “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” and will remain so till the
time of the Hour.

Was there anyone to ask Abdullah ibn Umar and those who held his views
from “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a”: “Had there ever been any consensus in
history such as the one attained for the Commander of the Faithful Ali
ibn Abu Talib ?” Abu Bakr's caliphate was “a mistake whose evil Allah
shunned,”[^79] and it was boycotted by a large number of the *sahaba*.

Umar's caliphate was by recommendation; rather, it was a promise granted
by Abu Bakr, and the *sahaba* had neither view, nor say, nor anything
else to do with it. And Uthman's caliphate was achieved through a
committee of three persons selected by Umar; rather, it was due to Abd
al-Rahman ibn Awf forcing his own view over the rest.

As for Ali's caliphate, it was done through the voluntary and peaceful
oath of allegiance of the Muhajirun and the Ansar; he wrote all Islamic
domains asking those in charge of them to grant him their oath of
allegiance, which they all did with the exception of Mu\`awiyah in
Syria.[^80]

What Ibn Umar and “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” were supposed to do was to
kill Mu\`awiyah ibn Abu Sufyan for declaring his mutiny and demanding
the caliphate for himself according to the narrations which they
themselves have recorded in their Sahih books. One of these traditions
states that the Messenger of Allah said, “If two caliphs receive oaths
of allegiance, one after the other, you should kill the second.”[^81]

He has also said, as recorded in Muslim's *Sahih* and in other books of
*hadith*, “Whoever swears the oath of allegiance to an Imam, shakes his
hand, and grants him his heart, let him grant him his all, but if
another person comes to dispute with him, you should kill the
latter.”[^82]

But Abdullah ibn Umar did exactly the opposite: Instead of acting upon
the Prophet's tradition, submit to his orders, fight and kill Mu\`awiyah
for having contested the caliph of the Muslims and lit the fire of
dissension, he, we find out, refused to swear the oath of allegiance
despite the Muslims' consensus in its regard. Instead, he swore it to
Mu\`awiyah who declared his mutiny, who disputed with the Imam and
killed a number of innocent people, causing dissension the aftermath of
which lingers till our time.

For this reason, I think that Abdullah ibn Umar was Mu\`awiyah's
accomplice in all the crimes and sins the latter had committed because
he erected his authority and assisted him in forcing people to accept
it, and in his confiscation of the caliphate which Allah and His
Messenger decreed to be out of the reach of the promiscuous and the sons
of the promiscuous according to the sacred hadith.

Abdullah ibn Umar was not satisfied with doing all of that, so he rushed
to swear the oath of allegiance to Yazid ibn Mu\`awiyah, the Yazid of
wines, corruption, and apostasy, the promiscuous son of the promiscuous
father, the cursed one and the son of the accursed.

Since Umar ibn al-Khattab, according to Ibn Sa\`d who discusses him in
his *Tabaqat*, used to say, “Caliphate is not suitable for a promiscuous
person, nor for the son of a promiscuous person, nor for those who
accept Islam after being vanquished,”[^83] then how did Abdullah
contradict his own father with regard to this principle which he himself
had recorded?

If Abdullah ibn Umar thus contradicted the Book of Allah and the Sunnah
of His Messenger with regard to the issue of caliphate, we will not then
be surprised to find him doing the opposite of what his father had
stated.

We would like to ask Abdullah ibn Umar this question: “What consensus
was there with regard to swearing the oath of allegiance to Yazid ibn
Mu\`awiyah from whom the righteous in the nation and the remnants of the
Muhajirun and Ansar, including the master of the youths of Paradise Imam
al-Husayn ibn Ali, Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr, Abdullah ibn Abbas, and all
those who kept them company and shared their views, dissociated
themselves?”

What is well known is the fact that he himself used to be among those
who in the beginning denounced Yazid receiving the oath of allegiance,
but Mu\`awiyah knew how to win him over: He sent him one hundred
thousand dirhams which he accepted as a gift. When it was mentioned to
him that the sender was soliciting his oath of allegiance to his son
Yazid, he said, “Is this what he wanted? My creed, then, must be quite
cheap...”[^84]

Yes, Abdullah ibn Umar sold his creed very cheaply as he himself
admitted. He ran away from having to swear it to the Imam of the
righteous but rushed to swear it to the leader of oppressors Mu\`awiyah,
then to the leader of the fornicators Yazid, thus bearing on his
shoulders the burdens of the crimes committed by Mu\`awiyah's oppressive
government.

He, no doubt, carried the burdens of Yazid's crimes on his head for
violating the sanctity of the Messenger of Allah and for killing the
fragrant flower, the master of the youths of Paradise and of the Progeny
of the Prophet, together with the righteous among the sons of the nation
whom he killed in Karbala in the Battle of the Harra.

Abdullah ibn Umar was not satisfied with this much of the oath of
allegiance to Yazid, so he pressured people to follow in his footsteps,
terrorizing anyone who contemplated doing otherwise.

Al-Bukhari in his *Sahih* and other compilers of *hadith* state that
Abdullah ibn Umar gathered his offspring, servants, and slaves when the
people of Medina rejected Yazid ibn Mu\`awiyah and said to them, “We
swore the oath of allegiance to this man acting upon swearing it to
Allah and His Messenger[^85], and I have heard the Messenger of Allah
saying, \`One who betrays will have a standard erected for him on the
Day of Judgment, and it will be said to him:

This is the betrayal of so-and-so,' and the worst type of betrayal,
after associating someone with Allah, is one who swears the oath of
allegiance to Allah and His Messenger then betrays it,[^86] and none of
you should unseat Yazid, nor should anyone among you see such unseating
as honorable, else something tragic should happen between me and
him.”[^87]

Yazid's oppression received a boost when Abdullah ibn Umar supported him
and urged people to swear the oath of fealty to him, so he raised an
army under the command of Uqbah, one of the leading adulterers of his
time, ordering him to assault Medina, the city of the Prophet,
permitting him to do whatever he wished in it. Uqbah, therefore, killed
ten thousand *sahabis* and took their wives as captives then confiscated
their property.

He also killed seven hundred *huffaz* of the Holy Qur'an according to
al-Baladhuri, permitting his army to rape many free Muslim women to the
extent that the latter gave birth to an estimated one thousand
illegitimate babies. Then he forced them to swear that they were all
slaves of his master Yazid...

Was not Abdullah ibn Umar his accomplice in all of that, since he
supported and empowered him? I leave the researchers to derive their own
conclusion.

Abdullah ibn Umar was not satisfied with all of that; rather, he went
beyond it to swear the oath of allegiance to Marwan ibn al-Hakam, the
bedeviled accursed one, the promiscuous adulterer, who fought Ali openly
and killed Talhah and did so many horrible things such as burning the
House of Allah and shelling it with catapults, demolishing one of its
corners and killing in that incident Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr, in addition
to other shameful actions.

Then Ibn Umar reaches in swearing his oath of allegiance new heights
when he swore it to al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf al-Thaqafi, the greatest
apostate who used to make fun of the Holy Qur'an and label it as Arab
martial poetry, preferring his master Abdul-Malik ibn Marwan over the
Messenger of Allah. This al-Hajjaj is the same one who was known by the
elite as well as the commoners as having belittled all Islamic tenets.

In his *Tarikh*, the *hafiz* Ibn Asakir indicates that two men disputed
with one another about al-Hajjaj. One of them said that he was a
*kafir*, an apostate, whereas the other said that he was a *daall
mu'min*, a believer who went astray. When they persisted, they asked
al-Sha\`bi about his view. Al-Sha\`bi said, “He is a mu'min [believer]
in as far as oppression and tyranny are concerned, a *kafir*
[disbeliever] in Allah, the Great.”[^88]

This criminal al-Hajjaj is the one who violated everything which Allah
decreed not to be violated. Historians record that he was excessive in
killing, torturing and mutilating the corpses of the righteous of the
nation, especially Shi\`a followers of Muhammad's, for these suffered at
his hands more than at the hands of anyone else.

In his *Tarikh*, Ibn Qutaybah says that in one single day, al-Hajjaj
killed more than seventy thousand men to the extent that the blood flow
reached the mosque's door as well as the highways.[^89] And in his
*Sahih*, al-Tirmidhi, having counted those executed by al-Hajjaj, says,
“After his [al-Hajjaj's] death, eighty thousand prisoners were found in
his jail, including thirty thousand women.”[^90]

Al-Hajjaj used to compare himself to the Lord of Might and Honor:
whenever he passed by the jail and heard the prisoners crying of pain
and pleading for mercy, he used to say to them [what the Almighty says
in the Holy Qur'an]:

***“Remain in abjection therein, and do not speak to me” (Holy Qur'an,
23:108)***.

Such is al-Hajjaj who was prophesied by the Messenger of Allah before
his demise; he said, “There is in [the tribe of] Thaqeef a liar and an
annihilator.” What is strange is that the narrator of this tradition is
none other Abdullah ibn Umar himself![^91]

Yes, Abdullah ibn Umar was reluctant to swear the oath of allegiance to
the best of mankind after the Prophet and did not support him, nor did
he even pray behind him; therefore, Allah, Glory to Him, humiliated him.
He went to al-Hajjaj once and said, “I have heard the Messenger of Allah
saying, \`Whoever dies owing an oath of allegiance will die the death of
*jahiliyya*.'“

Al-Hajjaj the accursed, thereupon, despised him and pointed his foot at
him saying, “My hand is busy right now; so, swear your oath of
allegiance to this.” He used to pray behind al-Hajjaj, the apostate, and
behind his *wali* Najdah ibn Amir, head of the Kharijites.[^92]

There is no doubt that Abdullah ibn Umar preferred to pray behind these
men only because they were famous for cursing and denouncing Ali after
the prayers. Ibn Umar used to gratify his hidden grudge and animosity
whenever he heard such cursing, feeling very contented at heart and very
satisfied therewith.

For this reason, we find the sect of “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a”
enjoining prayers behind the righteous as well as the promiscuous based
on what their master and the *faqih* of their sect Abdullah ibn Umar
doing likewise and praying behind the apostate al-Hajjaj and the
Kharijite Najdah ibn Amir.

As for the Prophet's statements such as these: “The one who should be
the Imam of people is their best in reciting the Book of Allah. If they
all recite it equally well, he should be the most knowledgeable of the
Sunnah.

If they all know the Sunnah equally well, he should be their foremost in
having participated in the Hijra. If they had all participated in the
Hijra at the same time, he should be the foremost in having accepted
Islam...,” they surely are discarded...

None of these four merits, namely reciting the Holy Qur'an, safeguarding
the Sunnah, early participation in the Hijra, and early acceptance of
Islam, applies to those to whom Ibn Umar swore his oath of allegiance
and behind whom he prayed: neither in Mu\`awiyah, nor in Yazid, nor in
Marwan, nor in al-Hajjaj, nor in Najdah, the Kharijite...

This, of course, is only one of the Sunnah injunctions which Abdullah
ibn Umar violated. He discarded them altogether and acted exactly to
their contrary. He abandoned the master of the Prophet's purified
Progeny, namely Ali, in whom all these and many more merits were
combined. Rather, he turned his back to him and went to join the corrupt
ones, the Kharijites, the apostates, the enemies of Allah and His
Messenger, praying behind them!

How many are the violations of the *faqih* of “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a”
Abdullah ibn Umar, violations of both the Book of Allah and the Sunnah
of His Messenger?! If we wish, we can gather them in a separate book,
but the following examples, which are quoted from their own books and
Sahihs, should suffice to back our argument:

Violations of Abdullah ibn Umar of the Book and the Sunnah
----------------------------------------------------------

Allah, the Most Exalted One, has said in His Glorious Book,

***“Fight the one [party] that acts wrongfully till it returns to
obeying Allah's Command” (Holy Qur'an, 49:9)***.

The Messenger of Allah has said, “O Ali! You shall fight after me the
renegades, those who equal others with Allah, and the heretics.”

Abdullah ibn Umar violated this text of the Holy Qur'an as well as the
above quoted tradition, and he violated the consensus (*ijma\`*) of the
nation, of the Muhajirs and the Ansar who fought beside the Commander of
the Faithful, following his own view and saying, “I shall not fight in
the dissension, and I shall pray behind whoever wins.”[^93] Ibn Hajar
has indicated that Abdullah ibn Umar was of the view that one should
avoid fighting during a dissension even if one of the two parties is
right and the other is wrong.[^94]

Truly strange, by Allah, is the case of Abdullah ibn Umar who sees one
party being right and the other being wrong yet refraining from
supporting the right one or from curbing the wrong party till it returns
to obedience to Allah! He performed his prayers behind whoever won,
albeit if the winner was a wrong doer!

This is exactly what happened to Ibn Umar, for Mu\`awiyah won and
subdued the nation, forcing his authority on it. Ibn Umar then came and
swore the oath of allegiance to Mu\`awiyah and prayed behind him despite
all the crimes and sins which he had committed and which are beyond
one's imagination and with which Ibn Umar was fully familiar.

The wrong doers from the leaders of oppression, due to their numerical
superiority, won victory over the leaders of the truth who were the
Imams of Ahlul Bayt. So the latter were excluded from authority, whereas
the promiscuous, the adulterers, the straying criminals, came to rule
the nation with force and oppression.

Ibn Umar abandoned the truth all of it, so history does not record any
friend for him nor any affinity towards Ahlul Bayt five of whose Imams
were his contemporaries. He did not pray behind a single one of them. He
did not quote one of their *ahadith*, and he did not recognize a single
virtue or merit of any of them.

We have come to know, while discussing the Twelve Imams in this book,
what his view with regard to the ones whom he labelled as the twelve
caliphs was. He regarded as authentic the caliphate of Abu Bakr, Umar,
Uthman, Yazid, al-Saffah, Salam, al-Mansour, Jabir, al-Mahdi, al-Amin,
and their team head [Mu\`awiyah], saying, “All these twelve are
descendants of Banu Ka\`b ibn Luayy, and they are all unmatched in
righteousness.”[^95]

Do you see among these men any of the Imams of guidance from the
Prophet's Progeny who were described by the Messenger of Allah as the
ark of salvation and the peers of the Qur'an?!

For this reason, you cannot trace any presence for them among “Ahlul
Sunnah wal Jama\`a,” nor is there even one Imam from Ahlul Bayt on the
list of imams and caliphs they emulate. Such is the case of Abdullah ibn
Umar in his violation of the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His
Messenger. As for his own ignorance of the same, you may say whatever
you wish.

Among the indications of such ignorance is his being unaware of the fact
that the Prophet permitted women to wear sandals when wearing the
*ihram* garb; Ibn Umar issued *fatawa* prohibiting it.[^96]

Another is the leasing of his farms during the lifetime of the Messenger
of Allah as well as during the reign of Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, and
Mu\`awiyah to the extent that one of the *sahaba* talked to him near the
end of Mu\`awiyah's reign and told him that the Messenger of Allah had
prohibited it.[^97]

Yes; such is the *faqih* of “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a;” he did not know
that it was *haram* to lease farms, and there is no doubt that he used
to issue his verdicts permitting it during that entire period which
lasted from the time of the Prophet to the end of Mu\`awiyah's reign, a
period of about fifty years...

Yet another example is Ayesha denouncing his verdict that a deceased
person is tormented because of the weeping of the living over him, and
also with regard to morning *athan*, and his saying that the month is
twenty-nine days. She opposed him in several other issues as well.

Other examples are recorded by both shaykhs, namely al-Bukhari and
Muslim, in the *Sahih* of each one of them: Abdullah ibn Umar was told
that Abu Hurayra used to say, “I heard the Messenger of Allah saying,
\`Whoever walks behind a coffin will receive one karat of rewards.'“ Ibn
Umar responded by [sarcastically] saying, “Abu Hurayra has surely been
generous with such karats!” Ayesha, however, testified to the
authenticity of Abu Hurayra's tradition saying, “I heard the Messenger
of Allah saying so.” It was then that Ibn Umar said, “We surely have
missed quite a few karats!”[^98]

Suffices us in this regard the testimony of Umar ibn al-Khattab with
regard to his son Abdullah: On his death bed, Umar was asked by a
flatterer, “Why don't you recommend Abdullah ibn Umar to be the next
caliph?” Umar said, “Shall I recommend a man who does not know even how
to divorce his wife [according to the Shari\`a]?!”

Such is Abdullah son of Umar ibn al-Khattab, and nobody knew him better
than his father.

As for the false traditions whereby he served his master Mu\`awiyah,
these are quite numerous indeed. We would like to mention a few of them
by way of sampling:

He said, “The Messenger of Allah said, \`A man from the people of
Paradise will soon come to you,' whereupon Mu\`awiyah came. Then he
said, \`Tomorrow, a man from the people of Paradise will come to you;'
Mu\`awiyah came. Then he repeated the same about the next day, whereupon
Mu\`awiyah came.”

Another is his saying, “When the Ayat al-Kursi was revealed, the
Messenger of Allah told Mu\`awiyah to write it down. \`What shall I get
if I do so?' asked Mu\`awiyah. He said, \`Whenever anyone recites it,
you will receive the reward of its recitation.'“

Another is his saying, “Mu\`awiyah will surely be resurrected on the
Resurrection Day outfitted with a robe of the light of *iman*.”

I do not know why “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a” did not add Mu\`wiyah's
name to the list of the ten men who received the glad tidings of going
to Paradise since their master Ibn Umar emphasized thrice, in three
consecutive days, that Mu\`awiyah was to go to Paradise. Since people on
the Resurrection Day will be raised bare-footed, naked, Mu\`awiyah will
be their very best because he will be outfitted with a robe made of the
light of *iman*! So read such statements and wonder!

Such is Abdullah ibn Umar; such is the extent of his knowledge; such is
his *fiqh* and violation of the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of the
Prophet; such is his enmity towards the Commander of the Faithful and
the pure Imams from the Progeny of the Prophet, and such is his loyalty
and flattery of the enemies of Allah and His Messenger, the enemies of
humanity.

12. Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr
--------------------------

His father, al-Zubayr ibn al-Awwam, was killed during the Battle of the
Camel, a battle labelled in the Prophet's Sunnah as the “War of the
Perfidious.” His mother was Asmaa daughter of Abu Bakr ibn Abu Quhafa.
His aunt was mother of the faithful Ayesha daughter of Abu Bakr and wife
of the Prophet. He was one of the main opponents of Imam Ali and of
those who hated him most.

He may have prided himself in the caliphate of his grandfather Abu Bakr
and in his aunt Ayesha, so he inherited from both of them such hatred
which lasted all his life. Imam Ali, peace be upon him, used to say to
al-Zubayr, “We used to consider you as one of the offspring of Abd
al-Muttalib till your evil son created dissension between us and you.”

It is well known in history that he was during the Battle of the Camel
one of the most prominent elements and immediate commanders, so much so
that Ayesha introduced him to lead people in the prayers after having
dismissed both Talhah and al-Zubayr for disputing with one another, each
desiring to lead it.

It is also said that he is the one who brought his aunt Ayesha fifty men
to falsely swear that the place where she had arrived was not called
Hawab. This is why she consented to continue her march towards the
Battle of the Camel.

Abdullah is the one who reproached his father for deciding to retire
from the battle after having been reminded by Imam Ali, peace be upon
him, of one particular *hadith* of the Prophet wherein he informed
al-Zubayr that he, being oppressive, would fight Ali. He kept
reproaching his father to the extent that the latter said to him, “What
is wrong with you?! May Allah shame you for being such an ominous son!”
It is said that he continued to reproach and excite his father till he
succeeded in getting him to attack Ali's army; he was killed and his
father's calling him an ominous son proved to be quite right.

This is the tale which we have chosen for you due to its accuracy, and
due to its being descriptive of al-Zubayr's spiteful psychology as well
as that of his ominous son Abdullah. Al-Zubayr could not have so easily
pulled himself away from that battle, leaving behind Talhah and his men
in addition to slaves and servants whom he had brought all the way from
Basra.

He could not have left the mother of the faithful Ayesha, sister of his
wife, in such peril. If we accept that he abandoned them, they would not
have let him get away with it that easily especially his son Abdullah
the forcefulness of whose determination we have already come to know.

Historians indicate that Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr used to curse and
condemn Ali. Once he said about him: “The mean villain is approaching
you.” He once delivered a speech to the people of Basra urging them to
fight Ali in which he said, “O people! Ali killed the rightful caliph
Uthman oppressively, then he raised armies to take control over you and
to take your city; so, be men who demand revenge for your slain caliph,
protect your women, and defend your daughters, kinfolks, and tribes.
Surely Ali does not consider in this issue anyone's view other than that
of his own and, by Allah, if he achieves victory over you, he will
annihilate your creed and world.”[^99]

His hatred and animosity reached the limit where he abandoned invoking
Allah's blessings unto His Prophet; so, no blame should be put on him,
nor should his lies to people surprise us, nor his thus charging Imam
Ali, peace be upon him, whom he accused of everything abominable such as
the accusations in his speech cited above when he addressed the people
of Basra and said to them, “... by Allah, if he achieves victory over
you, he will annihilate your creed and world.” It is nothing but blatant
falsehood and a great defamation coming from Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr to
whose heart the truth could not find a way.

What testifies to the above is the fact that when Ali ibn Abu Talib won
victory over the people of Basra and arrested most of them, and among
those arrested was Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr himself, he forgave all of
them and set them free and was generous to Ayesha, protecting her honor
and sending her back to her home to Medina. He also prohibited his men
from taking any booty or taking women or children captive or killing the
wounded, so much so that such prohibition cost him the mutiny of some of
his forces and doubts were cast at his judgment.

Ali, peace be upon him, was the embodiment of the Sunnah of the Prophet
and the most knowledgeable of the Book of Allah, the Book which none
then knew it better than him. Hypocrites and infiltrators in his army
instigated rebellion against him; they said, “How could he permit us to
fight them yet prohibit us from taking their women captive?”

Such talk duped a large number of his fighting men, but he, peace of
Allah be upon him, argued with them through the Book of Allah saying,
“Place your bets on who among you will take your mother Ayesha as his
captive!” It was then that they realized that he was right; so, they
said to him, “We seek Allah's forgiveness [against doing so]; you are
right while we are wrong.”

What Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr had said about the Imam was a lie and
obvious defamation: his hatred towards Ali, peace be upon him, blinded
both his eyes and mind, bringing him out of conviction. Ibn al-Zubayr
never repented after that incident, nor did he learn any lesson, nor did
he derive any wisdom from that war to the benefit of his soul...

No, indeed; rather, he rewarded a good deed with a bad one, and his
grudge and hatred against the descendants of Hashim in general and the
master of the Purified Progeny in particular increased, and he did all
he could to put out their light and to put an end to them.

Historians narrate saying that he, following the assassination of Imam
Ali, started seeking to be the caliph of the faithful, and some people
rallied behind him, so he grew stronger. He managed to have Muhammad ibn
al-Hanafiyya, son of Imam Ali (peace be upon him), jailed together with
al-Hasan ibn Ali and seventeen other men belonging to Banu Hashim.

Then he wanted to burn them alive, so he gathered in front of the jail a
great deal of fire wood then set it on fire. Had it not been for the
arrival of al-Mukhtar's army at the right moment and its putting the
fire out, the son of al-Zubayr would have achieved his evil
objective.[^100]

Marwan ibn al-Hakam then sent him an army led by al-Hajjaj who
surrounded his house, killed him, then hanged his corpse at the mosque.
Thus ended the life of Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr just as the life of his
father had ended before. Each one of them loved this life and did his
best to attain power and authority and to receive people's oath of
allegiance, fighting others for its sake, killing many in the process
till he himself was killed falling short of achieving his objective.

Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr had views with regard to *fiqh* which reflected a
negative reaction to the *fiqh* of Ahlul Bayt whom he hated. One of his
most famous views was his saying that the *mut\`a* marriage was
Islamically unlawful. He once said to Abdullah ibn Abbas [the greatest
traditionist], “O you blind man! If you do it, I shall most certainly
stone you.” Ibn Abbas responded to him by saying, “My eye-sight is
blind, it is true, but you are blind in your own insight; so, if you
wish to know how *halal* the *mut\`a* is, go and ask your mother about
it!”[^101]

We do not wish to go into details in tackling this subject which has
been discussed a great deal, but we simply wanted to expose Ibn
al-Zubayr's opposition to Ahlul Bayt in every aspect, including *fiqh*
matters where his foot was not firmly rooted.

All these twelve men have gone, in their good and in their evil, leaving
the afflicted nation sailing in a sea of blood, drowning in the ocean of
misguidance, with most of its members not distinguishing between truth
and falsehood. This, in fact, is what Talhah, al-Zubayr, and even Sa\`d
ibn Abu Waqqas had admitted.

The only person who was on clear guidance from his Lord, who never
doubted the truth even for the twinkling of an eye, was Ali ibn Abu
Talib, Allah's peace be upon him, with whom the truth revolved wherever
he revolved, accompanying him wherever he went. So congratulations to
whoever follows and emulates him. In fact, the Messenger of Allah
himself said, “You, O Ali, and your followers [Shi\`as] are surely the
victorious on the Day of Judgment.”[^102]

***“Is He then Who guides to what is right more worthy of being
followed, or he who does not guide unless he himself is guided? What is
the matter with you? How do you judge?” (Holy Qur'an, 10:35)***

Surely Allah, the Great, has said the truth.

[^1]: This statement is quoted in Ibn Kathir's Tafsir and in that of
al-Khazin, in addition to Al-Tafsir al-Kabir of Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti,
who all explain the verse in Surat al-Nisaa (Women) saying “They ask you
for a decision; say: Allah decides for you with regard to the kalala,
etc.”

[^2]: What proves this is the statement of the Messenger : “Let me write
you a book beyond which you will never stray.” Ibn Abbas has said, “Had
he written it, no couple in this nation would have disputed with one
another.” Since it was Umar who prohibited the Messenger of Allah from
writing it, accusing him of hallucinating so that he would not insist on
its writing, we can conclude that he is the one responsible for the
misguidance of the misguided and the one who deprived the Islamic nation
of guidance.

[^3]: Muslim, Sahih, Vol. 4, p. 59, commenting by saying that Ibn Abbas
and Ibn al-Zubayr disputed with one another with regard to both types of
mut\`a. Jabir ibn Abdullah [al-Ansari] said, “We used to do both when we
were in the company of the Messenger of Allah , then Umar prohibited us,
so we ceased.”

[^4]: Ibn Sa\`d, Tabaqat, Vol. 3, p. 204. Al-Suyuti, Tarikh, where the
caliphate of Umar ibn al-Khattab is discussed.

[^5]: Ibn Qutaybah, Tarikh al-Khulafa, Vol. 8, p. 31.

[^6]: Al-Bayhaqi, Al-Sunan al-Kubra, Vol. 3, p. 144.

[^7]: Ibn Hazm, Al-Muhalla, Vol. 4, p. 270.

[^8]: This is stated on p. 140, Vol. 3, and also by al-Tabrani in his
book Al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir, and on p. 310, Vol. 2, of Ahkam al-Qur'an of
al-Jassas.

[^9]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 2, p. 151, in a chapter dealing with
mut\`a and with combining both \`umra and hajj.

[^10]: This statement is recorded in the tafsir books written by Ibn
Kathir, al-Qurtubi, al-Alusi, and many others who all quote it while
explaining the sacred verse saying, “It did not befit you to harm [the
feelings of] the Messenger of Allah, nor should you marry his wives
after him.”

[^11]: This is what Ibn Qutaybah records in his book Al-Imama wal Siyasa
while discussing Abu Bakr's death and his appointment of Umar as the
next caliph.

[^12]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 1, p. 88, commenting
on the Shaqshaqi sermon.

[^13]: In Al-Fitnat al-Kubra, al-Tabari, Ibn Abul-Hadid, and Taha Husayn
all say that Talhah had borrowed fifty thousand dinars from Uthman once.
One day, he said to him, “Preparations have been made to pay you your
money back; so, send someone to receive it.” Uthman then said to him, “I
have granted it to you, O father of Muhammad, in order to assist you in
your manly support [of my government].” It is also said that Uthman had
also given Talhah once as much as two hundred thousand dinars.

[^14]: Ibn Sa\`d, Tabaqat, Vol. 3, p. 858.

[^15]: A bad name she coined for Uthman.

[^16]: These facts are recorded by: al-Tabari in his Tarikh, and by both
al-Mada'ini and al-Waqidi while discussing Uthman's assassination.

[^17]: Taha Husayn, Al-Fitna al-Kubra, Vol. 1, p. 150.

[^18]: The [Egyptian] Mu\`tazilite scholar Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh
Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 2, p. 500.

[^19]: Umar ibn al-Khattab had invented that idea in order to pave the
way for opposition to and competition with Ali simply because the sahaba
knew fully well that caliphate rightfully belonged to Ali and was
usurped by Quraysh. When Fatima al-Zahra argued with them in this
regard, they said to her, “Had your husband and cousin was the foremost
in approaching us (seeking to be the caliph), we would not have regarded
anyone as his peer.” But Umar ibn al-Khattab did not feel comfortable
with the idea that the caliphate would go back after his death to its
rightful owner, so he thus created an opposition party against him.
Hence, each one of those men coveted caliphate for himself, and they all
aspired to become chiefs, trading their creed for their world; their
trade was never profitable.

[^20]: Taha Husayn, Al-Fitna al-Kubra, Vol. 1, p. 147.

[^21]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 4, p. 53, in a chapter dealing with the
blessing in the wealth of a living or dead participant in a ghazwa.

[^22]: The meaning of this title is: one whose complexion is slightly
reddish. \_\_ Tr.

[^23]: Al-Tabari, Tarikh,Vol. 5, p. 204. Ibn al-Atheer, Al-Kamil, Vol.
3, p. 102.

[^24]: Taha Husayn, Al-Fitna al-Kubra, Vol. 2, p. 37.

[^25]: This statement is stated by al-Tabari in the discussion of the
Battle of the Camel, in al-Mas\`udi's Tarikh, in A\`tham's Tarikh, and
by others.

[^26]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 1, p. 101.

[^27]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, p. 306, quoting Muhammad
Abdoh.

[^28]: Ibid., p. 626.

[^29]: Al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 5, p. 205.

[^30]: Ibn Qutaybah, Tarikh al-Khulafa, Vol. 1, p. 18.

[^31]: Ibn Qutaybah, Tarikh al-Khulafa, Vol. 1, p. 48.

[^32]: This is indicated on p. 18 and p. 35 of Imam al-Nasa'i's
Khasa'is.

[^33]: Muslim, Sahih, Vol. 7, p. 119, where the virtues of Ali ibn Abu
Talib are discussed.

[^34]: Al-A\`tham, Tarikh, p. 163.

[^35]: Ibn Qutaybah, Al-Imama wal Siyasa, Vol. 1, p. 20.

[^36]: Egyptian scholar Muhammad Abdoh, Sharh Nahjul Balagha, Vol. 1, p.
88.

[^37]: Ibn Kathir, Tarikh, Vol. 8, p. 77.

[^38]: This is quoted in al-Mas\`udi's book of history known as Muruj
al-Dhahab when the author discusses the biography of Sa\`d ibn Abu
Waqqas.

[^39]: This is tallied by al-Tabari, al-Mas\`udi, Ibn Sa\`d, Taha
Husayn, and others.

[^40]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 8, p. 123.

[^41]: His using the first person singular “I” indicates the forcing of
his own personal view over all others, and that he did not consult the
masses of the populace as others claim.

[^42]: This tale is stated in several references; among them are: p.
166, Vol. 1, of Abul Fida's Tarikh, p. 57, Vol. 5, of al-Baladhuri's
book Ansab al-Ashraf, and p. 261, Vol. 2, of Al-Iqd al-Fareed by the
Maliki author Ibn Abd Rabbih.

[^43]: According to p. 577, Vol. 12, of Ibn Manzur's lexicon Lisan
al-Arab Mansham was a woman from Hamadan who used to sell perfume.
Whenever the Arabs bought perfume from her, a war among them would
intensify; so, she became proverbial in ill luck. \_\_ Tr.

[^44]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 1, p. 63.

[^45]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 8, p. 91, and also in “The Book of Iman”
in Muslim's Sahih.

[^46]: Al-Bukhari's Sahih, Vol. 2, p. 36.

[^47]: This is stated by Ibn Kathir in his Tarikh and by Ibn Abd al-Birr
in his Al-Isti\`ab where he discusses the biography of Hujr b. \`Adi.

[^48]: This is what both Ibn Kathir states on p. 136, Vol. 7, of his
Tarikh and al-Hakim on p. 13, Vol. 4, of his Al-Mustadrak.

[^49]: Ibn Kathir, Tarikh, Vol. 7, p. 137.

[^50]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 7, p. 90, in a volume dealing with
etiquette in a chapter discussing the Hijra.

[^51]: Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, Vol. 6, p. 77.

[^52]: Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, Vol. 6, p. 113.

[^53]: Abbas Mahmud al-Aqqad, Abqariyyat Khalid, p. 24.

[^54]: On p. 61, Vol. 2, of his Tarikh, al-Ya\`qubi says that Abd
al-Rahman said, “By Allah! It is Khalid who killed these people though
they are Muslims.” Khalid responded by saying, “Rather, I have killed
them to avenge your father Awf ibn Abd Awf.” Abd al-Rahman then said to
him, “No, you did not avenge my father, but you avenged your uncle
al-Faqih ibn al-Mugheerah.” See, may Allah protect you, how Khalid did
not deny that he killed those people although they were Muslims but
rather admitted that he killed them seeking revenge for Awf, Abd
al-Rahman's father. Does this, according to Allah's creed, permit him to
massacre a group of people for the murder of one single man? Is it
permissible to kill several Muslims for the killing of one kafir?

[^55]: Al-Tabari, Al-Riyad al-Nadira, Vol. 1, p. 100.

[^56]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 4, p. 325.

[^57]: Zaynab was one of Imam Ali's daughters.

[^58]: For more details of this plot, refer to al-Tabarsi's book
Al-Ihtijaj.

[^59]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 4, p. 175, where the author quotes Abu
Hurayra talking about himself in a chapter dealing with the
characteristics of Prophethood.

[^60]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 1, p. 38, in a chapter on acquiring
knowledge, and also on p. 2, Vol. 3, of the same reference.

[^61]: Refer to the book titled Abu Hurayra by the Egyptian author
Mahmud Abu Rayyah.

[^62]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 4, p. 28.

[^63]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 2, p. 232, in a chapter dealing with a
fasting person who wakes up finding himself in the state of janaba.
Malik, Muwatta', Vol. 1, p. 272.

[^64]: This is stated in al-Dhahabi's book Siyar A\`lam al-Nubala.

[^65]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 4, p. 68.

[^66]: Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wal Nihaya, Vol. 8, p. 108..

[^67]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 7, p. 31.

[^68]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 6, p. 190, in a chapter dealing with
spending on the wife and children.

[^69]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 4, p. 67.

[^70]: Ibn Sa\`d, Tabaqat, Vol. 2, p. 63.

[^71]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 1, p. 38, in a chapter dealing with
learning.

[^72]: Ibid., Vol. 1, p. 37.

[^73]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 1, p. 30.

[^74]: Ibid.

[^75]: Abu Hurayra was bi-lingual. He spoke Arabic (his mother tongue)
and Amharic. \_\_ Tr.

[^76]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 3, p. 158, in a chapter dealing with
children reaching the age of adolescence. It is also mentioned in a
chapter on adolescence in the Book of Government of Muslim's Sahih.

[^77]: The tradition of the standard is mentioned by al-Bukhari, Muslim,
al-Tirmidhi, al-Nasa'i, Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Abu Dawud, and all other
traditionists.

[^78]: Al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 5, p. 40. Al-Suyuti,, Tarikh al-Khulafa,
p. 104. Ibn Qutaybah, Tarikh. Ahmad, Musnad, Vol. 1, p. 75.

[^79]: This statement was made by Umar ibn al-Khattab at the Prophet's
Mosque in Medina shortly before his death. \_\_ Tr.

[^80]: Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bari, Vol. 7, p. 586.

[^81]: Muslim, Sahih, Vol. 6, p. 23. Al-Hakim, Mustadrak, Vol. 2, p.
156. Al-Bayhaqi, Sunan, Vol. 8, p. 144.

[^82]: This is recorded in Muslim's Sahih, in al-Bayhaqi's Sunan, and in
Ibn Majah's Sunan.

[^83]: Ibn Sa\`d, Tabaqat, Vol. 3, p. 248.

[^84]: Al-Baladhuri, Ansab al-Ashraf, Vol. 5, p. 31. Ibn Abd al-Birr,
Al-Isti\`ab, Vol. 2, p. 396. Usd al-Ghabah, Vol. 3, p. 289.

[^85]: Did Allah and His Messenger enjoin swearing the oath of
allegiance to adulterers and criminals? Or did He enjoin swearing it to
the righteous when He said, “Surely Allah is your Wali and His Messenger
and those who believe who uphold the prayers and who pay the zakat even
as they prostrate”?

[^86]: How we wish Ibn Umar had said the same to Talhah and al-Zubayr
who reneged from their oath of allegiance to Ali and fought him, and how
we wish “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah” acted according to this tradition in
classifying men! If violating the oath of allegiance is one of the
greatest sins which follow apostasy, what is the fate of Talhah and
al-Zubayr who did not only violate their oath of allegiance but also
violated people's honor, killed innocent people and confiscated their
wealth, and betrayed the promise?

[^87]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 1, p. 166. Ahmad, Musnad, Vol. 2, p. 96.
Al-Bayhaqi, Sunan, Vol. 8, p. 159.

[^88]: Ibn Asakir, Tarikh, Vol. 4, p. 81.

[^89]: Ibn Qutaybah. Tarikh al-Khulafa, Vol. 2, p. 26.

[^90]: Al-Tirmidhi, Sahih, Vol. 9, p. 64.

[^91]: Al-Tirmidhi, Sahih, Vol. 9, p. 64. Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad,
Vol. 2, p. 91.

[^92]: Ibn Sa\`d, Al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, Vol. 4, p. 110. Ibn Hazm,
Al-Muhalla, Vol. 4, p. 213.

[^93]: Ibn Sa\`d, Al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, Vol. 4, p. 110.

[^94]: Ibn Hajar states this fact on p. 39 of his book Al-Fath al-Bari.

[^95]: Al-Suyuti quotes this statement in his book Kanz al-Ummal, and it
is quoted in the history books of both Ibn Asakir and al-Dhahabi. To
know the other references with the number of their pages and volumes,
refer to the chapter in this book dealing with the twelve successors
according to the Sunnis.

[^96]: Abu Dawud, Sunan, Vol. 1, p. 289. Al-Bayhaqi, Sunan, Vol. 5, p.
25. Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, Vol. 2, p. 29.

[^97]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih. Muslim, Sahih, Vol. 5, p. 21.

[^98]: This is recorded by al-Bukhari in his Sahih in a chapter dealing
with the virtues of walking behind borne coffins in his Kitab al-Janaaiz
(Book of Borne Coffins).

[^99]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 1, p. 358. Al-Mas'udi,
Tarikh, Vol. 5, p. 163.

[^100]: Al-Mas\`udi, Tarikh, Vol. 5, p. 185. Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh
Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 4, p. 487.

[^101]: In his old age, Ibn Abbas grew blind. As for telling Abdullah
ibn al-Zubayr to go and ask his mother, it is due to the fact that his
father, Ibn al-Zubayr, had a mut\`a marriage with Asmaa, and Abdullah
himself was the product of that mut\`a marriage. It is said that
Abdullah did, indeed, go to his mother whom he asked about it. She said
to him, “Did I not prohibit you from coming in contact with Ibn Abbas
who best knows the Arabs' defects?”

[^102]: Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti quotes this hadith in his exegesis of the
Holy Qur'an titled Al-Durr al-Manthur as he explains the meaning of
Surat al-Bayyinah.


