Identifying Ahlul Sunnah
========================

These are members of the largest Muslim community; they represent
three-quarters of the total population of the Muslims of the world, and
they are the ones who refer for religious verdicts (*fatawa*) and for
religious following of the Imams of the four sects, namely Abu Hanifah,
Malik, al-Shafi\`i, and Ahmad ibn Hanbal.

Later in time, those called Salafis branched out of them; the
characteristics of their beliefs were later revived by Ibn Taymiyyah
whom they call “the one who revived the Sunnah,” then by the Wahhabis
whose ideology was invented by Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab; theirs is the
sect of the present rulers of Saudi Arabia.[^1]

All these call themselves “Ahlul Sunnah,” sometimes adding the word
“Jama\`ah” so they may be identified as “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah.”

Were one to research history, it will become evident to him that anyone
who belonged to what they term as “al-khilafa al-rashida,” the righteous
caliphate, or “al-khulafa al-rashidoon,” the righteous caliphs, namely
Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, and Ali[^2], and who recognized their Imamate
during their life-time, or in our contemporary time, such person belongs
to “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah.” Anyone who rejects the said caliphate or
considers it illegitimate, advocating the texts which prove that only
Ali ibn Abu Talib was worthy of it, is a Shi\`a.

It will also become clear to us that the rulers, starting from Abu Bakr
and ending with the last Abbaside ruler, were pleased with the
“followers of the Sunnah” and in total agreement with them, and that
they were angry with, and were seeking revenge against, all those who
opted to follow the leadership of Ali ibn Abu Talib as well as those who
swore the oath of allegiance to him and to his offspring thereafter.

Based on these premises, Ali ibn Abu Talib and his followers, according
to them, were not counted among “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah,” as if this
term, i.e. “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah,” was coined to confront and
juxtapose Ali and his followers. This is the major reason for the
division which afflicted the Islamic Ummah following the demise of the
Messenger of Allah into Sunnis and Shi\`as.

If we go back to analyze the underlying factors and remove the curtains,
relying on the authentic historical references, we will then find out
that such a distinction surfaced immediately after the death of the
Messenger of Allah. Abu Bakr soon took control, having ascended to the
seat of government with the help of the vast majority of the *sahaba.*
Ali ibn Abu Talib and Banu Hashim in addition to a very small number of
the *sahaba* who were politically weak did not accept him.

It goes without saying that the ruling authority expelled the latter and
banished them, regarding them as dissenting from the Islamic mainstream.
It did its best to paralyze their opposition by all economic, social,
and political means.

It is also a well known fact that our contemporary followers of “Ahlul
Sunnah wal Jama\`ah” do not realize the political dimensions of the
roles played during those periods and the extent of enmity and hatred
those vicious periods brought forth to isolate and expel the greatest
personality in the history of humanity after the Messenger of Allah
Muhammad.

Our contemporary “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah” believe that everything
went in the very best possible way, and that everything still revolves
in full agreement with the Book of Allah (the Holy Qur'an) and the
Sunnah since the time of the “righteous caliphs,” and that the latter
were like angels; therefore, they respected one another, and there were
no ill feelings among them nor ambition nor bad intentions. For this
reason, you find them refusing all what the Shi\`as say about the
*sahaba* in general and the “righteous caliphs” in particular.

It is as if “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah” never read the history books
written by their own scholars, feeling satisfied with only the praise,
compliments, and admiration their ancestors lavished on the *sahaba* in
general and on the “righteous caliphs” in particular. Had they opened
their minds and vision and turned the pages of their history books, as
well as the books of *hadith* (traditions of the Prophet [P]) available
with them, seeking the truth and getting to know who is right and who is
wrong, they would have changed their mind not only about the *sahaba*,
but also about many injunctions which they regard as correct while they
are not.

Through this humble effort, I am trying to clarify for my brethren among
“Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah” some facts which fill the books of history,
and to briefly highlight for them the clear texts which refute falsehood
and show the truth, hoping that doing so may heal the Muslims' disunity
and division and bring about their unity.

Contemporary “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah,” as I know them, are not
fanatics, nor are they against Imam Ali or Ahlul Bayt; rather, they love
and respect them, but they, at the same time, also love and respect the
enemies of Ahlul Bayt and follow in their footsteps, thinking that “they
all sought nearness to the Messenger of Allah.”

“Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah” do not act upon the principle of befriending
the friends of Allah and dissociating themselves from the enemies of
Allah; rather, they love everyone and seek nearness to Mu\`awiyah ibn
Abu Sufyan just as they seek nearness to Ali ibn Abu Talib.

The shiny term “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah” has dazzled them, and they
are not familiar with the implications and insinuations which the most
shrewd Arabs had embedded therein. If they one day come to know that Ali
ibn Abu Talib is the personification of Muhammad's Sunnah, and that he
is the gate leading to such Sunnah, and that they have contradicted him
and he has contradicted them..., they will surely renounce their stand
and research this issue very seriously, and there will be no Ahlul
Sunnah except those who followed Muhammad's and Ali's Sunnah.

In order to come to such a conclusion, we have to unravel for them the
greatest plot which played the most serious role in setting Muhammad's
Sunnah aside, and in substituting it with Jahili innovations which
caused the Muslims' setback and their deviation from al-Sirat
al-Mustaqeem (the Straight Path), and their disunity and dissension. It
also caused them at a later time to call each other apostate, and even
fight one another. It thus caused their scientific and technological
backwardness which led to their being invaded and occupied then
subjugated, humiliated, and assimilated.

Having concluded this brief survey identifying the Shi\`as and the
Sunnis, we have to take note of the fact that the proper noun “Shi\`a”
(or Shi\`ites) does not imply that its adherents oppose the Sunnah, as
most people are misled into thinking when they brag and say: “We are the
followers of the Sunnah,” implying that others are opponents of the
Sunnah.

This is something which the Shi\`as do not accept at all; rather, the
Shi\`as are convinced that they, and only they, are the ones who uphold
the authentic Sunnah of the Prophet especially since they have
approached such Sunnah through its gate, namely Ali ibn Abu Talib; there
is no gate to it other than his and, according to them, nobody can reach
the Prophet except through him.

We, as usual, seek neutrality in order to reach the truth while taking
the dear reader from one stage to another so that we may together review
some historical events. We will thus provide him with the proof and
argument showing the Shi\`as to be the true followers of the Sunnah as
this book's title suggests, leaving to him after that the freedom to
make up his mind and to comment as he pleases.

[^1]: According to informed Saudi citizens, the population of Wahhabis
in Saudi Arabia does not exceed 8%, whereas the majority are Maliki
Sunnis. \_\_ Tr.

[^2]: It will become evident to us from forthcoming researches that
“Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah” did not add the name of Ali ibn Abu Talib to
the three “righteous caliphs” except at a very late period in history.


