The Sahaba According to the Followers of Ahlul Bayt
===================================================

If we research the subject of the *sahaba* without prejudice or
sensationalism, we will find the Shi\`as viewing them as the Holy
Qur'an, the Prophet's Sunnah, and reason view them. They neither regard
all of them as unbelievers, as some extremists have done, nor do they
accept all of them as equitable, as “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah” have
done.

Imam Sharaf ad-Din al-Musawi[^1] says the following in this regard:

“Whoever researches our view with regard to the *sahaba* will find it
the most moderate of views. We neither go to extremes in this regard as
the *ghulat* have done, labelling them all as apostates, nor do we go to
extremes in accepting them as trusted authorities as most [Sunni]
Muslims have done. Those who attribute their perfection, as well as
those who go to the opposite extreme and label them as apostates, are
all in the same box.

Sunnis are of the view that anyone who heard or saw the Prophet is
absolutely equitable. They support their view from the tradition saying,
\`... whoever traversed or walked on the earth from them without any
exception.' But as far as we are concerned, although we regard keeping
company with the Prophet as a great honor, it, as is, does not render
one infallible. Like all other men, the *sahaba* included equitable
persons who are their scholars and greatest men, whereas some of them
are hypocrites who committed crimes.

The condition of some of them is unknown; so, we rely on the equitable
ones among them and accept them as our masters in the life of this world
as well as in the life to come. As for those who oppressed the *wasi*
and the Prophet's brother, as well as all those who committed crimes
such as Hind's son [Abu Sufyan], the son of the genius, the son of “the
blue woman,” the son of Uqbah, the son of Arta'a, etc., and their likes,
these have nothing to be honored for, nor does their *hadith* hold
water. It is of an undecided nature, and we have to carefully scrutinize
it.

“Such is our view with regard to the *sahaba* who narrate *hadith*. The
Qur'an and the Sunnah are our argument to pack this view as explained
wherever appropriate in our books that deal with the basics of
jurisprudence. But the majority of Muslims have gone too far in
sanctifying the *hadith* they hear from any *sahabi*, so much so that
they swayed from moderation and sought their arguments from those who
are good as well as from those who are bad, blindly emulating every
Muslim individual who had heard or seen the Prophet. They resented
others who differed from them in going to such extremes and went beyond
all limits in denouncing them.

“How intense their denunciation of us when they find us rejecting the
*hadith* of many *sahaba* whose integrity we publicly challenge or whose
condition is not fully ascertained! While doing so, we simply follow the
binding legislative obligation in verifying religious facts and looking
for authentic Prophetic legacy.

“It is for this reason that they cast doubt about us, piling their
accusations on us, charging us with unfounded charges, vying with one
another to remain in ignorance about us. Had they recalled their wisdom
and consulted the bases of knowledge and scholarship, they would have
come to know that equity as a basic ingredient in all the *sahaba*
cannot be proven. Had they delved in depth into the meanings of the
Qur'an, they would have found it full of references to a number of
*sahabi* hypocrites. Suffices you, for example, Surat al-Tawbah and
Surat al-Ahzab.”

Dr. Hamid Hafni Dawood, Professor of Arabic Literature and Head of the
Department of Arabic at Ayn Shams University in Cairo says, “As for the
Shi\`as, they view the *sahaba* as they view others: they do not
distinguish between them and between the Muslims who came later till the
Day of Judgment.”

The reason for that is their application of one set of rules whereby the
deeds of the *sahaba*, as well as those of other generations that
followed them, are measured. The mere quality of being a *sahabi* does
not award anyone a particular merit except when one qualifies himself
for such a merit and demonstrates his readiness to carry out the
injunctions set by the one who introduced the Shari\`a.

Among the *sahaba* are those who are divinely protected against sinning,
such as the Imams who were blessed to be in the company of the one who
introduced the Shari\`a. These include Ali and his sons (peace be upon
them). And among them are the men of equity who maintain a beautiful
company with Ali following the demise of the Messenger of Allah.

Among the *sahaba* are those who are accurate in their *ijtihad*, while
others among them erred in their *ijtihad*. Among them are those who
sinned, those who turned atheists and whose views are uglier and more
dangerous than those of the latter group. The circle of atheists
includes the hypocrites and those who worshipped Allah only marginally.
And among them were the disbelievers who never repented, as well as
those who reneged after having embraced the Islamic creed.

This means that the Shi\`as, who constitute a great portion of the
Muslim population, place all Muslims in one balance without
differentiating between a *sahabi*, a *tabi\`i*, or anyone else. To be a
*sahabi* is not to have immunity against wrong beliefs.

It is upon this strong foundation that they allowed themselves, out of
their own *ijtihad*, to criticize the *sahaba* and to research the
extent of their equity. They also permitted themselves to cast doubt
about a number of *sahaba* who violated the conditions of such
companionship and who deviated from the path of loving the Progeny of
Muhammad.

Why not? The greatest Messenger, after all, has said, “I am leaving
among you that which, so long as you adhere to them both, you shall
never stray: the Book of Allah and my *\`itra*, my Progeny. They shall
never part from one another till they rejoin me at the Pool [of
Kawthar]; so, see how you succeed me in faring with them.”

Upon this and similar *hadith*, they find many *sahaba* as having
violated this *hadith* by oppressing Muhammad's Progeny, and by cursing
some members of such Progeny; so, how can the honor of companionship be
sound for such violators, and how can they be branded as equitable?

This is the summary of the view held by Shi\`as in rejecting the equity
of some *sahaba*, and these are the factual scholarly proofs whereupon
they built their arguments.

Dr. Hamid Hafni Dawood admits somewhere else that to criticize the
*sahaba* and to find fault with them is not a *bid\`a* invented by the
Shi\`as alone. He goes further to say, “Since the beginning, the
Mu\`tazilites dealt with the same while discussing the issues relevant
to the creed. They did not only criticize the *sahaba* in general, they
even criticized the caliphs themselves. In doing so, they won supporters
and opponents.”

The subject of criticizing the *sahaba* used to be confined, during the
first centuries, to those who were deeply immersed in knowledge,
especially Mu\`tazilite scholars who were preceded in going in such a
direction by the heads of the Shi\`as and by the leaders who were
enthusiastically supporting the Progeny of Muhammad.

I have already pointed out somewhere else that the scholars of Arabic,
and Mu\`tazilite mentors, were a burden on Shi\`a leaders from the first
Hijri century. Thereupon, the issue of criticizing the *sahaba* is the
child-birth of following Muhammad's Progeny.

It was the result, not the nature, of Shi\`ism. Those who followed the
Progeny of Muhammad came to recognize the latter as having studied in
depth all the branches of knowledge relevant to the creed due to their
enjoyment of the sources of knowledge provided by the Imams of Ahlul
Bayt who are the pristine source and the over-flowing spring from which
Islamic scholarship is derived since the inception of Islam and till our
time.[^2]

I personally think that one who seeks the truth has to open the door for
criticism and fault-finding; otherwise, he will remain veiled from such
faults. This is exactly what “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah” have done: They
have exaggerated in their belief in the equity of all the *sahaba*
without researching the latter's conditions; they, therefore, remained
to our time distant from the truth.

[^1]: His full name is Sharaf ad-Din Sadr ad-Din al-Musawi. He is author
of the celebrated book Al-Muraja\`at. The translator of this book has
translated it into English under the title: Al-Muraja\`at: A
Shi\`i-Sunni Dialogue. It was published (hard cover edition only) in
1995 by Imam Hussain Foundation, P.O. Box 25/114, Beirut, Lebanon. \_\_
Tr.

[^2]: This text was published on p. 8 and its following pages of the
book titled Al-Sahaba fi Nadar al-Shi\`a al-Imamiyya (the Prophet's
companions as seen by Imamite Shi\`as).


