The First Incident that Led to Dividing the Muslim Ummah into Shi`as and Sunnis
===============================================================================

It is the stunningly sad stand taken by Umar ibn al-Khattab and a number
of other *sahaba* against an order by the Messenger of Allah to bring
him something to record a testament for them. He promised that this
would prevent their backsliding into error.[^1]

This Thursday Calamity is, indeed, a most tragic one. It is narrated by
all authors of *sahihs* and *sunan* and is documented by all
traditionists and historians. In a section dealing with the statement of
the ailing Messenger (pbuh): “Get away from me,” al-Bukhari records it
in his *Sahih*,[^2] relying on the authority of \`Ubaydullah ibn
Abdullah ibn \`Utbah ibn Mas\`ud. Abdullah quotes Ibn \`Abbas saying
that when death approached the Messenger of Allah, his house became full
of men including Umar ibn al-Khattab.

The Messenger of Allah said: “Let me write you something that will
forever protect you against straying after me.” Umar said: “The Prophet
is in a state of delirium, and you have with you the Qur'an; so, the
Book of Allah suffices us.” Those who were present there argued among
themselves, and their argument developed into a dispute.

Some of them said: “Come close to the Prophet so that he may write you
something that will safeguard you against straying after him,” while
others repeated what Umar had said. When the argument and dispute
intensified in the presence of the Prophet, the Messenger of Allah said
to them: “Get away from me.” Ibn Abbas used to say: “The calamity, the
real calamity, is what discouraged the Messenger of Allah from writing
what he wished to write on account of their argument and dispute.”

The authenticity of this *hadith* is not questioned, nor is the occasion
whereupon it came to be. Al-Bukhari quotes it in his treatise on
knowledge on page 22, Vol. 1, of his *Sahih*, and it is recorded in many
other books. He quotes it in several places of his *Sahih*. Muslim, too,
quotes it at the conclusion of the Prophet's will in his *Sahih* on page
14, Vol. 2. Ahmad narrates Ibn Abbas's hadith on p. 325, Vol. 1, of his
*Musnad*. It is narrated by all authors of traditions and books of
history, each writer editing it yet retaining its gist, reiterating the
fact that the Prophet was described as “hallucinating,” or “delirious.”

But they also mentioned that Umar had said: “The Prophet has been
delirious” just to sanitize the statement and undermine the sentiments
of those who found it abominable. Supporting this fact is what Abu Bakr
Ahmad ibn Abdul-Aziz al-Jawhari has said in his book *Al-Saqifa* where
he relies on the authority of Ibn Abbas.

Ibn Abbas has said,

When death approached the Messenger of Allah, there were many men
present at his house. One of them was Umar ibn al-Khattab. The Messenger
of Allah said: “Bring me ink and a tablet so that I may write you
something that will safeguard you against straying after me.”

Those present at his house disputed among themselves. Some of them said,
“Come close and watch the Prophet write you something,” while others
repeated what Umar had said. When the argument and dispute intensified,
the Messenger of Allah, became crossed and said: “Get away from me.”[^3]

This proves that the traditionists who did not wish to state the name of
the person who went against the Prophet's wish had nontheless quoted his
statement *verbatim*. In a chapter on rewarding the envoys, in his book
*Al-Jihad wal Siyar*, page 118, Vol. 2, al-Bukhari states:

Qabsah narrated a tradition to us from Ibn Ayeenah, Salman al-Ahwal, and
Saeed ibn Jubayr. They consecutively quote Ibn Abbas saying: “On a
Thursday\_\_what a day that Thursday was....” He burst sobbing then went
on to say, “...the pain of the Messenger of Allah intensified; so, he
ordered us to bring him some writing material so that he might write us
something whereby we would be protected against straying after him, but
people disputed, knowing that nobody should dispute in the presence of
any Prophe.

They said: \`The Messenger of Allah is delirious.' He, therefore, said:
\`Leave me alone, for the pain I am suffering is more tolerable than
what you are attributing to me.' He left in his will three orders: to
get the polytheists out of the Arab land, to reward the envoys the same
way whereby he used to reward them,' and I forgot the third one.”

The same hadith is narrated by Muslim at the conclusion of a chapter
dealing with the will in his *Sahih*, and by Ahmad in Ibn Abbas's
ahadith on page 222, Vol. 1, of his work, and by all other
traditionists. It is obvious from this incident that Umar ibn al-Khattab
was of the view that he was not bound by the Prophet's Sunnah.

This explains the edicts which he issued when he became the caliph and
in which he employed his own view even when it contradicted the
Prophet's statements. Actually, he followed his own personal views when
he contradicted clear divine texts. He thus prohibited what Allah had
permitted, and *vice versa*.

It is only natural to see that all his supporters among the *sahaba*
harbor the same attitude with regard to the Prophet's Sunnah. The next
chapters will prove to the reader that those *sahabah* had in fact, and
to the great misfortune of the Islamic Ummah, forsaken the Sunnah of the
Prophet and adopted the Sunnah of Umar ibn al-Khattab instead.

[^1]: It is the famous “Thursday Calamity” recorded in both al-Bukhari's
and Muslim's Sahih books.

[^2]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 4, p. 4.

[^3]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul Balagha, Vol. 2, p. 20.


