The Attitude of Ahlul Sunnah Towards the Shi`as
===============================================

If we exclude some contemporary scholars who have written with fairness
about the Shi\`as as dictated to them by their Islamic norms of conduct,
most others, in the past and the present, have been writing about the
Shi\`as in the mentality of hateful Umayyads.

Hence, you see them in every valley frantically going around saying what
they do not do, taunting and cursing, piling false charges and calumnies
against the innocent followers of Ahlul Bayt. They call them *kafirs*
(apostates). They yell bad names at them, following in the footsteps of
their “al-salaf al-salih,” so-called “good predecessors,” namely
Mu\`awiyah and his likes who took control of Islamic caliphate by force,
oppression, cunning and conniving, treachery and hypocrisy.

Once they say that the Shi\`as are a group founded by Abdullah ibn
Saba', the Jew, and once they say that they descended from Zoroastrian
origins, or that they are Rafidis, and that their danger against Islam
is more than that of the Jews and the Christians.

They also write that they are hypocrites, that they follow the principle
of *taqiyya*, that they are permissive folks who legitimize illegitimate
marriages, permitting the *mut\`a* which, in their view, is nothing but
adultery... Some of them write saying that they have a Qur'an different
from that of their own, that they worship Ali and the Imams among his
offspring and hate Muhammad and Gabriel..., and that they do this and
that, etc.

Hardly one year passes without the publication of a book or a group of
books written by “scholars” who lead “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`a,” as they
call themselves, filled with charges of apostasy and insults towards the
Shi\`as. They have neither justification nor motive except pleasing
their masters who have a vested interest in tearing the Islamic Ummah
apart and shattering its unity\_\_even its total annihilation.

Moreover, they have no proof nor argument except blind fanaticism,
veiled hatred, contemptible ignorance, and the blind imitating of their
predecessors without any discerning of facts, nor scholarly research,
nor any evident argument. They are, hence, like parrots: They are ever
repeating what they hear, copying what the Nasibis from the Umayyads'
henchmen, and those who are still making a living praising and
glorifying Yazid son of Mu\`awiyah.[^1] So do not be surprised at those
who glorify Yazid son of Mu\`awiyah when you see them cursing the
enemies of this Yazid, calling them *kafirs*.

Has the Prophetic Sunnah not stated that: “Each Muslim to another Muslim
is like a strong building: each one strengthens the other,” and, “A
Muslim relates to another Muslim like one body: if one part thereof
agonizes, the rest of the body will responds with vigilance and fever”?

Has not the Prophet said, “Cursing a Muslim is a sin, and fighting him
is *kufr*”? Had these writers who claim to be among “Ahlul Sunnah wal
Jama\`a” really come to know the Prophetic Sunnah, they would never have
permitted themselves to throw the charge of *kufr* at anyone who
testifies that: *La ilaha illa-Allah, Muhammadun Rasool-Allah* (There is
no god except Allah, Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah), and who uphold
the prayers, pay the *zakat*, fast during the month of Ramadan, perform
the pilgrimage to the Haram House, enjoin what is right, and forbid what
is wrong.

But since they are in fact followers of the “sunnah” of the Umayyads and
some leaders of Quraysh, they talk and write in the same mentality that
prevailed during the period of *jahiliyya* (pre-Islamic period) when
tribalism and racist arrogance prevailed. Whatever comes from its source
surprises none, and every pot drips of its contents.

Has the Messenger of Allah not said just as the Holy Qur'an states:

***“Say: O People of the Book! Come to an equitable proposition between
us and you: that we shall not worship anyone except Allah and not
associate aught with Him and that we shall not take others for lords
besides Allah” (Holy Qur'an, 3:64)***?

If they are true followers of the Sunnah, then they should invite their
Shi\`a brethren to a common agreement between them.

Since Islam calls upon its enemies among the Jews and Christians to come
to a common agreement of understanding and brotherhood between them,
what would you say about those who worship only one God, and whose
Prophet is one and the same, and so is their Book, *qibla*, and
destiny?! Why don't the scholars among Ahlul Sunnah invite their
brethren Shi\`a scholars and sit with them at the discussion table and
argue with them in the best manner so that they may “mend” their beliefs
which they claim to be “corrupt”?

Why don't they hold an Islamic conference of scholars from both sides
where all disputed issues are discussed and heard and seen by all
Muslims so that they may distinguish the truth from falsehood? We say so
knowing that “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah” comprise three-quarters of the
Muslims of the world, and they have the financial potential and the
political clout which make the achievement of the above easy, for they
even own satellites...

“Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah” do not attempt to do anything like this at
all, nor do they desire any scholarly debate like the one called for in
the Glorious Book of Allah in the verse saying,

***“Say: Bring your proof if you tell the truth” (Holy Qur'an,
2:111)***,

and also in this one:

***“Say: Do you have any knowledge with you so you should bring it forth
to us? You only follow conjecture, and you only tell lies” (Holy Qur'an,
6:148)***.

For this reason, you see them resorting to cursing, taunting, lying and
false charges, while they know fully well that the argument and the
proof are with their Shi\`a opponents! I think that they fear lest most
Muslims should embrace Shi\`ism if the facts are revealed as actually
took place to some Egyptian scholars who graduated from al-Azhar and who
permitted themselves to seek the truth. They did, indeed, find the
truth. They did, indeed, see the light. And they did, indeed, abandon
the beliefs they were nurtured by the “good predecessors.”

Scholars among “Ahlul Sunnah wal Jama\`ah” realize this danger which
threatens their entity with dissolution. When they run out of tricks,
therefore, some of them go as far as prohibiting their followers and
imitators to be with the Shi\`as, or to debate with them, or to marry
their daughters, or to give their own daughters to them in marriage, or
even to eat the meat of what they slaughter...

Such a stand is indicative of the fact that they are further from the
Prophet's Sunnah than anything and closer to the “sunnah” of the
Umayyads who exerted their efforts to mislead the nation of Muhammad at
any cost because their hearts never really feared the mentioning of
Allah's Name nor the truth which He revealed. Rather, they accepted
Islam against their free will.

This is admitted by their “Imam” Mu\`awiyah ibn Abu Sufyan who killed
the best of *sahaba* only to become ruler; in the very first *khutba*
which he delivered, he said, “I did not fight you so that you may pray,
fast, or perform the pilgrimage; rather, I fought you in order to take
charge of you, and Allah [?!] has granted it to me while you hate it.”
Allah has surely spoken the truth when He said,

***“Surely when the kings enter a town, they ruin it and make the most
noble of its people the very lowest, and thus do they (always) do” (Holy
Qur'an, 27:34)***.

[^1]: The Ministry of Education in Saudi Arabia has published a book
titled Haqaiq an Ameer al-Mumineen Yazid ibn Mu'awiyah (facts about the
commander of the faithful Yazid son of Mu\`awiyah) to be taught as a
curriculum text book at its public schools.


