Is Knowledge a Mental Aid, or Burden?
=====================================

   
 In Book Two of the noble *Mathnawī*, Jalāl ad-Dīn Muhammad Mawlawī
[Balkhī ar-Rūmī] has a short and elegant story. An ignorant desert Arab
has a sack full of grain and he wants it to load on top of his camel.
But instead of dividing it into two, he takes another sack full of sand
so as to balance the weight of the sack full of grain and load the two
on both sides of the camel. Along the way, a sage man becomes his
co-traveler and talks with him. As he finds out that one half of the
load is sand and it only causes trouble, he suggests to the Arab to
empty the sack full of sand and to fill in its stead half of the grain
so that the purpose [of having a balanced load over the camel] is also
met and at the same time the camel’s load would become lighter.

Being glad of the wise solution and after executing the suggestion, the
Arab asked the sage about his wealth and riches as he assumes that
having this cogent mind he is supposed to possess everything. However,
the sage sorrowfully answers that he possesses nothing in this world:  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
گفت: "واﷲ نيست يا وجهالعرب            در همه مُلكم وجوه و قوت شب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
پا برهنه تن برهنه مىدوم                    هر كه نانى مىدهد، آنجا روم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مر مرا زين حكمت و فضل و هنر           نيست حاصل جز خيال و دردسر"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“By God,” he replied, “O chief of the Arabs, in my whole property*

*There is not the means of (buying) food for the night.*

*I run about with bare feet and naked body.*

*If any one will give me a loaf of bread—thither I go.*

*From this wisdom and learning and excellence (of mind)*

*I have nothing but phantasy and headache.”*[289]

   
 Astonished and disappointed by the futility of such knowledge, the Arab
prefers his form of ignorance to such ominous wisdom and he asks the
sage to part ways with him so that his misfortune would not descend upon
him:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دور بَر آن حكمت شومت ز من              نطق تو شوم است بر اهل زَمَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا تو آن سو رو، من اين سو مىدوم       ور تو راه پيش، من واپس روم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يک جوالم گندم و ديگر ز ريگ              به بود زين حيله هاى مرده ريگ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
احمقيم بس مبارک احمقىاست              كه دلم با برگ و جانم متقى است
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Take far away from me that unlucky wisdom of yours:*

*Your speech is unlucky for (all) the people of the time.*

*Either you go in that direction, or I will run in this direction;*

*Or if your* *way be forwards, I will go back.*

*One sack of wheat and the other of sand*

*Is better for me than these vain contrivings.*

*My foolishness is a very blessed foolishness, for my heart is
well-furnished*

*(With spiritual graces) and my soul is devout.*[290]

   
 Then out of this story Mawlānā arrives at this conclusion:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فكر، آن باشد كه بگشايد رهى               راه، آن باشد كه پيش آيد شَهى
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The right thought is that which opens a way:*

*The (right) way is that on which a (spiritual) king advances*.[291]

   
 From the viewpoint of Mawlānā, it is not the discussion on the root of
knowledge and the necessity of knowing; neither does he mean bestowing
superiority to ignorance over wisdom. Instead, his point is that man
should benefit from his knowledge and this knowledge should transform
his life.

Such knowledge stands on top in self-cognition; not knowledge of the
horizontal and outer phenomena. Anyone who, without paying attention to
this truth, is in pursuit of profusely acquiring knowledge and lets
diverse and secondary information fill his memory to the brim is, in
fact, overburdening himself and placing insurmountable hurdles in his
way. Those who are like him know so many things about everything. But,
this knowledge has no influence on their fate and if all this learning
can be taken away from them, they will still pursue their past life.
Concerning such type of people, Mawlānā says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺻﺩﻫﺰﺍﺭﺍﻥ ﻓﺼﻞﺩﺍﻨﺪ ﺍﺯﻋﻠﻮﻡ             ﺟﺎﻥ ﺧﻮﺩ ﺭﺍﻣﻰﻧﺪﺍﻧﺩ ﺁﻥﻇﻠﻮﻡ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺩﺍﻨﺩ ﺍﻮﺧﺎﺼﻴﺖ ﻫﺭﺟﻮﻫﺭﻯ                 ﺪﺭ ﺑﻴﺎﻥ ﺟﻮﻫﺭﺧﻮﺪ ﭽﻮﻥ ﺧﺭﻯ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He knows a hundred thousand superfluous matters*[292] *connected with*

*The (various) sciences, (but) that unjust man does not know his own
soul.*

*He knows the special properties of every substance, (but) in
elucidating*

*His own substance (essence) he is (as ignorant) as an ass.*[293]

The approach to the issue of knowledge of one of the two prominent
branches of Western contemporary philosophy, i.e. existentialism, is the
same. Kierkegaard, the precursor of existentialism, divides truth into
exoteric and esoteric, or exact and imaginary. Exoteric truths are those
accomplishments of science while esoteric truths are rooted in the soul
of man. These esoteric truths, that he has named as ‘existential
truths,’ are interwoven with the destiny of man and determine the trend
of his life.

Every kind of knowledge should be exploited and utilized while keeping
in view its role in determining and nurturing man’s existential truths.
As such, according to Kierkegaard, all kinds of knowledge are not equal
in rank and worth. Rather, they are classified according to their
functions with respect to man. The kinds of knowledge are considered
more valuable that give answers to the ‘whys’ questions instead of the
‘whats’.[294] 

In conclusion, knowledge for the sake of knowledge is not that
important. Rather, it is due to its guiding role that it is
praiseworthy. Now, we will deal with Imām Khomeinī’s views on issues
concerning knowledge by examining them under the following headings:    

• The place of knowledge;

• The instrumental role of knowledge;

• The branches of knowledge and realms of human existence; and

• Ignorance as a pretext in neglecting knowledge.

   
  

The place of knowledge
----------------------

   
 Having roots in our religious tradition in which seeking knowledge is
deemed equal to military campaign and the ink of the scholars is even
viewed as holier than the blood of the martyrs, Imām Khomeinī (*r*)
thinks within this framework. According to him,

         Knowledge makes a man;  
          The universe itself is a large university;  
          Knowledge is a requisite for prosperity;  
          Knowledge and expertise is a criterion of superiority;  
          Knowledge means continuous learning.  
    
  

1. Knowledge makes a man
------------------------

   
 Concerning the caliphate (his appointment as God’s vicegerent on earth)
of Adam (*‘a*) we read that God taught him the names of things. Then He
tested the angels with respect to these names (in which they failed to
give answer). Thus, He proved to them that the reason behind Adam’s
(*‘a*) superiority is these very names.[295]

When man was also separated from other animals and brought them under
his dominance, he utilized the weapon of knowledge and established an
enduring civilization. If we efface knowledge from the life of man we
will confront our peer creatures as well as other levels (species) of
creatures, and not more than that. “It is the pen, knowledge and speech
that can build man, and not machine guns and other destructive powers.
Machine guns as well as other implements of war came into existence
under the aegis of knowledge.”[296]      
    
  

2. The universe itself is a large university
--------------------------------------------

   
 If we accept that the tradition of tests and trials are prevalent
everywhere, and that man has no respite for even a moment from not being
tested, and if we accept that every test entails lessons and teaching,
we will then accept the conclusion that the whole world is, for us,
essentially the place of learning and accumulation of knowledge. As
such, *madrasah*s [schools] and *maktab*s [old-fashioned primary
schools] are not the only specific places with particular lessons.
Rather, all places are schools and everything is a lesson.  
    
 The teacher and student are not surrounded by teachers of the
universities and high schools or the rest of places, and the student too
is not surrounded by those who go to the university. The universe is a
university while the prophets, *awliyā’* and those trained by them are
the teachers and the rest of mankind are students, and they ought to be
students.[297]      
    
  

3. Knowledge as a requisite for prosperity
------------------------------------------

   
 Knowing the way from the well depends on vision (being able to see) and
seeing, in turn, is the result of knowledge. So, knowledge is regarded
as the light of man in guaranteeing his prosperity and the ground for
his advancement and excellence. “It is through knowledge that man can
secure his prosperity in this world and the next. It is through teaching
that man can train and educate the youth in such a way that they are
able to safeguard their own interests in this world and the
hereafter.”[298]   
    
  

4. Knowledge and expertise as a criterion of superiority
--------------------------------------------------------

   
 By raising an amazing question which, at the same time, contains its
own answer, the Glorious Qur’an, shows us the criterion of superiority
and prominence: *“**Are those who know equal with those who know
not?**”*[299]

Hence, apart from considering knowledge as particularly valuable, Islam
also regards it as the standard of superiority. “Islam strives to that
extent for the experts and specialists. In both common laws and
religious laws it has given preference to the (one who is) more expert;
it has given preference to the more expert opinion.”[300]   
    
  

5. Knowledge as continuous learning
-----------------------------------

   
 Knowledge will acquire its fundamental function when it is pursued
throughout one’s life; not like medicine which is used only in times of
sickness. Knowledge is like food that is always needed by the living
organism. Therefore it should be planned in such a way as to be present
throughout man’s existence.  
    
 Up to the last moment of his life man is in need of knowledge, learning
and training. No man could be independent from (not in need of)
knowledge or be independent from learning and training. What some
individuals imagine that our time for learning lessons has already
passed is not correct. Learning a lesson has no specific time. As what
has been stated in the *hadīth* that [seeking] knowledge is from cradle
up to the grave, if a man in the agony of death can learn a single word,
it is better for him than to die as ignorant of it.[301]   
    
  

The instrumental role of knowledge
----------------------------------

   
 Notwithstanding all these emphases of ours on knowledge and seeking
knowledge, the principle that knowledge itself is not the aim should not
be forgotten. Rather, it has [merely] an instrumental role and it is
valuable and desirable to the extent that it performs its role. If one
day this role is forgotten and knowledge itself became the goal, then
the fall of man will commence. Knowledge is valuable to the extent that,
just like a vehicle or animal for riding, it can transport us to our
destination. Now, if these mount or means of transportation
malfunctions— however ostensibly ornamented it may be —it cannot be of
use to us.

The Imām’s approach in this context is an existential one. It is from
this aspect that knowledge ought to be an instrument for man’s dominance
and prosperity, and not that it becomes a goal itself and a hindrance
for the realization of other goals. This existential approach to
knowledge is regarded as an integral part of his moral thought. From his
perspective, all sciences should lead to a certain destination and
deliver man from this narrow pass of the world.

Otherwise, learning them is not only worthless but they themselves also
veil the way and are a hindrance to perfection. If ignorance is a dark
veil, knowledge can also be a luminous one the removal of which is more
difficult, because like a wall seen through its glass cladding which
hardly anybody can detect as being a covering and so it misguides [the
people] constantly. Hence, he describes this point in this manner:      
  If the doctrinal sciences and doctrinal truths are studied for their
own sake and if all the related concepts, terms, high-sounding
expressions, and embellished juxtapositions of terms be learned for the
sake of showing off to feeble minds and for the sake of obtaining
worldly status, then they cannot be called *āyāt al-muhkamāt*; rather
they must be named obscuring veils and hollow fantasies. That is because
if one’s purpose in learning the sciences should not be to reach God,
the Exalted, and to realize the Names and Attributes and to mould one’s
self in accordance with the Divine character [*takhalluq beh akhlāq
Allah*], each of such acquisitions of his is a dungeon of hell and a
black veil that darkens his heart and blinds his insight.[302]  
    
 This issue is not particular to this-worldly or that-worldly sciences.
Rather, every knowledge that does not lead to the True Beloved is a
[mere] mental burden. Sometimes, even gnosticism [*‘irfān*] and
knowledge of monotheism [*tawhīd*], instead of being a guide and leader,
can also be the impediment in the way to perfection and bring about
eternal destruction and perdition. So, it causes pride and superiority
complex in a gnostic [*‘ārif*] as a result of which, he remains a
captive of terminologies, explanations and descriptions.

The story of the scholar which the Glorious Qur’an indicates points to
this truth. That scholar—who has been mentioned in the Islamic sources
as Bal‘am al-Bā‘ūr—instead of benefiting from the divine sciences at his
disposal and converting them into a springboard to heaven, made use of
them as a rope in going down the bottomless pit of adversity.
Consequently, he was cursed by God and became like a dog.[303]

The Imām points to the destiny of those who were corrupted by
knowledge—even divine knowledge—in this manner:  
    
 With this short life and limited knowledge, I have seen certain people
among these so-called mystics and other scholars who, I swear by
‘*irfan* and knowledge that these terms have not made any mark on their
hearts; nay, they have rather left on them an opposite effect…  
    
 O amateurish student of concepts who has gone astray of the realities!
Deliberate over the matter for a while, and think as to what knowledge
you possess of God. What impact has the knowledge of God and His
Attributes made on your self? Perhaps the study of music and musical
rhythms may be more exact and precise than your knowledge. Astronomy,
mechanics, other physical sciences, and mathematics can match your
learning as to the precision of their terminology. Yet, in the same way
as they are not concerned with the knowledge of God, your knowledge also
is a thick curtain consisting of the veils of words, terms, and
concepts. They can neither make one ecstatic nor send anyone into a
trance.

Rather, in the eyes of the *Sharī‘ah*, the physical sciences and
mathematics are better than your knowledge, since they produce some
result, whereas your knowledge not only gives no good results, but gives
opposite ones. An engineer draws results from his calculations, and a
goldsmith is benefited from his craftsmanship; but your knowledge, apart
from not gaining any material benefits, has failed to fulfill any
transcendental ends as well… knowledge, which darkens the heart and
increases it in its blindness, is not knowledge.[304]      
    
 In short, knowledge with all the values that it possesses is desirable
and ideal so long as it can pave the way for man and lead him toward his
True Object of Worship, or at least, His Proximity.    
    
  

The branches of knowledge and realms of human existence
-------------------------------------------------------

   
 With his practical and existential approach to sciences the Imām
attempts to evaluate and categorize these on the basis of their
functions. According to him the practical merit of knowledge determines
its own station.

Thus, he makes this criterion the basis of categorization and assessment
of sciences, on the basis of which he endeavors to explain the *hadīth*
that views sciences as having three branches. It is narrated in the said
*hadīth* that the Messenger of God (*s*) once entered the mosque where
there was a group of people surrounding a man. Instead of “Who is that?”
“What is that?” inquired the Prophet (*s*) as a sign of contempt of the
person and his deeds. He was told, “He is an *‘allāmah,* (i.e. a very
learned man) and is the most learned of men regarding Arab genealogies,
past episodes, the days of the *jāhiliyyah* [Ignorance] and Arabic
poetry.” The Prophet (*s*) said, “That is a knowledge whose ignorance
does not harm one nor is its possession of any benefit to one.” Then the
Prophet (*s*) declared, “Verily, knowledge consists of these three: the
firm sign [*āyah muhkamah*], the just duty [*farīdah ‘ādilah*] and the
established *sunnah* [*sunnah qā’imah*]. All else is
superfluous.”[305]  
    
 The Imām makes this *hadīth* the basis of his categorization of
sciences and in the first degree he divides all sciences into three
branches: those that are beneficial, those that are detrimental, and
those that are worthless.  
    
 Thus, all the sciences are divisible into three kinds: first, those
sciences, which are beneficial to man in view of the other stages of
existence, success wherein is the ultimate purpose of creation… The
second kind consists of those which are harmful for man and lead him to
neglect his essential duties. This kind consists of the blameworthy
sciences and one must refrain from their pursuit… Thirdly, there are
those which are neither harmful nor beneficial.[306]  
    
 Thence, the Imām again divides into three those sciences that are
beneficial: One is the rational and doctrinal sciences; the other is the
science of ethics, and the third, the religious sciences.  
    
 You should know that the expression ‘firm sign’ [*āyah muhkamah*]
implies the rational sciences and the true doctrines and divine
teachings. ‘Just duty’ [*farīdah ‘ādilah*] implies the science of ethics
and self-purification. ‘Established *sunnah*’ [*sunnah qā’imah*] refers
to the science of the exoteric aspect and the bodily conduct (i.e.
involving some kind of physical activity).[307]  
    
 Here the Imām is actually doing an exegesis. Then, in order to prove it
he deals with a gnostical point. It is narrated from the *hadīth* of the
Messenger of God (*s*) that knowledge consists of the ‘firm sign’ [*āyah
muhkamah*], the ‘just duty’ [*farīdah ‘ādilah*] and the ‘established
*sunnah*’ [*sunnah qā’imah*].

The Imam propounds that what is meant by ‘firm sign’ [*āyah muhkamah*]
are the rational sciences and divine teachings by which issues on the
origin, resurrection and prophethood are clarified. What is referred to
as ‘just duty’ [*farīdah ‘ādilah*] is the knowledge that causes the
moderation of temperament and disposition. ‘Established *sunnah*’
[*sunnah qā’imah*] is a body of sciences that organizes the individual
and social relations of man, the highest form of which is illustriously
manifested in devotional precepts.

In a bid to elucidate this exegesis and comparison, the Imām points out
existential realms [*sāhat-hā-ye wujūdī*] of man. According to him man
has three existential realms, and in his words, three worlds
[*nash’ah*]: One is the external and sensory world or realm, and in the
mystical sense, the domain of *mulk* [corporeality] and *hudūr*
[presence]. The other is the *barzakh*i [limbo] and middle world which
is known as the domain of *khiyāl* [imagination] and *mithāl*
[allegory]. The third is the world of reason and the spiritual,
celestial and unseen domain.  
    
 You should know that… man, to put it briefly, is confronted with three
worlds, stations and phases of life: first, the world of the Hereafter,
which is the hidden world [*‘ālam-e ghayb*]of spirituality and the
intellect; second, the phase of *barzakh*, which is the world of
*khiyāl* lying between the other two worlds; third, the phase of this
world, the domain of *mulk* [corporeality] and the world of appearance
[*‘ālam-e shahādat*].[308]  
    
 Each of these existential realms is in need of training, nourishment
and exaltation. Training of every realm is also in need of knowledge of
its own kind. Then, for the training of the realm of reason we are in
need of sciences of reasoning and knowledge of certainty. For the
training of the realm of allegory of man we are in need of moral and
spiritual training. For the training of corporeal and external realm we
are in need of social training, which in turn, is attainable through
religious sciences.

In this manner, in order for each of this set of knowledge to become
significant and desirable, it should be supplemented and complemented by
one of these realms. If in the midst of this we come across knowledge
that does not train any of our realms of existence and does not fill any
of our existential ‘gaps’, we should abandon the same knowledge and go
in pursuit of other knowledge. All this emphasis on the beneficial
knowledge in the *hadīth*s is indicative of this truth. The Messenger of
God (*s*) would seek refuge in God from futile knowledge. Describing the
attributes of the pious, the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) says that
they have lent their ears only to beneficial sciences.[309] All of these
emphasize a single truth, and that is, knowledge should set light up the
ultra-light of man’s way.        
 The additional point is that although the Imām lays stress on the
useful sciences, he does not view them as confined to particular ones.
He believes that attempts should be made as much as possible to
categorize each kind of knowledge under any one of the three headings.
Therefore, everybody with the understanding that he has about himself
and his ‘vacuums’, should know which knowledge is more useful to him,
take utmost advantage of the opportunities, and avoid wasting his
time.        
    
 That is because when a sensible person knows that he cannot acquire all
the sciences and achieve all the excellences due to shortness of life,
scarcity of time and abundance of obstacles and accidents, he would
reflect about the sciences and devote himself to the acquisition of
those which are more beneficial for him.[310]  
    
 Therefore, the wayfarer [*sālik*] in the pursuit of morality should
always yearn for knowledge for his perfection and, on no account long
for it for himself. He should always be conscious that this
knowledge—though the knowledge of monotheism—does not tie his hands and
feet and makes him a captive of terminologies; disentanglement from this
kind of knowledge is in itself a virtue and perfection, as it often
happens that intense attention to terms and preoccupation with words and
that which relates to them make one totally oblivious of the heart and
its reform. [As a result] one may acquire complete mastery in expounding
the meaning and essence of the heart and the terminology of the
metaphysicians [*hukamā’*] and the mystics [*‘urafā*] while one’s heart,
we seek refuge in God from it [*na‘ūdhubillāh*], is one that is either
inverted or sealed, like someone who knows well the beneficial and
harmful properties of medicines and is able to describe them with
expertise without himself refraining from poisonous medicines or making
use of the beneficial ones. Such a person perishes despite all his
knowledge of pharmacology, which is unable to rescue him.[311]  
    
  

Ignorance as a pretext in neglecting knowledge
----------------------------------------------

   
 Although knowledge can sometimes induce man to boast, prevent him from
continuing his way to perfection, and become his mental burden, this
exceptional condition should never be taken as a pretext that ignorance,
therefore, is better than knowledge. In fact, in the parlance of
philosophy knowledge is from the category and kind of existence, and
existence, from whatever class and rank it may be, is from the lack of
what is better and superior.

Abandonment of knowledge under the pretext that it often becomes a veil
of man is like avoidance of food with the justification that gluttony or
malnutrition is a factor in the ailments of man. In the same manner that
treating malnutrition or gluttony is not abstention from food or
absolute fasting, but lies in proper eating, similarly, in order to
avoid the dangers of knowledge, one should not turn one’s back on
knowledge. Instead, its blemishes should be identified and be avoided.
Hence, those who assert that knowledge is the greatest of veils and, on
this pretext, trample on the legacy of the prophets (*‘a*) (that is,
knowledge)[312] have adopted a false way.   

In this corporeal world which is an arena of conflict of phenomena and
every thing is in danger and challenged by other things, knowledge also
has its curses that often  become man’s greatest veil. However, just as
we deal with the blemishes of other phenomena, those of knowledge should
be dealt with as well and the side effects trimmed off. Therefore,
knowledge, to whatever extent it may be, is valuable and, to that same
extent, facilitates man’s way to perfection, and the sciences—whatever
their level, whether they pertain to the *ma‘ārif* or something else—are
a path for reaching the Garden appropriate to each of them, and the
wayfarer of each of the paths of knowledge is a traveler on one of the
paths of Paradise.[313]  
    
 As such, albeit the Imām strongly emphasizes knowledge that is
profitable and discourages loading the memory with unnecessary
terminologies, he still stresses the instrumental role of knowledge in
this manner:  
 I, too, do not put much of a store by mere knowledge, and a learning
that does not bring faith with it is the greatest of veils. However, one
has to approach a veil in order to tear it into shreds. The sciences are
seeds of (spiritual) experience.[314]  
    
 Therefore, anyone who has essentially entered the greatest veil can go
out of it. One cannot bypass this channel. Instead, one should enter
through one door and exit through another. Not entering and also
stopping inside are both incorrect. As a result, through a practical
approach to knowledge and insistence on the fact that all “the sciences
are absolutely practical and even the transcendental sciences have, in a
way, a practical aspect in them,”[315] the Imām urges us initially to
deal with the profitable and ennobling kinds of knowledge consciously,
selectively and with consideration to the limited opportunity and
facilities that we have.

Then, after benefiting from this profitable instrument and reaching the
highest heaven by means of this ladder, we should abandon it and
continue on our way. We should not become the captives of the luminous
and hidden veils that are born of an attachment to knowledge. We ought
not to imagine this instrument as the goal, because pursuing knowledge
as the objective itself gives one a blackened heart and makes one remain
on the way. Thus, the wayfarer on the path to perfection ought not to
desire for anything except God, and not preoccupy himself with any
attainment and be deceived by it. He should always bear in mind this
ultimate objective, and should not quench his thirst except through
meeting the Friend.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﻫمچو مستسقى كز آبش سير نست         بر هر آنچه يافتى، باﷲ مايست
  </p>
</blockquote>

*By God, do not tarry in anything (any spiritual position) that thou
hast gained,*

*(But crave more) like one suffering from dropsy who is never sated with
water.*[316]

   
    
  


