Ethics and Politics Relationship
================================

   
 Politics has two faces—a smiling face that gives glad tidings of
prosperity, power and authority, and a furious one that calls to mind
power struggle, power worship, and injustice. It is owing to this that
politics is likened to Janus,[329] the first mythological king of
Latium.[330]

The gods had bestowed the king with such powers of clairvoyance that he
would see the past and the future in unison. It is for this reason that
they used to depict him as having two faces, portraying him as
terrifying. In reality, politics has also two facets and faces: On the
one hand, it is after securing the objectives and demands of the
citizens and is a powerful tool for the establishment of public order
and welfare—this is the favourable face of politics.

On the other hand, it is the means of rivalry, challenge, power
struggle, dealing a blow to the enemy, and outstripping and outsmarting
him—this gives a dreadful image of politics.

In our culture the latter face of politics is better known. Usually
politics has been equated and associated with fraud, deception, and in
slang, ‘chicanery’ [*pedar sūkhteh bāzī*].

A deeper analysis of this aspect of politics exists in Arabic and has
taken the form of a proverb. It states, “To rule is mule-like
(sterile)”[331]  [*al-mulk ‘aqīm*]. It means that it show no mercy to
anybody and recognizes no kinship and kinsmen.

History is replete with this attitude to politics. Nādirshāh[332] killed
his own son merely because of a misunderstanding, and Shīraveyeh[333]
murdered his own father Khusrūparvīz (Khosroe Parvez) in order to gain
power.[334] Ferdowsī elegantly depicts the gloomy end of this unlucky
king. After Shīraveyeh, who was himself a prisoner of his father, is
released from the prison through the help of the soldiers, he dethrones
his father, puts him behind bars, and goes in search of a person who
would kill his father. But he has nobody to help to murder the king as
such a deed would be inauspicious. However, he finally finds the person
who accepts to shoulder the heavy responsibility.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يكى خنجرى تيز دادش چو آب               بامد كُشنده سبک پرشتاب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
چون آن بدكنش رفت نزديک شاه           ورا ديد پابند در پيشگاه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بلرزيد خسرو چو او را بديد                  سرشكش ز مژگان به رخ
برچكيد...
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
چو آن جامهﻫﺎ را بپوشيد شاه                به زمزم همى توبه كرد از گناه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يكى چادر نو به سر دركشيد                 بدان تا رخ جانستان را نديد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بشد مهر هرمزد، خنجر به دست           در خانه پادشا را ببست
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سبک رفت و جامه از او دركشيد          جگرگاه شاه جهان بردريد
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He gave him a sharp dagger that shines like water,*

*And he* *was hastily directed to kill.*

*When the wicked  person approached the king,*

*He saw him devoted to God.*

*When Khosrow saw him, tears flew on his cheek;*

*When the king wore those garments and repented from his sins.*

*A new chador he covered himself with*

*So as not to see his murderous face.*

*Mehr Hormozd took hold of a dagger*

*And closed the door of the king’s house.*

*He promptly approached the king and took away the chador from his head*

*And opened the king’s belly.*[335]

This patricide does not end here. As a precautionary measure, fifteen
other sons of Khusrū who are imprisoned are also butchered.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
چو آگاهى آمد به بازار و راه                 كه خسرو برانﮔﻭنه برشد تباه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
همه بدگمانان به زندان شدند                 به ايوان آن مستمندان شدند
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
گرامى ده وپنج فرزند بود                     به ايوان شاه آنک در بند
بود
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
به زندان بكشتندشان بيگناه                   بدانگه که برگشته شد، بخت
شاه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When the people of the street and market understood*

*How* *Khosrow became corrupted,*

*All the wicked were imprisoned*

*While the indigent were in the veranda.*

*All the fifteen noble sons (of Khosrow)*

*Were imprisoned in the castle.*

*They were innocently murdered in prison*

*As the king’s fortune returned.*[336]

   
 Shīraveyeh, too, did not remain unpunished for this patricide [and
fratricide] for he was also murdered by others.

Well, the story of politics from this perspective is a tragic one and
replete with patricides, fratricides and filicides. If politics is such,
what will its relation to ethics be? Is it possible to build a bridge
between the two? This question has occupied and challenged the minds of
thinkers for the past two thousand years. Some believe that politics is
a mixture of fraudulence and violence, and, as such, it cannot be rid of
its abominations. This is while others do assert that politics can be
ethical. But we are after finding out the place of politics in the
ideological system of Imām Khomeinī and what connection it could have
with ethics. In a bid to answer this question, we have no alternative
but to discuss first the fundamental views on the subject under
consideration. Then, we will examine the viewpoint of the Imām in this
context.  
 Concerning the relationship between ethics and politics, there are four
main views and they are as follow:     

• View on the separation of ethics and politics;

• View on the subservience of ethics to politics;

• View on the duality of ethics and politics; and

• View on the oneness of ethics and politics.

   
  


