View on the separation of ethics and politics
=============================================

   
 The principal claim of this view is that one should believe in the
difference between ethical rules and political exigencies, and that one
should take political measures on the basis of reality and by keeping in
mind the interests and benefits. Anchored to this approach, which is
also called political realism, is the consideration of ethics in
politics ending in failure in this sphere.

It is because the pivot of ethics is truth and right while the motive of
politics is interests and benefits. Ethics demands that we tell the
truth even though it is against us, not to do injustice, not to take
people as our instruments, to be advocates of justice all the time, not
to lie, to abstain from deception, not to conceal the truths, etc. This
is while politics necessitates the abandonment of some principles of
ethics. Basically any step in politics begins with hostility against
ethics and trampling upon moralities. Any political activity is
impossible without ‘the dirty hands’.

Politics is nothing but an arena for the obtainment, expansion and
preservation of power, which cannot be realized without sacrificing the
principles of ethics. After every political step, the abundance of
crushed moral virtues is conspicuous. Therefore, one must choose either
ethics or politics, purity or defilement while discarding the other
since combining the two is absurd. As a result, “All the interests of
man who wants his soul to remain pure through piety lie in not doing
anything.”[337]

According to a political realist adhering to ethics in the political
sphere is not only unbeneficial but also means total loss since he knows
that in this world, “In spite of the moral tales which are for children,
virtue remains unrewarding. The real sovereign is power… and moral
temptations are signs of weakness of designs.”[338]

Apparently, the first thinker who dwelt on this issue and elucidated it
was Thucydides,[339] a Greek political thinker and historian. He
precisely sketched out this viewpoint two thousand and four hundred
years ago and decided to delineate the exact boundary between ethics and
politics and to separate these two realms from one another. In the
belief that politics is tied to interests while ethics is to truth, he
narrates the dialogue between the representatives of Athens, which was
then in a position of strength, and the representatives of the city of
Melos, a former ally of Athens that was in a position of weakness. The
dialogue strikingly shows the essence of this view.[340]

After the city of Melos fell under siege, the representatives of Athens
went there to conduct a dialogue and talked with the elders of the city.
An excerpt of the dialogue is as follows:

“What we want is to make it clear to you that we have come here for the
expansion of our empire and are conducting this dialogue so as to
maintain the safety of your city. To prevail over you is not difficult
for us, but at the same time, we want your safety since this affair is
beneficial to both of us.” [341]  
 The representatives of Melos replied, “How could it be just as good for
us to be the slaves as for you to be the masters?”[342]  
 Representatives of Athens: “You, by giving in, would save yourselves
from disaster; we by not destroying you, would be able to profit from
you.”[343]

Representatives of Melos: “Hence, according to the people of your city,
just behaviour lies in not differentiating between the cities that have
nothing to do with you (neutral) and those that are either your puppets
or have revolted against you, and you have gained control over
them?”[344]  

Representatives of Athens: “From the viewpoint of right and wrong, our
people do not make any difference between them and they believe that the
cities are still independent as they are strong, and the reason why we
do not attack them is that we are afraid of them. So, by conquering you
we shall increase not only the size but the security of our empire as
well. We have mastery over the seas and you are a small and weak island.
As such, it is only natural that you should surrender to us.”[345]

Therefore, since the people of Athens are more powerful than the people
of the island of Melos, the power itself gives them the right to occupy
the island and make its inhabitants their slaves. The view of the
separation of ethics from politics is more explicitly associated with
Machiavelli, the Italian thinker. He not only insists on this dichotomy
but also recommends, in his concise and famous thesis named, *The
Prince*, to the ruler or prince to trample upon every ethical
consideration so as to fortify his power.

Although Machiavelli thinks of ethics as essential for the life of the
individual and indispensable for the continuity of society and social
life, he regards attachment to it as dangerous for the prince and he
cautions him (the prince or monarch) against the danger of piety and
says:  
    
 Anyone who wants in all conditions to be virtuous, in the midst of all
this wickedness, has no destiny except disappointment. Thus, a prince
who would not like to relinquish his crown should learn wicked methods
and utilize them wherever needed.[346]      
    
 Even though in the view of Machiavelli the possession of virtues is
good for the prince, it is so as long as it does not amount to the
collapse of his rule.  
    
 Thus, since we think optimistically, we see it as an attribute which is
regarded as a virtue. But its implementation will lead to annihilation
[of the government]. This is while there is also another attribute which
is viewed as callousness although it engenders security and
success.[347]       
    
 Though the popularity of the prince is desirable, in case he cannot
avoid either the people adoring or fearing him. It is then better if
they fear him because in this way they could be controlled and guided
better.[348]  

No matter how desirable the faithfulness and fidelity of the prince are,
it is regrettable that circumstances are not always compatible with the
observance of *pacta sunt servanda*.[349]  
    
 Life experiences have taught us that the monarchs who have performed
onerous tasks are those that have not given any consideration to doing
good deeds and have manipulated the people through trickery. Finally,
they have prevailed over those who have observed righteousness.[350]   
    
 Thus, one must always move in tune with reality, know the value of
power and authority, and bear in mind that even among the prophets,
those armed had been victorious and “all the prophets who were fighters
triumphed and those who were armless remained unsuccessful.”[351]

There are two ways to gain victory: law and force. Law is peculiar to
the human being. Force belongs to the animals, and since the first
alternative is not always responsive, the monarch should also learn the
second option. It is in this sense that the monarch ought to know how he
could acquire the two temperaments as he will not remain faithful to one
of them. So, if the monarch is supposed to learn the style of the wild
beast and apply it, he ought to learn also the style (cunning) of the
fox as well as that (brawn) of the lion as the lion cannot escape from
traps (deception) and the fox from the clutches of the wolf (power)…

Therefore, the shrewd ruler is not supposed to be faithful to his
promise when it is to his disadvantage and detriment, and there is no
more reason to commit to it… From these circumstances, there are
numerous instances that can be brought out and be shown that so many
promises and commitments which have been violated through the infidelity
of the princes as well as for without any basis. Those who have imitated
the fox have come out more successful than the rest. But it should be
known how to embellish the outward appearance and to cunningly perform
deception and trickery. The people are so naïve and credulous such that
a deceiver can always find those who are willing to be
deceived.”[352]       
    
 The book is replete with such recommendations. Considering the
psychological makeup of the masses, he regards them as inherently filthy
and wicked, and believes that “anyone who leans on the people [actually]
leans on water.”[353] His main proposal is that “the people should
either be flattered or knocked down.”[354]

There is no middle way; it is either the stick or carrot. Reliance on
Machiavelli and quotation of his statements are due to his importance in
the history of political thought. There have been innumerable
discussions on Machiavelli and his thesis which he dedicated to Lorenzo
de Medici (1449-92), the ruler of Florence (in Italy). A group believes
that Machiavelli expressed his beliefs in that book and that he believed
in whatever he said; thus, he deserves curse and damnation.

But keeping in view his other book entitled, *Discourses*, another group
believes that Machiavelli was actually describing the rulers of his time
and not prescribing a particular method. At any rate, this discussion is
still alive and the first view prevails over the second. Similarly,
‘Machiavellian’ is an attribute that signifies jugglery and cheating in
the sphere of politics. In spite of this, he has been described as “the
first modern political philosopher”[355] and nobody doubts the influence
of his thinking and ideas.

So, it is fitting to claim that in the sphere of political thought,
Machiavelli can be accepted; he can be denied as well. But, he cannot be
overlooked. Machiavelli’s ‘crime’ was that he would expose whatever the
princes were doing, and made clear the essence and consequences of such
thinking. From then onward, this approach not only remained undiminished
in matters of politics but also the rulers who were Machiavellian
supporters commenced their rule by vilifying Machiavelli while observing
all his recommendations. Even those who opposed Machiavelli’s thought
would tread the same path once they obtained power, applying the same
recommendations to such an extent that Frederick, the Great, the King of
Prussia, at a young age while still a crown prince and enjoying the
companionship of the French philosopher, Voltaire, wrote a book on the
latter’s encouragement entitled, *Anti-Machiavelli*.

In it he criticized one by one the ideas of Machiavelli as being
contrary to moral laws. But no sooner than succeeding to the throne that
he found himself besieged by his rivals who, from all quarters, had cast
covetous eyes on his country. Whereupon he followed to the letter the
political principles enunciated by Machiavelli, particularly in *The
Prince*. It is notable that there has been no political figure who
observed so precisely and strictly the law of *raison d’éstat*[356] as
he did. Finally, in his political will and testament, he acknowledged
that Machiavelli was right; adding that among all those with boundless
ambitions, anyone observing ethics would not survive.[357]

The perfect epitome of a person possessing such a mental frame, who
instinctively applied all the above recommendations, was Mu‘āwiyah ibn
Abī Sufyān. In a bid to obtain the caliphate and preserve it, he did
many unofficial things and trampled on all moral virtues. After
concluding a peace treaty with Imām Hasan al-Mujtabā (*‘a*), he trampled
on the conditions that were not to his satisfaction.[358] He officially
announced that his objective in waging war and concluding the peace
treaty was nothing but obtainment of power and dominance over others,
and that there being no further impediment in his way, he saw no reason
to fulfill his promises and commitments. He performed congregational
prayer in Nukhaylah and in his sermon he declared to the signatories:  
    
 By God, I did not wage war against you in order to let you say your
prayers, observe fasting, perform *hajj*, or give *zakāt* [alms-tax],
[It makes no difference for me] whether you perform these acts or not. I
fought against you only for the sake of making myself your ruler and God
granted my wish even though it is unpleasant for you.[359]  * *      
    
 Prior to the birth of Machiavelli, Mu‘āwiyah applied his prescriptions
on the temperamental duality of the prince and the lion-fox nature of
the ruler. In his letter to Ziyād ibn Ubayyah, the then governor of
Basrah and Kūfah, he wrote:  
    
 It is not fitting for you and me to guide the people uniformly through
a policy of leniency as to make them experience inebriation, or to exert
extreme pressure on them as to put them in a quandary. Instead, you have
to adopt a policy of violence and rudeness while I will employ a policy
of clemency and compassion.[360]           
    
 The adventurousness of Mu‘āwiyah, the war he imposed on Imām ‘Alī
(*‘a*), the elected caliph of the people, and his Machiavellian ways are
well-known to all and sundry. Some of the people at that time were so
influenced by such an approach as to accuse Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) of lack of
political acumen, with which we will deal later. Relying on political
realism, this group of people believed that Mu‘āwiyah should be dealt
with in a Mu‘āwiyah-like fashion—something which Imām ‘Alī (‘a) was not
at all prepared to do.

Consequently, Mu‘āwiyah emerged triumphant. As such, their view, as they
thought it, was proved that the path of politics is separate from that
of ethics. The main critique of Imām ‘Alī’s (*‘a*) critics who have
always believed in the great value of his ethical personality, pertains
to the Imām’s (*‘a*) moral approach in politics. One of them is Shafīq
Jibrī, an Egyptian contemporary, who regards the Imām’s (*‘a*) ethical
approach as the reason behind his failure in the Battle of Siffīn.[361]
He says:  
    
 The Imām (*‘a*) did not know that the main apprehension of the people
concerned the vanities of the world. It was difficult for him to believe
that the people were in pursuit of their own interests and benefits. So,
he did not behave with them as a professional politician would; rather,
he dealt with them as a professional man of ethics.[362]                
    
 Sayyid Qutb, himself a Sunnī thinker, does not approve this assessment.
He believes that the Imām (*‘a*) was familiar with the way to victories
and defeats, and the methods thereof. But he was not willing to make use
of any method at any cost. Instead, he was strictly committed to ethics.
This is while  
    
 Mu‘āwiyah and his alter ego ‘Amr [ibn al-‘Ās], owing to being more
acquainted with the psychological motivations of individuals as well as
with useful attitudes in suitable conditions, turned victorious against
‘Alī. Nay, they became victorious since they regarded themselves free to
employ any weapon; whereas he [Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*)] abided by his ethical
principles in employing war weapons. Besides, Mu‘āwiyah and his alter
ego used to resort to lies, deception, trickery, bribery, and buying
commitments and loyalty. Therefore, it is not surprising that the two
would triumph and he be defeated; a defeat that was nobler than any
triumph.[363]     
    
 Such an approach to politics has led many religious individuals to turn
their backs on it; the reason being that the notion that politics, in
essence, necessitates separation from ethics has taken root. Expressions
such as ‘to rule is mule-like’ [*al-mulk ‘aqīm*], ‘politics has no
father and mother’ ‘politics is chicanery’ [*siyāsat pedar
sūkhteh-bāzī*], and the like, are the products of such a notion. Even
one of the contemporary jurists [*fuqahā*] who used to assail politics
pessimistically and dissuade the Muslims from engaging in it, would say,
“Politics is on one side while religion is on the other.”

In the words of Imām Khomeinī, the matter went to such an extent that
most of the scholars [*ahl-e ‘ilm*] and holy men [*muqaddasīn*] had
accepted the notion that “religion has its own boundary and so with
politics”[364] and even if they wanted to backbite somebody, they would
dub him as ‘political or politicized’ [*siyāsī*].[365] He himself
narrates that Pākravān, the then chief of the State Organization for
Security and Information (SAVAK)[366] approached him and said, “Sir,
politics consists of telling lies, cheating, trickery, jugglery and, in
short, chicanery of the highest order [*pedar-sūkhtehgī*]; leave all
this to us.” Since the occasion was not appropriate, I decided not to
argue with him and said, “From the very beginning we have not been
engaged in the kind of politics that you mention.”[367]

In reality, this tenet has two premises. One is that ethics and politics
belong to two distinct realms while the other is that political values
are different from those of ethics. Proponents of this view propound
that the realm of ethics is that of individual realm and his private
affairs, while the realm of politics concerns the assurance of wholesome
social life and regulation of social relations of individuals with one
another, as well as with the government. In addition, moral value is a
function of truth, whereas in politics the criterion of value judgment
is interests and benefits.

A certain political act is good provided that it is beneficial and
brings about a positive outcome, this not being so with ethics.
Basically, ethics manifests itself when man is free of the shackles of
his personal interests and considerations and moves beyond himself. This
point indicates that the precept of separation of ethics from politics
does not necessarily mean conflict between them. That is to say, it is
not that political acts and movements of politicians are unquestionably
repulsive to moral values.

Thus, this tenet is sometimes called the tenet of ‘amorality of
politics’. It means that in politics we are up against different kinds
of values and standards of measurement, and that politics should not be
assessed on the basis of moral values or be judged within the framework
of ethics. So, politics in this sense is neutral; it is not against
ethics. However, since in practice, this tenet is not bent on either
ensuring or negating ethics, and is only in pursuit of obtaining
benefits; it does not refrain from trampling on all the principles and
rules of ethics whenever necessary. Hence, this theory throughout
history has been tantamount to the negation of ethics and
etiquettes.                  
    
  

Criticism of the view
---------------------

   
 The conclusion of the claimants of this is that the principles of
ethics should not be allowed to interfere in politics. The story of the
followers of this tenet is that of the person who was cutting the root
while unwary of the fact that he was approaching death by his own hands.
The problem is that if the people realize that their leaders are not
behaving morally, they will also wash their hands of ethics, just as
Sa‘dī says:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺍﮔﺮ ﺯﺒﺎﻍ ﺮﻋﻴﺖﻤﻠﮏ ﺧﻭﺮﺪﺴﻴﺒﻰ         ﺒﺮﺁﻭﺮﻧﺪﻏﻼﻤﺎﻦ ﺍﻭﺪﺮﺨﺖ ﺍﺯ ﺒﻴﺦ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If the monarch were to eat a single apple from the garden of a
peasant,*

*The servants would pull up the tree by the roots.*[368]

   
 A government which permits itself to commit injustice and deceive the
people cannot expect justice and truthfulness from them. A citizen, who
realizes that his sovereign government tells a lie, prefers, for
instance, to fill his tax declaration form with lies, too, and give
wrong information. From the perspective, ‘The people are sovereign over
the judgment’ [*An-nās ‘alā dīn mulūkahum*], such a citizen considers
himself licensed to perpetrate all sorts of fraud and answers a lie with
another lie.

The point is also certain that no government is needless of ethics. The
government regards it necessary for its own citizens as they cannot
always be asked to obey through force and violence. Instead, the social
and government laws should be internalized; with ethics assuming the
responsibility for this task. So, any government or ruler is in need of
ethics. Even Mu‘āwiyah considered ethics as being necessary for the
people and would feign to be a moral person abiding by ethical
principles.

A government has hitherto not appeared in history which has permitted
its citizens to behave immorally and claim that ethics is worthless.
Even if there is a person who has, in practice, trampled on ethics, at
least he has pretended to preserve it. Hitler, too, considered himself
as a moral person, and Stalin, who set up those ceremonial and sham
courts, did so as well and regarded for his people morals as being
necessary.

Therefore, if ethics is needed for the people, it can only be kept when
the people feel that the government is also faithful and committed to
the principles of ethics. Otherwise, there will be no guarantee for the
survival of ethics in society, and in turn, survival of the government.

That is why even Machiavelli stresses on the need for the government to
behave morally. He views as oppressive the application of whatever he
explains in *The Prince*, saying, “Of course, all these instruments are
oppressive and destructive to civil life.”[369] He also states, “Just as
good law is needed for the preservation of good morality, good morality
is also necessary for the observance of law.”

In a nutshell, no government, no matter how powerful and versatile it
may be, can exact obedience from the people only through police methods
and by strengthening its own security system. It has no alternative but
to benefit from ethics and its promotion. Instead of intimidation, it
should persuade them and even pretend itself to be committed to
morality. The importance of pretending to be moral is so great that all
governments—even the immoral ones—try to make use of this cover-up to
achieve their objectives.

Given all the evidence that is sometimes put forth to support this
tenet, the reality cannot be denied that if one day the people realize
the untruthfulness and immorality of the government and government
policy, they will no longer follow them and will retaliate. The truth of
the matter is that the moral man is the very same social and political
man.

The exact demarcation between the public and private domain of
individuals cannot be specified, and ethics cannot be assigned
exclusively to a certain realm and politics to another. In practice, the
life of every individual has acquired social forms, and every social
dimension has individual manifestations. On the other hand, the
influence of the government over the private sphere of the individuals
is increasing daily. Actually, governments are also gradually taking up
the supervision of the private realm and are implementing policies for
it.

Thus, it is naïve to think that politics can be regarded as separate
from ethics, and accordingly, expect people to behave morally in their
relations with others and with the government. In his book entitled,
*Trust*, the Japanese-American thinker, Francis Fukuyama, points to the
issue on the legitimacy crisis of the American system and regards it as
caused by the negligence of the society’s leaders of the principles of
ethics, and their fraudulent conduct in political affairs. Deceitful
conduct, moral disgrace and scandals such as ‘Watergate’[370] have
provided the grounds for the mistrust of the people as regards the moral
conduct of the leaders. The people have steadily lost their confidence
and now the American society is facing a legitimacy crisis caused by the
decrease of confidence. According to Fukuyama,  
    
 The organizational potentiality of economic establishments relies not
only on the institutions such as trade law, contract, etc. Instead, it
necessitates the aggregate of unwritten moral laws and principles which
establishes the foundation of social confidence.[371]               
    
 Fukuyama believes that apart from enhancement of economic assets, the
government should always endeavor to enhance and increase social assets
(such as confidence).[372] In his opinion, confidence and moral
commitments are society’s engine of stimulation.[373] 

For that reason, nowadays almost everybody outspokenly advocates this
tenet and tries to mitigate its extremism, modify it[374] and
acknowledge, to some extent, politics as being ethical.  
    
  

View on the subservience of ethics to politics
----------------------------------------------

   
 This tenet stems from the Marxist-Leninist theory on society, politics
and ethics. According to the Marxist viewpoint, history is nothing but
the arena of struggle among classes—classes that emerge out of the new
mode of production, and after sometime, nurture their enemy
(anti-thesis) in their midst and then wither away, relinquishing their
position to the dominant class, which in turn nurtures its own
anti-thesis. In this way, any class that moves in harmony with history
is revolutionary while a class that stands in the way of progress of the
forces of production is anti-revolutionary. Every class generates its
own associations, which is the infrastructure of the society and
manifestation of the condition of economic production. From this
perspective, nothing is absolute and everything is class-based such as
moral concepts, arts and even science.

The final stage of history is the period of capitalism in which the mode
of production is collective while the ownership of the means of
production is private. This contradiction leads to the emergence of a
new class termed, ‘proletariat’ or working class, which is the agent of
production but not owner of the means of production. So, through
revolutionary means this class will take the reign of power and lead the
society toward socialism—which is a passing stage—and finally,
communism. At this juncture, class struggle comes to an end as the
society is no more divided into two classes, and both the mode of
production and ownership of the means of production are collective.

Marxism-Leninism considered struggle for the triumph of the proletariat
as inevitable and revolution as certain, and reckoned any sort of reform
movement to improve the living conditions of the workers as wrong. This
viewpoint brought into being a particular sociology, which increased its
‘scientific’ attribute and claimed that it has proved three things:  
    
 (1) The absolute withering away of the present society is the only way
of executing fundamental social reform;

(2) There is nothing needed or to be considered more than this violent
action; so, any planning endeavor for the new society is impractical and
unfeasible;

(3) In order to acquire the reign of power through a revolution,
observance of any kind of conditions or limitations is uncalled for; so,

(a) Historically, this trend is certain and irreversible, and as such,
beyond the control of man;  
 (b) Ethics, truth and the like are merely derived phenomena from the
class interests, and thus, the only scientific meaning of ethics, truth,
justice, and others, is the advancement of some class interests, which
science has proved to be at the threshold of ascension and dominance.  
 The violent act of revolution involves any sort of ethics, sincerity,
genuineness, and justice on the oneness of established scientific
meaning.[375]                        
    
 On the basis of this tenet, ethics and other social manifestations are
unconditionally and categorically subservient to politics and
revolutionary action― they derive their worth from them and are
justified by them― while revolutionary action and politics themselves do
not need the justification of ethics.

When discussing ethics, Lenin himself says, “Our morality is acquired
from the benefits of the class struggle of the proletariat;”[376] “For
us, ethics that stems from outside the society does not exist and such
ethics is nothing else but pretence;”[377] and “when the people ask us
about ethics, we say that for a communist, the totality of ethics finds
meaning in relation to the iron order and discipline as well as in the
conscious resistance against imperialism.”[378]  

 The tenet of the separation of ethics and politics regarded both ethics
and politics as true and authentic, and reckoned both as acceptable and
necessary for the society. But it emphasized that these two branches
belong to two distinct and independent realms and the criteria of this
branch should not be adapted to that realm, or that branch to this
realm.

Thus, Machiavelli, who used to maintain so vehemently that brutal
methods and fox-like cunning were essential for the ruler, would
nonetheless lay stress on the necessity of adhering to ethics and
believed that the ruler, as far as possible, should not trample upon
ethical principles unless forced to do so. But this tenet basically
reckons ethics, politics and the whole of culture as the superstructure
of the society. It espouses that no clout of authenticity should be
given to ethics and that the ‘moralness’ of behaviour of a certain class
depends on its historical circumstances.

So, a practice can be an ethical one from the viewpoint of a certain
class while the same is unethical and antirevolutionary according to
another class. To cite an example, the crackdown on the peaceful
demonstration rally of the Russian people perpetrated by Czar Nicholas
II in 1905 was an antirevolutionary act. But the crackdown on the
strikers and workers of factories perpetrated by Lenin, after the
establishment of socialism, was considered a revolutionary act.

Hence, an act is ethical when it is revolutionary and progressive with
historical trends determining the criteria of progress, and the
Communist Party recognizes them. Therefore, this tenet does not regard
any antirevolutionary act as contrary to ethics; it rather propounds
that whatever the Communist Party, which is the representative of the
proletariat, does is basically that which is morality and virtue. And it
means fighting against morality and flaying ethics. Lenin himself
announced the form of rule of the Communist Party in this manner:  
    
 ‘Dictatorship of the proletariat’ is a scientific expression—denoting
the class under discussion and the peculiar form of government authority
that is deemed ‘dictatorship’—that connotes an authority which is not
founded on law or election, but directly on the armed forces of a
section of the masses.[379]        
   

Criticism of the view
---------------------

   
 Based on this finding, the dictatorial government of the proletariat
replaced the Czarist government of Russia, and under the name of
revolution and interests of the masses, it committed crimes that
surpassed those of the Mongols and the Czarists. The acme of these
atrocities took place during the period of the bloody purges. Aimed at
eliminating his rivals and anyone who possessed some intelligence,
Stalin conducted a wide liquidation campaign from 1936 to 1938, setup
numerous ceremonial courts, and obtained false ‘confessions’ from his
opponents that they were agents of imperialism, foreign spies,
reactionaries, and anti-people, and that they had no thought other than
overthrowing the socialist system.

All these immoralities were reckoned as moral, because the interests of
the [Communist] Party demanded so and these lies were considered true
from the political standpoint. From this perspective, the difference
between the atrocities committed by Stalin and Hitler was that since the
conduct of Stalin was aimed at vouchsafing the interests of the emerging
class of the proletariat, it was good and ethical. But since what Hitler
does was aimed at serving the interests of the bourgeoisie, it was bad
and immoral. Micklaus James, one of the Hungarian intellectuals, who
found out the process of the reversal of this truth and lost his head in
the bargain, states:  
    
 Slowly, slowly, at least at the greater and dominant part of its
conception, we arrived at the conclusion that there are two kinds of
truth. The truth of the party could be different from the truth of the
people and can even be more important than the exact truth. Truth, in
fact, is that very political expediency. This thought is awful. But one
should openly confront its meaning. If there really exists a truth
loftier than the exact truth and if political expediency is the
barometer in gauging the truth, then even a lie can be true. For, even a
lie can possibly be with what is expedient temporarily.

Even a sham political trial, in this sense, can have ‘truth’. For, even
in such a trial, crucial political advantages can be obtained. In this
manner, we arrive at a viewpoint that not only defiled individuals to
design the sham political trials but also, in most cases, it even was
effective among the victims. It is a viewpoint that poisoned our entire
thinking, blackened our view, dilapidated our critical power, and
finally, took from us the intuition to discern the truth as well as the
potential to understand it.

The situation was like this. To deny it is pointless.[380] According to
one of the political analysts, “Perhaps, the corruption and
self-centeredness prevalent in the Czarist courts could not match the
one thousandth of what we witnessed during the succeeding periods of
communist governments”.[381]              
    
 Such a tenet gained an unprecedented historical opportunity to test and
prove itself lacking legitimacy and truthfulness in a vast geographical
expanse, that is, Eastern Europe, for a long period of time, that is,
two generations. The application of such a tenet led to the cracking of
its own pillars and foundations, and the malady of immorality rotted its
roots.

The social systems of the East disintegrated one by one over a short
period of time and the people, in fascination, turned toward the West
against which they fought for more than seven decades. This collapse
could no longer be attributed to the foreigners and imperialists.
Economic depression was also not the root of the problems. No, the
correct reply should be found.

These systems had everything for ruling—ideology, military power, ruling
party, strong allies, military pact, tribunal court, powerful defense
system, complex security and intelligence apparatus, etc. Yet, they were
lacking in one thing: legitimacy. These systems gradually lost their
moral legitimacy, and the people, who realized that the ruling party was
telling lies to, and deceiving, them, paid no allegiance anymore to the
ruling authority and released themselves from the state of being under
the yoke of the government, which made ethics as its plaything.

In an article, “What transpired in Eastern Europe in 1989,” Daniel Shiro
gives a detailed report, interesting and shocking, on the disintegration
of socialist systems. He regards the root of the collapse to lie in “the
total moral and spiritual decay”[382] of these governments and concludes
that what can cause revolutions and instabilities nowadays is the
ethical-spiritual factor, and that this element should be seriously
taken into account.[383]  

In short, any system that renders ethics at the service of, and
subservient to, politics will face a legitimacy crisis in the long run
due to its anti-ethics approach, and the people severely condemn these
lies of such a system. No matter how powerful this system may be, it is
only for a short period of time that it can beguile the people and not
all the time.

The only justification these systems had was that sometimes it is
expedient to accept a bit of evil in order to obtain abundant good and
for which they would cite the example of a gangrenous foot, claiming
that at times the physician has no option in preserving the life of the
patient but to cut his decaying and impaired foot, which is considered a
danger for the entire organism. Accordingly, the same act can, and
should, be done at the societal level, and in order to ensure the public
welfare and justice, cruelty should to be done to some individuals.

In other words, the objective is so ‘sacred’ that it justifies and
sanctifies such abominable acts. Yet, in practice, such means became the
aim. They did not even achieve any noble aims and the little justice
that the previous regimes provided was obliterated from the scene under
the pretext of justice for all. “Under the name of justice, the
communist regimes of Russia and China have slaughtered people. But up to
now its outcome is more killing and less justice.”[384]  
    
  

View on the duality of ethics and politics
------------------------------------------

   
 This tenet, which is also called dualist or doubly-inclined ethics,
endeavors to preserve moral values and some of the principles of ethics
in politics. On the basis of this tenet, ethics must be studied on two
planes: individual and social. Although these two levels have some
commonalities, whatever is moral on the individual plane cannot
necessarily be deemed as moral, too, on the social one. For instance,
self-sacrifice of an individual is viewed as an ideal and moral act.
This is while self-sacrifice of a state to the advantage of another
state is not that moral since it is contrary to the national interests.
An individual can endow his possession to others but the state cannot
bestow its national income to another state.

From this perspective, individual morality can be gauged on the basis of
absolute moral criteria while social morality is subservient to the
national welfare and interests. In emphasizing this tenet, they have
said that the scope of individual morality is morality of love and
affection, but the scope of social morality is the objective- and
result-oriented morality.

The consequence of such an understanding is the acknowledgment of two
distinct moral systems. As an individual, man is subjected to a certain
system of morality whereas society has another ethical system. The
principles of these levels of morality can also be contradictory to one
another. For example, Plato does not consider telling lies as
permissible for an individual, and regards a liar as one worthy of
punishment, while believing that the ruler of the society has the right
to tell lies. He says,  
    
 If telling a lie for someone is permissible, it is only for the rulers
of the city, because whenever the good of the city warrants he can
deceive the people, whether enemy or city-dweller. Yet, this conduct is
not permissible for anybody else, and if an individual from among the
city dwellers tells a lie to the governors, his crime is equal to or
even severer than the crime of a patient who deceives his own
doctor.[385]                   
    
 Bertrand Russell[386] also believes in such a duality in ethics,
regarding the religious beliefs as the source of individual or private
ethics and politics as the origin of other categories of ethics. He
states,  
    
 Without civil ethics the society is incapable of sustaining its life;
without the individual ethics, his survival is of no value. Therefore,
in order for the world to be good and desirable, the existence of both
the civil and individual ethics is necessary.[387]  
    
 Of course, what Russell is referring to as ‘social ethics’ and the
existence of which is deemed indispensable for the survival of the
society, is more indicative of the rules and regulations, which are
mostly enacted for the proper administration of the society and not
ethics in the sense of the totality of behavioural rules based on
values. He has considered Martin Luther (founder of Protestantism), Paul
Tilikh, Reinhold Niebuhr,[388] Max Weber, and Hans Morgenthau as
advocates of this tenet.

Max Weber, the 20th century German sociologist and thinker and one of
those having a far-reaching influence on contemporary thought, attempts
in the course of a famous lecture entitled, “Politics as a
Profession,”[389] to expound the nature of the political profession and
endeavors to clarify the relationship between ethics and politics.

Initially, he poses the question, “Are the moralities that are valid for
every action also valid for political interactions or not?”[390] In
answering this question, firstly Weber acknowledges the need for
politics to be moral and points out that politics cannot perform
anything outside the domain of ethics: “Is it not so that the Bolshevik
and Spartacus theoreticians, because of their having resorted to
violence, reached the very same conclusion as every other military
dictator had?”[391] “Moralities are not a carriage that, according to
your wish and depending on the circumstances, can be stopped for
mounting and dismounting.”

So, politics must, in a way, be ethical; but it is here that Weber
establishes the difference between public morality and political
morality and makes the two separate from one another. In his opinion, we
are faced with two classes of ethics: One is ideological ethics while
the other is responsibility ethics. Ideological ethics derives from
absolutist moral teachings, Christianity in particular.

Such a morality urges us to perform whatever is decreed by ethics
without paying heed to the consequence of our conduct and with the least
attention to the outer conditions.

For instance, Immanuel Kant[392] urges us not to tell a lie at all
whether to friends or foes. He similarly stresses that if a killer is in
pursuit of an innocent person in order to kill him unjustly, and the
innocent one hides in a certain place which is known to us, and the
killer asks us whether we know where a certain person has hidden, we are
duty-bound to tell him the truth and to refrain from lying. That which
would possibly happen to the innocent person is not important. That the
killer is in pursuit of realizing his wicked aim is not important.

What is important is that we have done our duty and abided by the decree
of truthfulness, absolutely and unconditionally. Kant explicitly states,
“Truthfulness in statements that cannot be evaded is an apparent duty of
man toward everybody, no matter what dire consequences it would entail
for him or for others.”[393]

He passionately stresses the principle of absoluteness of honesty and
truthfulness, saying: “Every human being has not only the right, but is
strongly obliged to be honest and truthful in the statements that he
cannot evade, whether these statements are to his detriment or to that
of others.”[394] Another example of the moral teachings of Christianity
is abstention from violence such that, according to the Book of Matthew,
the Holy Messiah (*‘a*) recommends to his disciples, thus:    
    
 You have heard that it was said, ‘Eye for eye, and tooth for tooth.’
But I tell you, do not resist an evil person. If someone strikes you on
the right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if someone wants to sue
you and take your tunic, let him have your cloak as well. If someone
forces you to go one mile, go with him two miles.[395]                
    
 Weber labels this kind of ethics as ‘ideological ethics’, that is,
ethics that urges us to perform our duty and not to mind its
consequences. Well, imagine that a politician wants, for example, to
implement these two tenets in the political arena; if he does so,
catastrophe will begin, because at the time of negotiation with other
governments, sometimes with the hostile ones, he has no option but to
answer honestly whatever question, however evil and internal in nature
it is, and to reveal his secrets.

Similarly, violence should not be answered with violence, and if an
enemy attacks his country, he should not show a negative reaction;
rather, it is better to relinquish another part of the country to the
enemy. So, ideological ethics cannot, and should not, be employed in
politics. Weber talks about the other ethics, which according to him, is
‘responsible ethics’. That is, it is here a tenet that is heedful of the
particular results. The politician responsibly performs whatever is
proper and fitting on the basis of circumstances and expediencies,
always acts in pursuit of his country and society’s welfare, and never
applies any absolutist tenet.

Weber thus concludes, “Conciliation between ideological ethics and
responsible ethics is impossible.”[396] It is because “political
activities necessarily resort to violent means and seek assistance from
the principle of responsible ethics.”[397]

Therefore, he recommends that in the political arena absolute ideals of
ethics should be abandoned while the appropriate ethics of politics
should be applied realistically and responsibly. Hence, ethics is
valuable and worthy. Yet, not every kind of ethics is appropriate for
politics. These two should be studied on two planes and each of them put
in its proper place.

If someone is totally committed to the ideological ethics, it is better
for him to withdraw from politics and not to put his spiritual salvation
in jeopardy, because politics involves defilement. However, it should
not be concluded from this topic that politics means to behave immorally
and to apply the dry logic of cost and benefit. “It is true that they
engage in politics by means of the brain (reason and intellect);
however, it is also correct that it is not only with the brain. In this
case, right is totally on the side of the ideological
ethics.”[398]         
    
  

Criticism of the view
---------------------

   
 If the ideological ethics really compels us to blindly comply with its
dictates without paying heed to the negative repercussions that they may
possibly entail, then Weber is right and it is better to abandon the
ideological ethics in the political arena and apply the ‘responsible
ethics’. But do the ideological ethics really mean this and do the
absolutist moral systems not pay any attention to the outcomes of the
behaviour of the individual?

This claim cannot easily be accepted. Of course, morality emerges at the
time when we are freed from the daily and petty shackles of cost and
benefit and widen the horizon of our view. Morality urges us not to be
self-centered human beings and to move beyond our self. In this sense,
ethics is different from the law of give and take, or the belief, “Die
for someone so that ‘he would have fever for you’.”

Morality enjoins us to give preference to truth over our interests. It
encourages self-sacrifice and devotion. It views bravery, and in times
of need, embracing death as a value and considers egotism and self-love
as an anti-value. But none of these mean inattention to our aims and the
consequences of our actions. No moral system allows its principles to be
applied in such a way as to destroy its foundation. Even Kant himself
who so passionately defended absolute honesty and truthfulness would not
think ‘Kantianly’. In one of his classroom lectures he had said:  
    
 If a robber holds me up and, putting me under pressure, says, “Where is
your money?” I can lie to him; for, he wants to take advantage of truth.
This kind of lying cannot be deemed treachery and trickery as the robber
knows that I will conceal from him what I am thinking, and he, on his
part, has no right to expect me to tell him the absolute truth.[399]
        
    
 The assertion of Kant is based on a principle that is open to debate
and has been debated many times by his contemporaries as well as by
present-day thinkers. Basically, the inclination of Kant to defend
absolute truthfulness and honesty is not to let even a small leak to be
made in this structure and even a single exception to be brought up that
would weaken the essence of the rule. 

So, by virtue of a general and absolute rule, which is among the most
ancient of moral tenets and is known as the golden rule, it offers us
this absolute rule and bids us to make it the general guide of our
conduct. “Act in such a way that the rule of your conduct and your will
become one of the general laws of nature.”[400]

The meaning of this statement is that whenever I tell a lie, I have, in
effect, accepted that in similar circumstances, they tell me lies as
well; however, as I do not like a lie to be told to me, I myself must
refrain from lying. So, for it to become a moral rule, it must be
general and beyond transient circumstances. At any rate, we do not
intend to criticize this Kantian view at this juncture. This task has
been dealt with in detail elsewhere.[401]

It is worth saying that even on the basis of Kantian sources responsible
ethics can be acquired and this is the task that Christine Korsgaurd has
dealt with in his famous book entitled, *Creating the Kingdom of Ends*.
Thus, ideological ethics is also not totally free from responsibility
and the consequences of behaviour. 

Similarly, the statement that has been attributed to the Holy Messiah
(*‘a*) should be understood in its broad context. At the time when the
laws and ordinances of the Torah were laying emphasis on retaliation and
revenge, and summoning all to take an eye for an eye, Jesus (*‘a*)
propagated the tenet that washing blood with blood is absurd and whoever
lives with the sword will die by the sword. The statements of Jesus
(*‘a*) are contrary to the logic that viewed vengeance, not forgiveness,
as a value. The aim of Jesus (*‘a*) was that instead of obscurantist
legalism and externalism, the spirit of faith should sprout in the heart
of men.  
    
 His utterance is that the Divine Will cannot be confined to the law of
indemnity.  The commands of God are much higher than what this law
stipulates. God wants to give his servants whatever they want—and even
more—from Him, even if their wishes are unjustified.[402]     
          
    
 Hence, the issue is basically not that of abandoning one’s right,
relinquishing power to the wicked, and heedlessness of the repercussions
of one’s actions. Similarly, it is not so that Jesus (*‘a*) has decreed
that we should absolutely desist from violence and to offer no
resistance to aggressors; rather, he only wants to free us from
superficiality.  
    
 We should not imagine that Jesus was saying that waging war is a sin.
Essentially, he has no intention of presenting the criterion for all
actions; he does not even (apparently) mean a specific thing. He
stresses on the fact that God does not want mere observance of the law.
Rather, He wants much more than this.[403]     
    
 Hence, as reported in the New Testament, we see the same Jesus (*‘a*)
saying, “Do not think that I have come to bring peace on earth. I have
not come to bring peace, but a sword.”[404] And when Jesus (*‘a*) saw
that the temple, that is, the House of God in Jerusalem, had been
transformed into a place of trading and commerce, and this holy
sanctuary desecrated, he dauntlessly entered it and threw out the goods
and furniture of the merchants,  
    
 Jesus entered the temple area and drove out all who were buying and
selling there. He overturned the tables of the money-changers and the
benches of those selling doves. ‘It is written,’ he said to them, ‘My
house will be called a house of prayer’ but you are making it a ‘den of
robbers’.[405]  
    
 So, the line of absolute demarcation between ideological ethics and
responsible ethics cannot be drawn, nor these two juxtaposed against one
another. Even Weber clearly states that the religion of Islam has a
specific law for self-defense and resistance against invaders, and in
such cases he declares war as permissible, saying: “Religious wars have
been the life-giving element of Islam from the very beginning.”[406] And
he again states, “All the religions have more or less successfully
studied this issue.”[407] In such a case, how can Weber prove his claim?

Granting that the demarcation line between ideological ethics and
responsible ethics does not exist and we, in effect, have acknowledged
that ideological ethics is also result-seeking concerned with the
outcome and deals responsibly with issues, then one cannot talk about
the necessity of a particular kind of ethics for politics. Or, it should
be stated that in politics ethics is necessary or it should be negated;
not that we claim that the duality of ethics exists and that individual
ethics is the ideological one while political ethics is the
‘responsible’ one. This distinction has no scientific and historical
precedence, and in effect, concerns the negation of ethics and stripping
politics of it; that is, the same thing that Machiavelli was after and
Mu‘āwiyah used to put into practice.

Concerning the example of sacrifice, which is good from the viewpoint of
individual ethics but wrong in the political arena, the issue can also
be viewed in a more profound manner and the conclusion reached that
sacrifice in both cases is moral and correct. Assuming that the
representatives of the people, with their justification, decide to
allocate a percentage of the national income of their country to a
certain famine-stricken country, it will certainly be a moral act and
will not be viewed as being against the national interests.

Thus, sacrifice is ethical on the individual level as well as on the
social and political one. Only in the case of the liberality of the
state will it be contrary to interests, and as such, anti-ethical if
done directly and without the people’s coordination and consent. The
reason is, the state is the representative of the people and cannot act
without the opinion of its clients. Juliano Puntara cites the same
example and advances this point,  
    
 ‘That realm of ethics which urges the individual to sacrifice his
interests for others—in other words, all the things that are under the
concept of magnanimity—has no functional capability in the political and
social conduct.’ That is, one has no right to risk the interests of the
people.[408]   
    
  Then, he himself criticizes this issue and cites the crime of
Bentham,[409] the real founder of the utilitarian ethics, who used to
ask: “‘Can a politician sacrifice the interests of his own people in
favour of others?’ And he himself [Bentham] had replied, ‘Why not? It is
only on the condition that the nation itself wants such actions and act
of sacrifice.’”[410] This distinction, that individual conduct is based
on the ethics of generosity and humanitarianism while political conduct
is subjected to the national interests, is still debatable. Both the two
features can openly be placed on both the two levels; there are so many
instances wherein individual conduct is anchored to self-interest and
welfare-oriented ethics while a political act is influenced by
humanitarian motives. “As, such a contradiction, even in the sphere of
individual ethics, is understandable and inferable.”[411]   

Lastly, the citizen or subject cannot be urged to follow two different
and distinct systems of ethics and be expected to profess honesty while
accepting the dishonesty of the government and not mentioning it, and in
the words of Plato, regard deception on the government’s part to be
permissible. Apart from these mentioned problems, this tenet as what
Puntara says is ambiguous and its limits and boundaries are not
specified.[412] It seems that finally it should be delivered to one of
the aforementioned two tenets, it having no validity and soundness
itself.[413]      
    
  

View on the oneness of ethics and politics
------------------------------------------

   
 On the basis of this tenet, ethics and politics are both in quest of
ensuring the prosperity of human beings and they cannot be at
cross-purposes with one another. Among the duties of politics are
spiritual nourishment of the citizens, making them sociable, teaching
them to love others and observance of the rights of others, all of these
being nothing but moral rules. An individual in private life is the same
as in his social life.

Although the principles that are dominant in the collectivity and rules
of collective life can be mentioned, it is not that these principles are
contrary to the principles that are dominant in the individual’s life.
To cite an example, a free person is always responsible of his conduct.
This sense of responsibility also exists in the collective sense, though
it could possibly be weaker, and no one can claim to have no
responsibility in the collective state and not assume the consequences
of his own conduct.

This tenet regards only one moral system as valid in the two spheres of
individual and social life. It considers whatever is ethical on the
individual level as ethical too on the social and political level as
well as for the politicians; whatever is immoral for each of the
citizens is also reckoned as immoral for the government. Therefore, it
is bad for an individual to lie, it is so for the government as well,
and if the citizens are supposed to observe honesty, so too is the
government.

Thus, no government can view itself as authorized to perpetrate immoral
acts and claim that such an act is a political necessity and has been
part of the requisites of political moves. This rule knows no exception.
From this perspective, ethics is considered as the rudiment of politics
and its prelude whereas politics is the means for the realization and
implementation of moral virtues. The view of Plato and Aristotle on the
two realms of ethics and politics has been so, for they believed,  
    
 There is no difference between the government and the society,
economics and politics, ethics and politics, religion and politics, or
culture and politics. Human being means the citizen. Every activity of
the society or the citizens of the society has a political implication.
The citizen can only realize his potentialities through the path of
political activity, and it is only with the blessing of politics that he
can achieve the stage of humanity.[414]             
    
 In our philosophical tradition, the same relationship between ethics
and politics has been observed to such an extent that Khwājah Nasīruddīn
at-Tūsī views politics as a technique that “has been undertaken for the
realization of moral life.”[415]  
 So, ethics is the foundation while politics is its instrument and
method for the emergence and deepening of moral principles.

To defend this tenet in the theoretical sphere is very easy. It
justifies itself, and contrary to the mentioned t enets, it cannot be
criticized. Because, no sort of internal contradiction can be noticed in
it and it is also safe from the legitimacy crisis caused by the previous
tenets.

The only critique that can be put forth against this tenet is this: In
practice, will the politics based on ethics also succeed? Or, will
political realism make the omission of some ideals and the overlooking
of some moral principles inevitable? It is this point that we will deal
with.

The most famous and greatest proponent of this tenet, both in theory and
practice as well as in words and deeds, was Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*)[416] who
did not neglect to explain it for a moment and lost his life for its
sake. With the firm belief that politics ought to be ethical and that he
should acquire his own legitimacy from the principles of ethics, Imām
‘Alī (*‘a*) never encroached on the ambit of ethics and suffered an
apparent defeat but he did not allow himself to be overcome from the
viewpoint of ethics.

The entire life of dignity and manliness of this great man is more
widely acclaimed than that in which we would like to show the
identicalness of ethics and politics. Nevertheless, we will briefly
mention some cases, which are all understandable and defensible only on
the basis of the theory of oneness of ethics and politics and, from the
perspective of duality of ethics and politics fragments from which can
be gleaned and taken:  
 1. The Imām, after the demise of the Messenger of God (*s*), and
contrary to the expectation of many, was removed as caliph and in the
course of the event that is proverbial for all; another person became
the ruler of the Muslims. Abū Sufyān, who was among the defenders of the
immorality of politics, suggested to the Imām (*‘a*) not to abandon
fighting for the nascent caliphate and he himself committed to place the
combatants at his (*‘a*) disposal. But the Imām (*‘a*) was not the kind
of person who wanted to obtain power through immoral ways and the
unwillingness of the people. So, he (*‘a*) rejected his suggestion and
invited the people to sobriety and amity.[417]

2. After the assassination of ‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb,[418] as the six-man
council for selecting the next caliph suggested to the Imām (*‘a*) to
accept the caliphate on the condition that he (*‘a*) follow the
tradition of the two Shaykhs [*shaykhayn*] (Abūbakr and ‘Umar), he
(*‘a*) declined the offer as he was not willing to tell a circumstantial
lie and obtain power in an unethical manner. On the contrary, he (*‘a*)
explicitly set the style and method of his policy in obtaining power on
the basis of the Book of God and the Sunnah of the Prophet (*s*),
saying: “The Book of God and the Sunnah of His Prophet (*s*) do not need
the addition of style and tradition of others.”[419]

3. In the course of the insurgency against ‘Uthmān ibn ‘Affān[420] and
the siege of his house, it was expected of the Imām (*‘a*) to take full
advantage of the emergent opportunity and take the reins of the
caliphate. But, contrary to expectation, he (*‘a*) did not welcome the
situation that had arisen and tried to intercede. He invited the people
to sobriety and ‘Uthmān to adopt a correct policy. To this end, he
(*‘a*) made such headway and so defended ‘Uthmān that he told ‘Abdullāh
ibn ‘Abbās: “By Allah, I continued protecting him till I feared lest I
become a sinner.”[421]

4. Since the people unanimously paid allegiance to him in assuming the
office of the caliphate, the Imām (*‘a*) did not delay a single moment
in removing the officials of the previous caliph whom he viewed as
impious and unjust. He did not accept the recommendations of Ibn ‘Abbās
and Mughayrah ibn Shu‘bah[422] on retaining them temporarily and then
gradually removing them after consolidating his position (*‘a*).[423]

5. Again, when it was suggested to him (*‘a*) to let Talhā and
Zubayr[424] share in power and win their support by allocating Kūfah and
Basrah to them, he did not accede to this inappropriate demand.[425]

6. Since Talhā and Zubayr were among the first and pioneering Muslims in
Islam, they took issue with him (*‘a*) as to why their share from the
public treasury is equal to that of the others and not more, and they
implicitly asked him for advantages and privileges for themselves. The
Imām (*‘a*) said that equality was part of the Sunnah of the Messenger
of God (*s*) and that they were not different from the others in this
regard.[426]   

7. As Talhā and Zubayr intended to fight the Imām (*‘a*) and prepare for
war that later became known as the Battle of Jamal, they asked the Imām
(*‘a*) for permission to leave Medina on the pretext of performing
*‘umrah* [unseasonal optional pilgrimage]. The Imām (*‘a*), who was
aware of their intention, did not take security measures nor did he bar
their exit. Instead, he (*‘a*) granted them permission to go and said to
them, “By Allah! I swear that you are not after *‘umrah*; rather, you
are in pursuit of deception and are heading toward Basrah.”[427]   

8. Since the Imām (*‘a*) triumphed over the insurgents in the Battle of
Jamal, he forgave everybody. He (*‘a*) even excused Marwān ibn al-Hakam
who was the root of all the seditions, the factor in the killing of
‘Uthmān, and one of the architects of the Battle of Jamal. When they
told him (*‘a*) that Marwān was ready to pay allegiance anew, he (*‘a*)
did not even accept his oath of allegiance and set him free;[428]
although he (*‘a*) could have taken action against him, and by means of
punishment and legal penalties, prevented his future activities.

9. When the Imām (*‘a*) saw his soldiers using foul language against
those of Mu‘āwiyah in the Battle of Siffīn, he dissuaded them from such
an unethical act—even though it was against an enemy and at the time of
war—telling them: “Instead of abusing them you should say, ‘O’ Allah!
Save our blood and their blood, bring about reconciliation between us,
and lead them, who have strayed, to the right path.”[429]

10. When Mu‘āwiyah shut off water to the Imām (*‘a*) [and his army], the
Imām (*‘a*) regained control of the water. But he (*‘a*) did not
retaliate in kind; he (*‘a*) did not hinder Mu‘āwiyah’s troops from
using the water.

11. Under the pressure of the Kharijites [*khawārij*],[430] the Imām
(*‘a*) submitted to arbitration, but  when they found out the ruse of
‘Amr ibn al-‘Ās, they demanded that the Imām (*‘a*) annul his pact with
Mu‘āwiyah and fight him [again]. But the Imām (*‘a*) did not agree to
violate the pact, even though it was to his advantage, and summoned the
Kharijites to accept it.[431] 

12. In the face of the troublesome and vexing movements of the
Kharijites in Kūfah, the Imām (*‘a*) never resorted to any form of
violence. He generally forgave them, their aspersions and abuse.[432]
And, finally when he (*‘a*), on the deathbed of his martyrdom, asked his
relatives not to let his killing pave the way for a widespread
bloodbath.

   
 “O’ sons of ‘Abd al-Muttalib, certainly I do not wish to see you
plunging harshly into the blood of Muslims, shouting *‘Amīr al-Mu’minīn*
[Commander of the Faithful] has been killed.’ Beware, do not kill on
account of me except my killer.”[433]  
     
 Such cases are so many that enumerating them is beyond the scope of
this book. Any political realist and believer in the tenet of the
separation of ethics and politics, or political authoritarianism will
subject the validity of the above mentioned decisions to criticism and
will view them as being against the spirit of politics and
interest-seeking.

This judgment also took place during the time of Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*)
himself, and those who used to stress on the courage of the Imām (*‘a*)
regarded him as being devoid of knowledge on warfare. Mu‘āwiyah was
deemed smarter and more knowledgeable on the principles of politics than
the Imām (*‘a*). The Imām had no option but to maintain his principles
as well as to refute such imaginations. In his agonized and
fault-finding remarks, he (*‘s*) said, “The people of Quraysh to the
extent say, ‘The son of Abū Tālib is valiant but ignorant of the
knowledge of warfare.” In dealing with the notion that Mu‘āwiyah was
more cunning than him, he also said:  
    
 By Allah, Mu‘āwiyah is not more cunning than I am, but he deceives and
commits evil deeds. Had I not loathed deceit I would have been the most
cunning of all men. But (the fact is that) every deceit is a sin and
every sin is disobedience (of Allah), and every deceitful person will
have a banner by which he will be recognized on the Day of
Judgment.”[434]      
    
 The difficulty of the Imām’s task was that he (*‘a*) wanted to be
ethical at all times and the political modus operandi to be based on
ethics, and not acquisition of power at whatever cost. He too describes
his internal impediment, thus:  
    
 “O’ people! Surely fulfillment of pledge is the twin of truth. I do not
know a better shield (against the assaults of sin) than it. One who
realizes the reality of return (to the next world) never betrays. We are
in a period when most of the people regard betrayal as wisdom. In these
days the ignorant call it excellence of cunning. What is the matter with
them? Allah may destroy them. One who has been through thick and thin of
life finds the excuses to be preventing him from orders and prohibitions
of Allah but he disregards them despite capability (to succumb to them
and follows the commands of Allah), while one who has no restraints of
religion seizes the opportunity (and accepts the excuses for not
following the commands of Allah).”[435]  
    
 The Imām (*‘a*) was so committed to ethics and observed its principles
that he was not prepared to ignore them for the entire world, for even a
minute, nor violate them on any occasion; he was not prepared to
sacrifice truth for the sake of any expediency. He, therefore, states:
“By God! If they give me the seven realms with whatever there is under
the sky to make me disobey God or unfairly take the husk of barley from
an ant, I would not do it.”

And so the government of the Imām (*‘a*) that could have lasted for
years had it been somewhat expediency-minded and lenient with regard to
ethical principles, did not endure for more than five years, thereby
substantiating the opinion of the political realists. Yet, this
government sowed the seed of its moral thought in the people’s minds,
with the result that in the course of history, hundreds of movements
based on it have taken shape, and so it is considered up to the present
times as the standard for measuring and assessing the moral principles
of governments. In this lies the true victory of this tenet whose
validity becomes more vivid with the passage of time.

Undoubtedly, the implementation of this tenet is difficult but not
impossible. It is possible that nowadays some would think of such a
moral understanding of politics as quixotic, idealist and unrealistic,
and while having conviction in the principles of ethics, believe that
ethics cannot be applied in politics claiming that the complexities of
politics and the difficulties of the governments of today have closed
the path to ethics. In reality, there are thinkers nowadays who are
moving forward to realize this ideal and for the sake of which they
suffer but become successful.

During the twentieth century, at least four persons from the different
parts of the world convinced that politics is rooted in ethics,
endeavored to act on the basis of their views and succeeded, too. These
four persons were Vacláv Havel,[436] Mahatma Gandhi, Nelson Mandela, and
Imām Khomeinī.  Vacláv Havel, the Czechoslovakian thinker, intellectual
and combatant, who became president of his country after the collapse of
the communist system, regards moralization of politics as the most
urgent concern of today’s world. He writes, “My experience and
observations affirm the fact that in politics, ethical practices are
possible although I do not deny that treading this path is not always
easy, and I have never claimed it to have been so.”[437]  
 After having obtained power he says,  
    
 One thing that seems certain to me is that my responsibility is to
emphasize as much as possible on the moral source of all kinds of decent
politics, and reliance on the importance of moral values and standards
in all aspects of social life.[438]  
    
 Standing on the conviction that cheating never pays[439] and that
“Truth cannot be attained through lying,”[440] he stresses that there is
only one way to success and that is honesty[441] and “Ethics, in fact,
is latent within everything and this matter is true; because, every time
I face a problem and try to reach its depth, I always find a sort of
moral aspect in it.”[442]  
 Havel stresses,  
    
 The point that the politicians should tell a lie has no validity
whatsoever… The necessity of telling lies and intriguing on the part of
the politician is a completely baseless statement which is propounded
and propagated by those who want, for whatever reason, to discourage
others from having concern and interest in social affairs.[443]       
    
 This utterance does not mean that the politician should divulge every
political issue to anybody. Instead, it means that he should not tell a
lie; that is all. Besides regarding commitment to ethics as a political
necessity, he considers it as the foundation of success in this regard
and lays emphasis on it.

The second personality, who entered the political arena with this
viewpoint and was also killed for its sake but never trampled on his
principles, was Mahatma Gandhi whose struggles led to the independence
and sovereignty of today’s India.

Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi (1869-1948), who belonged to the Brahman
caste and was educated in England, relied only on truthfulness and the
principle of non-violence in fighting against colonialism. It was by
means of this weapon that he succeeded in obtaining the independence of
India. Owing to his long-term political resistance and reliance on the
principle of *Ahimsa* (non-violence), he was called, *Mahatma* (Great
Soul) by the people of India. He never abandoned the principles of
ethics nor assail ethical rules with those in vogue in politics, even in
the face of the aggressor—England, the old colonialist.

He commenced his struggle against racial discrimination in South Africa
and continued it in India. He even consented to the division of India
and the formation of the state of Pakistan but never allowed himself to
trample on the principles of ethics. He did not at all regard the ends
as justifying the means, and believed that every means should justify
itself, saying: “In my philosophy on life, means and ends are things
that can be interchanged.”[444] To those who would consider means as
means and nothing else, he used to say:  
    
 I say that means are, ultimately, everything and your ends will be just
like your means, whatever they are. There is no wall to separate the
means from the ends. It is obvious that the Creator has endowed us with
the capability of putting the means under our control (and, that too, to
a limited extent, of course). But to have control of the goals is not
possible. The (extent of) realization of the goals will be proportionate
to the means that are employed in attaining them. This case knows no
exception.[445]      
       
 In his commitment to principles, Gandhi had gone so far as to stand
fearlessly against the Hindu fanatics who were criticizing him for his
supportive position with respect to the Muslims. It was for the sake of
this that he was killed by one of the Hindu fanatics.

Nelson Mandela is also one of these figures. Since he launched his
struggle against the ruling government’s policy of racial
discrimination, he was deprived of his social rights. As he did not
compromise, he spent almost thirty years in prison. His commitment as
well as that of his comrades bore fruit; finally racial discrimination
withered away in that country. When he became the president of the
country, he announced that the crimes committed against the Blacks could
not be forgotten, but they could be forgiven. During the course of his
tenure, Mandela was committed to his principles of ethics. After the end
of the normal tenure of his presidency, he resigned peacefully from
politics and continued his social activities with dignity. A survey of
Imām Khomeinī’s views in this regard is the subject of the next
chapter.   
    
  


