Imām Khomeinī and Ethical Politics
==================================

   
    
 In an article entitled, *Politics and the Problem of Dirty Hands*,
Coady endeavors to prove the bitter reality that politics is
incompatible with remaining innocent and pure, and anyone who enters the
political arena should accept the veneer of infamy, meanness,
defilement, and any kind of pollution. It is because political
expediency and the human condition are such, and “If they mean dirty
hands, then they are the mere offshoot of the human condition”[446] and
one cannot escape from them.

The Imām’s approach to this issue is of a different kind: His stand is
that politics can, and should, be ethical, for politics is nothing but
implementation of ethics in a broader spectrum of the society as well as
realization of religious ideals and goals. As such, he believes in the
oneness of ethics and politics and in a bid to prove it, he puts forth
certain points which are discussed in the content of the following:  

• Universality of Islam;

• Meaning of politics and the status of power;

• Politics as indispensable for the realization of Islam; and

• Oneness of ethics and politics in Islam.

   
  

Universality of Islam
---------------------

   
 It was mentioned earlier that man has numerous existential realms and
he should nurture and let all of them grow. Now, keeping in view this
fact, all divine religions, especially Islam, have appeared so as to
nourish these dimensions. The One who holds the reins of authority over
the universe, with the knowledge of all the needs of humanity, has sent
a prophet (*‘a*) to every community in every epoch in order to let man
attain his perfection: “Because the human being is a multidimensional
creature, with many needs, the prophets came to answer these needs and
teach man how to act in order to attain true happiness.”[447]

As such, all religions in their respective times have been universal and
all the prophets (*‘a*) have explained all the things needed by the
people. “The prophets (*‘a*) have spoken of those things which concern
the spirit, things which concern the different stages of understanding
and which relate to the realms of the unseen.”[448] Thus, every religion
has had its own particular time of universality until we reach Islam,
which is the culmination and perfection of Abrahamic faiths. In this
religion, all the needs of humanity have been anticipated and the ways
of meeting them precisely specified.  
    
 The traditions and the Holy Qur’an have spoken both of issues which
concern individual duties and which play a part in man’s development and
maturation, and of political issues as well as economic issues; issues
which concern society and have something to do with the regulation and
moral teachings of the society.[449]    
    
 It is with this perception that we see, “We have such a book in which
personal affairs, social affairs, political affairs, state
administration, and all things are encompassed.”[450] The least doubt on
the universality of Islam, and limiting its scope is tantamount to the
negation of its principles.  
    
 Those who confine Islam to [merely] eating, sleeping, praying, and
fasting while not interfering with the problems of this nation, and of
the predicaments of this society are not Muslims, [451]  according to
the narration of the Most Noble Messenger (*s*).[452]     
    
 In the opinion of the Imām, Islam is not a religion which is only
concerned with the spiritual and personal needs; rather, “Islam is
everything for the human being; that is, it has ideas and views on
everything from nature to beyond nature to the celestial world; Islam
has a thesis; Islam has a program.”[453] This program of Islam takes
into account all the facets and dimensions of life: “Islam has rules and
decrees for the entire life of man from the day he is born up to the
moment he is delivered to his grave.”[454]  
    
  

The meaning of politics and the status of power
-----------------------------------------------

   
 Politics is inextricably intertwined with all the dimensions of our
life and it is so palpable and conspicuous that its existence and
influence cannot be denied. But, what is politics really? Innumerable
descriptions of politics have been advanced. But one thing is certain:
politics is related to the acquisition of power or the struggle for the
acquisition of power. So, at the core of the concept of politics, ruling
(over others) and attempts at exerting influence lie latent.

If such is the meaning of politics, then it cannot be evaded and must be
accepted. It is because the requisite of social welfare and well-being
of the society lies in the existence of power, and attainment of power
is tied to politics. “What is politics by the way? It is the relations
between the ruler and the nation, relations between the ruler and the
other governments and, I should say, it is to prevent the corruption and
mischief that exist. All of these constitute politics and it is
so.”[455] If politics is such and forbidding corruption is deemed part
of it, then Islam also has politics as it pursues the enjoinment of what
is good and the preclusion of what is bad. Hence, the Imām describes
Islam itself, thus: “Islam is governance along with its affairs and
decrees.”[456] Similarly, the Infallibles (*‘a*) have always been
involved in politics in this sense.  
    
 On what day was the Most Noble Messenger (*s*) concerned with political
issues? He (*‘a*) used to establish a government; he (*s*) used to
resist those who were anti-Islam and oppressed the people; he (*s*) used
to wage war against them.[457]     
    
 It was not only the Most Noble Messenger (*s*) who used to engage in
politics in this sense; the aspect of politics was there in all the
prophets (*‘a*). Because, politics means ensuring the interests of the
people, and the prophets (*‘a*) used to perform this duty in the best
manner.   
    
 Politics means guiding the society and showing the way; it means
considering all the interests of the society, and taking into account
all aspects of man and society and guiding them toward the things that
are best for them, for the nation and the individuals. This is exclusive
to the prophets (*‘a*).[458]  
    
 Politics in this sense has been the principal axis of movement of all
the prophets (*‘a*) and no religion can be regarded as alien and distant
from it.

But, the most essential element of politics is power. However, power is
something that is frightening. It misleads man as well as disenchants
him, that the nature of power corrupts man. A person who feels powerful
rebels, and forgets himself, as well as his being a servant of God, and
nourishes an illusion of godhood. The story of Pharaoh is not a mere
historical account.

Everybody has a ‘Pharaoh” within himself and awaits a favourable
opportunity and situation to beat the drum of divinity for himself.
François Mitterrand, the former President of France who spent his life
in obtaining, preserving and extending power, says about this
phenomenon, “I think that power is always a dreadful thing; the one who
possesses power should—if not fear—be at least extraordinarily heedful
of the nature and extent of his particular role.”[459]

Power is prone to excesses and does not stop at a certain point. If the
instinct of power-seeking is given free rein, its expansion and spread,
then, can no longer be prevented. Because of this, many people, the
mystics in particular, have greatly feared and evaded power owing to its
corruptive quality. The following story about an ascetic with the name
of Ki Yuyu shows the depth of this fear and evasion:  
    
 One day, an emperor of ancient China said to a certain master of Zen
named Ki Yuyu, “You are a very great man. I like to transfer the
imperial throne to you after my death. Do you accept?”  
 Ki Yuyu was extremely annoyed and only said, “These words defiled my
ears.”  
 Then, he left so as to wash his ears in the nearest river. While
heading toward the river, he was talking to himself: “Today I have heard
impure words.”  
 His friend, along with a cow, came to the river and asked him, “Why are
you washing your ears?”  
 Ki Yuyu replied, “Today, I am very displeased. An emperor wants me to
be his successor. He offered the imperial crown to me, and my ears have
been polluted by these words. I have to wash them.”  
 His friend said, “I was supposed to let my cow drink from this limpid
water, but now this water has been contaminated.”[460]              
    
 The view of our mystics on power has been usually a negative one. They
consider the forestalling of power as the alternative to unbridled
power. By reflecting on the spirit of men they have realized that only a
few can withstand the enticement of power and not become its captive.

Mawlānā has a parable which speaks of this matter. A snake-catcher goes
to a cold region in search of a snake. He finds an extremely dreadful,
yet dead, dragon. He painstakingly drags it to Baghdad, which is a hot
place, and tries to excite astonishment.

Due to the scorching heat of the sun in Iraq, the dragon gradually
regains consciousness. It frees itself of its bonds, chases the
spectators and the snake-catcher, and devours them.[461]

From this tale Mawlānā concludes that in the lifespan of every man,
there exists a seemingly dead dragon. If a bit of the heat of power and
wealth reaches it, it will corrupt man:     

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﻧﻔﺴﺖﺍﮋﺪﺭﻫﺎﺴﺖ، ﺍو ﮐﯽ ﻣﺭﺪﻩﺍﺴﺖ؟     ﺍﺰ ﻏﻢﺒﯽﺁﻠﺗﯽﺍﻔﺴﺮﺪﻩ ﺍﺴﺖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﮔﺮﺒﻴﺎﺒﺪ ﺁﻠﺖِ ﻓﺮﻋﻮﻥ، ﺍﻮ                    ﮐﻪ به ﺍﻤﺮ ﺍﻮﻫﻤﻰ ﺮﻓﺖ ﺁﺐﺠﻮ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺁﻧﮕﻪ ﺍﻮﺒﻧﻴﺎﺪﻔﺮﻋﻮﻧﻰ ﻜﻧﺪ                  ﺮﺍﻩﺼﺪ ﻤﻮﺴﻰ ﻮ ﺼﺪﻫﺎﺮﻮﻦ ﺰﻧﺪ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﻜﺮﻤﮏﺍﺴﺖ ﺁﻦﺍﮋﺪﻫﺎ ﺍﺰﺪﺴﺖ ﻓﻘﺮ        ﭙﺷﻪﺍﻯ، ﮔﺮﺪﺪ ﺰ ﺠﺎﻩ ﻮﻣﺎﻞْ ﺼﻘﺮ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The dragon is thy sensual soul: How is it dead?*

*It is (only) frozen by grief* *and lack of means.*

*If it obtain the means of Pharaoh,*

*By whose command the water of the river (Nile) would flow,*

*Then it will begin to act like Pharaoh*

*And will waylay a hundred (such as) Moses and Aaron.*

*That dragon, under stress of poverty, is a little worm,*

*(But) a gnat is made a falcon by power and riches.*

*Keep the dragon in the snow of separation (from its desires);*

*Beware; do not carry it into the sun of Iraq.*

*So long as that dragon of thine remains frozen (well and good);*

*Thou art a mouthful for it,* *when it gains release*.[462]

   
 In the words of the Imām, the Hitlerian makeup and his mania for power
exist in the mind of everyone. “Hitler was ready to annihilate the whole
of humanity and make himself stay in power in Germany. The superior race
and that which was in the mind of Hitler are in the minds of all of you.
You have made yourselves unwary.”[463] Can it be concluded from this
matter that power is evil in itself?

In reality, the claim of those people is that since power has unpleasant
repercussions such as excesses, injustice and insolence, it follows then
that one must eschew it totally. This view has been propagated by many
of the Muslim mystics and it has been one factor in the decadence of the
Muslim societies. But if gluttony has dire consequences, it cannot be
concluded that food must be absolutely discarded.

If abundant wealth is corruptive, one cannot reject it totally and
abandon the same. As in the previous discussion on instincts, the way of
approaching the insolence of instincts is not to uproot them, but to
guide them. On the issue of power too, the same approach must be
adopted. Keeping aloof from the detriments of power by giving it up
cannot be realized.

The evils should be identified and their emergence prevented. Mitterrand
who himself speaks about the dangers of power, regards the solution to
lie in controlling and guiding it, and in his words, in acquiring
anti-power. “If the one who is in power… is of sound reasoning, he will
search for anti-powers.”[464]

This anti-power can prevent the excesses of power as well as the
corruption of the power-holder. It can be within a person, and is called
‘conscience’ according to Mitterrand: “Some of my powers only rely on my
conscience.”[465]

But one should not content himself with this anti-power; rather, “the
society, likewise, ought to bring into existence anti-powers within the
framework of its institutions.”[466]

In other words, power should be controlled through the mechanisms of
distribution of power, the partnership of the people, and the
supervisory bodies. Nevertheless, between these two types of anti-power,
it seems that the internal anti-power has primacy. As, sometimes, the
power-holder is in such a position of strength that he can neutralize
all the social anti-powers. It is here that “the only brake that exists
for his actions is the one within him.”[467]

Therefore, according to Weasel, it can be deduced that “the true power
is that power which man exercises on his self.”[468] It is this point
that can be regarded as among the axiomatic truths of Islamic ethics and
mysticism. It is only through internal edification and dominance over
the self that power can be properly handled and its perils avoided.

In the opinion of the Imām, the essence of power is an attribute of
perfection and God also possesses this attribute in its absolute sense.
“Power is a form of perfection in itself. God, the Sublime and Exalted,
is powerful.”[469] As such, one should not shun power. Instead, he
should understand it and benefit from it, in an optimal way, and the
proper way of benefiting from something, in the view of the Imām, is
internal refinement. Thus, he stands on the proposition that in case it
is acquired by unrefined individuals, power is dangerous. In case power
is obtained by corrupt persons, this same perfection will lead him to
corruption.[470]

Yes, all the evils that are found in the world arise from egocentrism.
Craving position, desire for power, love of riches, and the like—all of
them spring from self-love, and this ‘idol’ is the biggest one, breaking
which is also far more difficult than everything else.[471]             
    
 Therefore, in the intellectual code of the Imām, power ought not to be
feared or evaded. Rather, it should be properly utilized, nourished and
embellished; by means of relentless trimming of the extra branches of
power, its possible centralization and absolutism can be parried.  
      
  


