Three Ethical Pillars of Politics
=================================

   
 By giving nobility and validity to ethics and with the belief in the
oneness of ethics and politics, Imām Khomeinī (*r*) endeavored in the
course of various admonitions to the employees and officials of the
[Islamic] system, to present a portrayal of his ideal ethical politics,
or in other words, the Islamic politics.

During the first decade of the Islamic Revolution in Iran it rarely
happened that he did not emphasize, in his speeches and messages, the
centrality of ethics in politics. In fact, this ethical view on politics
is the continuation of the same tradition he had in his *Sharh-e Chehel
Hadīth*—that is, reformation of the society is only possible through
inner reformation and it is only through self-purification and constant
supervision of the self that a righteous society can emerge and the
foundation of authentic politics be laid down.

He used to point out to the statesmen on various occasions that every
one has a ‘Pharaoh’ within him and there is a kind of dictatorship in
one’s inner self. But one should always be vigilant not to let this
‘Pharaoh’ acquire power and this dictator to gain in strength. All these
emphases that man is always in the presence of God stem from his view on
the place of ethics.

He used to enumerate innumerable moral attributes and qualities for the
statesmen, and reckon them as requisites for ethical politics. Among
them, we will selectively identify three features here and discuss them
so as to find out the Imām’s outlook on them. Of course, this choice
does not imply inattention to the importance of other moral features of
ethical politics; it is, rather, merely a selection among many other
choices. These three features are as follows:     * *     
 • Sincerity;

• Openness to criticism; and

• Simple living.

 

Sincerity
---------

   
 As a moral virtue, truthfulness [*sidāqah*] has been always cherished
and lauded among all the peoples throughout history. There is hardly a
place where this virtue has been spoken of unfavourably.

When mentioning one of the prophets (*‘a*), the Glorious Qur’an points
to this same truthfulness as one of his characteristics, stating:
***“And make mention in the Scripture of Ishmael. Lo! He was a keeper of
his promise [as-sādiq al-wa‘d].”***[494]

Similarly, the Glorious Qur’an identifies the truthful ones along with
the prophets (*‘a*).[495] But, what is truthfulness? Truthfulness means
honesty but in reality it is beyond that. Truthfulness is the opposite
of lying but it is the opposite of treachery as well. Indeed,
truthfulness [*sidq*] and treachery [*khiyānah*] are diametrically in
opposition to one another.[496]

In this sense, truthfulness is synonymous with trust [*amānah*]. Hence,
truthfulness in politics means veracity, being honest with the people,
abiding by contracts and promises, and trustworthiness. The truthful
statesman is he who moves in the direction of truth and righteousness,
for truthfulness [*sidq*] means concordance and harmony with the
truth.[497] 

The truthful statesman is true to his commitments, shows himself to the
people as he really is, and refrains from any sort of deceit. Anyone who
nourishes this moral quality and attribute in his self never exploits
the people’s confidence in him and is not afraid of acknowledging his
mistakes. He views this [acknowledgment] not as a sign of weakness but
as the result of self-confidence. The concept of truthfulness [*sidq*]
itself embodies the meanings of uprightness, perseverance, tenacity, and
power, and it is far higher than mere honesty. After a precise analysis
of this term, Tuchihiko Izutsu says:  
    
 The term truthfulness [*sidq*] takes the implicit meanings of
sincerity, perseverance, uprightness, and trust. As such, we encounter
so many cases of the real function of the term *sidq* in the Glorious
Qur’an as well as in other places all of which can never satisfactorily
be substituted by the word ‘truthfulness’.[498]            
    
 The broader meaning of the word, *sādiq*, in the lexicon of the Qur’an
is such that at times it is used in contradistinction to the words
*munāfiq* [hypocrite] and *kāfir* [disbeliever].[499] 

Well, the truthfulness that is discussed in politics is this general
meaning of the term. Therefore, the truthful politician should possess
all these qualities in order to be deemed ethical. In the practical
aspect this truthfulness goes to the extent of the politician regarding
himself as the servant of the people—not their administrator—and
wherever he commits a mistake, he fearlessly and courageously expresses
it.  
    
 So, if we had committed a mistake before, then we should explicitly say
that we erred. Deviation [*‘udūl*] among the jurists [*fuqahā*] from one
edict [*fatwā*] to another has exactly the same meaning… The jurists of
the Council of Guardians[500] [*Shūrā-ye Nigahbān*] and members of the
Supreme Judicial Council[501] [*Shūrā-ye ‘Ālī-ye Qadayī*] should also be
like this so that, in case they erred in any matter, they should say so
categorically and recant their views; we are, after all, not
infallible. 

Before the Revolution I used to imagine that once the Revolution
triumphed there were pious people who would do the works in accordance
with Islam… Later I found out that it was not so; most of them were
impious individuals. I realized that what I had said was not true, and
so I explicitly announced that I had made a mistake.[502]   
    
 According to the Imām, therefore, confession of one’s mistake, apart
from not being considered a flaw, is a value and a form of the
politician’s truthfulness in relation to himself as well as to others.

Karl Popper[503] describes his ideal democracy in the following manner:
At the time of the election campaign, instead of enumerating the list of
his accomplishments the candidate for a seat in the parliament
courageously announces that the previous year he has discovered
thirty-one mistakes committed by him, and has tried to compensate for
thirteen mistakes while his election rival has only discerned
twenty-seven of his mistakes.[504]

That is, it is a value in itself that the politician, before letting
others find out his mistakes, himself, steps forward, and dauntlessly
and truthfully enumerates his own faults one by one. From the Imām’s
viewpoint dictatorship starts when man commits an error and after
realizing it, instead of admitting and rectifying it he importunately
sticks to it and continues with his crooked ways.  
    
 You mention an issue and in case you realize that it is a mistake, you
are ready to say that you erred, you committed a mistake, or you want
the same mistake to be carried out to the end. Among the corruptions
that dictatorship has and with which the dictator is afflicted, is that
he opens a subject and then he cannot, that is, he has no power over
himself that this subject he has opened if it is against expediency… He
cannot renounce his statement… This is the greatest dictatorship with
which man is afflicted.[505]      
    
 From this aspect, admitting one’s fault, apart from not being a sign of
weakness, is a sign of power over one’s self and occasions one’s
greatness and increase in popularity. “If you realize that you have
erred in something, you must admit it. This confession of yours makes
you great in the eyes of the nation; not that it humiliates you.
Persisting in one’s mistake greatly debases a person.”[506]  
    
 Hence, confession of one’s fault which is the result of truthfulness is
a human virtue and excellence and is considered a manifestation of
ethical politics. Thus, the Imām emphatically says:  
    
 You should know and do know that man is not free from fault and error.
As soon as you commit a mistake, turn away from it and admit it. In this
lies human perfection, whereas justifying and persisting in a wrong
action is a defect and the work of Satan.[507]       
    
 The point worthy of consideration is that some politicians think that
if they express their faults, the people’s confidence in them will
diminish and the people will think them to be incapable. So, instead of
admitting their faults they prefer to cover them with yet another
mistake, and under the excuse of preserving the people’s confidence and
by relying on them they commit other errors. But the answer to this
illusion is that the justification itself, in the words of the Imām, is
of the guiles and tricks of Iblīs (Satan) and is considered as part of
the defense mechanism of internally inept individuals in avoiding facing
the truth.

On the other hand, people’s confidence itself stems from truthfulness
and does not exist absolutely; rather, it depends on the observance of
truthfulness and sincere practices of the politicians. Once the people
notice a degree of untruthfulness in them, their confidence in them
diminishes twofold. Confidence is, indeed, a tree that matures and grows
by means of the water of truthfulness of the rulers, and dries up by
their lies and untruthfulness. So, one cannot rely too much on the
withered confidence since it is fragile and, in the words of Bertolt
Brecht,[508] “People’s confidence wanes once it is relied upon.”[509]

The confidence of the people is no excuse for the rulers to commit
mistakes and take refuge in it. It is, in reality, a kind of emotional
reserve which should always be augmented and not spent indiscriminately
and without any backing.

A truthful politician is one who remains in the political sphere so long
as he feels that he is useful. But whenever and for whatever reason he
feels that he can no longer perform his duties, then, instead of
continuing with his previous ways and concealing his impotency, he
relinquishes his responsibility heroically. In doing so, he adds another
golden page in his record and places another virtue alongside his other
ones.  
    
 Anytime anybody feels that he is inadequate for whatever position he
holds—be it inadequacy in management or will-power—he should, with
courage and dignity, submit his resignation to the competent authorities
which is, in itself, a pious and devotional act.[510]           
    
 Therefore, truthfulness is not a mere individual moral virtue. Rather,
it is a social and political value and has various facets. The truthful
politician presents himself to the people as he really is; he knows
himself, his capabilities well and makes proper use of them. He talks to
the people truthfully and fulfills his commitments. Just as he views
political tasks and activities as values, in times of necessity he views
resignation as a value as well. He tries not to commit a mistake. Once
he commits a mistake, instead of concealing or justifying it, which is
itself another mistake, he courageously admits it. He regards this as an
indication of the greatness of his soul and the reason for his courage;
not weakness and lethargy.   
    
  

Openness to criticism
---------------------

   
 The truth of the matter is that we have dual attitudes with respect to
the term ‘criticism’. We like it and regard openness to criticism a kind
of perfection and value, while at the same time we are very afraid of
it. So, usually we invite our friends to criticize us and our actions.

But we immediately put up a shield against the flood of criticisms and
reject them one by one in various ways. For this purpose we usually
first make it clear as to what type of criticism we wish to face.

Through the addition of such modifiers as ‘constructive’,
‘guidance-giving’, ‘reformative’ and the like, we specify the type of
criticism we have in mind.

Finally, if the criticism leveled against us was not to our liking, we
practically neutralize its effect and protect our personality through
the use of such clichés as bias of the critic, weakening motive, falsity
of the criticism, and others.

An anecdote of this type of facing criticism and reacting to it calls to
mind the story of man who, pretending to be a champion, went to a
tattooist and asked him to tattoo his shoulder with the image of a lion.
As the tattooist started his work, the man became restless due to the
intensity of the pain of the needles that penetrated his body. He asked
the tattooist which part of the lion he was tattooing. He replied that
he had started from the tail. The ‘champion’ said that there was no need
for the tail and that he should start with another part. The tattooist
started again from the other part, but the pain persisted. Again the
question was asked and the answer was that he had started from the mane.
Again the request of the ‘champion’ was to abandon the mane and to start
with another part. These questions and answers, and complaints about the
pain thus continued until finally the tattooist got angry over this
situation, flung the needles to the ground and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شير بى دمّ و سر و اشكم كه ديد            اينچنين شيرى خدا هم نافريد
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Who (ever) saw a lion without tail and head and belly?*

*God Himself did not create a lion like this*.[511]

   
 Our attitude toward criticism is more than this. We welcome criticism
and sometimes insist on it. But once we experience its sting, we evade
from it and in order to cover up our evasion, we assign various labels
to it. We brand it as the venting of complexes, vengeance, accusation,
and injustice.

This duality in words and in deeds is so vivid to obviate the need for
description. Criticism is looked upon as a gift in our religious
culture, and to present an ‘offering of faults’ is deemed a value and,
at times, a duty so much so that Imām as-Sādiq (*‘a*) says: “The most
beloved of my brothers is he who presents me an offering of my
faults.”[512]

However, in cultures, there is practically nothing worse than criticism
and unethical than criticizing, the reason being that we try not to
criticize and, in case we have no alternative, we strive to make it very
mild and practically ineffective; while leveling it apologetically and
reticently. Even then, instead of thanks, an immediate storm of wrath,
calumny and misunderstanding confronts us in that motive, purpose,
malice, envy, and the like have compelled us to make this criticism. In
short, criticism is not welcome in our culture.

Nevertheless, the truth must be accepted that, in life, we cannot escape
from criticism. Even supposing that we promise ourselves not to
criticize anybody and to be true to our commitments, we cannot prevent
the flood of criticisms of others to be cast on ourselves. So, another
option must be sought and our view on criticism be changed since there
is no absolute way of eliminating criticism. “The reality is that so
long as you have relations with others, that is, so long as you are
alive, you will hear criticism and need it.”[513] 

This fact is more vivid in the political arena and political function is
always subject to criticism. Therefore, anyone who enters the political
arena must learn how to confront criticisms and make good use of them.
Criticism, particularly in the political arena, is the most basic
channel of communication between the citizens and government officials,
and through which they realize the effectiveness or otherwise of their
policies and their repercussions. As such, criticisms are a mirror in
which the politicians see the impact of their actions and the strengths
and weaknesses thereof.

In spite of this, individuals and organizations practically dodge
criticism and see it as a personal attack on them. Consequently, in most
cases, instead of accepting the purport of criticism they rebut it in a
sense and consider it unfair. It is because criticism is undertaken on
the presumption that the characteristic, attitude, action, or speech of
the person being subjected to criticism is not correct. This for some
means bringing into question their entire existence and the shattering
of their personalities.

As if to say the critic has come to wage war against the personality of
the person being criticized and he, in turn, has no alternative but to
fight and protect his integrity. The reason for this is that the nature
of man is such that he deems himself, his attitude and intellect as
perfect and flawless. In as much as it is possible for anybody not to
complain about the scarcities in his life, it has, however, not been
seen for a person to whine over his own imperfection and lack of
intelligence. Sa‘dī describes this mental condition in this manner:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﻫﻤﻪﻛﺲ ﺮﺍ ﻋﻘﻞﺧﻮﺪ ﺒﻪ ﻛﻤﺎﻞﻨﻤﺎﻴﺪ ﻮﻓﺮﺰﻨﺪ ﺧﻮﺪﺒﻪ ﺠﻤﺎﻞ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Everyone thinks his own wisdom perfect and his child beautiful*.[514]

Then, he slyly concludes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﮔﺮ ﺍﺰﺒﺴﻴﻃ ﺰﻤﻴﻦﻋﻘﻞ ﻤﻨﻌﺪﻢﮔﺮﺪﺪ         ﺒﻪ ﺧﻮﺪﮔﻤﺎﻦ ﻨﺒﺮﺪﻫﻴﭻ ﮐﺲ ﮐﻪﻨﺎﺪﺍﻨﻢ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If wisdom were to cease throughout the world,*

*No one would suspect himself of ignorance.*[515]

   
 Descartes,[516] the French philosopher, describes this state in a
satirical manner thus: “Among the people intellect has been divided
better than anything else, although every person thinks he has such a
complete portion of it that the people who are hard to please in
anything, do not wish to have an intellect more than they already
possess.”[517]

This is the reason why everybody, immediately upon hearing a criticism,
imagines that his wisdom and intellect has been insulted, and so he
tries to dispel this insult through the use of weapons and answer his
critic or rival; the beginning of the fall of man from the ethical
aspect being this very attitude. As was discussed before, man is a
mixture of good and bad dispositions and is in need of inner nourishment
and spiritual purification. Therefore, apart from not being fearful of
criticism anyone yearning for perfection also seeks it earnestly.

Dodging criticism means claiming perfection and flawlessness; this is
peculiar only to God. Anyone with such pretensions is claiming
partnership with God and, as a result will, all at once, be expelled
from His Presence. It is through this approach that the Imām admonishes
thus:  
    
 Nobody, no establishment and no individual can claim, ‘I have no defect
whatsoever.’ If one claimed so, his gravest flaw then, is this very
claim. No one can say, ‘I have no flaw anymore …’ We do not have a
flawless one in this world. We should always pay attention to these
flaws of ours.[518]         
    
 Basically, from the viewpoint of the Imām anyone who is in pursuit of
advancement and perfection should be pessimistically and critically in
search of his flaws and faults, and not see what virtues he has. In our
ethics and ethical literature it is propounded that man should refrain
from critical observation and should have an optimistic view of others.
Hence, Hāfiz says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كمال سرّ محبت ببين نه نقصِ گناه          كه هر كه بى هنر افتد، نظر به
عيب كند
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Look well with love, and not at the filth of sin.*

*He who is artless (always) looks at the defects (of others).*[519]

   
 But this issue is different from the one we are currently discussing.
The first issue is that we should refrain from pessimistic and critical
views on others while the other issue is that we should judiciously,
critically and meticulously evaluate ourselves. This is not only
ethical, but also a requisite for man’s growth and perfection.

In the view of the Guardian of the Pious and Commander of the Faithful
[‘Alī ibn Abī T&ālib] (*‘a*) one of the attributes of the pious is that
they always indict and scrupulously call themselves to account.
According to Karen Harney, a contemporary psychoanalyst,  
    
 As long a person is proud of a certain state, propensity and attribute,
and considers them as virtues, it is natural for him not only to exert
no efforts for their elimination, but also, because he feels himself
worthy due to them, he defends it and tries to preserve them.[520]   
    
 Thus, the first condition for seeking perfection is that man should
consciously strive for his exaltation, and critically assess himself.  
    
 The man who would like to work for God and reach the station of
humanity should constantly be in pursuit of uncovering his own
shortcomings. He should not be after identifying his virtues. As a
person wants to know his faults, it might make him think of eliminating
them, while being in pursuit of finding out his virtues veils his eyes
by which he cannot see his faults.[521]   
    
 In this manner, offering criticisms constitutes the grounds for the
growth of individuals, particularly the politicians who seek to secure
the interests of the public.

Another point is that reforming the society is basically dependent on
making criticisms and their assessment. So as to know whether the state
organizations are functioning properly, or have had shortcomings at
times, everybody should put forth whatever criticism he has to offer
and, in doing so, participate in the reformation of the society.

Hence, from the Imām’s viewpoint, “There should be criticism; without
criticism a society cannot be reformed. This is also true with faults.
Man is defective from head to foot and these defects must be stated.
Criticisms must be stated so as to reform the society.”[522]   

It is true that the nature of man is such that he does not like being
criticized. But if man goes beyond the level of instincts and nurtures
himself, he welcomes criticisms with open arms no matter how acrimonious
and harsh they may be. “If man builds himself, he will not dislike a
peasant criticizing him. He does not dislike it at all. He does not mind
being criticized.”[523]

In spite of this, since most men have not yet reached this extent of
perfection to welcome criticism and take advantage of it, they have an
inappropriate attitude toward it and prevent it in various ways. The
totality of these reactions that the individual shows in protecting
himself against the reality of criticism can be classified under the
general heading of ‘defense mechanisms’. “Defense mechanisms are
unconscious strategies through which the person preserves himself from
the more unmerciful aspects of reality.”[524]   

Thus, when facing the bitter reality of criticism man engages in
self-deception. Through falsification of reality and ignorance in
relation to it, he conceals the reality from himself. If this act
happens rarely it is perhaps admissible. But if man, particularly in the
political arena, makes it a habit of always adopting one of these
mechanisms vis-à-vis criticisms, it is then that his relation to reality
is completely severed and he will pass his days in the cocoon of his
illusions.

Some of these defense mechanisms, which, unfortunately, most of the
people including the politicians utilize, are the rejection of
criticism, reading the critic’s motive, corresponding criticism,
humiliating the critic, coining justification, belittling the criticism,
evasion and reversion, blaming others, and classifying criticisms as
‘constructive’ or ‘destructive’.

Sometimes, in facing the criticism against him, the person denies the
basis of criticism and deems it a calumny. At other times, instead of
reflecting on the concept of criticism and its acceptance, he tries to
uncover the treacherous motive of the critic, defaming him and proving
that the critique stems from the malevolence and bad faith of the
critic. Sometimes also, instead of answering the criticism the person
reciprocally criticizes the critic and answers blow by blow.

On occasion, he humiliates the critic and does not consider him to be
qualified to offer criticism. Every so often instead of sincerely
acknowledging the criticism he reckons it a trivial and worthless issue,
needing no investigation at all. Sometimes, he becomes furious and since
his worth has remained unrecognized and his kindness has been
reciprocated with criticism, he is offended and is indignant of the
‘ungrateful’ people. At times, he attributes to his critic whatever is
in his own heart as well as his motives and ideas, and unbelievingly
thinks of him based on his own religion.

Occasionally, he acknowledges the basis of criticism but instead of
assuming his accountability in this context, he blames the circumstances
and time, and shows himself as being entirely innocent. Finally, he
sometimes classifies any criticism as constructive or destructive, true
or false, justifiable or unjustifiable. These mental classifications
relieve him of acknowledging the criticism and reforming himself, and he
leaves the matter unsolved.

All the above mechanisms are, in reality, the promptings of the carnal
self and delusions of Satan. They are the curtains that blind the
truth-seeing eyes of man, prevent him from understanding himself
correctly and impede his growth and perfection. Anyone wanting to enter
the arena of politics and ethically practicing it should listen
sincerely to all criticism, evaluate it dispassionately and utilize it
for his reformation.

He should not adopt any of the aforementioned mechanisms, and instead of
classifying criticism as proper or not, should entertain every criticism
and make good use of it for his development. It was with this view that
Imām, in addressing Dr. ‘Alī Akbar Wilāyatī, the then Foreign Minister,
said: “You and our friends in the Foreign Ministry should bear
criticism, whether justified or not.”[525]     

In this context, Imām goes to the extent of saying that, basically,
criticism from the enemy should be heard and heeded. It is because
friends are usually indifferent to our flaws, and even if they do
notice, they do not mention them. So, for us friends are not good
teachers; whereas our enemies who inconsiderately notice our
shortcomings and mention them unsparingly—albeit with spiteful
motives—can be our best teachers. Therefore, that man should not only
expect criticism from friend and foe alike, but should also be prepared
to receive and solicit it from everybody.  
    
 Man should come to a person who is his enemy and see what his judgment
on him is so as to enable him to realize his faults. He cannot learn
from his own friends; he should learn from his enemies. When he says
something, he should know what the enemies say and should think that the
enemies understand his faults. Although you and I might have flaws,
friends…say: ‘How eloquently you delivered your speech!’… Man’s friends
are his real enemies while his enemies are his real friends. Man should
learn from those who find his faults. He should know that those who
extol him, this tongue, the tongue that admires an affair which is
supposed to be criticized, is the very tongue of Satan.[526]  
                
    
 Therefore, from the viewpoint of the Imām one of the fundamental values
and pillars of ethical politics is the element of the politicians’
openness to criticism. As far as they can, they should make use of the
enemies even for understanding their own flaws and treat them as their
own teachers. This element of openness to criticism not only leads to
the spiritual loftiness of the politicians but also makes them more
successful in the political arena. It is because they will recognize
better the strength and weakness of their own actions, and on the basis
of the criticisms that have been expressed they can reform their own
policy and give direction to it.

Besides, the channels of communication between them and the people will
remain open. Indeed, these criticisms, however bitter they are, are the
best expression and exhibition of the people’s notions on the political
practices of the politicians. If a politician is responsibly in pursuit
of improving his own practice and function, he should regard their
existence as booty and make use of them for the reformation of the
society. The existence of criticism, from the Imām’s viewpoint, makes
the concerned officials perform each of their duties and no one would go
beyond the ambit of their prerogatives.

In other words, the existence of the spirit of criticism and openness to
criticism hinders the growth of dictatorship. “If I did something wrong,
all of you would rush to say, ‘Why are you doing this?’ [Thus] I will
sit in my own place (I will perform my duty properly). All of you are
responsible; all of us are responsible.”[527]   

It is possible for some people to imagine that criticism is incompatible
with compliance and wherever criticism is offered the pillars of
compliance are weakened. Because of this, criticism must be avoided as
far as possible especially in religious governance. This notion is based
on the proposition that compliance implies blind allegiance and
adherence, whereas criticism connotes noticing and mentioning faults and
defects. In answer to this notion it should be stated that in Islamic
governance there is no place for absolute compliance.

Compliance must be conscious and based on accountability. Every citizen
is duty-bound to comply with the authority while at the same time he is
obliged to check its deviation. The Imām’s slogan, ‘All of you are
responsible; all of us are responsible,’ refers to this point. In
reality this saying is a paraphrase of the statement of the Most Noble
Messenger (*s*) who said: “All of you are responsible and you will be
asked about the things you have been in charge of.”[528]

Thus, we cannot speak of unrestrained, unconditional and absolute
compliance in the political arena and prevent criticism from being made.
The consequences of whatever happens in the Islamic society involve both
the citizens and rulers. So, all are equal and accountable with respect
to social responsibilities. It is from this perspective that *Shahīd*
Mutahharī says: “Laudable and legitimate imitation does not mean
allegiance and turning a blind eye. It is opening the eyes and being
watchful. Otherwise, it is accountability and participation in crime and
sin.”[529] He goes beyond this point and believes, “Islam does not allow
for deafness and abstention from sin for anybody even for the person of
the Most Noble Messenger (*s*).”[530] Then, in a bid to express his
opinion he narrates the story of Hadrat Mūsā (*‘a*) and a pious servant
who, based on our tradition, has been identified as Prophet Khidr
(*‘a*), and concludes:  
    
 The story of Moses and the pious servant which has been mentioned in
the Holy Qur’an is an amazing one.[531] One point of the story that can
be utilized is that the follower and adherent is submissive, obedient
and compliant so long as he does not break and violate the principles,
bases and law. If he notices that the act of obedience is performed
contrary to the principles and bases, he cannot remain silent… Why did
Moses not remain patient and kept on objecting although he would promise
and suggest himself not to object, and again kept on raising objections
and criticizing? Moses’ fault was not in objecting and criticizing. It
was because he was not conscious of the absolute secret and essence of
actions… Some have said that if the practice of the pious servant is
repeated up to the Day of Resurrection, Moses will also not cease
objections and protestations.[532]              
    
 Basically, if one day criticism and openness to criticism is to be
forgotten on the excuse of obedience, the Islamic society will
experience a crisis and all will become afflicted with irreparable
flaws. As such, Mutahharī strongly emphasizes the necessity for
criticism at all levels: “I did and do believe that every non-infallible
position which is not liable to criticism is dangerous to the holder of
the position as well as to Islam.”[533]

Hence, obedience and compliance with the religious rule and following
the authorities do not imply indifference to their policies and
non-criticism.

Of course, undoubtedly, there are individuals who use criticism as a
means of settling their personal accounts, and instead of criticizing
they are actually taking revenge. There are also those who, in the name
of criticism give vent to their inner complexes as well as those who,
again in the name of criticism, intend disgracing others. But nothing
can justify improper behaviour of politicians toward these people and
such criticisms. Here we are facing two separate issues. One is those
who take unfair advantage of the weapon of criticism.

By way of advice, the Imām emphasizes to such people that the language
of criticism should be polite and courteous, and it is in this context
that he says, “If they have criticism, they should have a brotherly
criticism; it should be prudent and sensible.”[534]

Or he stresses that the language of admonition is different from that of
disgracing individuals. “The language of admonition is different from
the language of disgracing and damaging the reputation [of
others].”[535] From the viewpoint of the Imām as a neutral observer,
most of the criticisms made in the political arena and encountered by
politicians stem from resentment, self-love and injustice, and they
cannot be doubted.

But the second issue is that none of these realities can be the grounds
for the politicians to evade criticisms or to decide on determining
which criticism is justified or not; in good faith or hostile. It is
because his nature will persuade him in a bid to preserve his
personality and prevent its destruction, to reject whatever he does not
accept as done in bad faith, destructive, detrimental, unfair, and the
like. Thus, in order to distinguish the honest from the spurious from
among the criticisms, we need a third party, which is actually the
public opinion. The politician performs his task while the critic
criticizes. It is the duty of the politician to listen to criticism and
to heed it as much as possible. But with regard to their correctness or
otherwise, it is the public opinion that determines and classifies them.

In the final analysis, from the Imām’s viewpoint openness to criticism
is among the human perfections. It draws man from the existential sphere
of instinct and egoism to the status of the lofty and God-loving human
being, and obliterates his flaws.

This is due to the fact that the God-loving man removes his weaknesses
by means of these criticisms and makes good use of this effective tool.
Instead of asking for the basis of criticism he pays attention to its
spirit, and it is in this context that he is grateful for the criticisms
of his enemies and considers them as his sympathetic teachers. This kind
of attitude calls to mind a story that Mawlānā narrates: Contrary to
convention, a preacher would pray for his enemies every time he ascended
the pulpit. Because the people found fault with this practice—of his
praying for the bad ones in place of the good ones,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
گفت: نيكويى از اينها ديده ام                من دعاشان زين سبب بگزيده
ام
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُبث و ظلم و جور چندان ساختند           كه مرا از شر به خير انداختند
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He replied, “I have seen (experienced) goodness from these folk:*

*For this reason I have chosen to pray for them.*

*They wrought so much wickedness and injustice and oppression*

*That they cast (drove) me forth from evil into good.*[536]

We will read a more explicit one in the poem of Abū Hayyān Andalusī, an
Arab poet, who considers himself beholden by, and debtor to, his own
enemies, deems their existence as necessary, and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﻋِﺪﺍي ﻠﻬﻢﻔﺿﻞٌ ﻋﻟﻰّ ﻮﻣﻧّﺔُ                         ﻔﻼﺍﺬﻫﺐﺍﻟﺭﺣﻣﻦ ﻤﻧﻰﺍﻻ
ﻋﺎﺪﻴﺎ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﻫُﻢ ﺑﺣﺛﻮﺍﻋﻦ ﺰﻠّﺗﻲﻔﺎﺠﺗﻧﺒﺗﻬﺎ                       ﻮﻫﻢ
ﻧﺎﻔﺳﻮﻧﻰﻔﺎﻜﺗﺳﺒﺖﺍﻠﻤﻌﺎﻠﻳﺎ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*For me enemies are favour and grace.*

*O God, take not these enemies from me.*

*They are so painstakingly in search of my slip.*

*Thus, I evaded it.*

*And they are in competition with me.*

*As an outcome, I attained excellent qualities*.[537]

Therefore, instead of wasting time in finding out the motive of the
critic and adopting the unscrupulous defense mechanisms, it is better
for us to consider every type of criticism as a favour, blessing and in
the words of Imām as-Sādiq (*‘a*) a gift, and to benefit from it in the
political arena.    
    
    
  

Simple living
-------------

   
 Simple living in the individual’s life is a moral virtue. But in the
political arena and for the Islamic statesmen, it is, apart from this, a
political necessity. What is meant by simple living is what has been
referred to in our religious culture as *zuhd* [asceticism].

Of course, throughout history this term has been laden with negative
connotations and usually the term *zāhid* [ascetic] gives the impression
of a disheveled man, impudent, crowd-evading, anti-social, reclusive,
narrow-minded, and without activity. Even now, if one is asked to
describe a *zāhid* man, most probably he will describe him in this
manner: a thin and pale person, clothed in a patched garment, wearing
disheveled hair, dirty body, detached from social responsibilities,
indifferent toward the fate of his fellow human beings, and lurking in
the corner of prosperity.

Although this notion is not much to our liking, numerous historical
testimonies affirm it. The truth of the matter is that *zuhd* at the
advent of Islam, and in the words of the Infallibles (*‘a*) was
described in a certain manner while in the our Sufi culture, it has been
expressed in yet another fashion, which is actually a metamorphosis of
the real meaning and function of this term.  
    
  

Negative Asceticism
-------------------

   
 Here, in order to substantiate these remarks, we will first mention
instances of what have been introduced as asceticism and ascetic. Then,
we will deal with the correct and original conception of this term. They
said to Dāwūd at-Tā’ī who was one of the disheveled Sufis and notable
ascetics, “Comb the end part of [your] beard.” He said, “Have I remained
disengaged that I should do it?”[538]

Of course, the occupation of Dāwūd was not of the social occupations.
Rather, it was a sort of ecstasy. A part of *Kīmyā-ye Sa‘ādat* [*The
Alchemy of Happiness*] is allocated to asceticism and its etiquette such
as indigence and seclusion. It is mentioned therein that there was
someone who said to Dāwūd at-Tā’ī, “Give me a piece of advice.”

He said, “Keep aloof from the world of all-embracing subsistence and the
people until the time of death, just as they run away from the
lion.”[539]

Likewise, al-Ghazzālī narrates, “Sa‘d ibn al-Waqqās and Sa‘īd ibn
az-Zayd who were among the great Companions lived near Medina. It was a
place which they called ‘Aqīq; they did not use to attend the
Friday,[540] and they did nothing else until they died there.”[541]

Similarly, the ascetics would think of marriage as one of the signs of
non-asceticism and the cause for attachment to the world. So, most of
them refrained from it and preferred a bachelor’s life to it. According
to these ascetics, seclusion and indigence was superior to social life
and wealth. The dispute of Sa‘dī with a claimant on the issue of riches
and mendicancy is an exquisite attempt to express the logic of those who
view indigence as superior to fortune, which is very interesting.[542]

This anti-social and narrow-minded approach of the ascetics has taken an
extensive form in our literature and has been subjected to severe
criticism. According to these men of letters ascetics are clad in wool,
hollow persons, intolerable, insensible, idle, self-indulgent,
pretentious, and worthless who, wearing sackcloth and wool, seek to gain
a reputation for themselves. In reality, they have portrayed asceticism
as a snare of guile. For instance, Hāfiz says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
پشمينهﭙوش تندخو، از عشق نشنيده است بو
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
از مستىاش رمزى بگو تا ترک هوشيارى كند
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The wool-clad hot-tempered has not heard of love;*

*Talk to him of its (love’s) intoxication that he would abandon
soberness.*[543]

                
 Likewise, according to Hāfiz these people wear patched and mended
clothes as a symbol of asceticism, and keep their sleeves short as a
sign of simplicity and abstinence from luxury. But all of these are
tricks to deceive the people:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
به زير دلق ملمّع كمندها دارند               دراز دستى اين كوته آستينان
بين
  </p>
</blockquote>

*There are tricks under the patched-clothes;*

*See how deceitful the short-sleeve wearers are.*[544]

Sa‘dī also narrates a wholesome story concerning this which is very
interesting:  
    
 An ascetic was the guest of a king. He was invited for a dinner. He ate
less than what he wanted to take, and since the time for prayer had
come, he prayed more than what he used to do…As he returned to his
place, he again asked for the spreadsheet of food so as to eat. He had a
son… He said, ‘O father, have you not eaten at the invitation of the
sultan?’ He said: [According to him] I have eaten nothing that would be
useful. [The king said: ‘Perform also the compensatory prayer as I have
performed nothing that would be useful.’][545]  
    
 Mawlānā who was one of the great mystics and ascetics of his time also
mentions, bitterly and disparagingly, the ascetics and their
narrow-mindedness. In the course of the story of an ascetic who had
intrusively broken the jug of wine of an emir and had then run away,
Mawlānā narrates the story thus in the words of the ascetic’s neighbors
who had come to intercede on his behalf:]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اوچهداندامرِمعروفازسگى           طالبِمعروفىاستوشهرگى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تا بدين سالوس خود را جا كند             تا به چيزى خويشتن پيدا كند
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كو ندارد خود هنر الاّ همان                 كه تسلّس مىكند با اين و آن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*What should he know about enjoining (others) to do right?*

*He is currishly seeking notoriety and fame,*

*In order that by means of this hypocrisy he may make a position for
himself*

*And somehow make himself conspicuous;*

*For in truth he has no talent save this alone,*

*That he plays the hypocrite*[546] *to all and sundry*[547].[548]

   
 At any rate, much has been said about asceticism and ascetic in our
mystic and critical literature which we shall pass over. The only
important point is that from this perspective, ascetics have not been
quite popular. Nowadays, asceticism in this sense is also not
acceptable. It is enough for us to imagine that one day all the people
of the society decide to become ascetics. That is, family units would
disintegrate, social life would be deranged; economic activity would
stagnate; everyone would be heading toward the mountains and jungles,
lurking in the corner of prosperity, and in pursuit of managing his own
affairs.

Undoubtedly, asceticism in this sense is not only unethical at the
individual level but also a defect, and in the political arena, it is
baseness and a source of societal backwardness. Then, what is meant by
asceticism and simple living which has been much mentioned in the
speeches of the Infallible Ones (*‘a*) and which Imām Khomeinī also used
to repeat so often while addressing the government officials?  
    
  

Positive Asceticism
-------------------

* *  
 Here, in order to present a correct picture of the ideal Islamic
asceticism, we will state its features and facets in the course of some
questions and answers:  
  

What is asceticism?
-------------------

   
 By citing reference in the Holy Qur’an, Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*), who was among
the pioneering figures of asceticism during his time, describes
asceticism in this manner:  
    
 The whole of asceticism is confined between two expressions of the
Qur’an. Allah, the Glorified, says: ***That ye grieve not for the sake
of that which hath escaped you, nor yet exult because of that which hath
been given*****.**[549]

Whoever does not grieve over what he misses and does not revel over what
comes to him, acquires asceticism from both its sides.[550]   
    
 As such, asceticism has no relation whatsoever to indigence and
mendicancy. Asceticism is a psychological state and a sort of inner
freedom. In this respect, the ascetic is one who remains so even if he
is affluent and if he loses all his possessions, he will not look back
on his past and fret about it.

He is such a master of himself that if he were given the whole world, he
would still not lose nor forget himself. In fact, asceticism is a sort
of mastery and control over oneself and regulation of one’s emotions. In
this sense, not only can an indigent man not be an ascetic; but, in
order for one to know whether he is an ascetic or not, he should have
wealth.

The indigent man has nothing to lose. We can only speak about asceticism
when one has wealth and then lose it but is still able to preserve and
maintain his spiritual mastery. Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) who so describes
asceticism, though he led an ascetic life, was a productive person, and
even during the time of his caliphate and amidst all his engagements and
worries, he never gave up his economic activities.

Throughout his life, he worked just like other laborers did, but not for
himself, rather for pious purposes.  On the very day that the people
swore their allegiance to him, he took his spade and pick-axe in hand
and went to finish a job he was doing.  He was digging a well, digging
it with his own hands.  And to whom were congratulations to be extended
when water sprung forth?  He said that congratulations were to be given
to those who would inherit this and asked that he be brought a pen and
paper so that there and then he could dedicate the well to pious
purposes.[551]  
    
 Therefore, asceticism has no direct bearing on indigence. Asceticism
implies freedom from want, not dependency and parasitism. A beggar who
desires riches is not an ascetic. But a wealthy man who has no
attachment to his wealth is an ascetic. As such, asceticism means to use
amenities as needed and not beyond that. Asceticism connotes enjoyment
of the blessings to attain goals, and not making blessings the goals. In
this sense, asceticism is the opposite of lavishness. But, “Lavishness
is something that the people are in quest for, even though they may have
the least need for it.”[552]  
    
  

Is asceticism abstention from the blessings?
--------------------------------------------

   
 Well, some have thought that asceticism means abstention from the
blessings and legitimate enjoyments and imagined that the ascetic is he
who refrains from eating, drinking and wearing clothes except what is
needed for survival. The story of Sufyān ath-Thawrī, the ascetic who
found fault with Imām as-Sādiq (*‘a*) for wearing a beautiful garment,
is expressive of this wrong view on asceticism. With this same thinking,
‘Asim ibn Ziyād al-Hārithī abandoned his wife and child, retreated to a
corner, closed his eyes to all the divine favours, and considered all
these acts as values. But Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) rescued him from his wrong
conception, viewing it as the result of Satanic inculcations and said to
him: “Do you believe that if you use those things which Allah has made
lawful for you, He will dislike you?”[553]

In refuting this inadmissible notion, the Holy Qur’an states: *“Say: Who
hath forbidden the adornment of Allah which He hath brought forth for
His bondmen, and the good things of His providing? Say: Such will be
only for those who believed during the life of the world.”*[554]
Similarly, the Qur’an emphatically urges the believers to be pure and
smart and thus commands them: *“Look to your adornment at every place of
worship, and eat and drink, but be not prodigal.”*[555]

Basically, from this perspective refraining from eating and drinking
cannot be considered a value. The believers are well-groomed, and they
eat and drink commensurate to their vital needs. What has been forbidden
to them is extravagance, and in today’s jargon, ‘wasting the favours of
God,’ and not ‘depriving oneself of the favours.’ A cursory glance at
the lives of the Infallible Ones (*‘a*) illustrates this approach.

The Most Noble Messenger (*s*) was so fond of applying perfume that he
would skip his supper so as to procure his needed perfume. If perfume
was not at his disposal, he would soak the perfumed scarf of his wife
and rub his face with it so as to be perfumed. Likewise, before going
out he would always look at himself in the mirror or water, and groom
himself to such an extent as to always be an embodiment of adornment and
dressing well. He would apply so much perfume that his beard had turned
white as a result.[556]

Well, this has been the tradition and way of the true ascetics. Now, let
us compare it with that of Dāwūd at-Tā’ī who used to assert that he had
not enough time to comb or trim his disheveled beard, or with that of
the other (person) who was pleased with the lousiness of his clothes, or
that of another, that is, Mālik ibn Dīnār who claimed to have not eaten
meat for twenty years, about which he was proud, saying: “I do not know
the meaning of the statement that if a man does not eat meat for forty
days, his intelligence is diminished. I have not eaten meat for twenty
years and my intelligence increases every day.”[557] Apparently, it
refers to a *hadīth* attributed to the Most Noble Messenger (*s*) which
states: “Whoever would not eat meat for forty days, the call to prayer
[*azān*] should be recited again near his ear.”

Another story is narrated about this Mālik which, if assumed to be true,
not only does not confirm any value for him, but is also incompatible
with the indisputable principles of religion. The story is as follows:  
    
 For forty years he [Mālik] lived in Basrah and never ate fresh dates.
When the season of ripe dates came around he would say, ‘People of
Basrah, behold, my belly has not shrunk from not eating them, and you
who eat them daily—your bellies have not become any larger.’ After forty
years he was assailed by a mood of restlessness. However hard he tried,
he could not withstand the craving for fresh dates. Finally after some
days, during which the desire daily increased while he constantly denied
his appetite, he could resist no more the importunity of his carnal
soul.  
 ‘I will not eat fresh dates,’ he protested. ‘Either kill me, or die!’  
 That night a heavenly voice spoke.  
 ‘You must eat some dates. Free your carnal soul from bondage.’  
 At this response his carnal soul, finding the opportunity, began to
shout.  
 ‘If you want dates,’ Mālik said, ‘fast for a week without breakfasting
once, and pray all night. Then I will give you some.’  
 This contented his carnal soul. For a whole week he prayed all night
and fasted all day. Then he went to the market and bought some dates,
and betook himself to the mosque to eat them. A boy shouted from the
rooftop.  
 ‘Father! A Jew has bought dates and is going to the mosque to eat
them.’  
 ‘What business has a Jew in the mosque?’ the man exclaimed. And he ran
to see who the Jew might be. Beholding Mālik, he fell at his feet.  
 ‘What were those words the boy uttered?’ Mālik demanded.  
 ‘Excuse him, master,’ the boy’s father pleaded. ‘He is only a child,
and does not understand. In our quarter many Jews live. We are
constantly fasting, and our children see the Jews eating by day. So they
suppose that everyone who eats anything by day is a Jew. What he said he
said in ignorance. Forgive him!’  
 When Mālik heard this, a fire consumed his soul. He realized that the
child was inspired to speak as he had.  
 ‘Lord God,’ he cried, ‘I had not eaten any dates, and Thou didst call
me a Jew by the tongue of an innocent child. If I eat the dates, Thou
wilt proclaim me an unbeliever. By Thy glory, if I ever eat any
dates!’[558]       
    
 Obviously, it was the hidden voice which had been making fun of him.
Besides, day and night fasting for seven whole days, even though it is
possible, is certainly forbidden [*harām*] and can be considered an
‘uninterrupted fasting’ [*rūzeh-ye wisāl*], which Islam has sternly
prohibited.

Anyway, we have plenty of similar stories. But no matter what we call
them, we cannot regard them as asceticism that is one of the teachings
of the Infallibles (*‘a*). The Messenger of God (*s*) as well as other
Infallibles (*‘a*) would eat meat, dates, and other permissible
foodstuffs. They did not prohibit for themselves anything which God had
permitted for them. In the heat of the Battle of Jamal, Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*)
asked for water but they brought him honey syrup. He drank it and said
that the honey is that of T&ā’if.[559]

This tranquility and control which such a war failed to disturb the
Imām’s (*‘a*) mind, surprised others, and ‘Abdullāh ibn Ja‘far, paternal
nephew of the Imām (*‘a*), asked him (*‘a*), “In such a situation, how
could you identify the place of origin of the honey just by taste?” He
(*‘a*) replied, “My son, I swear to God, none of the world’s affairs has
ever satisfied your uncle.”[560]

Even if the Imām (*‘a*) used to refrain from eating food or wearing
(expensive) clothes, it had definitely a social philosophy and his
action was not inappropriate. In fact, it was considered a lesson and
education for the governors. After the Imām was informed that his
governor in Basrah, Uthmān ibn al-Hunayf, had accepted the invitation of
one of the affluent men of the city to a banquet, he (*‘a*) in the
course of a letter, admonished him, dissuaded him from repeating such
actions, and reminded him that he (*‘a*) who is the caliph of the
Muslims has worn two garments and sufficed himself with two loaves of
bread, and he urged the state officials to follow this practice. He
(*‘a*) emphasized that this abstinence and asceticism did not arise from
indigence and mendicancy and [then, he (*‘a*) said:]  
    
 If I wished I could have taken the way leading toward [worldly
pleasures like] pure honey, wheat germ and silk clothes but it cannot be
that my passions lead me and greed take me to choosing good meals while
in the Hijāz[561] or in Yamāmah[562] there may be people who have no
hope of getting bread or who do not have a full
meal.[563]                  
    
 This abstinence shows the height of his humanity. The Imām led an
austere life because he felt that possibly others were not be able to
dress and drink as they liked. This was very different from what Mālik
ibn Dīnār did—a kind of self-torment.

In another instance, the Imām (*‘a*) expounds the philosophy behind this
self-mortification. As he (*‘a*) had prohibited ‘Alā ibn Ziyād from
seclusion and self-mortification, the latter asked, “Why are you so
austere in your own case?” He (*‘a*) replied, “Woe be to you, I am not
like you. Certainly, Allah, the Sublime, has made it obligatory on true
leaders to live like the poor people, so that they are not tormented by
their poverty.”[564] And he (*‘a*) deemed it endurable. Thus, as he
(*‘a*) himself saw that one of his companions had built a huge house, he
(*‘a*) told him that he did not need a house of such a vast size unless
it was for entertaining visitors and establishing relations with
kinsmen;[565] and would be used as a means of social interaction and
helping others.

Therefore, asceticism does not mean poverty and indigence, or depriving
oneself of the [divinely-endowed] favours, but a sort of independence
and detachment from worldly possessions, absence of attachment, and in
the words of Hāfiz, freedom from any ‘color’ of attachment:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غلامِ همّت آنم كه زيرِ چرخ كبود           ز هرچه رنگ تعلق پذيرد آزاد
است
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I am slave of he under the sky (the world)*

*Who is free from any color of attachment.*[566]

 

Is asceticism a hindrance to economic activity?
-----------------------------------------------

   
 Some have believed that asceticism means solitude and seclusion, and
have concluded that it is discordant with any kind of economic activity,
and consequently, social progress. It is because they think that
asceticism summons man to eat and drink less, be indifferent to the
world and to minimize desires, while the prerequisite of any type of
economic activity and social development is long-term planning and
active presence in the society.

So, they conclude that if all the people are supposed to be ascetic then
there will be no sign of the bustle of economic activities, and
expansion and progress of the society.

Of course, undoubtedly, some have taken asceticism to mean seclusion,
monasticism and solitude. The point must not be overlooked that
sometimes, in the different phases of the life of man, seclusion is
needed and by remaining alone, man can closet and assess, himself. As
such, in our religious tradition *i‘tikāf* [seclusion in the mosque for
prayer and other devotional acts] has a special status.

The Messenger of God (*s*) would sometimes go to the cave of Hirā, and
sometimes seclude himself in the mosque and meditate; but it was only
for a short period. In reality, seclusion is a medication and a kind of
short-term relaxation; not a strategy for one’s life. In the words of
Will Durant,[567] “Seclusion is a medication and a sort of therapy
through abstinence; but it cannot be food. As what Goethe[568] had said,
once and for ever, ‘‘Human habits and disposition grow only amidst the
waves and confusion of this world.”[569]

So, asceticism should not be equated with mere seclusion. Consequently,
apart from not being an impediment to economic activity, asceticism,
with the magnanimity that it creates in man and warns him of excessive
elation over his possessions can be a promoter of economic activity.

This is especially true if the economic activity is a value and a kind
of religious worship and devotion [*‘ibādah*]. With the notion that
economic activity is discordant with devotion and reliance on God
[*tawakkul*], some companions of the Infallibles (*‘a*) abandoned all
endeavor and stayed in their houses. But the Holy Infallibles (*‘a*)
dissuaded them from this act and said that the supplications of such
persons will not be granted and that everybody should exert efforts to
find his sustenance.

One of these persons asked Imām as-Sādiq (*‘a*) to pray for him and ask
God to give him sustenance without the need for him to exert any effort.
He (*‘a*) said, “I will not pray for you as God has commanded you to
strive in pursuit of sustenance.”[570] Similarly, the Messenger of God
(*s*) said, “Worship has seventy parts, among which the most superior is
the search for permissible [*halāl*] sustenance.”[571] Economic activity
from the viewpoint of Imām as-Sādiq (*‘a*) is so blessed that he
commanded Hishām that even “If you saw a war break out and the opposing
forces take up positions, you should not stop your economic
activities.”[572]

We have also dwelt on the story of Imām as-Sādiq (*‘a*) busy working in
extreme heat and being subjected to his companions’ objection. And we
have also heard his reply.[573]  
 On the other hand, poverty, according to Islam, is not a value; it is,
rather, a matter of disgrace.

Thus, in the supplications of the Infallibles (*‘a*) refuge has been
sought in God from it. Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) calls destitution as the
greatest death.[574] He (*‘a*) says to his son, Muhammad ibn Hanafiyyah:
“O’ my son, I fear lest destitution overtakes you. So, you should seek
Allah’s protection from it, because destitution is deficiency of
religious belief, perplexity of intelligence, and it is conducive to
hatred of obstinate people.”[575]

Therefore, the very person who views asceticism as a value and invites
people to it, brands destitution as loathsome and the source of
defilement of religion and the intellect. As such, a connection between
asceticism and destitution cannot be established except that of duality
and alienation.

Well, the question is: Will the emergence of asceticism at the general
level not obstruct economic activities? The answer is ‘no’. Even
nowadays there are countries where asceticism is embedded in the depth
of their culture, but, at the same time, are enjoying the peak of
economic prosperity and boom. We are referring to Japan.

In the culture of Japan, what can be approximately regarded as the
equivalent of asceticism of our religion is *wabi*. *Wabi* means “not
being bound to the things of this world such as wealth, power and fame
and, notwithstanding all this, deeply experiencing the most precious
things that are above time, place and status.”[576]

These are the words expressed by one of the most notable Japanese
culturologists and masters of Zen, who is himself a devotee of this way
of life. “*Wabi* spells out the totality of Japanese culture.”[577]

It is present in all aspects of the individual and social life of the
Japanese and has left its marks on the architecture, industry and other
facets of today’s life in Japan. Even the wealthy Japanese, who devote
their entire life to production and make investment again and again,
lead mostly ascetic lives, based on the *wabi* doctrine. They work and
produce wealth as they regard it as holy and blessed. At the same time,
they lead ascetic and disciplined lives.

They refrain from profligacy in their lives as they believe in the
doctrine of *wabi*. It is better for us to see what the chairman of the
board of directors of the huge Daewoo Organization has to say about this
matter. Kim Wu Chung, who is a South Korean and one of the most
hard-working economic figures, reproaches the profligacy of some of his
countrymen and summons them to learn from the Japanese:  
    
 Albeit the standard of living of the Japanese is far higher than ours,
their life is far more moderate. Even the high-ranking directors of
giant Japanese corporations live in 100-130 meter houses with very
simple furniture. The chairman of the board of directors of the eminent
Toshiba Company has an annual salary of approximately 100 million yen,
but he lives in an 83-meter house. His monthly expenses do not also
exceed 15,000 yen, but in [South] Korea some managers of small companies
have 330-meter houses with luxurious imported equipment and
furniture.[578]        
    
 These words have been uttered by someone who himself has spent almost
his entire life in travel, signing contracts and production of wealth.
He says that he experiences joy in increasing the wealth of his country
and is not so much in pursuit of personal enjoyment from his wealth and
prosperity. After emphasizing the intensification of economic activity,
he recommends, “Let us be hard-working and faithful.”[579] According to
this economic icon,  
    
 [t]he Japanese are unrivalled in saving and frugality. It is this very
saving and frugality that has transformed Japan into one of the richest
nations on earth today. Sometimes, things must be learned from others
and we have no alternative but to be ashamed of the frugality and modest
life of the Japanese.[580]   
    
 Then, he urges the people of [South] Korea:  
    
 Therefore, the more your possession is, the more you should be frugal
in your living, for, through frugality and diligence you are responsible
in leading your society toward what is desirable and wholesome. You
should bear in mind that one of the greatest hindrances in the progress
of every society is immoderation and over-consumption.[581]    
    
 Therefore, asceticism is a value, and apart from not being incompatible
with other values such as work and activity, it is even a requisite for
them. Now, we understand the utility and importance of asceticism. At
this juncture, it is a good idea to indicate the three fundamental
elements of Islamic asceticism, which the late Martyr Mutahharī has
pointed out. According to him, the essential elements of asceticism are
as follows:  
 (1) Natural and physical enjoyments are not the sole factors of
obtaining happiness;

(2) Individual destiny is not separate from that of society;

(3) While the soul is in union with the body, it is loftier than the
latter.[582]

With the same notion of asceticism and positive outlook on it, the Imām
urges the government officials to behave ascetically in their lives,
take simple living as their motto and, in this path, take Imām ‘Alī
(*‘a*) as their leader and model.  
  

What is the political utility of asceticism?
--------------------------------------------

   
 From the political perspective, asceticism and simple living are not
merely moral virtues; rather they are political necessities. One can
enter the political arena and employ ethical politics provided he does
not have attachment and devotion to materialism, position and power. To
the extent that one becomes dependent, the possibility of his ‘movement’
and progress will decrease by the same degree.

Try to consider a mountaineer who wants to climb a summit which can be
conquered (climbed) within one night. If this mountaineer is really
well-experienced, he will only bring with him the things that he will
need for one day and one night and will bring only a maximum of four
meals. Now, the more this person increases the weight of his knapsack,
the harder his climb will be, and traversing the route, he will become
more tired. Inexperienced and neophyte mountaineers have had this bitter
experience time and again of bringing along with them equipment that was
more than needed and weighed heavily on their shoulders, making them
wish that they had set out with a lighter load.

The same is true in the political arena. Those who have many financial,
emotional, social, and economic attachments have less chance of keeping
their boat on an even keel along this tumultuous river. This aside, the
more one has attachment to and affection for something, the more is his
chance of being deceived and of forgetting his objective. In fact,
bullets do not kill the statesmen; rather, it is the sugar-coated
bullets that destroy them.

A glance at history bears witness to the claim that so many statesmen
were seduced by the sight of gold or the illusion of power and splendor,
and betrayed their ideals and country. In contrast, history shows that
the only statesmen who succeeded were those who had taken simple living
as their motto and weapon. From among our religious narratives, Imām
‘Alī (*‘a*) can be mentioned the story of this great man being
frequently told and retold.

From among the contemporaries, Gandhi is worth mentioning. A man with a
few meters of hand-woven canvas named *khadi* covering his body, a
manual spinning machine and a milking goat, succeeded in obtaining the
independence of India and overawed British colonialism with his
spiritual power. In the contemporary history of Iran, the late Āyatullāh
Sayyid Hasan Mudarris[583] can be mentioned. H

e was a person with respect to whom persons such as Ridā Khān[584] stood
helpless. The latter asked the former, “Sayyid, what do you want from
me?” He answered, “I want you to be no more [in the position of power].”
It was only due to his unflinching faith, simple living, and ascetic
life that Mudarris succeeded in not being swayed by power and splendor
and in not forgetting his goals. The Imām describes the spiritual
strength of Mudarris and reminisces about him with great admiration:  
    
 You have noticed and seen the history of the late Mudarris who was a
very slim Sayyid [having], I say, a canvas garment (which is one of the
abusive words coined by the poet for him—‘clad in canvas trousers’). A
person like this stood against the brutality (which was such) that
whoever is aware of those times knows that the time of Ridā Shāh was not
the same as that of Muhammad Ridā Shāh. At the time when there reigned
tyranny, with which our history is perhaps less acquainted, he stood up
to such a person (the tyrant). In the *Majlis* (Parliament)… (Ridā Khān)
once asked him, ‘What do you want from me?’ He replied, ‘I wish you to
be no more [in the position of power];   I wish you no more [in 
power]’. This person… used to come to Sepahsālār *Madrasah* [theology
school]… to give lectures.

One day I attended his class; it appeared that he had nothing else to
do; a mere theologian engaged in teaching. He had such strength of
character… Even in the days when he used to attend the *Majlis*
sessions, he was held in high esteem by everybody… It seemed as if the
Parliament was waiting for Mudarris to come. Although they were not well
disposed toward him, it was as if the Parliament felt that something was
missing whenever Mudarris was not there. But once he came, it was as
though something new had happened. What was the reason for this? It was
owing to the fact that he was a person who paid no heed to position,
possessions and the like. He paid no heed to anything; no position was
able to attract him… Why was it so? It was because he was upright; he
was not attached to carnal desires… And neither was he afraid of anyone…
It was because he was free from carnal desires. He was honest; he was
not dependent [on anything and anybody].[585]      
    
 Therefore, political courage, mental freedom, intelligence, and power
of practical innovation emerge only when the politician is free and
upright [*vārasteh*] and not dependent [*vābasteh*]—this exactly is
asceticism. From this perspective, asceticism does not mean not eating,
drinking and wearing (beautiful) clothes. Basically, this individual
level is problematic. At the highest level, asceticism is that very
freedom and independence that emerges only when the person disengages
himself from his diverse attachments. The Most Noble Messenger (*s*),
who was able to cleanse the entire Arabian Peninsula from the pollution
of polytheism, succeeded due to the very fact that, apart from divine
assistance, he (*s*) was free from various attachments; he was upright
and free of want; notwithstanding all his authority and in spite of the
fact that  
    
 he was the vicegerent of God [*khalīfatullāh*], everybody accepted him;
when he was sitting in the mosque, they were not able to recognize him;
one who entered (the mosque) did not recognize him for there was no such
thing as sitting in ‘superior’ or ‘inferior’ places in the
mosque.[586]        
    
 Simple living from the Imām’s viewpoint is discussed as one of the
pillars of governmental politics. After indicating the simple lifestyle
of Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) and regarding it as the model, he says:  
    
 That which we want is this… In Iran we want it to be so that when the
head of state of some country, for example, the President or Prime
Minister, is among the people, there should be no such privilege for him
that the people have to step aside with ‘ahs*’* and ‘ohs*’*.[587]  
    
 In the opinion of the Imām, the Messenger of God (*s*) who was the most
authoritative individual in the Muslim society, “His (material)
condition in life was lower than the common people who were then living
in Medina.”[588] 

From the Imām’s viewpoint, not only does simple living ensures the
independence of political authorities, but also secures their political
future. If one day the officials abandon their simple lifestyle, they
will be forsaken by the people. While addressing the clergymen, he would
say:  
    
 Praise be to God that, today, there is nothing wrong in dealing with
political issues; however, you should bear in mind that all are watching
you; Therefore, you must preserve your image as scholars. Live modestly,
exactly like the *‘ulamā* [religious scholars] of the past… If one day
your living standards exceed those of the common people, then, sooner or
later, you will be rejected and ostracized.[589]    
    
 He staunchly opposed lavishness and would enumerate, one by one, its
negative effects. Some of the consequences of lavishness are, according
to him, ostracism by the people, dependency and attachment, drifting
away from spiritualities, fallen reputations and, finally, spiritual
debasement. Even the responsible leaders of society should not engage in
lavish formalities on the excuse of their own security. “Even those who
want to protect themselves should realize that sometimes a Peykan[590]
(automobile) could be safer for them than any other vehicle.”[591] 

Some erroneously think that lavishness is a symbol of power, and the
more lavish we are in life, the more powerful we are. This notion on the
alleged relationship between lavishness and authority has led to the
issue of lavishness, or what is called ‘power symbols’, being brought
into administrative circles and international relations. One, who thinks
of luxury from this angle, and as a political or administrative
necessity, endeavors to possess all symbols of power such as costly
tables and chairs, showy cars, and palatial mansions. These they use to
show their personal or national power. Those who are after such excuses
are, actually, deceiving and covering up their concealed desires. One
thing certain is that, in the long run, all those who have been engaged
in the power play (of politics) and have employed its symbols have
gradually been affected and tainted by these symbols. Thus, these are
facilities and symbols that are not without their (unsavory)
consequences. In fact, they take firm control of the mentality and
psyche of man.[592]     

In essence, once the politician gets used to simple living he will not
be dejected and dispirited by any failure, and will not experience a
sense of emptiness or loss. “We should live in such a way that we will
not rue the things that were taken from us.”[593]

In the Imām’s code of ethics, asceticism and simple living has such a
lofty status that it is the axis and cornerstone of every kind of
movement for independence and dignity. Anyone who likes to tread safely
the tortuous, dreadful and horrendous path of politics should be an
ascetic and accustomed to simple living. He should know that the desert
tree which receives a lesser amount of water is more resilient. It seems
as if, the Imām has obtained this viewpoint by reflecting on the
utterance of our master ‘Alī (*‘a*) who says, “Remember that the tree of
the forest is the best for timber, while green twigs have soft barks,
and the wild bushes are quick to kindle but slow in dying
off.”[594]      

It is with this perception that Imām Khomeinī regards simple living as
the key to success and the secret of felicity and honor in both the
worlds, saying:  
    
 If you want to stand fearless and intrepid against falsehood; to defend
the truth; and the superpowers, their advanced weapons, the devils, and
their conspiracies not to affect you mentally; and not drive you away
from the scene, get yourself accustomed to simple living and refrain
from having fondness for riches and position. Most of the great men who
have rendered remarkable services to their nations have lived modestly
and have been uninterested in the vanities of the world.

Those who were and are captives of mean carnal and bestial desires are
willing to endure hardship and humiliation to preserve or obtain them
(all that they long for). In front of satanic forces and powers they are
humble and meek while in relation to the weak masses of people they are
despotic and cruel. But the upright ones are contrary to them owing to
the fact that, for them, human and Islamic values cannot be preserved
through an aristocratic and consumerist lifestyle.[595]     
    
 Therefore, from the Imām’s perspective, asceticism and simple living
are deemed part of the triple pillars of ethical politics. The one who
can tread this path is like Ya‘qūb ibn Layth as-Saffārī[596] who would
suffice with mere bread and onion, and reckon ascetic life as his motto
so as to be counted as a formidable threat to the ‘Abbāsid caliphate.


