Imām Khomeinī’s Code of Ethics
==============================

   
 In the heart of Imām Khomeinī’s[1] way of thinking, ethics has a
[special] place, and in fact, all areas of knowledge revolve around this
pivot. According to his view, by citing a *hadīth* (Prophetic tradition)
from the Messenger of God (*s*) ([2]), all kinds of knowledge can be
placed in three general categories. It is because the human being
possesses three existential presences and three types of world: one,
external and sensory; another, the allegorical world; the third, the
intellectual one.

Social science, juristic precepts and transactions are examples of the
first category while rational sciences are instances of the third type.
Yet, what is related and complementary to the second type is called
*ethics*. If man wants to go beyond logic and the law of instincts, then
he needs ethics in its broad sense. Ethics in this context cannot be
confined to merely a number of ethical rules; instead, it is in fact a
knowledge which searches for the deepest recesses of man’s existence,
and which cures him.

This ethics is, indeed, a sort of theoretical and practical
anthropology. It is awareness of fixed principles and their application.
It is owing to this that this knowledge can be considered as the noblest
one and the raison d’être of the prophets’(*s*) ([3]) summons.

The Messenger of God’s (*s*) sayings were a manifestation of such kind
of ethics which he made known as the purpose of his mission. In this
sense, man can be needless of many types of knowledge; yet, he cannot
consider himself needless of ethics since this knowledge is the capital
asset of felicities in both worlds:  
    
 The purpose and result of the summons of the Seal of the Prophets (*s*)
is the perfection of morality. In the noble traditions, both that are
brief and those which are elaborate, moral excellences have been given
more importance than anything else after doctrinal teachings
[*ma‘ārif*]… And their importance is greater than what we are capable of
explaining adequately, but that which we know for certain is that the
asset of the everlasting life of the hereafter and the capital asset of
the life of that abode is the acquisition of noble dispositions and the
possession of moral excellences.

The paradise which is given to man for the sake of moral excellence is
the paradise of Attributes, incomparable to the physical paradise of
Act.[4]  
    
 Ethics, with this peculiar status, has always had Imām Khomeinī’s
attention. From the very beginning when he was a regular teacher up to
the time when he was in the midst of the political arena, led the
people’s uprising, and established the Islamic Republic, he always paid
particular attention to morality, and viewed almost all socio-political
issues from the moral perspective. His recommendations and political
messages to the officials and the people speak for this, and these
[recommendations] can be treated, apart from the occasion of their
issuance, as profound moral lessons from which we can learn.

However, from his point of view morality cannot be restricted to some
recommendations and decrees. Rather, it is anchored in profound
philosophical, theosophical and anthropological principles and precepts.
His view on morality is a philosophical one. It is in this sense that he
keenly scrutinizes moral vices and virtues, discusses them wisely, and
enumerates the benefits and harms of this and that item. In fact, he has
a remarkably profound belief in religious morality and uncovers vices
and virtues from the heart of the narrations [*ahādīth*] from the
Infallibles [*ma‘sūmīn*][5] (*‘a*); nevertheless, he does not content
himself with the tradition of quoting, but perfectly utilizes intellect
in analyzing these narrations [*ahādīth*] and in elucidating moral
concepts.

This mode of striking a balance between the intellect [*‘aql*] and
narration [*naql*], which has been acceptable to the great Shī‘ah
scholars, is very manifest and conspicuous in the moral discourses of
the Imām. Anyone who assiduously scrutinizes the ethical and gnostic
works of the Imām can deduce his system of ethics.

The truth of the matter is that he has based his code of ethics and
mystical-moral understandings on theoretical principles, which he does
not specify so much. In the same manner that he juxtaposes the fragments
of a riddle with one another, so also the researcher must carefully find
these principles and place them together. In doing so, he could present
the Imām’s code of ethics, which is rooted in a long-standing tradition
and founded on the great gnostic and ethical heritage of the Muslim
mystics and teachers of ethics.          
      
 The writer of these lines has tried his best to accomplish this task to
the best of his ability. Thus, by pondering on the ethical writings of
the Imām, particularly the *Sharh-e Chehel Hadīth* [Exposition of Forty
*Hadīth*s],[6] which is replete with philosophical, ethical and
psychological intricacies and subtleties, he has attempted to infer and
expound on the principles that he considers as being the underpinning of
the Imām’s system of ethics.

The outcome of this study is the presentation and explanation of the
Imām’s eight fundamental tenets and the results that emanate from them.
Undoubtedly, the comprehensiveness of such kinds of studies cannot be
claimed and the first person who perceives its flaws is the researcher
himself. The reason for this is that if, after a few days, he reads what
he has written, he feels there is something to be added and omitted from
it. This, in itself, indicates that such handiworks of man are, like
him, is an unfinished matter and an open question. 

What must be said is that these tenets and principles are theoretical
teachings on the basis of which the system of practical ethics takes
form, and so one can talk about practical ethics. These discussions are
mainly theoretical in form. The framework of practical discourses and
the manner of ethical behaviour must be dealt with elsewhere. The
teachings which will be discussed in this section and can be considered
as the bedrock of the Imām’s code of ethics are as follows:

1.       Indescribability of the human being;  
 2.       Man in the state of nature;  
 3.       Man as the arena of conflict between good and evil;  
 4.       Regulation of instincts;  
 5.       This world and the hereafter;  
 6.       The philosophy behind suffering;  
 7.       Knowledge as a mental aid, or burden; and  
 8.       Behaviour as emanating from ethical principles.  
     
  


