Man as the Arena of Conflict between Good and Evil
==================================================

 

Once we accept the previous principle, we can then deduce that the human
being has a dual personality; this is part of the well-established
Islamic anthropology. According to the Qur’an, God Almighty created man
out of odorous black mud, which had been transformed into dry clay, and
then He breathed His Spirit upon it; thus, emerged man. In other words,
man is a muddy creature, which has the Spirit of God. The Glorious
Qur’an describes the creation of man, thus:  
    
***“And (remember) when thy Lord said unto the angels: Lo! I am creating
a mortal out of potter’s clay of black mud altered. So, when I have made
him and have breathed unto him of My spirit, do ye fall down,
prostrating yourselves unto him.**”*[94]       
    
 This fact is repeated in the different verses of the Qur’an. The
reality must be emphasized that the human being has a twofold
personality: heavenly and earthly. This creature has its origin in the
earth and his hands are extended toward heaven. While glancing at this
transitory world, his eyes are fixed on that everlasting world. This
creature is the connecting link between animal and angel. It is this
point that distinguishes him from the two, and raises the question—is he
superior to the two, equal to, or inferior to them? 

One of the companions of Imām as-Sādiq (*‘a*) asked him as to who is
superior, man or angel. The infallible Imām (*‘a*) replied that the
Commander of the Faithful Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) had the following answer to
the same query:    
    
 God created the angels from reason without carnal desire and He created
human beings from the combination of these two. Therefore, whoever uses
his reason above his desire is superior to the angels and whoever uses
his desire above his reason is inferior to the four-footed ones.[95]  
    
 While pointing to this *hadīth* Jalāl ad-Dīn Muhammad Balkhī [ar-Rūmī],
a great gnostic and expounder of the subtleties of human existence,
recites thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺩﺮﺤﺩﻳﺚ ﺁﻤﺩ ﻜﻪﻳﺯﺩﺍﻦ ﻤﺠﻳﺩ                 ﺧﻟﻕﻋﺎﻟﻡ ﺮﺍ ﺴﻪﮔﻮﻧﻪ ﺁﻓﺮﻳﺪ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﻳﮏ ﮔُﺮُﻩﺮﺍ ﺟﻤﻠﻪ ﻋﻗﻞﻮ ﻋﻠﻡ ﻮﺧﻮﺩ         ﺁﻦﻓﺮﺷﻪ ﺍﺴﺖ، ﺍﻮ ﻧﺩﺍﻧﺩ ﺟﺰﺴﺟﻮﺩ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﻧﻴﺴﺖ ﺍﻧﺩﺮﻋﻧﺼﺮﺵ ﺣﺮﺹ ﻮﻫﻮﺍ          ﻧﻮﺮ ﻣﻃﻠﻕ، ﺰﻧﺩﻩ ﺍﺰ ﻋﺷﻕﺨﺩﺍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﻴﮏ ﮔﺮﻮﻩﺩﻳﮕﺮ ﺍﺰﺩﺍﻧﺵ ﺗﻬﻰ                ﻫﻣﭼﻮ ﺤﻴﻮﺍﻥﺍﺰ ﻋﻠﻒ ﺩﺮﻓﺮﺒﻬﻰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺍﻮ ﻧﺒﻴﻧﺩﺟﺰ ﻜﻪ ﺍﺻﻃﺒﻝﻮ ﻋﻠﻒ              ﺍﺰ ﺸﻗﺎﻮﺖﻏﺎﻓﻞﺍﺴﺖﻮﺍﺯﺸﺮﻒ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺍﻴﻥﺴﻮﻢ ﻫﺴﺖﺁﺪﻤﻴﺯﺍﺪ ﻮﺒﺸﺮ               ﻧﻴﻢ ﺍﻮﺯﺍﻓﺮﺸﺘﻪ ﻮﻧﻴﻤﺶ ﺧﺮ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It is related in the hadīth that the Majestic God*

*Created the creatures of the world (in) three kinds.*

*One class (He made) entirely reason and knowledge and munificence;*

*That is the angel: he knoweth naught but prostration in worship.*

*In his original nature is no concupiscence and sensuality:*

*He is absolute light, (he is) living through (his) love of God.*

*Another class is devoid of knowledge,*

*Like the animals (which lives) in fatness from (eating) fodder.*

*It sees nothing but stable and fodder:*

*It is heedless of (future) misery and glory (felicity).*

*The third (class) is Adam’s descendant and Man:*

*Half of him is of the angel and half of him is ass.*[96]

This is the state of human existence. His worldly aspect directs him to
the world while his celestial side spurs him to quest and growth.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺠﺎﻦﮔﺷﺎﻴﺪ ﺴﻮﻯﺒﺎﻻ، ﺒﺎﻟﻬﺎ                  ﺪﺮﺯﺪﻩ ﺘﻦ ﺪﺮﺯﻤﻴﻦﭽﻧﮕﺎﻟﻬﺎ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The spirit unfolds its wings (to) fly) upwards;*

*The body has stuck its claws in the earth.*[97]

Of course, it is stated in the Prophetic narrations that God created man
out of His own mold.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺧﻠﻕ ﻤﺎﺒﺮ ﺻﻮﺮﺖ ﺧﻮﺪﻜﺮﺪ ﺣﻕ            ﻮﺻﻒ ﻤﺎ ﺍﺯﻮﺻﻒ ﺍﻮ ﮔﻴﺮﺪﺴﺒﻕ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*God created us in His image:*

*Our qualities are instructed by*[98] *(are modeled upon) His
qualities.*[99]

But this is only one side of the coin. It does not mean that man, as
such, is superior to the angels and the representative of God. Rather,
it points to the fact that man can, and should, make apparent and
nurture his divine aspect, and make himself his Lord’s worthy viceroy.

As such, man has a dual personality and each part of him drives him to
its pertinent direction. As a result, an inner conflict arises in man,
dichotomizing his being. There is a story about Majnūn, which
illustrates well this state of humanity. One day Majnūn decided to pay a
visit to Laylā who used to live with her tribe in a distant place. So,
he went after a she-camel that he possessed and mounted it. The
she-camel had just given birth to an offspring and so was not willing to
leave the place. However, it had no choice but to take Majnūn.

But whenever Majnūn used to fall asleep due to fatigue, the halter that
was in his hand naturally used to slacken and the she-camel, realizing
that its master had fallen asleep, would swiftly change its direction
and head hurriedly toward its foal. After a short while, Majnūn would
wake up and realize that the she-camel had changed course. So, he would
correct his course and, gripping the halter tightly, lead the camel
toward Laylā. But after some time, Majnūn would lapse into sleep once
again and the camel, with its young mind, would change its direction, so
on and so forth. After going to and fro like this many times, Majnūn
consequently realized that they have not even covered a half day’s
distance and that his actual problem was the rider heading toward his
beloved and the animal ridden heading in another direction; he would not
be able to reach Laylā so long as this situation was such and the two
conflicting aims persisted. Mawlānā relates the story in the following
words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﻤﻴﻞﻣﺠﻧﻮﻦ ﭘﻴﺶﺁﻦ ﻠﻴﻠﻰﺮﻮﺍﻦ                 ﻤﻴﻞ ﻧﺎﻗﻪﭘﺲ، ﭘﻰ ﻛﺮّﻩﺩﻮﺍﻦ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﻴﮓﺩﻢ ﺍﺮ ﻣﺠﻧﻮﻦﺰ ﺨﻮﺩ ﻏﺎﻔﻞﺒُﺩى           ﻧﺎﻗﻪﮔﺮﺩﻴﺩى ﻮﻮﺍﭙﺲ ﺁﻤﺩى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﻋﺸﻖﻮ ﺳﻮﺪﺍ، ﭽﻮﻦﻜﻪ ﭙﺮ ﺒﻮﺪﺶﺒﺪﻦ        ﻤﻰ ﻧﺒﻮﺪﺶ  ﭽﺎﺮﻩﺍﺯ ﺒﻴﺧﻮﺪﺷﺪﻦ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺁﻧﻜﻪﺒﺎﺷﺪ ﺍﻮﻤﺮﺍﻗﺐ، ﻋﻗﻞﺒﻮﺪ                  ﻋﻗﻞ ﺮﺍﺴﻮﺪﻯ ﻠﻴﻠﻰﺪﺮ ﺮﺒﻮﺪ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﻠﻴﮓﻧﺎﻗﻪ،  ﺒس  ﻤﺮﺍﻗﺐ  ﺒﻮﺪ  ﻮ  ﭽُﺴﺖ      ﭽﻮﻦ ﺒﺪﻴﺪﻯ ﺍﻮﻤﻬﺎﺮ ﺧﻮﻴﺶﺴﺴﺖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﻓﻬﻡﻜﺮﺪﻯ ﺯﻮ، ﻜﻪﻏﺎﻔﻞ ﮔﺷﺖ ﻮﺪﻧﮓ       ﺮﻮ ﺳﭘﺲﻜﺮﺪﻯ ﺒﻪﻜﺮّﻩ ﺒﻰﺪﺮﻧﮓ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﭽﻮﻦﺒﻪ ﺨﻮﺪﺒﺎﺯﺁﻣﺪﻯ، ﺪﻳﺪﻯ ﺯ ﺟﺎ            ﻜﻮﺴﭘﺲﺮﻓﺗﻪﺴﺖﺒﺲﻓﺮﺴﻧﮕﻬﺎ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺪﺮ ﺴﻪﺮﻮﺯﻩ ﺮَﻩ، ﺒﺪﻳﻦﺍﺤﻮﺍﻟﻬﺎ                 ﻤﻧﺪﻤﺟﻧﻮﻦ ﺪﺮﺗﺮﺪﺪ ﺴﺎﻟﻬﺎ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Majnūn’s desire is speeding to the presence of that (beloved) Laylā;*

*The she-camel’s desire is running back after her foal.*

*If Majnūn forgot himself for one moment,*

*The she-camel would turn and go back.*

*Since his body was full of love and passion,*

*He had no recourse but to become beside himself.*

*That which is regardful was (ever) reason:*

*Passion for Laylā carried (his) reason away.*

*But the she-camel was very regardful and alert:*

*Whenever she saw her toggle slack*

*She would at once perceive that he had become heedless and dazed,*

*And would turn her back to the foal without delay.*

*When he came to himself again, he would see on the spot*[100]

*That she had gone back many leagues.*

*In these conditions Majnūn remained going to and fro*

*For years on a three days’ journey.*[101]

 

Yes, this is the condition of man, possessing existential dichotomy. As
a result, man is always experiencing the greatest war he can ever
imagine. All the great wars in history in reality are echoes of this
same inner war. The wildest animals have never been observed to kill and
tear up other animals except when they have to eat and cater for their
subsistence needs.

No animal ever enjoys killing just for the sake of it or for amusement.
However, man is not like this. Rather, at times he sinks so low that if
he gets tired of slaying others, he teaches other human beings to rip up
and butcher one another in front of him. There was a time in the Roman
Empire when physically powerful slaves were given training in warfare.

Then, as gladiators they were brought to the middle of the imperial
coliseum and were watched while fighting each other, and then the
victorious slaves had to slay those who were overwhelmed. Such is the
situation of man who constantly invents new methods for killing his
fellow beings. It is enough to recall that during the World War II that
lasted for six years, fifty million people lost their lives, though
advanced electronically-controlled weapons and intercontinental
ballistic missiles were not yet invented.

The root of all these crimes is that same animalistic instinct of man,
by recognizing which the angels had beforehand protested to or
questioned God about the selection of man for the vicegerency
[*khilāfah*]. However, this is not the whole truth. Throughout human
history, we have been witnesses to the unprecedented endeavors of some
people for the salvation of their fellow beings. Gandhi who was a law
graduate, materially well-off, and belonging to the elitist Brahmin
caste, had discarded his material comfort, and for the sake of freeing
and saving the nation of India from the clutches of colonial rule, he
gave up everything he possessed, and lost his life for the sake of
equality among the Hindu castes and for guaranteeing the rights of the
caste known as the ‘untouchables’. Nelson Mandela, Albert
Schweitzer,[102] Mother Teresa, and hundred others—all created immortal
epics. In our own religious culture, the movement and uprising of Imām
Husayn (*‘a*) notwithstanding the absence of the least hope for military
victory, is a vivid manifestation of that divine quality that is moulded
in the natural constitution of man. Imām Khomeinī, in his own
characteristic style, portrays human nature as follows:  
    
 Let it be known that man is a marvel possessing two lives and two
worlds within one existence. That is, apparent life or the outward
world, which is this worldly existence, and is associated with his body,
and the other is ‘inner life’, the inward world, associated with the
hidden, invisible, higher other world, his soul in short, which belongs
to the realms of the invisible and celestial world, and consists of
several levels and grades… For each one of them is specified host of
guardians.

The host related with the divine and intellectual powers attracts him
toward the sublime, heavenly spheres, and summons him to the acts of
virtue and goodness. The other host of guardians is the ignoble and
satanic, which attracts man toward the baser realms of darkness and
shame, and invites him to the acts of villainy and destruction. There is
always a state of conflict and strife between these two forces, and
human existence serves as the battleground of these two bands.[103]  
    
 The late Farīdūn Mashīrī [104] relates this status of man, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
گفت دانايى كه: گرگى خيره سر                   هست پنهان در نهادِ هر
بشر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا جرم جارى است پيكارى سترگ                روز و شب، مابين اين انسان و
گرگ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مردمان گر يكديگر را مىدرند                     گرگهاشان رهنما و رهبرند
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اينكه انسان هست اين سان دردمند               گرگها فرمانروايى مىكنند
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و آن ستمكاران كه با هم محرمند                  گرگهاشان آشنايان همند
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
گرگها همراه و انسانها غريب                      با گه بايد گفت اين
حالِ عجيب؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A wise man said: ‘A stubborn wolf*

*Is hidden inside every man.*

*Inevitably, there is a great conflict and war*

*That takes place day and night between the man and the wolf.*

*Men are at logger head with each other*

*And these wolves lead and direct them.*

*For, this man is ill and ill-fated;*

*As such, the wolves rule over them.*

*Those tyrants are together;*

*Thus, their wolves are friends to one another.*

*The wolves are together while men are far from one another.*

*To whom should we share this amazing condition?*[105]

   
 From this principle, ample and valuable teachings can be derived, the
most important of which are as follows:

1.       Right to choose and select;  
 2.       Necessity of self-cognition; and  
 3.       Combat with the self as the major *jihād* [struggle].  
    
  

Right to choose and select
--------------------------

   
 Once we acknowledge that mankind is indescribable (first principle),
that man is a combination of the spirit of God and putrid clay (second
principle), that the human being is an arena of conflict between these
two instincts, then we can proceed to the principle that man is always
in the process of choosing and selecting.

Man is not a neutral spectator of his inner war; rather, he is like a
commander who, by the choice he makes, acts to the benefit of one of the
sides in the war. Man does not only enjoy the right to choose, but is
also obliged to choose. In other words, he is compelled to choose, and
in the jargon of existentialists, he is condemned to be free. Every
movement of us is a form of choosing.

Even if one day we decide not to choose anymore, we have, with this
decision, actually undertaken the act of choosing. That is, we have
chosen not to choose or, in other words we have decided not to choose.
Never for a moment can we ever imagine that we have refrained from
choosing. Of course, the scope of this choosing is our conscious and
voluntary actions and behaviour; not our genetic and environmental
attributes.

For instance, we have not chosen our father, mother, race, or colour
beforehand. Nevertheless, in our social behaviour and relations we are
always in the state of choosing and selecting. It is through these
assorted choices and selections that we build, demolish and rebuild
ourselves.

We examine ourselves. We acquire a new description and account of
ourselves. We again reject this description and adopt another one. In
doing so, we construct and ‘recreate’ ourselves. For, “If indeed
existence takes precedence over essence, then humanity is responsible
for its own existence.”[106] So long as man is alive this choice exists.
So long as man is in the terrestrial plane of existence, this successive
self-building and self-demolition is inevitable:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صورتگر نقاشم، هر لحظه بتى سازم                و آنگه همه بتها را در
پيش تو بگدازم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صد نقش بانگيزم، با روح درآميزم                  چون نقش تو را بينم، در
آتشش اندازم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تو ساقىِ خمارى، يا دشمن هشيارى                 يا آنكه كنى ويران هر
خانه كه مى سازم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جان ريخته شد بر تو، آميخته شد با تو             چون بوى تو دارد جان،
جان را، هله بنوازم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هر خون كه ز من رويد، با خاک تو مىگويد:      با مهر تو همرنگم، با عشق
تو هنبازم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
در خانه آب و گل بى توست خراب اين دل          يا خانه درآ، جانا، يا
خانه بپردازم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*As a portraitist every moment I make a beautiful idol*

*But in the end I destroy all of them under your feet.*

*I make hundreds of pictures and portraits and mix them with soul*

*But as I see your picture and portrait, I will put all of them on
fire.*

*You are an intoxicated cupbearer, or a wary enemy,*

*Or that you destroy every house I build.*

*My soul is filled and mixed with you;*

*As this soul has your fragrance, I revere and adore it.*

*Every blood that flows in me says to your dust:*

*‘I’m synchronous and share with your love and affection.*

*Without you this heart in this house of water and flower[107]* *is
broken.*

*O heart! Either go out of this physical house, or build it.*[108]

This power to choose is embedded within us, and we are inevitably
responsible for ourselves and our choices. In this connection, God, the
Most Sublime, says: ***“Lo! We have created man from a drop of thickened
fluid to test him; so We make him hearing, knowing. Lo! We have shown
him the way whether he be grateful or disbelieving**.”*[109]

Elsewhere, while pointing out to the inattentiveness of man with respect
to all the things endowed on him, God Almighty states: ***“Did We not
assign unto him two eyes and a tongue and two lips, and guided him to
the parting of the mountain ways?**”*[110]

Accordingly, from the very beginning man is faced with a variety of
choices at his disposal. But with respect to these choices, he is
neither blind nor compelled to act blindly; rather, he has two eyes that
see, two ears that hear, a cogent intellect, and remarkable power to
enable him to choose. In this struggle and conflict, man is neither
helpless nor unaided; in case he himself wants and chooses, he will be
assisted by God. According to the Messenger of God (*s*), the heart of
every human being possesses two chambers: one is the angel’s domain
while the other is under the sway of Satan. God renders help and support
to the faithful through this angel.[111]

From here we proceed to the next point, which is a prerequisite of
choice and indispensable for it; that is, freedom.

Man can only choose if he is free. To be free is latent in the meaning
of choice. Once we have the right to choose to be free, we can pick and
choose whatever we like. This freedom is not political, social or
cultural; rather, it is above all these, and they all emanate from it.
This freedom is the natural freedom. Here we do not wish to embark on an
extensive and fruitless discussion of freedom, nor of compulsion,
predestination and free-will. It is a debate that has engaged
philosophers for centuries and millennia.

If we reflect on ourselves we easily observe this state of freedom in
us, basically without which, there is no point in talking about
education and ethics. The Glorious Qur’an also highlights this innate
and intuitive state of ours and on the basis of which it conveys its
commendation and praise, or rebuke and chastisement to us. If man were
not free, there would have been no need for the sending of prophets and
revelation of divine scriptures. Hence, man is free to embrace the faith
or deny it.

Even so, there are some people who regard this freedom to be an
impediment to deviation and perversion, and by accepting it, have to
shoulder their responsibility. They are averse to this assumption of
accountability. They try to cast doubt on this principle of freedom and
consider themselves compelled, helpless and vulnerable.

When the Messenger of God (*s*) was appointed to shoulder the mission of
messengership [*risālah*], a group of the polytheists who considered the
acceptance of the faith as taking responsibility for, and exercising
control over their own carnal desires, claimed: “If God did not want it,
we and our forefathers would not have become polytheists and since we
have become so, it implies that God has approved it and it is God’s
will.” As a result, they became fatalists, and would say that they did
not have the right to select and were, perforce, polytheists. In
reality, they were juxtaposing the power and will of God vis-à-vis their
own power. They would claim that if they were truly free, it implied
that God was powerless, and since God had power over everything, it
meant that their unbelief and denial of the faith also stemmed from the
will of God in the midst of which they had no option. Anticipating this
type of argument and reasoning, God told His messenger: *“**They who are
idolaters will say: Had Allah willed, we had not ascribed (unto Him)
partners neither had our fathers.”***[112]

God presents this attitude as an excuse for not responding to the
prophet’s call and for disavowing them. In another place, He considers
the same reasoning as the rationale for their freedom. Knowing that His
messenger (*s*) was painstakingly trying and endeavoring to make the
idolaters finally submissive and subservient to Islam, God Almighty
restrained him from these endeavors and said to him: *“If Allah willed,
He could have brought them all together to the guidance.”*[113]
Therefore, the crux of the matter is not whether God has power or not;
the point is that God wants to test human beings. For this reason, He
says:  ***“Had Allah willed He could have made you one community. But
that He may try you by that which He hath given you (He hath made you as
ye are).**”*[114]

As such, God desires everybody to embrace the faith. But He wants this
acceptance of the faith to be done freely and without any compulsion.
Otherwise, it would not have been difficult for Him to have created all
with identical mental and emotional makeup so that they would be Muslims
and faithful *en masse*.

Renunciation of freedom, then, is in fact the result of mere sophistry
and caprice, not attention to esoteric and exoteric realities. The
reason is that anyone who is keen on doing something feels a sort of
freedom in relation to doing it, whereas if he is not inclined to do
something, it gives him a feeling of fatalism. Most of us witness this
circumstance in our daily lives. Anybody who is engaged in economic
ventures and activities feels himself free and believes in the right to
choose, while he or she who is only confined within the four corners of
the house experiences a sense of determinism and believes that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما آبروى فقر و قناعت نمى بريم                  با پادشه بگو که روزى
مقدر است
  </p>
</blockquote>

*We talk not of poverty and contentment;*

*Tell to the king that fortune is predetermined.*

   
 The fact is that for our sustenance to be predetermined does not mean
abandoning economic activities. Mawlānā describes this propensity and
morale as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺩﺭﻫﺭ ﺁﻥ ﻛﺎﻯ ﻛﻪﻣﻴﻞ ﺍﺳﺘﺖﺑﺪﺍﻥ                 ﻗﺪﺭﺕﺧﻮﺩ ﺭﺍ ﻫﻣﻰﺑﻴﻨﻰ ﻋﻴﺎﻥ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﻭ ﻧﺩﺭ ﺁﻥﻛﺎﺭﻯ ﻛﻪﻣﻴﻠﺖ ﻧﻴﺴﺖ ﻭﺧﻮﺍﺴﺖ       ﺧﻮﻴﺶ ﺭﺍﺟﺒﺮﻯ ﻛﻨﻰ، ﻛﻴﻦ ﺍﺯﺧﺪﺍﺳﺖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*In every act for which you have inclination,*

*You are clearly conscious of your power (to perform it),*

*But in every act for which you have no inclination and desire,*

*In regard to that (act) you have become a necessitarian, saying,*

*‘This is from God.’*[115]

   
 An illustrating story of these fatalists is that of a man who entered a
certain garden without permission, approached a tree, and began picking
its fruits. When the owner of the garden reproached him for doing so, he
claimed predetermination and said that he was an involuntary servant of
God, i.e. without control over anything, and he was picking the fruits
of a tree belonging to God. The owner of the garden tied him with a rope
and beat him on his back and sides with a piece of wood, and when the
man objected to him for doing so, he answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﮔﻔﺖ: ״ﺍﺯ ﭼﻮﺏ ﺧﺪﺍﺍﻳﻦ ﺑﻨﺪﻩﺍﺵ           ﻣﻰﺯﻨﺪ ﺑﺮ ﭘﺸﺖﺩﻳﮕﺮ ﺑﻨﺪﻩﺧﻮﺵ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﭼﻮﺏ ﺣﻖ، ﻭ ﭘﺸﺖ ﻭ ﭘﻬﻠﻭﺁﻥِ ﺍﻭ           ﻣﻦ ﻏﻼﻡ ﻭﺁﻟﺖِ ﻓﺮﻣﺎﻥِ ﺍﻭ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﮔﻔﺖ: "ﺗﻭﺑﻪﻛﺮﺩﻡ ﺍﺯ ﺟﺒﺮﺍﻯ ﻋﻴﺎﺭ        ﺍﺧﺘﻴﺎﺭﺍﺳﺖ، ﺍﺧﺘﻴﺎﺭﺍﺳﺖ، ﺍﺧﺘﻴﺎﺭ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He answered, ‘With God’s cudgel this servant of His*

*Is soundly beating the back of another servant.*

*’Tis God’s cudgel, and the back and sides belong to Him:*

*I am (only) the slave and instrument of His command.*

*He (the thief) said, ‘O cunning knave, I make a recantation of
Necessitarianism:*

*There is free-will, there is free-will, (there is) free-will!’* [116]

   
  

Necessity of self-cognition
---------------------------

   
 As the state within man is in reality an arena of conflict between
irreconcilably competing forces, everyone should be well acquainted with
this battleground, opposing camps, and the types of weapons used in this
conflict. Perhaps one could lead a prosperous life even without a
knowledge of mathematics. Maybe one could be felicitous in life even
without being familiar with the natural history of the world and
geology.

Possibly one could enjoy a blissful life even without familiarity with
the history of one’s forebears or geography of the time. But no one
could take a step toward perfection and bliss without knowing one’s
self.

Therefore, this is the knowledge from which no one could consider
himself not to need. More than two thousand years ago, it was written on
the door of the Delphi temple in Athens: “Know thyself.” It seems that
this saying will never fade and in no way relinquish its virtue and
significance. All the efforts of Socrates were made to apply this maxim
in his own case. As such, everybody throughout history has acknowledged
his philosophy. Whether man regards himself as the center of the
universe—as those in the past did believed—or as a speck of atom in the
Milky Way—as people believe nowadays—he cannot escape from
self-cognition. In no way can one ignore this cognizance. If man
succeeds in drawing everything under his command but is ignorant of
himself and unaware of the agitation within him, then he is still
subjugated by his self and a prisoner of the forces within him.      

Real freedom is not attained through dominance over nature but through
recognition of one’s self. But alas! Man drifts away from the path, and
as he obtained knowledge of nature as well as mastery over it, he
imagines it as the very path to happiness. While the enemy is inside the
house, he goes to fight the windmills and so deceive himself in the
manner of Don Quixote.[117]

The intention is not to show the knowledge of nature to be unimportant;
rather, the point is that if this nature which has been subjugated is
placed at the disposal of man who does not yet know himself, not only
does it not guarantee his felicity but even provides powerful means for
the destruction and massacre of human beings as it has been hitherto. As
technology advances, moral decadence and degeneration have also
increased. Anyone who is not cognizant of himself but is after the
understanding of nature loses the essence of his life’s period, and
falling to the level of creatures subjugated by their instincts. This
kind of person, according to Mawlānā, is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺻﺩﻫﺰﺍﺭﺍﻥ ﻓﺼﻞﺩﺍﻨﺪ ﺍﺯﻋﻠﻮﻡ             ﺟﺎﻥ ﺧﻮﺩ ﺭﺍﻣﻰﻧﺪﺍﻧﺩ ﺁﻥﻇﻠﻮﻡ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺩﺍﻨﺩﺍﻮ ﺧﺎﺼﻴﺖ ﻫﺭﺟﻮﻫﺭﻯ                 ﺪﺭ ﺑﻴﺎﻥ ﺟﻮﻫﺭﺧﻮﺪ ﭽﻮﻥ ﺧﺭﻯ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﮐﻪ: "ﻫﻤﻰ ﺩﺍﻨﻡﻳﺟﻮﺯ ﻮﻻﻴﺟﻮﺯ"          ﺧﻮﺪ ﻨﺩﺍﻨﻰﺗﻮ ﻴﺟﻮﺯﻯ ﻴﺎﻋﺟﻮﺯ!
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺍﻴﻥﺭﻮﺍ ﻮ ﺁﻥﻨﺎﺭﻮﺍ، ﺩﺍﻨﻰ ﻮ ﻟﻴﮏ           ﺗﻮﺭﻮﺍ ﻴﺎﻨﺎﺭﻮﺍﻴﻰ؟ ﺑﻴﻥ ﺗﻮ ﻨﻴﮏ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﻗﻴﻣﺖﻫﺭ ﻛﺎﻟﻪﻣﻰﺩﺍﻨﻛﻪﭼﻴﺳﺖ              ﻗﻴﻣﺖ ﺨﻮﺩﺭﺍ ﻨﺎﺩﺍﻨﻰﺍﺤﻣﻘﻰ ﺍﺳﺖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺳﻌﺩﻫﺎﻮ ﻨﺤﺳﻬﺎﺩﺍﻨﺳﻪﺍﻯ                    ﻨﻨﮕﺭﻯ ﺳﻌﺩﻯﺘﻮ ﻴﺎﻨﺎﺸُﺳﺘﻪﺍﻯ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺠﺎﻦﺠﻤﻠﻪ ﻋﻠﻤﻬﺎﺍﻴﻦ ﺍﺳﺖ ﺍﻴﻦ              ﻜﻪ ﺑﺩﺍﻨﻰﻤﻦ ﻜﻰﺍﻢ  ﺩﺮ ﻴﻮﻢ ﺩﻴ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آن اصول دين بدانستى تو، ليک            بنگر اندر اصلخود، گر هست نيک
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He knows a hundred thousand superfluous matters*[118] *connected with*

*The (various) sciences, (but) that unjust man does not know his* *own
soul.*

*He knows the special properties of every substance,*

*(But) in elucidating his own substance(essence) he is(as ignorant) as
anass,*

*Saying, ‘I know (what is) permissible and impermissible’*[119] *Thou
knowest not*

*Whether thou thyself art permissible or (unpermissible as) an old
woman.*[120]

*Thou knowest this licit (thing) and that illicit (thing),*

*But art thou licit or illicit? Consider well!*

*Thou knowest what is the value of every article of merchandise;*

*(If) thou knowest what is the value of thyself, ’tis folly.*

*Thou hast become acquainted with the fortunate and inauspicious stars;*

*Thou dost not look to see whether thou art fortunate or unwasted*

*(spiritually foul and ill-favoured).*

*This, this, is the soul of all the sciences—*

*That thou shouldst know who thou shall be on the Day of Judgment.*

*Thou art acquainted with the fundamentals* [usūl] *of the Religion,*

*But look upon thine own fundamental* [asl] *and see whether it is
good.* [121]

Well, the true essence of wisdom and foundation of true knowledge is
self-cognition. This view on man and the true station of self-cognition
in the West starts with Socrates and reaches its zenith in the
philosophy of existentialism.[122] Søren Kierkegaard,[123] a Christian
orator and thinker of Denmark, is regarded as the father and precursor
of existentialism.

Although this idea is traced from the thoughts of such personalities as
Socrates, Marcus Aurelius, Apectitus, St. Augustine, and Pascal, it is
through Kierkegaard that it has been presented systematically. In his
short but productive life he produced valuable works, which proved very
useful to those that came after him. Even though his contemporaries had
not given much importance to his sayings, his thought is being
increasingly recognized nowadays. The core of his thought, revolving
around the human being, can be mentioned in the following five
statements:          
    
 1.       *Be yourself*. That is, behave in such a manner that your
outer and inner self is in unison, and eschew any sort of pretension.

2.       *Mind yourself*. That is, mind only your own business. Of
course, it does not mean that one should be indifferent toward the
affairs of others. Rather, the point is that everyone should be
concerned first and foremost about himself. If everybody does so,
naturally the society could have a brighter future.

3.       *Know yourself*. That is, strive to have a correct picture of
yourself which should be identical with reality as much as possible.

4.       *Know your ideal condition*. That is, after acquiring an actual
image of yourself, strive to identify the ideal image of yourself.

5.       *Always move from your present to your ideal condition*. That
is, after recognizing your real self and obtaining the correct picture
of your ideal condition, set out on a perpetual journey and move toward
your ideal station.[124] In the language of Mawlānā,  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
همچو مستسقى كز آبش سير نيست          بر هر آنچه يافتى باﷲ ميست
  </p>
</blockquote>

*By God, do not tarry in anything (any spiritual position) that thou
hast gained,*

*(But crave more) like one suffering from dropsy who is never sated with
water.*[125]

   
 Therefore, the core of existentialism, which is one of the most
influential contemporary schools of philosophy, is nothing but
self-cognition. In this case, “if the fundamental principle of
existentialism, in short, is the primacy of knowledge of the soul over
knowledge of the world, it appears that it can be said by implication
that the proponent of this school, aside from not being an infidel, is
[actually] concerned with the spirit of all knowledge and
learning.”[126]  

Such a judgment is natural since all religions have invited man to
self-cognition and “the slogan of primacy of knowledge of the soul over
knowledge of the world is a slogan, which stems from the heart of the
teachings of Abrahamic faiths, and has abundant manifestations
particularly in Islam.”[127]

The truth is that in our religious thought, self-cognition has been
recognized as the spirit of all knowledge and learning (i.e., the most
profitable of all kinds of knowledge). Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) says: “Knowledge
of the self is the most beneficial of all knowledge.”[128] Viewing
self-cognition as the objective and apogee of knowledge, he (*‘a*) also
says: “The highest degree of knowledge is that man would know his own
self.”[129] Elsewhere he (*‘a*) says: “Whosoever has attained
self-cognition has achieved greater victory.”[130]

All these emphases point to the significance and necessity of
self-cognition in the discipline of Islamic anthropology. If knowledge
of the self is equivalent to knowledge of God,[131] it follows that
oblivion of the self means oblivion of God. So, if there is someone who
does not know himself and claims to have knowledge of God, then
according to Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*), there is room for distrust and
amazement.[132]  

It is only through self-cognition that man is able to understand the
purpose of creation, know his place in this system, and realize that the
aim of imparting to us all these graces and endowments is something
else, superior to and higher than what is visible. This world is a stage
of action and its aim is a higher and more sublime sphere of existence.
This lower and animal existence is not an end in itself.[133]  
    
 If man does not know himself and has no knowledge of the subtleties of
his soul, he will then be afflicted with a multitude of destructive
moral maladies such as hypocrisy, selfishness, pride, and polytheism.
The first step in moral conduct [*sulūk-e akhlāqī*] is self-cognition.
The aim of reckoning [*muhāsibah*], heeding [*murāqibah*] and other
ethical precepts is this self-cognition and nothing else. To cite an
example, whoever does not know himself and is unaware of the real
subtleties of his own self, experiences narrow-mindedness, and this in
turn, provides the ground for pride to develop in him and “being a
person with a narrow mentality, as soon as he beholds any merit in
himself he imagines that he has position and status. He thinks he has
acquired a high station.”[134]

It can thus be deduced that it is not pride unless it is based on
ignorance and feeble-mindedness. Those whose ignorance is more and whose
rational faculties are more defective, are more proud of themselves; and
those whose knowledge is greater, whose souls are more capacious, and
whose breasts are spacious—they are humbler and more modest.[135]  
    
 It is through this approach that Imām Khomeinī, may his soul be
sanctified, gives preference to reforming the self over reforming others
and reckons the interior as more important than the exterior. In this
perspective, the essence is the interior and not the external
conditions. If man be free from all external entanglements but has a
feeling of inner bondage, he is then not truly free. If man possesses
the whole world but internally feels indigence, he is still destitute. 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﮔﻔﺖﭽﺷﻢ ﺗﻧﮓﺪﻧﻴﺎ ﺪﻮﺴﺖﺮﺍ           ﻴﺎ ﻗﻧﺎﻋﺖﭘﺮ ﮐﻧﺪ ﻴﺎﺧﺎﮎ ﮔﻮﺮ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He said that the covetous eye of the worldly man is either satisfied*

*Through contentment, or will be filled with the earth of the
grave.*[136]

   
 Basically, everything originates internally. So, while quoting a
*hadīth* which expresses, “The freeman is free in all
circumstances,”[137] the Imām says:  
  Let it be known to you that contentment comes from the heart and the
absence of neediness is a spiritual state, unrelated to external matters
that lie outside the human self. I have myself seen certain persons
among rich and wealthy classes who say things which no honorable poor
man would say.[138]  
    
 This point is not restricted to wealth alone. All other conditions are
like that. For this reason, the Imām invites all, particularly the
theology students, to begin with and reform themselves, saying that: The
first thing that the learned in religious sciences and the seekers of
this perilous road must take into consideration is self-reform during
the period of studies, counting it as far as possible to be the foremost
of their duties, for this is harder and more obligatory than all the
duties and obligations dictated by *sharī‘ah* and reason.[139]  
    
 Non-recognition of the self springs from blindness of the heart and
inner loss of sight, which is considered as the origin of all
adversities. Hence, “one must be very fearful of this inner blindness of
vision which is the main source of all kinds of darkness and
wretchedness. The blindness of the heart is the source of all
misfortunes.”[140]

Thus, self-cognition is the fountainhead of all human perfection while
self-ignorance is the root of all deprivation and humiliation of man.
So, knowledge of the self is superior to knowledge of the world, and
appears to be even more important than many religious sciences. As such,
this knowledge should be accorded its own separate place and be
developed and expanded. One should not be unduly confined to collecting
and amassing terms of little use; rather, one should think of
understanding one’s real self and the intricacies and subtleties of the
soul.           
  

Combat with the self as the major jihād {struggle}
--------------------------------------------------

   
 The explication of the major *jihād* [struggle] and combat with the
self can be traced from an event which has been narrated from the
Messenger of God (*s*). The story runs as follows: The Messenger of God
(*s*) dispatched a contingent of the army from among the Muslims to a
battlefront.

Upon their successful return, he (*s*) said to them: “Blessed are those
who have performed the minor *jihād* and have yet to perform the major
*jihād*.” They asked, “O Messenger of God, what is the major *jihād?*”He
(*s*) replied: “The *jihād* of the self (combat with the self).”[141]

In this manner, combat with the self and the major *jihād* [struggle]
entered our moral culture and attained an eminent status in our
religious literature. But, what is meant by this ‘combat with the self’?

We can only talk about combat with the self when the preceding
principles have been well understood and accepted. Once we acknowledge
that man has dual personalities and between which a constant war is
taking place, we can then have a proper understanding of combat with the
self. What is meant by ‘self’ [*nafs*] here is not the philosophical
sense of the term. Rather, it means the world of carnal instincts and
desires. The totality of all existential needs, motives, and sexual
impulses is called ‘self’ [*nafs*].

As such, what is meant by combat with the self is the struggle against
these instincts; though this understanding is somewhat premature and
fails to convey the exact import of the *hadīth*. The objective of
combat with the self, in a nutshell, is to place all carnal powers,
desires and instincts under the dictates of reason and use them for
serving God and perfecting the self.

It is from this aspect that Imām Khomeinī describes it as follows: “Thus
the *jihād* of the self… implies overpowering one’s own powers and
faculties, and placing them under God’s command, and purging the domain
of our body of satanic elements and their forces.”[142]

Combat with the self, in the Imām’s code of ethics has such an esteemed
position that he commences his book, *Sharh-e Chehel Hadīth* [Exposition
of Forty *Hadīth*s] with it and the first *hadīth* he expounds is this
very *hadīth* of ‘combat with the self’, considering it loftier than
attaining martyrdom in the way of God: “Thus, the *jihād* of the self is
the *jihād* of greater importance. This *jihād* is superior to being
killed in the way of God…”[143]

The reason behind the importance of combat with the self in relation to
the conventional *jihād* is obvious.

If somebody abandons (conventional) *jihād* he has then committed a
grave sin and caused the defeat of others while if somebody pulls out of
the combat with the self, he, in fact, is vanquished and has caused his
own fall. Military combat is not constant. But combat with the self is
an arduous and constant activity. In military combat there are others
who can help the person. Yet in the combat with the self it is the very
person himself who should render the final blow to the enemy and gain
victory. In military combat victory is sometimes so apparent and
conspicuous that it elicits the applause and eulogy of everybody and
gives a boost to one’s pride. However, in the combat with the self
nobody is a witness as to what is taking place inside man and victory
does not evoke praise and congratulations from anyone.

The story of a *mujāhid* [combatant] who had been fighting and gaining
marvellous victories for years and then, in seclusion, engaged in combat
with the self, and the reactions of the self, which Mawlānā has
elaborately narrated, is the best example of such differences. In short,
these distinctions and many others exemplify the primacy of combat with
the self over combat against an adversary—(as combat with the self
involves fighting with) an adversary whose killing is not easily
possible and who is more powerful than any outer enemy:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺍﯼﺸﻬﺎﻦ! ﮐﺸﺘﻴﻢﻤﺎ ﺧﺻﻢ ﺒﺮﻮﻦ                   ﻤﺎﻨﺪﺧﺻﻤﻰ ﺯﻮ ﺒﺘﺮﺪﺮ ﺍﻨﺪﺮﻮﻦ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﮐﺸﺘﻦﺍﻴﻦ، ﮐﺎﺮﻋﻘﻞ ﻮ ﻫﻮﺶﻨﻴﺴﺖ               ﺸﻴﺮ ﺒﺎﻄﻦ ، ﺴُﺧﺮﻩﺧﺮﮔﻮﺶ ﻨﻴﺴﺖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺪﻮﺰﺥﺍﺴﺖ ﺍﻴﻦ ﻨﻔﺲﻭ ﺪﻮﺰﺥﺍﮊﺪﻫﺎﺴﺖ         ﻜﻮ ﺒﻪﺪﺮﻴﺎﻫﺎﻨﮔﺮﺪﺪ ﻜﻢ ﻮﻜﺎﺴﺖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﻫﻔﺖﺪﺮﻴﺎ ﺮﺍﺪﺮﺁﺷﺎﻤﺪ، ﻫﻨﻭﺰ                      ﻜﻢﻨﮔﺮﺪﺪ ﺴﻭﺰﺶﺁﻥ ﺨَﻠﻕ ﺴﻭﺰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺴﻨﮔﻬﺎﻮ ﻜﺎﻓﺮﺍﻥﺴﻨﮓ ﺪﻞ                          ﺍﻨﺪﺮﺁﻳﻨﺪ ﺍﻨﺪﺮﺍﻭ ﺰﺍﺮ ﻮ ﺨﺠﻞ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O kings, we have slain the outward enemy,*

*(But) there remains within (us) a worse enemy than he.*

*To slay this (enemy) is not the work of reason and intelligence:*

*The inward lion is not subdued by the hare.*

*This carnal self* [nafs] *is Hell, and Hell is a dragon*

*(The fire of) which is not diminished by oceans (of water).*

*It would drink up the Seven Seas, and still*

*The blazing of that consumer of all creatures would not become less.*

*Stones and stony-hearted infidels enter it,*

*Miserable and shame-faced.*[144]

   
 Of course, it should not be assumed that since combat with the self is
superior to that against an adversary, one should abandon the latter and
engage only the former. Unfortunately, this understanding had emerged
among a group of people and they would replace this one with the other.
They were negligent of the fact that combat against an adversary is the
preliminary of combat with the self and it is only after triumphing over
an outer foe and obtaining the necessary preparedness that one can
engage in combat with the self.

Thus, it was only after a contingent of that army had defeated the
enemies that the Messenger of God (*s*) apprised them of the combat with
the self, and not prior to (the triumphant return of the contingent).
This shows that it is only after the outer *jihād* has been performed
that one can talk about combat with the self.

Anyhow, the quintessence of Islamic morality is this combat with the
self, which the Imām also emphasizes so much and reckons it as the
touchstone of man’s prosperity or adversity. He describes the arena of
this conflict as follows:   
    
 The human soul inhabits another realm and another territory also, which
is the world of the hidden and the sphere of the sublime world. In that
world, the role of the sensual forces assumes graver dimensions. This is
the place, where the struggle and conflict between the divine forces and
the fiendish ones is more severe and also more significant. Everything
that exists in the external or visible world drifts to this hidden
world, and is manifested there. Whichever of the forces whether godly or
devilish, is victorious here is essentially triumphant there also… it is
possible that, God forbid, due to the defeat of heavenly forces, the
self is left vacant for the unholy occupation of the vicious and
unworthy satanic legions, and hence causing an eternal loss to the human
being that cannot be retrieved.[145]  
    
 Nevertheless, this combat with the self sometimes brings about
questions and ambiguities, which are the subject of the next
discussion.  
  

Regulation of Instincts
-----------------------

Really, what should be done with our wayward instincts and earthly
aspect? Once we accept that man is a blend of the spirit of God and
putrid clay, and that this existential contradiction is the cause of the
rise and fall of man’s spiritual life, how could and should this
contradiction be resolved? Since time immemorial this existential
contradiction of man has been known to many thinkers and philosophers.
Some of the Greek thinkers used to liken man’s soul or spirit to a bird,
held within the cage of body and shackled to the physical dimension. For
instance, in an ode [*ghazal*] they claimed to be that of Mawlānā,[146]
it appears thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مرﻍ باﻍ ملکوتم نيم از عالم خاک          چند روزى قفسى ساخته اند از
بدنم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I’m a bird of the heavenly garden and not of this material world.*

*But for some moments they have made a cage out of my physical
body.*[147]

   
 For that reason, they have considered the body and physical dimension
of man as a prison and an impediment to perfection, and life in this
physical world as the greatest veil in reaching God. Many a time Hāfiz
Shīrāzī[148] expresses chagrin and remorse for this earthliness of man
and reminds [man] that this [world] is not his [final] abode:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كه اى بلند نظر، شاهباز سدره نشين             نشين تو نه اين كُنج محنت
آبادست
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ترا ز كنگره عرش مىزنند صفير                 ندانمت كه در اين دامگه چه
افتادست
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O ambitious and great who is in a sublime station!*

*Your abode is not this corner of suffering and affliction.*

*They call on you from heavens;*

*I know not what you are doing in* *this world of deception.*[149]

   
 Expression of distress for this bondage and adversity can be seen in
numerous poems of Iranian poets. In the different religions of India,
particularly Jainism,[150] this contradiction between soul and body is
more evident. The most important tenets of this sect are anchored on the
principle that the growth of the bodily instincts be impeded and the
soul nourished as much as possible. This is the way of setting it (soul)
free from the body.

So long as the body is strong and desirous of complying with the
dictates of its instincts, the soul is feeble and a servant of the body.
But once we burn and melt the body through contentment and refrain from
obeying its whims and caprices, the soul, which is a ‘divine breath’,
gains strength and becomes powerful and is able to gradually subdue the
body.

For the generation of this power many ways have been proposed, the most
important of which are as follows: celibacy, withdrawing from activity,
seclusion, eating less and less often, and sleeping less and less often.
For instance, they narrate that Mahavira,[151] the founder of Jainism,
remained single all his life and would pass his days in begging. Other
sects springing from Hinduism, such as Buddhism, as well as the system
of Yoga more or less recommend the same.[152]   

The interpretation of these people on the issue of bodily needs and
their relation to spiritual ones are very simplistic. A human being
wants whatever he sees; so it is better for him not to see and want
anything. The following couplets that are attributed to Bābā Tāhir[153]
point to this view:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ز دست ديده و دل هر دو فرياد              كه هرچه ديده بيند، دل كند ياد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ببسازم خنجرى نيشش ز فولاد              زنم بر ديده تا دل گردد آزاد
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I complain of both my eyes and heart*

*For everything that the eyes see, the heart would yearn for.*

*I am going to make a dagger with a blade of steel*

*With which to stab my eyes so that my heart will be set free.*

As such, the solution to this issue is that man should pay no heed to
his bodily needs, withdraw from the society, be apathetic to the fate of
others, close his eyes from viewing the beauties of nature, and deprive
himself of all the natural endowments. Sa‘dī[154] thus narrates his
dialogue with one of these kind of people as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺒﺰﺮﮔﯽﺪﻴﺪﻢ ﺍﻧﺪﺮﮐﻮﻫﺳﺎﺮﯼ                  ﻗﻧﺎﻋﺖﮐﺮﺪﻩ ﺍﺰﺪﻧﻳﺎ ﺒﻪﻏﺎﺮﯼ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﭽﺮﺍ، ﮔﻔﺗﻢ ﺒﻪ ﺷﻬﺮﺍﻧﺪﺮﻧﻴﺎﻴﯽ؟              ﮐﻪ ﺒﺎﺮﯼﺒﻧﺪﻯ ﺍﺯ ﺪﻞﺒﺮﮔﺷﺎﻴﯽ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺒﮕﻔﺖﺁﻧﺠﺎﭙﺮﻴﺮﻮﻴﺎﻦﻧﻐﺰﻧﺪ                   ﭼﻮ ﮔﻞﺒﺴﻴﺎﺮ ﺷﺪ، ﭙﻴﻼﻦﺒﻠﻐﺰﻧﺪ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A great man I saw in highlands*

*Who has contented himself in cave-dwelling?*

*‘Why do you not come to the city’—to him I said—*

*‘To relax and refresh your heart?’*

*He said that the city is full of glitters*

*Be it known that when dry clay increases, the elephants will make a
slip.*[155]

   
 In this manner, asceticism and seclusion, in our culture, are
considered synonymous, and *khāneqāh* [monastery, convent or house of
dervishes] and school is juxtaposed with each other. The difference
between the worshipper and ascetic on the one hand, and the scholar on
the other hand, is that the former is only after his salvation while the
latter is concerned with the salvation of others as well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﺻﺎﺤﺒﺪﻠﻰﺒﻪ ﻤﺪﺮﺴﻪﺁﻤﺪ ﺯﺨﺎﻧﻘﺎﻩ                 ﺒﺸﮑﺴﺖﻋﻬﺪِ ﺻﺤﺒﺖ اﻫﻞ ﻄﺮﻴﻖ ﺮا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﮔﻔﺘﻡ: ﻤﻴﺎﻦ ﻋﺎﻠِﻡﻮ ﻋﺎﺒﺪ ﭽﻪﻓﺮﻕ ﺑﻮﺪ             ﺗﺎ اﺧﺘﻴﺎﺮﮐﺮﺪﻯ اﺰ ﺁﻦ اﻴﻦ
ﻓﺮﻴﻖ ﺮا؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﮔﻔﺖ: ﺁﻦ ﮔﻠﻴﻢﺧﻮﻴﺶ ﺑﺪﺮﻤﻰﺑﺮﺪ ﺰ ﻤﻮﺝ         ﻮﻴﻥﺠﻬﺪ ﻤﻰﻛﻨﺪﮔﻪ ﺮﻫﺎﻨﺪﻏﺮﻴﻖ ﺮﺍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A certain holy man having quitted the monastery,*

*And the society of religious men, became a member of a college.*

*I asked what was the difference between being a learned,*

*Or a religious man that could induce him to change his society?*

*He replied, “The devotee saves his own blanket out of the waves,*

*And the learned man endeavors to rescue others from drowning.”*[156]

   
 Definitions such as ‘self-denial’, ‘purging of instincts’, and
‘self-restraint’ are based on this view, which arises mainly from Hindu
culture and has found its way among some Muslims. Thus, in most cases
when talking about combat with the self, some of them suppose it to be
equal to self-denial and uprooting of instincts, and this very Hindu
notion of self-denial is what is in their mind.

At times, a group of early Muslims had the same perception of combat
with the self [*jihād an-nafs*]. One day one of the companions of the
Messenger of God (*s*) named Uthmān ibn Maz‘ūn asked his permission for
seclusion and solitude. But the Holy Prophet (*s*) did not consent and
said: “God, the Blessed and Exalted, has not ordained that we lead a
monastic life. The monasticism of my *ummah* [community of believers] is
the struggle in the way of God [*jihād fī sabīlillāh*].”[157] Likewise,
in interpreting on the noble *āyah* [Qur’anic verse], ***“Do you want me
to inform you of the most destructive of people? It is he whose endeavor
is corruption of the worldly life,”*** the Holy Prophet (*s*) said: “It
refers to the monks who have confined themselves to the four corners [of
the monastery].”[158]

There was also a time when one of the companions of Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*)
named ‘Alā’ ibn Ziyād Hārithī brought a complaint to the Commander of
the Faithful (*‘a*) that his brother, ‘Āsim, has turned his back from
the world (i.e., he has renounced the world) and put on a woollen
garment.[159] Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) summoned him. As he came, the Imām (*‘a*)
told him:  
    
 O’ enemy of yourself! Certainly, the evil (Satan) has misguided you. Do
you feel no pity for your wife and your children? Do you believe that if
you use those things which Allah has made lawful for you, He will
dislike you? You are too unimportant for Allah to do so.[160]   
    
 Although our ethical and gnostic literature is replete with associating
repudiation of the world with combat with the self and equating
asceticism with Christian monasticism, the principal tenets of the
Messenger of God (*s*) and the Infallibles in this regard are something
else.

Combat with the self does not mean denying the reality of instincts or
their suppression. Combat with the self commences with the presumption
that all instincts of man are necessary and that, basically, without
them spiritual perfection cannot be attained. Combat with the self is
not meant to ignore, for instance, the sexual instinct, and to order its
repression. Rather, it considers it vital, necessary and essential for
growth, and tries to guide it.

Thus, Imām Khomeinī while expounding it (combat with the self) does not
speak about suppression of instincts. It is true that in *jihād* we
always aim for victory and that we earnestly aspire to crush our
opponent. But we do not all the times yearn for the elimination of the
adversary. Rather, it is likely that his existence could be useful to
us! We only see to it that we are not overcome by the adversary in this
arena, not that we annihilate the enemy, i.e. our self. So, the Imām
adopts the term, ‘triumph’ and in no way talks about self-denial.
Instead, he emphasizes that “the *jihād* of the self which is the
*jihād* of greater importance implies overpowering one’s own powers and
faculties, and placing them under God’s command.”[161]

Yes, it is about harnessing and regulating instincts through
overpowering them; not through self-denial. Consequently, in the combat
with the self, one cannot talk at all about the obliteration of
instincts. Rather, the existence and indispensability of all instincts
has been assumed. It is through this outlook on the issue of instincts
and how to regulate them that we arrive at the following:

• Necessity of instincts for perfection;

• Insatiability of instincts; and

• Social involvement as a requisite of combat with the self.

   
  

Necessity of instincts for perfection
-------------------------------------

   
 Curbing the instincts does not mean that their existence is not
necessary. Instead, they must be endured. If it is so, there is no need
then to preserve them, and the policy of eliminating them is the best
one. [Yet,] in the code of ethics of the Imām the existence of all
instincts is deemed necessary, and all of them have advantages and uses.
In essence, from this aspect, nothing in the universe has been created
inordinately and every integral part of the universe has its own
particular function. So, the existence of all things—even the apparently
worst instincts—is beneficial and necessary. This reasoning has roots in
the Qur’anic view of the universe. God Almighty says: ***“We created not
the heaven and the earth and all that is between them in play.**”*[162]

As far as creation is concerned it is the act of the All-Wise God; it
has been created wisely and nothing therein is futile and vain. In the
same vein, since all beings are creatures of the One and Only God, they
are in a state of harmony and concordance, and all parts are related to
one another. If in a certain level of existence disorder is noticeable,
through a deeper analysis we would realize its intrinsic order. To cite
an example, a child who has seen the kitchen utensils in the cabinet
every day and today he notices that all of them are apparently cluttered
in different parts of the kitchen, he considers it as the result of his
mother’s carelessness and confusion.

But once he understands that they are supposed to entertain visitors
that night at home, he realizes that this apparent disarray has meaning
and order. Such is the creation. If at first glance the same impression
is entertained in one’s mind, this notion will dissipate after a second
and profound scrutiny. That is why the Glorious Qur’an admonishes us,
anytime we comprehend diversity and duality in the universe, to take a
second and deeper look so as to discover our own misconception.[163]

The corollary of this precept is for us to reckon the universe as
orderly and purposeful, and not to think of any phenomenon therein as
useless. God Almighty considers it an attribute of the learned and sages
that they hold the passing of nights and days and all the phenomena in
the universe significance, and say: ***“Our Lord! Thou createdst not
this in vain. Glory be to Thee!**”*[164]      

This all-embracing view on the universe also includes man’s self and
instincts. Since there is nothing useless in the universe, it follows
that human instincts are also meaningful and purposeful. If we view
instincts from this perspective, we cannot on any account, talk about
eliminating and suppressing them. Instead, efforts should be made for
them to act in accordance with their particular functions and not drift
away from their own specific tasks; this is different from self-denial.
This rule is applicable to all instincts.

The existence of even those instincts which have apparently negative
functions is also essential and their absence would render man’s
existence imperfect and deficient. For instance, one of the ‘negative’
instincts is anger, which is mentioned in the *ahādīth* [Prophetic
narrations] as the key to all kinds of destruction and mischief.

Nowadays, numerous books have been written about this affliction, its
negative effects, and ways of curing it. There are hardly any who are
immune to the side effects of this ominous phenomenon; all of us in
different places drunk its hemlock and have poisoned our palates. Many
psychologists consider anger as causing high blood pressure,
cholesterol, and even untimely death, and say that anger deprives man of
the powers of sound reasoning and judgment, making him blind to the
realities.  
    
 Once such anger and hatred arises in you, the most important part of
your mind, which is the center of judgment between right and wrong,
fails to function, rendering you incapable of judging the short- and
long-term consequences of your conduct and behaviour. In this condition,
our power of judgment completely fails to function and there is no
chance of its working. This condition is exactly similar to that of a
person when he becomes mad.[165]     * *  
    
 We can thus continue to enumerate the destructive effects of anger and
to cite the various opinions about it. The Imām himself has allotted a
section in the *Sharh-e Chehel Hadīth* to this destructive instinct. He
discusses it in detail, indicating the way of release from it and the
method of regulating it.[166]

Well, now this question arises: Is not anger, with all these destructive
effects arising from it, an example of the many instincts that must be
uprooted? Is the existence of such an unpleasant instinct essential in
man? Keeping in mind the Qur’anic precept that everything in the
universe has a purpose and goal, the answer to the above question is
positive. Yes, anger is also necessary and if it were not for this
instinct, humankind would never have endured and would have become
extinct. It is enough to imagine this instinct to disappear overnight
from man’s existence. In that case, no danger, no matter how serious,
will induce him to move, and the necessary energy to face unpleasant
situations will be not available to him. We should not forget that the
greatest specific function of anger is preparing us to deal with
emergency situations and providing us with the power to respond quickly.
Most of the writings dealing with anger have also mentioned its specific
positive function. Therefore, from this perspective anger is also a
vital element for the continuity of man’s life. Anger becomes bad only
when it strays from its original function.

While conducting an analysis of anger, Imām Khomeinī also delves into
all its dimensions and considers it in moderation to be necessary for
individual and social life. Pertaining to its benefits, he
says:                       
 It should be known that the Power of Anger is one of the biggest
favours of God conferred upon His creatures, which enables them to
pursue activities constructive to their world and the Hereafter, assure
the continuity of the species as well as the safety and survival of the
individual and the family. It also plays a great role in the
establishment and maintenance of social order and civic life. If this
noble faculty were not ingrained in the animal’s nature, it would not
have been able to defend itself against natural adversities, and would
have been subjected to destruction and extinction. And if it were absent
in man, then besides these, he would have failed to achieve most of his
progress and perfection.

Moreover, even its deficiency and insufficient presence below the
moderate level is itself considered a moral weakness and flaw which
gives rise to innumerable vices and defects like fear; timidity;
weakness; laxity; laziness; greed; lack of restraint, patience and
tolerance; lack of constancy and perseverance when needed; love of
comfort; torpor; lethargy; submissiveness to oppression and tyranny;
submitting to insults and disgraces to which an individual or his family
may be subjected; dastardliness; spiritlessness, etc. Describing the
qualities of the believers God Almighty says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَشِدَّاءُ عَلَى الْكُفَّارِ رُحَمَاءُ بَيْنَهُمْ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(*****The believers*****)*** **are hard against the unbelievers and
merciful among themselves**.*[167]*

The fulfilment of the duty of *al-amr bī’l-ma‘rūf wa’n-nahy ‘an
al-munkar* [to enjoin good conduct and forbid indecency], the
implementation of *hudūd* [punishment prescribed by the Islamic penal
law], *ta‘zīrāt* [punishments decreed by a judge], and the carrying out
of other policies set forth by religion or guided by reason, would not
have been possible without the existence of this noble Power of Anger.

On this basis, those who believe in eradicating the Power of Anger and
consider its destruction as an accomplishment and mark of perfection are
highly mistaken and in great error, ignorant as they are about the signs
of perfection and the bounds of moderation. Poor fellows, they do not
know that God Almighty has not created this noble faculty in vain in all
the species belonging to the animal kingdom. To the children of Adam
(*‘a*) He bestowed this power as the source of securing a good life in
this world and the Hereafter, and a vehicle for procuring various
blessings and felicities.

The holy *jihād* with the enemies of the *Dīn* [religion]; the struggle
for the preservation of mankind’s social order; the defense and
protection of one’s own life, property and honor, as well as the Divine
values and laws; and above all the combat with one’s inner self, which
is the biggest enemy of man, none of these could be possible without the
existence of this noble faculty.

It is under the banner of this noble faculty that aggression and
encroachments upon rights are repelled, borders and frontiers are
protected, and other social and individual offences, noxious practices,
and harmful deeds are checked. It is for this very reason that the
*hukamā* [men of wisdom] have recommended various remedies for treating
any deficiency in this Power, and prescribed numerous practical and
theoretical remedies for the purpose of its regeneration, like
participation in acts of heroism and going to battlefronts on the
occasion of war with the enemies of God.[168]  
    
 As such, instincts are not only to be endured but also their existence
is to be considered a grace for the spiritual and social growth and
perfection of man from which benefits are to be sought for the growth
and development of human talents. This principle is also true for all
instincts. None of the instincts should be suppressed and uprooted;
instead, efforts should be made for them to perform their specific
functions and not go beyond their limits.

This nourishment and training should be coordinated and concordant; all
the instincts and attributes of man should be so harmonious with each
other as to constitute a coherent whole. For example, instead of
eliminating the sensual instinct it should be modestly moderated.
Basically, moral virtues are understandable with the control of
instincts, and without these instincts, they (moral virtues) would lose
their meaning. Anyone who has no sexual instinct has no business talking
about chastity.

How could one who does not possess at all the power of anger talk about
meekness and forbearance? The understanding of Mawlānā on the Prophet’s
noble *hadīth*, “*Lā rahbāniyyah fī’l-Islām*” [There is no monasticism
in Islam][169] succinctly illustrates the essence of this viewpoint:  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
چون عدو نبْوَد، جهاد آمد محال             شهوتت نبود، نباشد امتثال
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صبر نبود چون نباشد ميل تو                خصم چون نبود، چه حاجت خيل تو؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هين! مكن خود را خصى، رُهبان مشو     زانكه عفّت، هست شهوت را گرو
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بىهوا، نهى از هوا ممكن نبود              غازىاى بر مُردگان نتوان نمود
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When there is no enemy, armed struggle is inconceivable;*

*(If) thou hast no lust, there can be no obedience (to the divine
command).*

*There can be no self-restraint when thou hast no desire;*

*When there is no adversary, what need for thy strength?*

*Hark, do not castrate thyself, do not become a monk;*

*For chastity is in pawn to (depends on the existence of) lust.*

*Without (the existence of) sensuality ’tis impossible to forbid
sensuality:*

*Heroism cannot be displayed against the dead*.[170]

The most important distinction between Islamic ethics and those of
Christianity and Buddhism is rooted in this issue. It is this approach
that places Islamic ethics in the category of ‘worldliness’ and
separates it from world-denunciation approaches. Yes, the existence of
every instinct—however negative it may seem—serves as the basis for the
appearance of positive and valuable attributes of man. It is in times of
adversity and hardship that man’s power of patience and constancy is put
under test and man is able to recognize his essence well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عِرْقِ مردى آن گهى پيدا شود               كه مسافر همرهِ اعدا شود
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The root (innate quality) of manhood (only) becomes apparent at the
time*

*When the traveler meets his enemies on the road.*[171]

   
 Furthermore, it is only in the presence of negative instincts that
positive attributes basically find their meaning and that we can talk
about nourishment and training. Thus, Mawlānā used to admonish those who
were bent on uprooting their sexual instinct, telling them not to do so,
for in the absence of this instinct, chastity has no meaning and value.
That is why they have said that the one who can never get angry at all
is an imperfect man, but the one who does not want to get angry is a
wise person. The first type (of person) is fundamentally lacking an
instinct while the second has the instinct to get angry, but has
controlled it.  
    
 It is possible that *wahm* [the power of imagination and invention],
*ghadab* [the power of passion and anger], and *shahwah* [the power of
lust or sensuality], also possess divine aspect, and may bring about
felicity and good luck to man, if these powers are subjected to the
dictates of reason and good sense and the teachings of prophets of God
(*‘a*).[172]  
    
  

Insatiability of instincts
--------------------------

But the fact cannot be denied that once these instincts are released and
set free, they would never stop anywhere, and, like hell give the cry
of, *“Can there be more to come?”*[173]

That is, these instincts can never be satiated and no matter how man
endeavors to satisfy them and to meet his instinctive needs, he becomes
thirstier just as the one who drinks the salty water of the sea. This is
the secret behind the tragic condition of humanity. Anyone who is a
captive of the instinct of greed and avarice remains in a state of
indigence and insatiability even if becomes a Qārūn.[174]  
 The cure for avarice and covetousness does not lie in acquiring all the
things that we desire. For this ‘all’ is of an indefinite and unspecific
level, and everyone has his or her own limitations. Up to now we have
yet to see a rich man who is satisfied with his financial condition.
[Instead,] he always experiences a sense of inner restlessness and is
not satisfied with his own extant status: “Right below the layer of
comfort a kind of mental uneasiness exists which leads to hopelessness,
unnecessary encounters, the need for alcohol and drugs and, in the worst
case, to the committing of suicide.”[175]

The limits to the acquisition of wealth and the attempts to satisfy the
instinct of avarice cannot be determined at all. Once man reaches
whatever optimal point that had been anticipated, he considers another
optimal point for himself. So if man wants to obtain mental satisfaction
through greed and covetousness, he is treading the wrong path which
leads him nowhere, because one of the interesting features of greed is
that no matter how much the covert motivation of greed to attempt
attaining mental satisfaction is, the satirical point is that after you
obtain the sought-after and desired thing, you will still remain
unsatisfied.[176]                 
    
 The true antidote of greed is not more greed; rather, it is
satisfaction for what has been given, contentment and self-respect:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كوزه چشم حريصان پر نشد           تا صدف قانع نشد، پر دُر نشد
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The pitcher, the eye of the covetous, never becomes full:*

*The oyster-shell is not filled with pearls until it is contented*.[177]

   
 One day a man came to Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) and said that whatever he sought
and obtained did not satisfy him and that he yearned for more of it,
adding that he was annoyed by this situation. He asked the Imām (*‘a*)
to teach him something that would be beneficial to him. The Imām (*‘a*)
said:  
    
    
 If that which suffices you makes you not in need (self-sufficient), the
smallest of which is making you not in need, and if you look for more
than that which suffices you, all the things in the world cannot make
you self-sufficient.[178]    
    
 Yes, such is the nature of this instinct. The more its root is
satisfied, the stronger it becomes, so much so that even if it has two
valleys of gold and silver, it will crave for the third valley (of gold
and silver). Nothing can please and satisfy the world-loving eyes of man
except contentment or the soil of the grave.

This point is true not only for covetousness; such is also the case with
the sexual instinct—which does not know what satisfaction is. Freud
erroneously thought that through meeting the sexual needs this instinct
can be soothed and calmed down. The point is that the more this instinct
is quenched, the thirstier it becomes:  
    
 The power of sensuality and lust acts in man in such a way that if he
is given one woman, he is attracted to other women. If he is given an
empire, he will hanker after some other empire. Man always desires for
what he does not possess. In spite of this vanity of imagination and
futility of human desire, the kiln of sensuality is always hot and its
heat ever increasing, and our desires are never cooled down.[179]  
    
 A glance at the lives of kings and sultans who kept thousands of women
in their harems but still longed for other women bears witness to this
fact and “anyone who has any doubt is advised to examine his own self
and other human beings belonging to the classes of poor, rich and
powerful; he will then agree with me.”[180]

This rule is applicable to all instincts and none of them can be
excluded from it. No one can be found who can say, “I have fulfilled all
my desires.” Even Hosang Vazīr[181] who used to claim, “I engulfed the
whole world and did everything,” was also looking for deliverance and
respite until his death so as to conduct again all the affairs.” In no
way are these instincts satiated, and herein lies the danger. For, the
bounds of every instinct should be identified, its proper specific
function obtained and employed within these limits. This does not imply
elimination, while at the same time, this instinct should not be
released altogether:      
    
 None of the prophets of God (*‘a*) ever tried to eradicate the powers
of passion, sensuality or imagination completely. None of the messengers
of God have ever demanded to completely kill sensuality and desire or to
extinguish the fire of passion or anger and ignore the inventions of
imagination. But they have rather advocated for controlling and bridling
them and making them function under the command of reason and Divine
Laws. For each one of these powers struggles to dominate others and win
its goal, whatever mischief, chaos, and confusion may be stirred
up.[182]  
    
 In this case, this question can once again be posed: Since these
instincts are insatiable, is it not better for us to uproot them and
thus free ourselves from their bonds? The answer to this question is
negative. For, aside from all these benefits that derive from their
existence, we should never forget the point that basically the humanness
of man is the preservation of these instincts. The best medicine has
also side effects and as of the moment no medicine without side effects
has ever been known. Is there anyone who, due to the fact that these
medicines have side effects, refrains from taking them in case of
necessity?

Water which is the source of life can make a person sick if an excess of
it enters the body. Fire, the discovery of which led to a quantum
transformation in the life of man would burn us if we went very near it.
The sun, with all its procreative and bountiful aspects, would destroy
the earth if it comes a little nearer. As such, due to these issues, the
essence of instincts cannot be uprooted; instead, they should be
regulated. Now, another question arises and that is: Why have these
instincts been created so as to be insatiable, and why is there no
instinct with predetermined limit and threshold of satisfaction?

The answer is this: One of the innate qualities of man is that he is
always aspiring for perfection and is not satisfied with anything. It is
this relentless search that has transformed him from a cave-dwelling
savage to an outer space-roving astronaut. If humankind were always to
be content with its existing condition, no sort of change would ever
occur in its life, and like that of honeybee, would not have been
different from what it was thousands of years ago. It is this *fitrah*
[natural disposition of man] that urges him to discover the secrets of
the universe and not to be content with all that he possesses:     
    
 It is obvious that man is always allured by something, which he does
not own. This is the human nature as conceived by various great Islamic
thinkers and holy men, especially one should refer to a great master of
divinity, Mīrzā Muhammad ‘Alī Shāhābādī, may my soul be ransomed for
him.[183]  
    
 So, finally, all these instincts are deeply embedded on man’s essence
of seeking and devotion to perfection which, in itself, is a blessing up
to this point. The problem arises when it happens that we forget the
rationality behind these instincts and their creation, and imagine that
we have to comply totally with their dictates, spending day and night in
the acquisition of wealth and beauty-worship. It is here that we go
astray from the Path, forgetting the True Object of Worship and Absolute
Perfection while imagining riches, power, or sensuality as our gods and
devotionally eulogizing them.[184]

It is enough that we realize our mistakes, knowing that these are not
our real masters. They are servants who, if properly trained and
nourished, will always be our helpers. [On the other hand,] once they
are abandoned and released for some time, they will claim divinity and
make us their slaves. Accordingly, instincts should neither be killed
nor released. Rather, they should be guided and regulated so that you
could enjoy their benefits and remain secure from their
menaces.         
    
  

Social participation as a requisite of combat with the self
-----------------------------------------------------------

Just as some people would imagine that combat with the self implied
self-denial and uprooting of instincts, some others have supposed that
the requisites of combat with the self are withdrawing from the society,
seclusion, and confinement in a corner. This tenet of running away from
the people in order to attain security is indeed against the teachings
of our religion and against values, and has gradually assumed an aspect
of ‘value’ for itself, being reckoned as a manifestation of
‘perfection’.      

One of the most important books on mystics [*‘ārifīn*] and Sufis ever
written is the *Tadhkirat’ ul-Awliyā’*[185] in which the author has
given an account of the lives of more than ninety famous mystics. This
book is replete with stories of the Sufis’ isolation and retreat from
society. In this book it has been reported that they [the people around
him] said to Hasan al-Basrī[186]—one of the notable mystics: “There is a
man who for a period of twenty years has not attended a congregational
prayer, has no social intercourse with anyone, and has [always] been
sitting in a corner.”[187] Hasan approached him and asked him the reason
for his conduct. On hearing the reply, he said to him: “Be as you are as
you are better than me.”[188]

Again, concerning the description of *tasawwuf* [Sufism] Sahl at-Tustarī
(201-273 AH), a great Sufi, is reported to have said: “Sufism is meager
eating, having tranquility with God, the Sublime and Exalted, and
keeping aloof from people.”[189] Again, in an account on the life of
Dāwūd at-Tā’ī[190] it is reported: “He was constantly disillusioned with
the people,”[191] “keeping aloof from them [people],”[192] and would
say: “Run away from the people just as they flee from the fierce
lion.”[193]

In his *Kīmyā-ye Sa‘ādat* [The Alchemy of Happiness] Al-Ghazzālī,[194]
likewise, devotes a separate chapter to the etiquette of seclusion and
says:  
    
 The school of thought [*madhhab*] of Sufyān Nūrī, Ibrāhīm Idham, Dāwūd
Tā’ī, Fadīl ‘Ayyād, Sulaymān Khawwās, Yūsuf Isbāt, Hadhīfah Mar‘ashī,
Bashar Hāfī, and many other God-fearing and great men (*r*)[195] is that
seclusion and solitude is more virtuous than mingling with
others.[196]  
    
 Then it quotes sayings from them such as follows: Rabī‘ ibn Khuthaym
and Ibrāhīm Najafī, may Allah be pleased with them, have said: “pursue
knowledge and keep away from people.”[197] Fadīl said: “I would receive
a great favour from one who did not mind me or greet me, and when I fell
ill, would not visit me.”[198] In short, after discussing such
quotations on the virtues of seclusion, Al-Ghazzālī has named six of its
benefits, discussing each one of them in detail.

For example, the third benefit of seclusion in his view is this: “No
city or town…is free of hostility and sedition and anyone who secluded
would be free from sedition. Once he associates with the people, he
would fall into sedition, destroy his religion and be in danger.”[199]
The fourth benefit of seclusion in the view of Al-Ghazzālī is
deliverance from the mischief of the people, while the fifth one is that
the people will not pin their hopes on him. The sixth [and last] benefit
is “being rid of meeting dear ones, the stupid, and those whom it is
naturally abominable to meet.”[200]

In a nutshell, seclusion means turning away from responsibility,
non-acceptance of the reality of life, and shirking any form of endeavor
to change the status quo in favour of the desired condition. Seclusion
from this perspective is nothing but the worthlessness of man in as much
as one cannot hope for any good from him. Apparently, this kind of
outlook has arisen at some stage in the mystical lives of many. After
passing through different stages of mystic knowledge and gnosis, our
mystics resorted to nothing other than seclusion. They considered the
best way to live was to go into seclusion; that is, somewhat a
premeditated kind of suicide and seemingly legitimate.[201]    
    
 This approach, regardless of the intention it is based, is squarely in
opposition to the teachings of the Infallibles (*‘a*) and the
rudimentary precepts of the Qur’an. We have read a lot that monasticism
and seclusion have no place in Islam and those who practice these are
considered the most destructive of people. In the parlance of religion,
the best of men is he who is beneficial to others and has a stronger and
more profound sense of responsibility with respect to those around him
and the society at large. Enjoining what is good and forbidding what is
wrong, which is one of the fundamental Islamic obligations, is only
comprehensible with the acceptance of collectivity and living therein,
as well as accountability.[202]

Essentially, from the view of the Messenger of God (*s*), Muslim is he
who is concerned with other Muslims and shares joys and sorrows. Hence,
the Holy Prophet (*s*) said: “He who has passed the night without
concern for the affairs of Muslims is not a Muslim.”[203]

Being a Muslim is not only restricted to individual acts of worship and
devotion; it transcends these and embraces all levels of social life.
From this perspective, being a Muslim means acceptance of responsibility
and having an active presence in society:  
    
 Well, the Prophet (*s*) has advised us to be diligent about the affairs
of Muslims. Does diligence over the affairs of Muslims lie only in
saying how many *rak‘ah* [cycle] the prayer is; what the doubt between
so-and-so is? Is this supposed to be showing concern for the affairs of
Muslims? It is an issue that does not speak of the affairs of Muslims.
Affairs of Muslims refer to their political affairs, their social
affairs, and their predicaments. Whoever does not give concern to these
is not a Muslim [*falaysa bi-muslim*], according to the [above-quoted]
*hadīth*.[204]        
    
 The distinction between human beings and animals is this sense of
responsibility. Once we ignore it, we tend to promote seclusion and
isolation [to prevail in the society]. It is enough to imagine that all
the people want to enjoy the benefits of seclusion and to choose
isolation and retreat. The endurance of such a society and to live
therein is nearly impossible. The social order will soon be in shambles
and everyone will retreat to the caves and jungles.

So, the point should be known that in our religious teachings seclusion
has never met with approval. When one of the companions of the Messenger
of God (*s*) asked for his approval for seclusion, the Holy Prophet
(*s*) discouraged him from doing so and said: “Once you do not mingle
with the people, how you will then perform the enjoinment of what is
good and the forbiddance of what is wrong?”[205]

That is, social life and responsibility to others are a duty of all
Muslims while seclusion means trampling upon this duty.  
 Even in our religious sources it has been narrated that the
supplications of one who withdraws from social and economic activity and
sits in a corner relying on God, will not be granted. One day Imām
as-Sādiq (*‘a*) enquired about one of his companions named ‘Umar ibn
Muslim. They said, “He has abandoned trade and has turned to [only]
worship.” He (*‘a*) said: “Woe to him! Does he know not that the prayers
of one who abandoned all endeavor will not be granted?” Then he narrates
the story of those in the time of the Messenger of God (*s*) who, under
the pretext of trust in and reliance on God [*tawakkul*], withdrew from
active life and went into retreat. He (*‘a*) says that the Holy Prophet
(*s*) told them: “The supplication of whoever does so will not be
granted. So, exert effort.”[206]     

Undoubtedly, the tenet of seclusion and asceticism is in contradiction
to many of the religious teachings. In his discourses on ethics the Imām
has also put great emphasis on man as a social being, and does not at
all name seclusion as a value. Rather, he believes that combat with the
self is only possible through a responsible presence and activity in the
society; not through withdrawal and isolation. He believes that the only
gift of sitting secluded in a corner is wretchedness and misery.
Preservation and advancement of human values lies in sustained efforts;
not seclusion:  
    
 If you want to be a human being, you have to strive hard. Preserving
your human values requires effort. It is not possible for one’s human
values to be preserved while sitting at home. One who sits in seclusion
at home will suffer setbacks. However, he does not realize that he is no
longer a human being.[207]      
    
 From the Imām’s perspective, isolation and withdrawal from
responsibility is in no way concordant with Islam and its teachings. It
is an alien phenomenon which has brought malaise to the Islamic society,
so much so that this anti-value has found an esteemed place among
Muslims, and if one lives in isolation—that is futility—he enjoys
greater respect, esteem and worth:    
    
 Seclusion was not extant in Islam at all; it has never been so. This
seclusion, I wonder what—retreat, withdrawal, and basically,
aloofness—have all been present in non-Muslim religious groups and have
been introduced among the Muslims; reaching the stage of saying that
“Mr. so-and-so is a very good person; he does not care at all about what
may happen (regarding something)!” Apathy itself became part of
eulogy![208]   
    
 This inversion of values would, at times, lead to those who were alert
and conscious pretending to be indifference and using others as their
plaything: “Well, this causes even the one who distinguishes between
each and everything would show himself as undiscerning.”[209]

Only presence in society can polish his coarseness of personality and
crudity, just as gravel is smoothened by rolling and tossing innumerable
times in a river’s course, a human being is moulded and refined only in
the midst of society and in the context of the challenges of life, thus
causing the essence of his self to manifest itself.  
  

 This World and the Hereafter
-----------------------------

   
 For many people, this world and the hereafter are cheese and chalk
apart, and (to them) worldliness means turning away from the hereafter,
while seeking the hereafter denotes hostility to the world.

Whenever the subject of the hereafter and that of keeping it in mind
comes up, it seems that one should withdraw from the world, abandon and
flee from it. Most of our Sufis and mystics have given currency to this
dictum and claimed that the hereafter can be attained by trampling on
this world, as this world is a world of matter while the hereafter is a
world of meaning, and these two are irreconcilable.

All this vilification of the world, its vainness and the disgrace to
which it has been subjected in our literature has its roots in this
understanding of the world. Perhaps this world and the hereafter are
inimical to one another and will never be reconciled. Someone with this
notion of the world had vilified it and whose statement Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*)
heard. Contrary to his expectation, the Imām (*‘a*) did not confirm his
view. Rather, he (*‘a*) said to him:        
  O’ you who abuse the world, O’ you who have been deceived by its
deceit and cheated by its wrongs. Do you accuse it or it should accuse
you? When did it bewilder you or deceive you? Certainly, this world is a
house of truth for him who appreciates it; a place of safety for him who
understands it; a house of riches for him who collects provision from it
(for the next world); and a house of instructions for him who draws
instruction from it. It is a place of worship for the lovers of Allah;
the place of praying for the angels of Allah; the place where the
revelation of Allah descends; and the marketing place for those devoted
to Allah.”[210]  
    
 From the viewpoint of Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) there is nothing wrong with the
world and it is not blameworthy. By the way, what is meant by the
‘world’? If we look upon the world as one of the levels of existence and
one of God’s creations, then it cannot be reproached. If by the world we
mean that place of origin and nourishment of humankind, then again it
cannot be blamed. If by the world we mean that ground and bastion of
human development, in this case, too, it cannot be deemed futile.

From whatever perspective we view the world, it seems as though the
world is far from being blameworthy, and reproaching it is tantamount to
reproaching God. Notwithstanding this, the world has been referred to in
a blameful and rebuking manner in many of the Qur’anic verses and
narrations (of the Prophet). It cannot be denied that the basis of many
among those who have been hostile to the world has been some Qur’anic
verses and sayings of the Infallibles (*‘a*) and our religious
leaders.  
 For instance, concerning the world, God Almighty says: ***“Know that
the life of this world is only play, and idle talk, and pageantry, and
boasting among you, and rivalry in respect of wealth and
children.**”*[211]

This assertion that the world is nothing but a plaything and futility
has been repeated in numerous verses.[212]

Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*), too, who used to express praise for the world,
addressed the world thus: “O’ world, O’ world! Get away from me. Do you
present yourself to me? Or are you eager for me? You may not get that
opportunity to impress [and deceive] me.”[213]

In the former statement the Imām (*‘a*) was saying that the world is not
a deceiver whereas in the latter he (*‘a*) wants the world to deceive
others [i.e., to deceive those who wanted to be deceived and not to
deceive him]. Now, how could this ambiguity be resolved? This vagueness
will be made clear through an examination of the following three
points:        
      
 • This world as the place of cultivation for the hereafter

• Which is the blameworthy world?

• This world and the hereafter as complementary to one another

   
  

This world as the place of cultivation for the hereafter
--------------------------------------------------------

   
 From a philosophical and general viewpoint, this world and the
hereafter are located in a single continuum—a continuum in whose one end
is the world and in the other end is the hereafter. As far as existence
is concerned it is not possible to put a gap between the two. The world
is the lowest level of the universe and the descending stage of
existence.

The world is that place in which all talents are not yet set in motion
and in which every phenomenon can endlessly manifest its potentialities.
The world is that abode in which thousands and thousands of unfulfilled
possibilities could materialize. The world is that learning sanctuary
wherein one can still pursue knowledge and improve oneself. It is this
world that is considered as “the lowest level of existence and the abode
of change, transition, and annihilation.”[214]

In this sense, this world means there is still opportunity for everyone
to polish the essence of his existence and to give it the appropriate
form he likes. As such, the world has no blemish. Although it appears
imperfect comparison to the hereafter, in term of its function and duty,
which is providing the grounds for the advancement of everybody, it is
absolutely without any defect:    
    
 Although worldly existence is a lower and defective realm of being,
since it is a nursery for the training of lofty souls and a school for
acquiring higher spiritual stations, it is a field for cultivating the
Hereafter. In this sense it is the most sublime of the realms of being
and the most profitable of worlds for the lovers of God and the
wayfarers of the path of the Hereafter.[215]  
    
 Therefore, if there were no such realm for the manifestation of human
ability and ingenuities, no one could have been able to tread the path
of perfection and be freed from his own faults and deficiencies, and
this itself is the greatest defect:    
    
 And were it not for this terrestrial realm of matter, the domain of
physical and spiritual substantial transformation and change, … not a
single imperfect soul would have attained its promised state of
perfection nor would it have been able to reach the realm of permanence
and stability, nor the embodiments of imperfection would have been able
to enter the Kingdom of God.[216]

The statements uttered by Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) to the blamer of the world is
a testimony to this truth. Whenever referring to this aspect of the
world the Glorious Qur’an also describes the world as the overture of
the hereafter and its prelude, and avers it is in this world that man
builds his own hereafter. Deliverance in this world leads to deliverance
in that world while blindness in this abode is equivalent to blindness
in that one: ***“Whoso blind here will be blind in the Hereafter, and
yet further from the road.**”*[217]

The statement, “The world is the farm of the hereafter,” which the Holy
Prophet (*s*) is reported to have said, expresses this point. So, the
world is not only irreproachable but also praiseworthy. The world
provides the best opportunity for us to construct whatever we like from
our existence and to achieve our perfection. The world not only has no
place for complaint and grievance, but is also worthy of appreciation
and laudation.

Besides this, not only is the world good, but also loving it is even
ethical and acceptable. The essence of man takes form in this very water
and soil, and the world is not only deemed as the cradle and bedrock of
his advancement but also plays the role of his mother. Thus, anyone who
expresses love to his mother is not reproachable. On the contrary,
unkindness to one’s mother is unethical. It is for this reason that Imām
‘Alī (*‘a*) says: “People are the progeny of the world and no one can be
blamed for loving the mother.”[218]

Yes, blameworthy is the one who does not love his mother—that too, the
mother who endows his child with all the means of comfort and growth,
and provides him with all the potentialities for perfection. So, loving
this world is rooted in man’s innate constitution. “Let it be known that
man is the child of this physical world, nature being his mother, and he
the offspring of water and dust. The love for this world is implanted in
his heart since the early time of his development and
growth.”[219]Therefore, the world is not reproachable, and loving it is
natural and even ethical.  
    
  

Which is the blameworthy world?
-------------------------------

   
 The world is commendable and praiseworthy so long as it paves the way
for the advancement of man and leads to his perfection. However, if it
is supposed to prevent his advancement and obstruct his way to
perfection, then it is no longer praiseworthy. In the same manner, love
of the mother is acceptable so long as it causes the growth of the
child. Yet, if this love is to arrest the independence of man and to
make him always dependent on her, it can then no longer be considered a
positive emotion. Instead, it is a malady.

If our outlook on the world is that of one who wants to go a long way
and reach his destination, we can then take all the things we need from
this house (world) and commence our journey fully equipped. But once we
take this world as our goal, we will then forget the journey,
destination and movement, and will not be able to advance and attain
perfection. Therefore, what makes the world valuable is the ‘utilitarian
outlook’ on it, and what makes it worthy of rebuke is the ‘destinational
outlook’.

The difference between the one who seeks the world and that who seeks
the hereafter is not that the worldly one acquires benefits from this
world while the other avoids it. The fundamental distinction lies in the
type of outlook of these two. The wise and clear-sighted one is he who
sees the world as a good instrument to reach the hereafter while the
stupid one is he who thinks of the world as his objective:   
    
 Certainly this world is the end of the sight of the (mentally) blind
who see nothing beyond it. The sight of a looker (who looks with the eye
of his mind) pierces through and realizes that the (real) house is
beyond this world. The looker therefore wants to get out of it while the
blind wants to get into it. The looker collects provision from it (for
the next world) while the blind collects provision for this very
world.[220]  
    
 Therefore, what is meant by the blameworthy world is not this physical
planet with all its beauties and endowments, because, reproaching them
is tantamount to reproaching the beautiful creations of God. Rather,
what is meant by the blameworthy world is forgetting one’s own goal,
having absolute attachment to it, and evading one’s own human and divine
responsibilities:    
    
 Therefore, this world, being as it is the manifestation of and witness
to His Beauty and Majesty, is not at all condemnable in this sense. That
which is condemnable is the world of man himself in the sense of his
absorption in the world of carnal nature and his attachment and love for
it. That world is the source of all vices and all inward and outward
sins.[221]  
    
 From this perspective, the cause of all these sins and offences is love
of this world. Imām as-Sādiq is reported to have said: “Love of the
world is the root of all sins.”[222]

In as much as the love of this world causes total attachment to it and
makes one forget his or her objective; it gradually immerses the person
in various sins and offences. The first sin and offence arising from the
love of the world is that man thinks of this ephemeral and temporal
world as everlasting, but whenever the veil of his notion is torn, one
becomes fearful and dreadful of death. As a result, it would even make
him furious of God. The other sin that spawns from love of this world is
the weakening of man’s will. What makes man a man is his willpower and
if, due to love of the world, this will is to weaken, then nothing would
be left of his humanity. The third sin issuing from love of this world
is that man is never satiated by it and in order to get more enjoyment
from it he is prone to defile himself with any sort of sin and gradually
drowns in all these sins.

Imām Khomeinī describes some of the evils of loving this world in this
manner:     
  Among the evil effects of the love of the world and attachment to it
is that it makes man afraid of death… Another great evil caused by the
love of the world is that… it weakens his power of resolution and
debilitates the will… Since he mistakenly believes the world and worldly
fascinations to be the desired ultimate goal his greed grows day by day
and his desire for them multiplies. His need for the world increases and
poverty and deprivation becomes his fate.[223]  
 Consequently, he is like a thirsty person who drinks water from the sea
and becomes thirstier. 

 

This world and the hereafter as complementary to one another
------------------------------------------------------------

Man has to go on a great journey—from the earth to the heavens.
Initially, he emerges from a particle that cannot be seen with the naked
eye; however, at the end of the voyage he steps into a world,
annihilating the worlds within his being.

This odyssey, from creation [*khalq*] to Truth [*haqq*] is a spiritual
one, the provisions of which are the aspiration and faith of man. If man
knows the starting point of his journey and appreciates it to just that
extent, he has then taken this world to be the preliminary step to the
hereafter and the place of its cultivation. In such an event, if this
preliminary step is lost sight of, the hereafter and the purpose of the
journey would be meaningless. In the absence of this world, the
hereafter will no longer be so. It is only with the admission of this
contrariety that journey and movement acquire meaning. Nevertheless, the
journey from this world to the hereafter is not a spatial journey.
Rather, it is an inner, behavioural and spiritual one.

From the viewpoint of the Qur’an, the world is the external
manifestation and outer layer of the hereafter while the hereafter is
the esoteric form and inner layer of this world. Yet, most of the people
do not realize this truth and ***“they know only some appearance of the
life of the world, and are heedless of the Hereafter.”***[224]  

The reason for this negligence and complacency is that they have not yet
realized the fact that the heaven and the earth and all the things
therein have been created in truth and that every phenomenon has its own
specific function. If only this corporeal man thinks deeply about the
essence of the world and realizes its true condition, he will then
benefit from it without taking it as his goal and being captivated by
and attached to, it. Constructing the hereafter is bound to that in
constructing this world. Anyone who did not invest in this world would
be a loser in that world. Exertion of effort and endeavor in this world
is valuable since it is the hereafter that guarantees [the well-being
of] man. It is with this outlook that this maxim can be understood:
“Whoever does not have sustenance has no hereafter, too.”[225]

This view is a broad perspective on the world and the hereafter, which
gives meaning to any type of economic venture and social participation
without which he would be confined to the whirlpool of daily routine.
That which has been reported that the Messenger of God (*s*) viewed the
Christian and Jewish beliefs as having one eye (one dimensional) while
describing Islam as having two eyes (two dimensional) is a testimony to
this truth. The Jewish creed drowns man to such an extent in the
activities of this world as to keep him from thinking about the
hereafter.

Christianity, too, instils such apprehension in its adherents with
regard to the other world that they forget this one. But it is only the
religion of Islam which reckons the provision of sustenance for the wife
and child as a form of spiritual undertaking and struggle [*jihād*] in
the way of God, and considers work as a form of worship.

From this perspective, not only is economic activity praiseworthy and
laudable while, on the other hand, abandoning economic pursuits and
withdrawal from, and non participation in, the different spheres of life
is viewed as casting out of the ambit of religion. ‘Worldliness’ is only
objectionable when it makes man forgetful of God and his destination,
and not when it would be his companion and aid in this journey and for
reaching the destination:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
چيست دنيا؟ از خدا غافل بُدن                نه قماش و نقده و ميزان و زن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مال را كز بهر دين باشى حمول             نعم مالٌ صالحٌ خواندش رسول
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آب در كشتى، هلاک كشتى است            آب اندر زير كشتى پشتى است
  </p>
</blockquote>

*What is this world? To be forgetful of God;*

*It is not* *merchandise and silver and weighing-scales and women.*

*As regards the wealth that you carry for religion’s sake, as the
Prophet recited,*

*“How good is righteous wealth (for the righteous man)!”* **[226]**

*Water in the boat is the ruin of the boat,*

*(But) water underneath the boat is a support.*[227]

   
    
  


