The Philosophy behind Suffering
===============================

   
 One of the issues engaging the mind of man since the distant past is
the existence of suffering, which is apparently pointless and futile.
The presence of evil and suffering in our world is undeniable. Everyone
has encountered and experienced them in their various forms in his life.
Life without anguish or pain, and happiness without grief exist only in
the imagination. But the reality is a mixture of the two (happiness and
loneliness).

Concerning suffering there are mainly two fundamental questions. The
first is, what is the origin of suffering and from where does it emerge?
The other is whether agony and pain are concordant with the justice and
mercy of God.  

All the religious people of the world should answer these two questions.
If God is the Lone Creator of the world and the Manifestation of
goodness, then where have all these miseries come from? Can the God of
Goodness be the agent of misery and just as He creates, can also
destroy? Acknowledgment of the fact that the One God is the sole origin
of all creations—even those events that are seemingly evil—was enigmatic
for many. Thus, most of them would follow the path of polytheism and,
like the Manuians,[228] believed in at least two deities. As narrated by
Paulo Cuello, the great soothsayer who believed in various gods, when he
heard the claim of Prophet Ilyās (*‘a*) that God is One, he asked in
mockery: “Do you want to say that according to your belief, the same God
that sends the storm also makes the wheat grow even though these two
things are poles apart?”[229]

The other point is that in the teachings of all religions, God has been
described as the Absolute Power, Absolute Authority, Most Gracious, and
Most Merciful. These attributes are apparently discordant with the
existence of miseries.

Various philosophical and ethical answers to these queries have already
been given. After much experience and meditation, [Siddhartha Gautama]
Buddha arrived at the Four Noble Truths, the first of which is the
existence of suffering in the world and its inevitability.[230] Then he,
who did not believe in monotheism [*tawhīd*] in its Abrahamic sense,
presented a most detailed analysis of the phenomenon of suffering and
recommended certain ways on how to be completely released from it.[231]

But, though the first question seems more philosophical, it is the
second question that has occupied the minds to a greater extent; and
that is the ethical aspect of suffering. Are all these miseries in the
world acceptable? Could not the existing world have been better than
this? Are all these sufferings compatible with the justice, omniscience,
and omnipotence of God? If there is a being other than God who could
create another world, could he (the being other than God) have been able
to cause a world better than this one to appear? Is the poet’s following
assertion valid?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
گر بر فلكم دست بُدى چون يزدان           برداشتمى من اين فلک را ز ميان
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وز نو فلكى ديگر چنان ساختمى             كآزاده به كام دل رسيدى آسان
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If like the Creator I had only dominion over* *the heaven,*

*I would have taken away this heaven.*

*And then a new heaven would I make;*

*As you can easily have whatever your heart dictates.*

   
 One of the most ancient and famous writings about suffering is the Book
of Job in the Old Testament. We have all heard about the story of
Prophet Job [*Ayyūb*] (*‘a*). The Glorious Qur’an briefly points to the
story of his life and states that Job (*‘a*) fell ill but chose
patience, and tasted the pain of suffering until he attained a pleasant
end. According to the Qur’an, Job (*‘a*) experienced such suffering that
he raised his hands in supplication and sought God’s assistance. His
prayer was granted and regained whatever he had lost. God mentions Job
(*‘a*) as a patient servant.[232] 

The story of Job (*‘a*) is narrated more elaborately in the
Judeo-Christian sources. In the Book of Job in which the different
dimensions have been discussed and explained, it is narrated that Job
(*‘a*) was an affluent and influential man, and the fame of his wealth
and power was known everywhere:  
    
 Job (*‘a*) had seven sons, three daughters, and possessing seven
thousand sheep, three thousand camels, five hundred cows, five hundred
she-donkeys, and innumerable servants. He was being acknowledged as the
richest man of the entire district.[233]    
    
 Job (*‘a*) was an upright person and a philanthropist. He used to help
the needy and cater to their needs. One day God extolled Job (*‘a*)
before an assembly of angels and said, “Nobody like him can be found on
earth. He is an honest and God-fearing man and keeps away from
sin.”[234]

Satan who was present in that assembly said in protest, if fearing God
was not of benefit to him, he would not have done so. Thou hast kept Job
(*‘a*), his family and possession safe from every predator. Thou hast
multiplied his earnings and bestowed abundant wealth on him. Take away
his possession from him; then Thou wilt behold that he openly blasphemes
Thee.[235]       
    
 In this manner, the great trial for Job (*‘a*) commenced and Satan was
granted the permission to do whatever he liked to him except exercising
domination over his body and mind. As a consequence, tribulations
occurred one after another. All the possessions of Job (*‘a*) were lost.
His children died. He, himself, became afflicted with an ailment and
suffered intense physical agony. He was expelled from his community. His
friends forgot him and even his wife assailed him. Yet, he patiently
endured all these adversities.

In spite of this, three of his friends approached him and rubbed salt
into his wounds. They believed that these tribulations served as
punishment for the sins of Job (*‘a*) and he was now paying for his
sinful past. They urged Job (*‘a*) to repent for his sins so that God
would forgive him. However, Job (*‘a*) insisted that he had committed no
sin and that these happenings and tribulations had no relation
whatsoever to his alleged commission of sins.

This dialogue is one of the most elegant and profound conversations
pertaining to human suffering. It presents the diverse views on evil and
its origin. In short, those three could not convince Job (*‘a*) that he
was a sinner. God cured him; restored to him his lost properties,
endowed him with other children in the place of his deceased ones, and
inspired the three to apologize to Job (*‘a*). In this way, Job (*‘a*)
recovered his lost social standing. Everybody realized that the ordeals
are not the result of his sinfulness. Rather, these had been only a
trial to prove the unflinching faith of Job (*‘a*).

This notwithstanding, the question of the need for good men to suffer is
still open to debate. This question and many other similar ones have
been discussed for hundreds of years. Through an analysis of the nature
and essence of mischief and evil [*sharr*] (as what Plato did) and its
benefits (as what St. Augustine did), everyone has tried to address
these questions that are just as debatable and can be pondered
upon.[236] 

The question at this juncture with which we have to deal is this: Is the
existence of all these sufferings and evils in the world ethical and
compatible with the sublime attributes of God or not? This question can
be answered from two perspectives. One is from the perspective of faith
and through the acceptance of the principles of religion [*usūl ad-dīn*]
and submission to them. It is from this perspective that the believer
says that the entire universe and all its components are creations of
God, one of Whose Attributes is Wisdom. All the actions of the Wise are
full of wisdom.

Thus, there is wisdom in suffering and evil in it as well. Although we
are not able to comprehend the secret behind so many evils, this
ignorance of ours does not mean that they lack wisdom. It only shows how
ignorant we are, and that our knowledge is not so considerable in
relation to the things unknown to us and that we have taken only a cup
from the ocean of knowledge.[237]

But this answer does not convince all minds and, accordingly, for some
it is a challenging one. Through reflection on the essence of the world,
and the phenomenon of suffering and its function, they try to give a
more elaborate answer to the question. In reality, they admit the wisdom
behind the act of God but seek the hidden wisdom in suffering and its
function. As a consequence, it is owing to this kind of view and
reflection that the subject of divine justice has been one of the most
sensational subjects of scholasticism and philosophy. It is the field
for testing the capability of the human mind.

By relying on a tradition which tries to elucidate the issue of evil
[*sharr*], Imām Khomeinī, in acknowledging the philosophical principles
that consider the existence of evils as inevitable, attempts to show the
ethical aspect of evil. His viewpoint will be made clear through a
survey of the following points:     

• Evil as relative;

• Evil as constructive;

• The hereafter as the place for reward; and

• Suffering as commensurate to one’s own understanding

 

Evil as relative
----------------

   
 We human beings view the world from the standpoint of our own
interests, evaluating and classifying everything on the basis of its
benefit and detriment to us. We never view the world as bare, exactly as
it is and separate from us. This point will be more vivid especially
with regard to the phenomena that are interwoven with our fate. To cite
an example, we identify some of the plants as ‘weed’.

This classification does not convey anything about its nature; it only
shows our judgment regarding it. Now, if one would ask us, what is weed,
our answer would be that weed is a plant which has no benefit, or grows
spontaneously in our garden and orchard. But these answers indicate only
one thing and that is the fact that we have named this plant on the
basis of its benefits and harm to us. Thus, if assuming that a virtue is
discovered in some of these weeds, our classification is immediately
changed.

That is why Emerson,[238] an American thinker and poet, asks: “What is
‘weed’?” He himself answers: “It is a plant whose benefits have not yet
been discovered.” In this example we clearly see that the remarks are
not about identity, and that it is not obvious what weed is. ‘Weed’ is a
value-laden concept and belongs to the domain of the human mind.
Professor Izutsu cites the same example and analyzes it in this
manner:  
    
 To cite an example, consider the term, ‘weed’. Dictionaries have
usually defined this term in this way: ‘It is a wild plant that grows
everywhere.’ In other words, it is unwanted and undesirable. However, in
the exact real world, that is, in the natural world, nothing exists that
is unwanted or undesirable; it only exists in the viewpoint of man who
views the endless things of the complex nature, classify them,
categorize them, and give them different values on the basis of their
purposes.[239]     
    
 Thus, our view on the universe is not a neutral one; in most cases we
identify and categorize things on the basis of our own interests. Of
course, the point here is not individual interests but the interests of
mankind as such. That is to say, man considers everything beneficial to
him as good and detrimental as bad. Well, with this analysis in mind,
let us proceed to the subject of evil [*sharr*] and examine, basically,
what evil [*sharr*] is. Whatever description of evil and suffering is
presented pertains to man.

That is, it is only in relation to man that evil finds meaning. What we
mean by evil—be it natural or ethical—is a phenomenon which, in both
cases, bring suffering into our lives in one way or another, or
endangers and frighten us. We regard destructive floods as evil since
they can cut off our means of communications, ruin our harvests, destroy
our houses, and finally, endanger our lives. But aside from the danger
the flood brings to us and our interests, it can no longer be deemed
‘evil’. Rather it will only be viewed merely as a natural phenomenon.
This is also true with respect to dangerous animals.

We think about poisonous reptiles such as venomous snake as dangerous
and evil since it is possible that they can kill us with their fangs;
however, this same poisonous fang is the most important factor in the
protection of the snake’s life and the continuity of its species. So,
this ‘evil’ is ‘good’ for the snake. Of course, it can be asked,
“Basically, what is the benefit of this ‘evil’ to us?” “Its
non-existence is better than its existence!”

Although an elaborate reply to this inquiry could be given and proved
that they constitute a part of this very same order of nature, and that
their presence is necessary, we can, here, give a brief and adequate
answer which is that the question itself is rooted in man’s
self-centeredness. Man views all the creatures within the framework of
his interests and then asks what good or necessity does the existence of
venomous snakes have. It is enough that the universe be viewed from the
perspective of the venomous snakes. Then, this question for the snakes
arises: “What is the necessity or benefit for nature of the existence of
this two-footed creature (man) who is always in the pursuit of killing
snakes and whose existence is entirely evil?” Then, we would observe
that our viewpoint in relation to nature is a one-sided and value-laden
one.

Once we understand this point well, we will realize that in many cases
the things we think ‘evil’ is only ‘evil’ as far as we are concerned,
and once the outlook is changed we will discern it to be good. In
addition to the fact that the outlook of mankind on nature is such, the
outlook of each and every individual also has this peculiarity. We have
heard the old story of two neighbours. One was a farmer while the other
was a potter. The farmer exerted all his efforts for one whole year and
cultivated much of the land. The potter also made a lot of earthenware.

Thereafter, the farmer would always pray and ask God for rain to pour
down from the sky so that his produce would be abundant. On the other
hand, afraid of the rain, the potter, raising his hands up to the sky,
asked God for clear skies and bright sunlight. The sun for the former
neighbour is ‘evil’, whereas for the latter, rain is always so. As a
result these two have associated good and evil with their own interests
and evaluated them with respect to themselves; duly naming them as
‘good’ or ‘evil’.

This is what is meant by subjectiveness or relativeness of evil. If
there is no human judgment, no phenomenon can be termed ‘evil’. But as
soon as human judgment intervenes—the judgment being based as it is on
the benefits and interests of man—the issue of evil appears. Thus,
nothing is absolutely evil, that is, *per se* and in relation to itself.
Instead, it is only when it is evaluated that it is called ‘evil’ by us.
So, evil is that which is discordant with our interests. In this sense,
evil will be subjective and relative. On the other hand, since our
interests change with a change in circumstances it is possible that what
was evil yesterday is good today and vice-versa.

As a result, in this sense evil would also be relative. Let us assume
that you have an appointment with one of your bosom friends. However,
before you leave your house to visit him, an unexpected guest arrives
and hinders this supposed visit. This guest is reckoned as something bad
[*sharr*]. But, after making the appointment if something happened that
discouraged you from meeting him and you were looking for an excuse to
cancel the appointment the guest’s arrival, in such a case, would be
good for you.

We have heard about the story of an ugly husband whose wife was not
showing pleasant gesture to him. One midnight the wife heard the sound
of a thief’s steps, and fear-stricken, clung to her husband. After
realizing that the reason for this extraordinary and unusual love of his
wife was nothing but the presence of the thief, he welcomed him saying,
“You are welcome to take whatever you want.”

Thus, evil is relative in both senses. That is, it is evaluated and
labeled from the human point of view, and also because of our interests’
being variable, it may happen that yesterday’s evil is today’s good, and
yesterday’s good, today’s evil:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
پس بد مطلق نباشد در جهان          بد به نسبت باشد، اين را هم بدان
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
در زمانه هيچ زهر و قند نيست       كه يكى را پا، دگر را بند نيست
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مر يكى را پا، دگر را پايبند             مر يكى را زهر و بر ديگر چو قند
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زهرِ مار، آن مار را باشد حيات       نسبتش با آدمى باشد ممات
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خلق آبى را بود دريا چو باغ           خلق خاكى را بود آن، مرگ و داغ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
همچنين برمىشمراى مرد كار!        نسبت اين، از يكى كسى تا هزار
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زيد اندر حقِ آن شيطان بود            در حقِ شخص دگر سلطان بود
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آن بگويد: زيد صدّيق سنى است      وين بگويد: زيد گبرِ كُشتنى است
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
گر تو خواهى كو تو را باشد شكر     پس ورا از چشمِ عُشّاقش نگر
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hence there is no absolute evil in the world:*

*Evil is relative. Know this (truth) also.*

*In (the realm of) Time there is no poison or sugar*

*That is not a foot (support) to one and a fetter (injury) to another—*

*To one a foot, to another a fetter;*

*To one a poison and to another (sweet and wholesome) like sugar.*

*Snake-poison is life to the snake,*

*(But) it is death in relation to man.*

*The sea is as a garden to the water-creatures;*

*To the creatures of earth it is death and a (painful) brand.*

*Reckon up likewise, O man of experience,*

*(Instances of) this relativity from a single individual to a thousand.*

*Zayd, in regard to that (particular) one, may be a devil,*

*(But) in regard to another person he may* *be a (beneficent) sultan.*

*That one will say that Zayd is an exalted siddīq (saint),*

*And this one will say that Zayd is an infidel who ought to be killed.*

*If you wish that to you he should be (as) sugar,*

*Then look on him with the eye of lovers.*[240]

   
 Nonetheless, relativeness of evil has a more profound philosophical
meaning. We have read a lot that this planet earth is the locus of
movement and change, which the Imām termed as “the abode of change,
transition, and annihilation.”[241]

In this world, nothing is fixed and static; all things are in the
process of transformation. Every phenomenon in this world moves toward
its own perfection. God created every phenomenon in such a way that it
moves on the basis of its own creational [*takwīnī*] and essential
[*sirishtī*] guidance.

Yesterday’s seed is today’s tree; yesterday’s embryo is today’s fetus
and today’s fetus is tomorrow’s newborn baby—this cycle continues
unabatedly. Yet, this process naturally engenders contradiction and
duality. A fetus which wants to become a newborn baby should abandon its
fetal state whereupon its metamorphosis would become perfect. In order
to become a tree the seed should break out of its peel. So as to have
permanent and complete teeth, the child should lose his baby teeth. A
youngster, who likes to be independent in his life, should reduce his
dependence on his family and accept the responsibility that freedom
entails. All these transformations are bound to suffering.

No fetus is born without suffering, and no seed transformed into a
fruitful tree. A youth who wants to have a muscular and
well-proportioned body should get used to the pain of doing workouts
with cold iron bars, and bear the pain of lactic acid accumulation in
his muscles. He should also endure extreme muscle fatigue for some time.
A butterfly should live inside its cocoon for a period of time to let
its beautiful wings grow and prepare it for a new plane. In this sense,
no movement and contact is possible without suffering and release from
the existing condition. This famous saying of Mullā Sadrā testifies to
this truth: “If there were no contradiction, the grace of the Merciful
Fountainhead would not be obtained.”[242]

No one can deny this reality. A pupil of yesterday who wants to be a
university student of today should accept the pain of being far away and
separated from high school friends so as to establish contact with new
friends and a new environment. Therefore, not only is every phenomenon
involved with its own past in its path to perfection, but also it
sometimes encounters other phenomena that hinder its perfection. It is
here that an all-out conflict ensues—an inevitable and blessed battle in
which neither adversary is totally defeated. The Imām examines evil from
this perspective and says:      
  [All] the evils, catastrophes, death, disease and destructive events
and troublesome creatures and other such things which are in this world
of nature and this narrow pit of darkness arise from the interferences
and conflicts between existents, not from the aspects pertaining to
Being but on account of the deficiency of their ambiance and the
narrowness of their abode.[243]  
    
 As such, evil in this sense is also relative (subjective). That is,
every happening that takes place is evil for some while good for others.
A person falling down and breaking his leg is an ‘evil’ event for him.
Yet, this same unpleasant happening is good for the bonesetters and
orthopaedists since their occupations are connected to these kinds of
‘evil’. However, the Imām goes beyond this point and believes that evil
is not only relative but also a non-existing issue. That is, in a more
technical description, all the evils [basically] arise from the
interferences and conflicts between existents, not from the aspects
pertaining to Being but on account of the deficiency of their ambiance
and the narrowness of their abode. And these derive from limitations and
deficiencies which are totally outside the ambit of the light of
creation and are in reality below making [*ja‘l*]. The true reality is
the Light which is quit of all evil, defect and deficiency. However,
these defects and evils and harmful and troublesome things, in respect
of their defectiveness and harmfulness, are not essential objects of
creation, but they are accidental objects of creation.[244]  
    
 The idea that evil is a non-existing affair is among the ancient ideas
of philosophy, the exact comprehension of which necessitates an
extensive technical preliminary preparation propounding which is not
possible in this concise volume. But the core of the issue is that evil
is not an exact, existing and specified reality which can be identified.
Evil is a relative issue; it means that in relation to us it is
considered evil. Evil is dependent on our judgment and since our
judgment is interwoven with our variable interests, evil is variable as
well and not fixed. Take a look at this earthly world. Perfection
requires abandonment of the present condition and acceptance of some
failures and frustrations which themselves bring about suffering and
evil. As a result, evil is inevitable in the corporeal world. Yet, this
evil is relative, not absolute and a requisite for perfection:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اين جهان جنگ است چون كل بنگرى           ذره با ذره، چو دين با كافرى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آن يكى ذره همى پرّد به چپ                       و آن دگر سو يمين اندر
طلب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذره اى بالا و آن ديگر نگون                      جنگِ فعلىشان ببين اندر
رُكون...
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جنگِ طبعى، جنگ فعلى، جنگِ قول             در ميان جزوها، حربى است هول
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اين جهان زين جنگ قايم مى بُوَد                 در عناصر در نگر تا حل
شود
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When you consider, this world is all at strife,*

*Mote with mote, as religion (is in conflict) with infidelity.*

*One mote is flying to the left,*

*And another to the right in search.*

*One mote (flies) up and another down:*

*In their inclination (movement) behold actual strife.*

*The actual strife is the result of the hidden strife:*

*Know that that discord springs from this discord.*

*This world is maintained by means of this war:*

*Consider the elements, in order that it (the difficulty) may be
solved.*[245]

 

Evil as constructive
--------------------

   
 The foregoing discussion was more a philosophical outlook on the place
of evil in the system of the universe where we tried to illuminate the
point that basically evil is relative and subjective, not a reality
independent from man’s perception. But here the discussion is on its
function.

The question is: What is the benefit of evil—be it relative or exact and
absolute reality—for man? The thrust of the famous Book of Job is this
one. Why a pious and upright man such as Job (*‘a*) should be afflicted
with all these adversities and undergo diverse miseries and agonies?

Many have attempted to answer this question. Yet, most of these answers
embody one point and that is the constructive role of evil for man. Many
of the mystics [*‘ārifīn*] and teachers of ethics emphasize this
principle that the presence of some of the evils is needed for the
nourishment of man’s soul and formation of his personality. Man grows
and attains perfection only in a conducive environment and with the
provision of necessary conditions.

But this favourable environment does not only mean comfort, convenience
and unconsciousness; it also means the existence of some unpleasantness
and tribulations. A driver who drives along a highway having no
acclivity or declivity will easily feel sleepy and it is even possible
for him to be exposed to the danger at an accident. However, the one who
is driving along an extremely winding highway, and every moment,
considers the probability of an unexpected occurrence, is always careful
and does not allow himself to fall sleep.

Thus, the philosophy behind some evils is to keep man always alert and
ready to overcome all odds. One of the contemporary Christian preachers
names this theory as the divine justice theory of soul nourishment since
this theory is indicative of the great scheme of God of assisting human
beings in attaining moral and spiritual maturity. According to this
theory, to live in a particular environment is necessary for nourishment
of the soul. An environment can cause the moral and spiritual maturity
of man in which real challenges are real opportunities for the emergence
of moral virtues, and real facilities for the appearance of faith in God
should be present.[246]    
    
 For instance, in the training courses for soldiers, training programs
are designed to be rigid and severe so as to put the maximum physical
and emotional pressure on them. The aim of such programs is not to annoy
or torment others. Rather, it is meant to prepare individuals to
confront actual situations and serious challenges. Well, if we encounter
such cases which are termed evils, our outlook on them in general will
be changed. The goal of a coach who encourages the athletes under his
supervision to undergo difficult and rigid practice is the enhancement
of their physical ability. The purpose of a professor who gives
complicated assignments to his students is to increase their knowledge.
The problem that nature poses for us is with the same aim of augmenting
our ability.

 The same is the view of the Imām on the issue of evil. He devotes one
of the *hadīth*s in his forty selected *hadīth*s on this matter. After
narrating a *hadīth* with this purport, he embarks on its exposition:
Imām as-Sādiq (*‘a*) narrates from the Book of Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) in which
he says:  
  Of all mankind the prophets undergo the severest of trials, and after
them the *awsiyā’* [executors of will], and after them the elect to the
extent of their nobility. Indeed, the believer undergoes trial in
proportion to his good deeds. So, one whose faith is sound and whose
deeds are good, his trials are also more severe. That is indeed because
God Almighty did not make this world a place for rewarding the believer
and punishing the unbeliever. And one, whose faith is feeble and whose
(good) deeds are few, faces fewer tribulations. Verily, tribulations
hasten toward the believer with greater speed than rainwater toward the
earth’s depths.[247]  * *  
    
 We should not forget that in Islamic belief, this world is the place
for trial. Trial takes place not only through difficulties and
tribulations but also through happiness and joys. In the Glorious Qur’an
the word, *bālā* [calamity and affliction] and its derivatives are used
in the sense of testing through happiness as well as testing through
suffering and tribulation.

Sometimes, in a bid to distinguish the two forms of *bālā*, terms such
as ‘good’ and ‘evil’ are used. For example, in this noble *āyah* we
read: “And We try you with evil and with good, for ordeal.”[248]
Likewise, the terms *hasanāt* [good things] and *sayyi’āt* [bad things]
are used. For instance, in this *āyah* it is stated: “And We have tried
them with good things and evil things that haply they might
return.”[249] Hence, the description of *bālā* in the language of the
Qur’an is far more general and broader than its prevalent meaning in the
Persian language.[250] As a result, some of the trials take place in the
form of evil and prepare to face real situations. In this sense, evil is
not only not bad, but also prepares the ground for the growth and
cognition of man. Thus, they have said:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اندر بلاى سخت پديد آيد                فضل و بزرگى و سالارى
  </p>
</blockquote>

*From severe affliction will come out*

*Virtue, greatness and merit*

   
 Such evils are broad in scope—extending from a simple fever to the
death of spouse or child. A simple ailment such as fever not only
activates the entire immune system of the body but also warns us to
prepare ourselves to face it, and to make ourselves prepared for the
eradication of the purulence from our body.

Hence, this evil is needed for our existence and survival. If we
carefully analyze all afflictions and tribulations, we will realize this
feature of them. Even the severest bodily pains also have this function,
and if one day the alarm system of the body is removed for whatever
reason, then calamity, tragedy and mishap will commence. In this context
Dr. Paul Brandt embarked on a detailed study and shed light on the vital
role of pain.

The outcome of the research has been published in the book entitled,
*Pain: The Gift that Nobody Accepts*. After studying patients afflicted
with leprosy, who gradually gave up their body members, he arrived at
the conclusion that the disease itself does not cause the death of the
body tissues. Rather, it is the effect of malfunctioning of the sense
[of touch] that the leper ceases to protect his senses and
[unconsciously] commits acts harmful to himself. According to Dr. Brandt
such patients “are lacking a system that gives alert to the damages done
to the tissue.”[251]

The consequence of the lack of system (sense) of pain is that sometimes,
such patients run and walk with their skins full of wounds—even open
ones—to the extent that the bones are also visible, thus causing
constantly increasing deterioration of the tissues … In some cases,
those afflicted with leprosy put their hands on fire, for example to
pick something there but do not feel any pain.[252]                
    
 Thus, apart from being not bad, pain is rather considered an agent
protecting our body and it is the same unpleasant sense that guarantees
our life, and in general, compels the human organism to react. This view
is also true for other ‘evils’. For example, suppose we fail in the
university entrance examination; in this case this ‘evil’ is, in fact, a
warning to us that shows us as not being intelligent enough and urges us
to strive more. It is the same analysis that explains why all the
prophets (*‘a*) have suffered.

One who wants to lead a nation or community [*ummah*] should have such
an extraordinary capacity, that no amount of difficulty could shake his
will. God makes His chosen prophets (*‘a*) suffer, He tests and trains
them, causes them to develop, and so prepares them to shoulder the
responsibilities of prophethood. As such, suffering cannot be a useless
and worthless affair. Instead, the blessings therein should be seen with
clear vision and it should be comprehended that in this world “each of
its pains and hardships carries within itself some goodness and
bounty.”[253]

Apart from this fundamental function of suffering and evil, there are
many other functions and utilities some of which have been pointed out
by Imām Khomeinī. One of the functions of suffering is that it makes man
attentive to, and concerned with, the hereafter and makes him understand
that this world is not his everlasting abode:  
    
 Thus, if a man faces adversities, pain and torments in this world and
is overtaken therein by waves of calamities and tribulations, he will
inevitably come to resent it. His attachment to it will diminish and he
will come to distrust it. If he believed in another world, a vast world
free of every kind of pain and grief, he will inevitably want to migrate
to it, and if he were unable to make the journey physically, he will
send his heart out to it.[254]  
    
 Hence, most of the tribulations and afflictions are a sign for the
believers and a notice about their unpleasant condition and also a
reminder of the goal that they should have. Apart from this, some of the
tribulations and afflictions make man remember the Fountainhead of the
universe and make him harmonious with the remembrance of the Sole
Creator:  
  And another point relating to the severity of the tribulations of the
elect among God’s servants is that they are made to remember God on
account of these adversities and tribulations and to pray and lament in
front of His Sacred Essence. This makes them accustomed to remember Him
and keep their thoughts busy with Him.[255]  
    
 Moreover, some of spiritual excellences and stations for man will be
attained only through patiently tasting and experiencing tribulations
and afflictions. Hence, the Imām indicates this point in this manner:  
    
 Another point related to the severity of the believer’s tribulations
that has been mentioned in traditions is that there are certain stations
for the believers which they cannot attain without undergoing suffering,
pain and affliction.[256]  
    
 Therefore, keeping in view the diverse functions and utilities of
tribulation and suffering, it can be deduced that the more the blessings
God bestows on His servant, the more is he afflicted with them and it is
this conclusion that the Imām describes in this way:  
  Whenever God Almighty has a greater consideration and love for
someone, and when someone is the object of the mercy of His Sacred
Essence to a greater extent, He restrains him from this world and its
charms with the waves of calamity and tribulation… And if there weren’t
any other reason except this one for endurance of severe calamities it
would have been sufficient.[257]  
    
 At this juncture, two points must be stated. One is the issue of
natural sufferings and the other, self-made ones.  
 Whatever has been stated about suffering and its station is related to
natural sufferings and tribulations, which man experiences naturally.
God Almighty views these tribulations as a kind of test, attributes them
to Himself and points to Himself as the cause. That is why He says, *“We
test them.”*

Nevertheless, some of the tribulations and sufferings exist as a result
of the unscrupulous actions of we human beings and arise from our moral
vices. If our social system is designed in such a way as to cause
rivalry, and if such rivalry entails suffering, one cannot consider the
social system to be constructive. If in the society wealth accumulation
and the desire for more is such that it deprives all of tranquillity, it
can no longer be considered an opportunity for rectification of the soul
and attachment of spiritual perfections. All of these are a result of
love of this world, which in turn, is the source of all sins. Most of
the sufferings and tribulations are a product of the wrong actions of
man and arise from vices such as jealousy, selfishness, and pride.

These tribulations can never be ascribed to God; basically attributing
them to God arises from man’s irresponsibility. In relation to such
tribulations, God Almighty disavows responsibility and holds them to be
the result of man’s action: *“Whatever of good befalleth thee (O man) it
is from Allah, and whatever of ill befalleth thee it is from
thyself.”*[258] In essence, God is the Absolute Source of goodness and
His Essence is all-blessing and all-good and from this Essence there is
nothing but goodness. Hence, every evil is the consequence of man’s
erroneous actions and selfishness. Therefore, God considers the
occurrence of corruption, tribulations and mischief as the product of
human beings’ conduct, and says: *“**Corruption doth appear on land and
sea because of (the evil) which men’s hands have done.**”*[259] So, the
most important point is that we should distinguish natural sufferings
from self-made ones.

The second point is that although suffering has a constructive role in
the life of human beings, one cannot ‘create’ suffering by using this as
an excuse, and use it for one’s growth. It is true that tribulation is
an element in man’s growth. Yet, the ground for the occurrence of
tribulation should not be prepared in advance. For instance, taking an
examination and failing in it can be the ground for our growth. But it
does not mean that we refrain from any form of preparation and only take
the examination.

The outcome of taking various examinations without preparing for them is
failure after failure. These failures cannot be considered as a prelude
to success; they also pave the ground for further failures. That is why
psychologists point to the destructive effects of such failures in this
manner: “If a person repetitively experiences failure, he will reach a
stage where he can no longer endure experiencing more failures and thus,
behavioural derangements appear in him.”[260]

The point is that in case some adversity occurs, we welcome it warmly
and consider it as an opportunity for our growth; not that we chase
after misery before it strikes us. As such, our various *hadīth*s have
discouraged us from hoping for tribulations and from laying the grounds
for it. We have been taught to always pray to God for health and
well-being, and to refrain from looking for trouble and tribulation. For
example, it has been narrated from Imām ar-Ridā[261] (*‘a*) that Prophet
Joseph [*Yūsuf*] (*‘a*) complained to God:  
  ‘Why did I deserve to be imprisoned?’ God revealed to him: ‘It is you
who chose it when you said: ‘O my Lord, the prison is dearer to me than
that unto which they invite me.’[262] Why did you not say, ‘Prosperity
is dearer to me than that unto which they invite me’?[263]           
    
 Therefore, the fundamental teaching of the Infallibles (*‘a*) in this
context is that we should be always seeking welfare and prosperity.
However, when we face tribulations, we should not be afraid, take it as
a good omen and utilize it as an opportunity for our perfection.   
  

The hereafter as the place for reward
-------------------------------------

   
 If the prophets (*‘a*) and saints [*awliyā’*] faced abundant
tribulations as was stated, the tribulations cannot be reckoned as
compensation for one’s sins in this world. As was indicated in the
aforecited *hadīth*, God has assigned the world neither as the reward of
the believer nor compensation for the disbeliever.

Hence, there is no connection between the sins of man and worldly
tribulations. It is narrated in the Book of Job that [his] sympathizers
persistently attempted to prove to Job (*‘a*) that his tribulations and
sufferings were the result of his past sins. But he would strongly
reject this notion, viewing no connection between the two, and deeming
himself sinless. “Job (*‘a*) knew that the world is more complex than
the simplified theory that [his] sympathizers portray.”[264]

This theory that misery is the consequence of man’s sins and punishment
for his deeds, though very prevalent, has numerous shortcomings and is
not compatible with the indisputable principles of religious belief.
Though it is often said, “If you vex the people, circumstances will also
vex you; circumstances makes no mistake in punishing the people,” this
sort of understanding elicits abundant unanswerable questions, which is
the subject of books on divine justice.

If we accept that the world is the testing place and that as long as man
is alive he has the chance to look back on his past deeds, and at any
moment, is able to turn away from the path he has taken, the issue of
this world as the place for retribution for sins can no longer be put
forward. Let us assume that a teacher wants to give an examination to
his pupils and he gives 90 minutes for them to write their answers. Now,
every student has the right to make use of the total 90 minutes.

It is even possible for one to give wrong answers to all the questions;
but in the last minutes, once he realizes his mistakes, he could change
them. If the teacher also found out that somebody has given wrong
answers to all the questions, so long as his test paper has not been
submitted, the teacher cannot deprive him of the chance of changing his
answers and give him a grade then and there. It is the definite right of
the students to make use of this chance in whatever way they like, and
interference on the part of the teacher is counted as a violation of
this right. Likewise, the world is exactly the place of examination of
man.

The lifespan of everyone is the period in which one should come out of
life’s examination with dignity and pride. Hence, throughout life
everyone has this opportunity and right to give his answers to the
questions of life. In the description of Imām Khomeinī, “This world, due
to its defective, feeble and weak nature, is neither the abode of the
reward of God Almighty nor the place of chastisement and
punishment.”[265]

It is such since this world is the world of duty and not of reward.
“This world is the abode of duty and the farm of the Hereafter. It is a
place of trade and earning whereas the Hereafter is the abode of reward
and punishment, of bounty and damnation.”[266]

In the language of the Master of the Pious [Imām ‘Alī] (*‘a*), “Today is
the day of preparation (training the horses) while tomorrow is the day
of race.”[267]

Divine justice necessitates that one can make use of all his
opportunities and it is only after that is his account examined. Hence,
neither can those that have met with misfortunes be regarded as sinful,
nor the prosperous as sinless. In essence, the cause and effect
relationship between these two is not in this world. In the same manner,
it is not so that anyone who commits a sin will immediately suffer for
it. Such an expectation is contrary to reality and repugnant to divine
justice. Thus, those who expect that God Almighty would immediately get
hold of one who commits some sin or indecency in this world or
perpetrates some injustice or aggression against someone, and cut his
hand off and expunge him from the realm of existence, are unaware that
their expectation is contrary to this world’s order and opposed to God’s
wont and *sunnah*.

Here is the place of trial and the zone of the separation of the
wretched from the felicitous and the sinful from the obedient. Here is
the realm of the manifestation of deeds, not the abode of the emergence
of the results of personal deeds and qualities.[268]  
    
 Therefore, tribulation in this world is not retribution for the deeds
of human beings, and no connection should be established between the
two. Nonetheless, at times Divine Grace warrants that by motivating the
sinner, he can be prevented from indulging in sins; and God does so.
However, this matter has no link to retribution for sins. Let us assume
that in the previous example, after the teacher found out that one of
the students had given wrong answers to most of the questions, she
passes snide remarks or looks at the student sternly, making him
immediately realize and correct all his mistakes. In this case, the
teacher has not punished him but actually done him a great favour.

Some of the punishments of God are like this and anyone subjected to
them should be grateful to God for being kind to him. So, “If
occasionally God Almighty troubles an oppressor, it may be said that it
is because of the Almighty’s mercy for that oppressor (for it stops him
from sinning further).”[269]  
 As such, from the viewpoint of Imām Khomeinī evil is a relative and
non-existing phenomenon, not a real and exact affair. In addition to
this, it is necessary for man’s perfection and an indication of God’s
grace to His servant, and there is no connection between sinfulness and
tribulation in this world. So, evil is also a disguised grace of God for
His servants and is among the necessary grounds for man’s spiritual
perfection. In his poetical lines Mawlānā likens the soul of believer to
an animal named *ushghur*, a kind of porcupine, which becomes stronger
and its resolve firmer with increasing tribulation and suffering:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هست حيوانى كه نامش اُشغُراست          او به زخم چوب زفت و لَمتُر است
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تا كه چوبش مىزنى، به مىشود            او ز زخم چوب، فربه مىشود
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نفس ﻣﺆمن اشغرى آمد يقين                  كو به زخم رنج زفت است و سمين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زين سبب بر انبيا رنج و شكست            از همه خلق جهان افزون تر است
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تا ز جانها جانشان شد زفت تر              كه نديدند آن بلا قوم دگر
  </p>
</blockquote>

*There is an animal whose name is* ushghur *(porcupine):*

*It is (made) stout and big by blows of the stick.*[270]

*The more you cudgel it, the more it thrives:*

*It grows fat on blows of the stick.*

*Assuredly the true believer’s soul is porcupine,*

*For it is (made) stout and fat by the blows of tribulation.*

*For this reason the tribulation and abasement (laid) upon the prophets*

*Is greater than (that laid upon) all the (other) creatures in the
world,*

*So that their souls became stouter than (all other) souls;*

*For no other class of people suffered that affliction.*[271]

Thereafter, he likens man to an untanned hide that the tanners treat and
make useful by the use of bitter and acrid agents. Then, he urges us to
accept such sufferings which are meant for our own perfection:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
پوست از دارو بلاكش مىشود              چون اديم طايفى خوش مىشود
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ورنه تلخ و تيز ماليدى در او                گنده گشتى، ناخوش و ناپاک بو
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آدمى را پوستِ نامدبوغ دان                 از رطوبتها شده زشت و گران
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تلخ و تيز و مالِشِ بسيار ده                  تا شود پاك و لطيف و با
فِرِه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ور نمى تانى، رضا دە اى عيار                 گر خدا رنجت دهد بىاختيار
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كه بلاى دوست تطهير شماست             علم او بالاى تدبير شماست
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The hide is afflicted by the medicine (tan-liquor),*

*(But) it becomes sweet like Tā’if leather;*

*And if he* *(the tanner) did not rub the bitter and acrid (liquor) into
it,*

*It would become fetid, unpleasant, and foul-smelling.*

*Know that Man is an untanned hide,*

*Made noisome and gross by humors.*

*Give (him)*[272] *bitter and acrid (discipline) and much rubbing
(tribulation),*

*That he may become pure and lovely and exceedingly strong;*

*But if you cannot (mortify yourself), be content, O cunning one,*

*If God give you tribulation without choice (on your part).*

*For affliction (sent) by the Friend is (the means of) your being
purified:*

*His knowledge is above your contrivance.* [273]

   
 Suffering as commensurate to one’s own understanding  
    
 The fact cannot be denied that the more our awareness of ourselves and
the things around us increases, the more we discern the gloomy aspects
of life. This matter pains us. In a research study on prosperity, which
a number of American and European universities had conducted, the
conclusion was reached that there is a direct relationship between
suffering and awareness, and if man’s awareness exceeds a specific
level, it can even prevent his happiness in life. Mawlānā describes this
truth in this fashion:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هر كه او بيدارتر، پردردتر                   هر كه او آگاهتر، رخ زردتر
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The more wakeful anyone is, the more full of suffering he is;*

*The more aware (of God) he is, the paler he is in countenance.*[274]

   
 But, this suffering does not belong to the daily suffering and that
which, at times, ensues from foolishness making man’s soul dejected and
sad. This suffering neither arises from moral vices nor selfishness and
pride. Some of the sufferings are files of the soul and obstruct man’s
soul from soaring to greater heights—like the pain of having no material
luxuries and means of comfort; like the pain experienced when our
neighbor or friend is financially well-off while we are not. Such
sufferings and the illusion arising there from trample on the soul of
man:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جان همه روز از لگدكوب خيال             وز زيان و سود و از خوف زوال
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نى صفا مى ماندش نى لطف و فر          نى به سوى آسمان راه سفر
  </p>
</blockquote>

*All day long, from* *the buffets of phantasy*

*And from (thoughts of) loss and gain and from fear of decline,*

*There remains to it (the soul)*

*Neither joy nor grace and glory nor way of journeying to Heaven.*[275]

   
 No, such pains have no relation to man’s intellect and discernment; in
fact, it is a sign of a lack of intelligence. However, there are
sufferings born of sagacity and an indication of man’s wisdom. If we
search through the whole of history we will realize this truth and see
that the sages and people’s leaders always used to suffer. Their
suffering was expressive of their extraordinary innate capacity.

They possessed such a greatness of soul that they held the suffering of
all as their own and were concerned not only with their own affairs. In
a speech, Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) refers to the attack of Mu‘āwiyah’s
army,[276] and says: “They used to attack the women of the *Ahl
adh-Dhimmah*[277] and confiscate their ornaments, and these women had
nothing to do but to plead for mercy.” Then he (*‘a*) reckoned this
tragedy to be so serious that if a person dies on hearing this news, it
is not only regarded by him (*‘a*) as natural but even praiseworthy. “If
any Muslim dies of grief after all this he is not to be blamed but
rather there is justification for him before me.”[278] Yes, such
suffering is an indication of man’s lofty soul. Thus, John Stuart
Mill,[279] a philosopher who was a proponent of the ethical school of
utilitarianism[280] and, at times, whose ideas were poorly interpreted,
unambiguously posits that human sufferings are superior to animal joys,
and says: “To be an unhappy human being is better than to be a cheerful
pig. It is better for me to be a despondent Socrates than a joyful
stupid.”[281]

Sometimes, the Most Noble Messenger (*s*) would also suffer because of
the condition of his *ummah* [community] and would strive for its
welfare so much so that he would be on the verge of danger. His noble
soul could not accept that those people live in ignorance and
corruption. Owing to this, he was acting beyond his duty. So, God
Almighty discouraged him from exerting excessive pressure on himself,
and said: ***“We have not revealed unto thee (Muhammad) this Qur’an that
thou shouldst be distressed.**”*[282]

Likewise, He dissuaded him from arduous effort for the salvation of
disbelievers, and said: *“**So let not thy soul expire in sighings for
them.**”*[283]

Then, God also thus describes His Most Noble Messenger (*s*) and while
addressing the people He says: ***“There hath come unto you a messenger,
(one) of yourselves, unto whom aught that ye are overburdened is
grievous.”***[284]

In spite of all these, he (*s*) had suffered so much that he said: “No
prophet was persecuted as I was.”[285] This suffering is rooted in man’s
altruism and endeavor for the deliverance of others, and it is only in
name that it has commonality with self-made and superficial sufferings.
Hence, it has been emphasized in the noble *hadīth* that whoever is
narrow-minded and of poor intellect, his hardship and suffering then
will also be less. It is due to the fact that such a person only suffers
with regard to water, bread and shelter and if these three are provided,
it will make no difference for him what the fate of others may be and
will view himself as an isolated and solitary island.

Therefore, suffering is a symbol of altruism and a profound sense of
humaneness, having direct relationship with the intellect and wisdom.
Imām Khomeinī analyzes this kind of suffering in this manner:  
    
 The persons of weak intellects and feeble sensibility are secure from
spiritual tribulations and intellectual suffering in proportion to their
intellectual weakness and the feebleness of their sensibility. On the
contrary, those with more complete intellects and acuter sensibility
have to undergo spiritual tribulations more intensely in proportion to
the perfectness and acuteness of their intellect and sensibility… for
whoever perceives the greatness and glory of the Lord to a greater
extent and knows the sacred station of God Almighty more than others, he
suffers more and is tormented to a greater extent by the sins of the
creatures and their offences against the Lord’s sanctity. Also, one who
has a greater love and compassion for the creatures of God is tormented
to a greater extent by their crooked and wretched condition and
ways.[286]  
    
 It should not remain unsaid that this type of suffering does not mean
grief and sorrow. Man is aware of the truths of the universe to such an
extent that he views God as Beautiful and His creations as
manifestations of beauty and splendor.

He regards this system as excellent and believes, “Every thing is good
in its own place.” As such, everything is joy, happiness and rejoicing.
On the other hand, since other human beings have not recognized their
reality, take no step in the matter, and search for the way from the
misled ones on the verge of ‘drowning’, they suffer and become
sorrow-stricken. Hence, on the one hand there is joy and happiness, and
grief and sorrow on the other. These two levels should not be
erroneously interchanged. Owing to this, it is stated in the *hadīth*s
that the believer always has a smile on his face, and hides his sorrow
beneath his bosom.[287]        

Therefore, what is meant by sagacious suffering is profound discernment
of the tragic condition of some people, and not personal despondence and
daily sorrows.[288]


