Introduction
============

Praise be to Allah. Lord of the worlds, and peace and blessings be upon
His Messenger Muhammad (s.a.w.), his pure progeny and the righteous
among his companions. The opponents of Islam have been continuously
trying. to make use of every means of perversion, distortion and
obscurity in order to mar the beliefs of Muslims, to smear their divine
teachings, to distort their history and to disrupt their unity. This has
been especially true since the era when infidel imperialism was
occupying the Islamic countries. In their pursuits, these opponents
infiltrated into a variety of fields, a wide array of falsification and
fabricated slanders, both through pens dipped in the Crusades' hatred,
and tongues speaking on behalf of modem day ignorance.

The aim of this cunning and wicked tactic was to prevent the Muslims
from knowing the facts of their own religion, and the falsities inherent
in their opponents' beliefs. It was, and is a part of a formidable and
far-reaching conspiracy aimed at keeping discord and struggle kindled
among the Muslims themselves.

Consequently, instead of mobilizing good efforts, utilizing the
constructive energies, and concentrating the fighting forces to purify
the Islamic countries from the filth of the disbelieving invaders, to
nullify the imperialists' exploitation of the Islamic wealth, and to
carry the call to the world, the Muslim strugglers had to direct their
energies to guide those who had gone astray among the children of the
ummah, those who had been drifted away by the materialistic and infidel
currents, and those who had been induced by the Western thought and
behavior, or by the mercenaries of the imperialists, to protect their
influential positions of domination and exploitation, so, the Muslims'
problems and calamities remained with each other.

Al-Balagh Foundation presents the Principal Signposts of the Islamic
Message, in the series of Islamic Concepts, for our dear readers, and
wishes to lift a green light to all those who had slipped into the abyss
of injustice and perversion, and to declare that Islam is the only way
which leads towards happiness and peace. ( 2 )

Al-Balagh Foundation further assures the front which opposes Allah,
Islam and humanity, that if there survived only a single Muslim on the
surface of the earth, he would continue fighting, for it was incumbent
upon Allah to make Islam victorious through him that it may prevail over
all religion, however much the idolaters may be averse.


**AL-Balagh Foundation**

**WHAT DOES ISLAM MEAN?**

The word "Islam bears, within its meaning, the following two
definitions

1. Linguistic Meaning: This is the general meaning in Arabic usage.
implying absolute submission, surrender and obedience that is obeying
the injunctions of the ruler without objection. Before Islam came as a
formal religion. The word was used to denote the above meaning, without
attaching to it any ideological or conventional context.

2. Idiomatic Meaning: The Holy Qur'an defines Islam as the Message of
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.). Although Islam was the theme of all preceding
divine messages, the word was chosen as a particular title denoting the
Almighty's final revelation to mankind. In fact the Qur'an transformed
the word "Islam from its linguistic meaning to the idiomatic meaning.
Still there remains the common implication in both usages - the
linguistic and the idiomatic - that is submission and obedience, since
Islam is the religion of voluntary submission to Allah's Will, the
obeying of His commands and surrendering to His Will without the least
objection.

Thus, the religion which Muhammad (s.a.w.) brought to humanity was
called Islam'. It has since been used as a proper title for the Message
preached by the Seal of Messengers and the word acquired has particular
religious, legislative and devotional implications. Formerly the word
did not enjoy these dimensions being void of any religious context,
except that denoting mere submission, obedience and surrender in a
hitherto obscure language, spoken by an insignificant desert people.

**WHO IS A MUSLIM?**

Whoever utters the two testimonies Shahadatain that is to say: Ashhadu
an Ia ilaha iI-Iallah wa ashhadu an-na Muhammadan Rasoolullah which
means "I bear witness that there is no god save Allah, and I bear
witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah is a Muslim (1).

Those who are born to Muslim parents are regarded Muslims by birth,
disregarding whether or not he/she is a faithful believer, is a
Muslim.

Starting from this general definition of the Muslim, we may divide the
belief of a Muslim with respect to one's connection with Islam, as
follows:

a- The Faith: This is the belief which is based on complete rational
and intutive understanding and conviction, embodied in adherence to, and
application of, the decisions and the teaching of the religion in daily
life. This degree of belief and adherence is called "faith , and the
Muslim who attains to this high degree of connection with Allah and of
adherence to His laws is called "faithful.

Thus, faith is a degree higher than mere "submission . because it is
true belief accompanied by complete adherence to, and application of,
all the decisions of Islam, including devotions, rites, laws, systems,
morals, concepts, commandments, teachings, etc. The Qur'an distinguishes
between these two different degrees of belief - that of being a Muslim
and that of being a called Momin the faithful. It denounces those who
pretend by proclamation to be Muslims, claiming to be of the
believers.

Allah, the Exalted, says:

"The Redouin Arabs said: We believe. Say (unto them, O Muhammad): You
believe not, but rather say: We submit', for the faith has not yet
entered your hearts. Yet, il'you obey Allah and His Messenger, He will
not withhold from you aught (of the reward) your deeds. Surely Allah is
All-forgiving All-merciful. The (true) believers are those who believe
in Allah and His messenger said afterward doubt not, and who strive with
their wealth and their selves for the cause of Allah. These are they the
truthful ones.

Holy Qur'an (49:14-15 )

Ultimately, one's Islam, will not be true, unless it reaches the stage
of faith and complete responsiveness to the Will of Allah, the stage
which has been pointed out by the verse describing Abraham's Islam
towards Allah, the Exalted:

"When his Lord said to him: submit'! he said: Ihave submitted to the
Lord of the worlds'. And Abraham enjoined on faith to his sons, and (so
did) Jacob, (saying): My children, Allah has chosen for you the faith;
so die not unless you are Muslims"

Holy Qur'an (2:131-132)

This is the true Islam as described by the Glorious Qur'an. It
represents the highest degree of faith and commitment, detailing the
believer's intellectual and psychological maturity, and describing the
response of his conduct and will. This is the Islam which brings about
for humanity the good of both this world and the hereafter, and
personifies the aims of the message of the Messenger, who said:

"...Ihave brought you the good of the world and the hereafter ".

b- The Ostensible: This is a weak and formal submission which has no
firm basis in the human soul. It does not have any effect on daily
conduct, is not integrated with practical life and does not govern man's
social relations and activities. It is a purely superficial attachment
to Islam, rebulous undertaking which has no roots.

This false pretense is dangerous to the society and to the Islamic
religion. It is a danger sign foretelling destruction and deviation,
because it is the first step on the road to a relapse into the abyss of
ignorance. Pretended submission does not make its adherent fit for, or
worthy of, being a true follower of faith. It does not enable him to
attain to the true degree of Islam, called for by the religion of the
Master of Messengers. Muhammad (s.a.w.). which formulates the real
nature of man and his goals in life, according to the laws of Allah and
the path of the right religion.

If man does not attain to this stage of Islam, there arises a gap
between his ideology and practical conduct, and subsequently a great
divide rises between him and Islam as a belief and religion, and as a
cultural way of life. Such a man remains far from being Muslim, except
in outward appearance. He is, however, regarded as subject to the
Islamic rules, and is treated as a Muslim.

In stuyding this group of Muslims, we must distinguish between two
sorts which, though they come under the general heading of "Muslim , yet
they cannot be described as "believers" .

These are:

1. The Hypocrite: is the one who outwardly manifests Islam, while
inwardly he is disbeliever. A hypocrite is professing Muslim on whom the
rules of Islam are applicable, and who is treated as a Muslim,
disregarding the belief which he cherishes in himself.

2. The Corrupt: This is the one who believes in Islam in his heart, but
he does not apply it to his life and does not observe its
obligations..

The difference between the two is vast. As regarding the hypocrite, the
difference is ideological, which, in fact, is equal to plain disbelief,
as the Qur'an says: "Have you not seen those who are hypocrites (who)
say to their brothers who disbelieve among the followers of the
Scripture: ifyou are driven out, we surely will go out with you, and we
will never obey anyone against you, and ii you are attacked we surely
will help you. And Allah beares witness that they verily are liars. "
Holy Qur'an (59:11)

As to the corrupt, the Qur'an does not treat him in this way, as the
difference, in this case, is that which concerns conduct. This
corruption does not stand on an equal footing with hypocrisy in its
quality and effect, if we take into consideration the inward and the
heartfelt conviction. C- The Scheme of the Study: Islam, in its
entirety, is a complete unity of thought, legislation and guidance. By
understanding it you gain a general intellectual clarity, and by
comprehending it you are encouraged to make real advances in the area of
human culture.

By contemplating this dynamic religious infrastructure we may discover
four basic facts which give Islam its form, and define the identity of
man and his society which this religion creates. These four facts are:

1. The Bask Principles on Whkh Islam is Founded.
2. The Content of the Message of Islam.
3. The General Characteristics of the Islamic Message.
4. The Objectives of Islam.

We shall try in this brief study, to deal with these four facts by way
of explanation and definition.


