The Contents of the Islamic Message
===================================

**PRELIMINARY:**

By studying the Islamic message and analyzing the intrinsic structure
of this religion, we come to realize that the questions which Islam
deals with - these issues cover all of man's needs - Can be divided into
three major categories: ideology, legislation and, social morals and
conduct.

**1. IDEOLOGY:**

It comprises the collection of the ideas and concepts which explain the
appearance of the world and the meaning of life. This ideology works as
the basis of a starting point for the construction of all the aspects of
this great religion. The Islamic belief centres on monotheism Tawheed,
that is. believing in the One and only Creator, to Whom are ascribed all
the attributes of Absolute Richness and Perfection. Guided by this
belief, a Muslim draws a plan for thought and action, and defines his
relation with the Creator to Whom are ascribed the traits of Absolute
Perfection, Knowledge and Power, and Who fashioned the universe out of
nought.


**The Islamic doctrine is based on three important factors:**

1. Belief in Allah, the Almighty Who is Just, and never does He leave a
people in darkness. Injustice is not one of His traits, and the meeting
out of reward and punishment is based on Justice.

2.Belief in Revelation, Prophethood and what is connected to them, such
as the message and the Imamah (divinely ordained leadership): follows
next.

3. The last but not least is the belief in life of the hereafter,
resurrection, judgement day, reward and punishment.

**2. LEGISLATION:**

The second subject which the Islamic message came to treat and organize
is law and order. i.e. to show man the correct path in all aspects of
life, both social and convictional. In the social field, Islamic
legislation manages the affairs of adjudication. economy, finance,
trade, ownership, inheritance, marriage, divorce, relations in the
workplace, civil service, war and peace, contractual agreements, etc.

As regards organizing the religion's devotional affairs. such as
praying, fasting, pilgrimage, purification. etc.. the Islamic
legislation defines the necessary rules and regulations required to show
the lines of man's relations with Allah the Exalted, and of the method
of worship. The books of jurisprudence and Islamic legal and legislative
wnttings are full of the most mature type of legislation and the widest
systematic way of organizing life, reflecting the spirit and the goals
of Islam, and explaining the dynamics and dimensions of Islamic
legislation in its dealings.

**3. SOCIAL MORALS AND CONDUCT:**

Humanity has never heard a message that attaches such great importance
to social morals, conduct and education as that of the Islamic code.
Islam regards morality as one of the most essential characteristics of
man. and the truest yardstick for distinguishing humanity from
bestiality. The Messenger of mankind says:

"I have been sent to complete the best of morals."

So. Lslam's message is an ethical one, and its keen interest in
building individuals morally is connected to its general educational
method for nurturing the righteous personalitv and building a virtuous
society.

Thus, Islam concentrates on building the personality from within, and
concentrates on developing moral inclinations. and strengthening
morality and consciousness in the individual, which ultimately benefits
society as a whole.

Through this vast, encompassing of all aspects of human life-ideology,
legislation, morals. manners, principles of social relations and
educational directives - Islam becomes a general way of life, and a
message comprehensive of all human activity, quite distinct from other
religions and social and political systems.


**The General Charactarisicts Of The Islamic Message**

**PRELIMINARY**

The Islamic religion enjoys certain subjective characteristics and
attributes that are inseparable from the nature of its legislation and
message; the effects and spirit of which are discernible in every law,
idea and concept. In order to cast more light on these general
characteristics and attributes, we should now study them with close
attention, so as to elucidate the brilliant concepts embodies in these
valuable characteristics:

**1. EVERLASTING:**

Islam's eternity is the continuation of its existence and the extension
of its message, as long as man continues his life on the surface of this
planet. "Say (0 Muhammad): What thing is great est in testimony? Say:
Allah is witness between me and you. And this Qur'an which has been
revealed to me to warn you therewith and whomever it may reach..." Holy
Quran (6:19)

Islam has to be everlasting, because it is the last of the religions
and completes the divine message, as an expression of Allah's kindness
and mercy to His creatures.

Throughout history and in every period mankind has not been able to do
without religion. It has always been in need of a religion to guide it,
and in need of a faith to save it from ignorance, the domination of
despots, and deviant ways of life.

Allah the Exalted willed that the religion, which was to accompany
mankind in its forward progress and to encompass the aspects of renewal
and growth in life, should be Islam, because it is the religion designed
to throw light on straightest path. and to guide humanity towards good
and righteousness. How wonderfully Imam Au (a.s.) describes this eternal
religion and the most practical system that had been revealed to the
final messenger, Muhammad (s.a.w.), saying: "...then He revealed to him
the Book, a light whose brilliance never goes out, a glow which never
fades away, an ocean that is never fathomed, a path that never goes
astray, and a ray whose light never becomes dark." (4)

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a.s.) illustrates this everlasting and ever
extending divine law in his saying:

"The Qur'an is not dead; it is alive. It goes on as do the day and the
night, and the sun and the moon. It will be with our last as it had been
with our first"(5). Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) further explicitly adds to the
horinzon of that idea, and fills dimensions with light, by saying: "The
Qur an is not dead, but alive, and the verse is not dead, but alive. Had
it been that if a verse revealed to a people died with the death of
those people, the Qur'an would have died too. But the verse flows on
with the survivors as it had flowed with the departed. "(6)

Through these firm, expressive words, the leaders of thought and the
Imams of the divine law, illustrate the continuity and eternality of the
Islamic religion. They made a distinction between the contents and the
goals of the religion on one hand, and the elements of time and place,
on the other hand, since the laws and the regulations of the religion
are regarded eternally applicable, free of any outside effects.

The Islamic religion deals with man abstractly and objectively, so that
it may be applicable in respect to all of mankind in every stage and
age, taking into consideration that man, owing to his particular
disposition, innate needs, inclinations and instincts, does not change
in his essential makeup, though time place and other outer circumstances
may vary. Actually changes and developments occur only in the means,
methods and interests which man develops to meet his psychological and
physical needs,

and through which he may express his ideas and feelings. Through
progress in the ways and means of living or what is termed social
development, the goods and services which meet man's natural
requirements, such as the means of transportation, medical treatment,
housing, education, food. etc., all increase. If we study deeply this
phenomenon and discover the basic elements which impart to Islam the
quality of being everlasting and continual, we would uncover the
following:

a. Scope and universality: One of the factors which maintains Islam
amidst mankind, is its scope and universality. Islam is a universal and
capacious religion. It handles affairs as diverse and far ranging as
belief, worship, ethics and a complete set of laws organizing family
affairs, the state. wealth, economy, war and peace, land and relations
in the workplace. It also covers man's various individual activities,
including hygiene. nourishment. comfort. creativeness, preservation of
bodily and psychological health, etc.

The Our' an says:

"...and We have sent down the Book (the Qur'an) which makes clear
everything and a guidance and a mercy and glad tidings to Muslims (those
who submit to Allah)." Holy Our'an (16:89)

"Surely We have sent down to you the Book with the truth to judge
between mankind by what Allah has shown you..." Holy Our'an (4:105)

Thus the Qur'an, with its broad concepts, comprehensive foundation, and
the universality of its verses, is a complete constitution for life, a
way of governing and of politics, and a call to guidance and salvation.
The Prophet's tradition undertakes to explain its meanings, disclose its
contents, defines it where applicable, outlines its details and analyzes
its general terms. This legislative unity between the Book and the
tradition has produced a general systematic comprehension, and a vast
intellectual capacity. This objective fact about the Islamic religion
inspired the following legislative rule; "There is not a single
occurence without there being a divine decision about it.

Further confirmation of this fact is seen in the Qur'anic verses and
narrations of Ahl al-Bait (The Prophet's progeny). Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir (a.s.) says: "Allah, the Exalted, left out nothing that the
ummah may need without revealing it in this Scripture, and without
explaining it to His Messenger (s.a. w.). For everything He ordained a
limit and a sign pointing to it, and ordained apenalty on whosoever
transgresses the limit."(7) Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a.s.) says:

"Allah the Exalted revealed in the Qur'an the explanation of
everything. By Allah, He left out nothing needed by His servants, so
that no servant can ever say: I wish this was revealed in the Qur'an! As
Allah had revealed this, too, in it."(8) He (a.s.) adds: "There is
nothing that is not in the Book (Qur'an) or not in the tradition."

The Imam (a.s.) also says:

"There is not an affair about which two persons may dispute, without
its having a root in the Book of Allah the Exalted, (the problem is
that) only men's minds do not attain to it."(9)

All these texts confirm the enormous scope of Islam and the vast extent
of its legal, organizational, intellectual and convictional horizons,
enabling a Muslim to know that Islam has a legal viewpoint and an
attitude towards every situation, event and topic that may occur or
appear in man's life, throughout time and space. The development of the
human in life, the appearance of new financial, political, economic and
social institutions, such as banksicompanies, different financial and
commercial establishments; as well as clubs and societies,
organizational and management concers; and the development of the
relations of work and production; the development of the various means
of life; all find their legal basis and legislative roots which Islam
comprehends and for which it coins relevant laws according to its
accepted way.

This intellectual and legislative capacity is the reason of the
everlastingness of Islam and of the continuation of its existence. This
characteristic is the major factor and basic cause for Islam's ability
to meet every new development that may take place in man's world.

b. Flexibility: If we give a close look to man's life for the purpose
of defining his needs for sustenance and advancement, to development and
perfection, we realize that these can be divided into two categories.
Firstly, a constant and unchanging one, related to the fixed needs of
man. These are the natural and instinctive needs for nourishment, do
thing, marriage, medical treatment, learning, security, etc. All these
human needs are invariables and are innate in man, connected to his
disposition and inborn instincts. These drives do not change, and the
need for them remains constant, disregarding the changing circumstances
and ways and means of life.

Secondly, the means and methods which enable man to respond to these
fixed needs and to try and satisfy them. These instruments continually
change and develop. That is, the means of producing food, clothing,
transportation. housing, medical treatment; the means of acquiring
knowledge, the means of defence and security and the means of managing
and organizing political, social and economic activities. All of these
continually develop, and become continuously more complicated as life is
growing and being enriched through science, increased experience and
human discoveries.

Islam organizes the fixed aspects of life through broadly defined rules
and regulations as these particulars are not subject to change. It
leaves the changing aspects of life to move according to general rules
and concepts which embody Islam's flexibility, a dimension frequently
misunderstood. It should be made clear that the flexibility afforded in
Islam does not mean changing its spirit, or changing its principles and
concepts. This dynamism is meant to reflect that Islam is well equipped
to accomodate different methods of implementation, within the general
framework of faith. In a nutshell. Islamic flexibility translates as a
constancy of contents, with the possibility of changing external forms
in every case for which Islam has defined no specific quality or
model.

C. Ijtihad (Reasoning): The third basic factor that eternalizes Islam
and gives it its ability to absorb the constantly changing circumstances
in man's life, is Islam's acceptance of ijtihad, or reasoning by a
qualified Jurist and the procreative and extendable nature of its rules
and concepts. Ijtihad is a scholarly endeavor practiced by the learned
jurisprudents, the specialists of Islamic legislation, with the purpose
of deriving laws, making decisions and defining concepts from the
original Islamic sources. However, an important point of note is,

ijti~hadis not conjecture as some have misunderstood. The Glorious
Qur'an and the noble traditions of the Prophet (s.a.w.) are the basic
sources for the process of ijtihad, which is exclusively practiced by
experts specialized in delineating the Islamic legislation.
comprehending its concepts, digesting its contents, and understanding
its goals and purposes. Historically there have always been
jurisprudents qualified to contrive decisions. rules and concepts needed
by the society, the individual, and the state, in respect to the diverse
affairs of life. These legal specialists depend on the basic source
(10). to uncover the massive intellectual and legislative content from
the texts and the light of the concepts of the Qur'an and the
traditions.

Thus, ijtihad is a scientific effort that depends on certain
legislative sources, and follows a specified inductive method. Ijti had,
without these sources and void of this scientific method, would be a
futile and harmful deviation. injuring the spirit and the goals of
religion. Clearly not all sources or methods are capable of arriving at
sound religious decisions or of fulfilling the goals of religion and its
legislative aims.

This is why ijtihad is an effective means of maintaining the
originality, capaciousness and eternity of the Islamic religion.
Ijtihad, for this reason, allows basic Islamic sources, the Qur'an and
the tradition~ to remain flowing like a swift river that feeds the
brooks, streams and canals and continues in its path even watering far
away areas.

If we consider the river in this parable to represent the Scripture and
the tradition, and the far away areas to be the unexpected new topics
and issues which appear in man's life, and the network of canals and
streamlets brunched from it as the derived decisions and rules, then the
jurisprudent or the Mujtahid, represents the clever engineer who designs
the intricate network of canals to water those far away areas.

To stop ijtihad from functioning is like blocking the flow of a mighty
river and preventing the construction of the canals which are the keys
to fertility, thus, causing potentially good soil to remain a wasteland
as a result of depriving the sub-waterways of the flow of the
life-giving river. Since Islam represents life's fertility and
humanity's path of growth, no one has the right to stop the course of
this great current which was meant to penetrate the limits of time and
place and enrich all areas of life:

"0 you who believe! respond to Allah and the Messenger, when he calls
to that which will give you life, and know that Allah intervens between
a man and his heart, and that to Him you will be gathered." Holy Qur'an
(8:24)

Muslims are ordered to refer to the experts and to seek their advice
whenever a new situation arises, and not to rely on their personal, or
others' conjecture, which may spell same disaster in this world and the
hereafter.

Allah, the Most High, says:

"When there comes to them a news of security or fear, they immediately
spread abroad; but if they had referred it to the Messenger and to those
responsible among you, those of them who investigate it, would have
known it. And were it not for Allah's bounty upon you and His mercy, you
would surely have followed Satan, save a few (of you)." Holy Qur'an
(4:83)

In this Qur'anic text there is a plain command to refer to the trusted
notables, after the Prophet (s.a.w.) who know the rules and
circumstances and thus are able to derive from them practical decisions
for whatever happens in the world. Here we must make clear that ijtihad
does not mean to changing the edicts of Islam and its fixed principles,
or to falsify them, as these principles and texts are fixed and
unchanging. The process of ijtihadis designed to understand and
interpret the texts.

It is a scientific method employed by the jurisprudent the faqeeh to
comprehend the texts and to induce their meaning for the purpose of
forming general rules and derive the needed laws and decisions
therefrom. If the mujtahid the faqeeh does not understand correctly and
errs in his induction, the Qur'anic principle, or the Prophet's
tradition, would remain intact and preserve its spirit and originality,
without being damaged by the mujtahid's mistake. Thus, there appears the
rule that no ijtihad (induction) is permissible where there is a
definite text. That is, no mu]tahid has the right to coin a law, twist a
rule or issue a decree concerning an event, if there is already a
relevant decision covering that event in the Qur'an or in the
tradition.

**2. EASE AND FACILITY:**

Islam is a divine revelation, in whose entire structure and goals
reflects the perfect attributes of Allah the Exalted, Law-Maker, Who is
Just, Kind, Merciful and Wise. These sacred attributes are clearly
discernible in all the Islamic laws, obligations and recommended codes
of behaviour.

They are also manifest in the ease and tolerance of Islamic teachings,
which recognize man's abilities and personal capabilities. They are seen
in every law and every obligation prescribed by Islam for the humankind
in order to define relations between the Creator and the created, as
well as among fellow-humans themselves. Divine wisdom willed that the
laws should be based on a real and practical principle of correlation
between the specified obligation and man's ability to respond to it and
enact it. Thus, obligations and responsibilities all come within man's
power and ability to carry them out. This fact is necessitated by divine
justice. and to apply justice, man is not burdened with what he
cannotfulfill, nor must he exceed the lowest limit of his endurance.

Had man been ordered to do what was beyond his ability and power, and
had he been asked to submit and respond to laws which could not be
carried out, nor tolerated, the Lawmaker would have been unjust and
trifling, and deemed unwise at adjusting the relation between man's
natural disposition and laws. Consequently, the purpose of having a law
would have been lost. But in Islam the Law-maker is Allah. the Just and
the Wise. and certainly injustice is not His attribute and neither does
He trifle. It was He Who created man and universe from nought, and it
was He Who placed everything on the footing of wisdom and exactitude in
perfect harmony with human disposition and the laws of nature. That is
why Islam is also called the Natural Religion,.

"A llah bears witness that there is no god but Him. And (so do) the
angels and the possessors of knowledge - upholding justices. There is no
god but Him, the All-mighty, the All-wise." Holy Our'an (3:18)

The Glorious Qur'an refers to this wonderful attribute of ease and
facility in Islam, and discloses the unique Wisdom of the Almighty:

"Allah wants to lighten your burden for man was created weak." Holy
Qur'an (4:28)

"...Allah desires not to make any uneasiness on you; but He desires to
purify you and to complete His blessings upon you, that you may be
thankful." Holy Qur'an (5:6)

"Allah does not charge a soul but according to its ability for it
(soul) what it has earned, and against it what it wrought." Holy Qur'an
(2:286)

"...Allah does not impose on any soul that which he cannot afford.
Allah will bring ease, after hardship." Holy Our'an (65:7)

If we turn to the traditions, we will find them a perfect reflection
close shadow of the great spirit of the Qur'an, calling to what the holy
Book calls to. The Prophet (s.a.w.) says:

"I have brought to you the facile and easy religion . He (s.a.w.) also
said:

"My people are exempted (from punishment) in nine cases: when mistaken,
forgetting, compelled, unknowing, unable, forced to, envious, when
jealous, and when whispering evil about people (before leaving the lips,
nor uttered by a tongue."(11)

Imam Au (a.s.) also referred to this by saying:

"Praised be Allah Who revealed divine laws through Islam. For its
follower He made its codes easy..." Talking about the hajj (pilgrimage)
as an obligatory act, in circumstances of easy accomplishment. Imam Ali
ibn Musa al-Ridha (a.s.) says:

" People are ordered to perform it only once, no more, because Allah
imposed the obligations in accordance with the weakest ability,' he
added, together with whatever accessible sheep of sacriflce', which is
available to both the rich and the poor. Similar are the other religious
duties; they are imposed according to the abilities of the weakest of
the people, like the hajj (pilgrimage) which is imposed just once, while
those who are capable, are urged to repeat it if possible . (13) .

Through these principles, Islam has strengthened the rule of ease and
facility, extending it to all religious obligations and duties. This
serves to emphasize that all Islamic legislations are practical. Allah
is the Law-Maker. He knows man's real scope and the limits of his
ability. Allah the Exalted wants man to be obedient in accordance with
the principles and rules which he is to follow. Therefore, He made all
the duties and obligations within the limits of man's scope and
endurance.

For example, Islam exempts the sick, the weak and the traveller from
fasting, lightens these situations by accepting fasts at some other
time, or by feeding the needy, or by asking Allah's forgiveness. A sick
person compensates for lapsed fasts by fasting after recovering from
sickness and becoming able to fast, otherwise must pay a specified
expiation. In case if he/she is too poor to pay that, then should pray
for Allah's forgiveness. Whoever is unable to go to hajj, or to fight in
the way of Allah, jibad, is completely be exempted from that duty.
Whoever is in debt and cannot settle it, is entitled to receive from the
public treasury as much as he owes. Whoever is disobedient, the doors of
repentance and forgiveness are open to him, and so on. All these
injunctions are to assist in adhering to his obligations and practically
apply them.

**3. HUMANITY:**

The prime goal of Islam is the deliverance and salvation of humanity.
Its only aim is to save humanity from tyranny, evil, incorrect beliefs,
corrupt creeds, and debased morals and values, sO that justice, harmony,
while peace and security prevail all over the world.

In this way humanity would enjoy divine blessings, free from all
concepts and theories of ignorance. Such ignorance dissects unity and
rends asunder human brotherhood with the claws of racism and
class-discrimination, or with the talons of sectarianism, power, wealth,
etc. Therefore, the Qur'an speech is addressed to humanity as a whole so
as to deliver them all and guide them to their best interests without
making any distinction between the rich and the poor, the strong and the
weak, the high and the low, the fair-skinned and the coloured.

"0 mankind! We have created you male and female, and have made you
nations and tribes that you may know one another. The most honourable
among you, in the sight of Allah, is the most pious of you in conduct.
Allah is All-knowing, All-aware." Holy Qur'an (49:13)

The Almighty describes Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) by stressing: "We sent
you not save as a mercy for the peoples." Holy Qur'an (21:107)

"And We have not sent you (0 Muhammad) save as a bearer of glad tidings
and a warner to all mankind; but most of people know not." Holy Qur'an
(34:28)

This human attribute is embodied in two major principles of Islam. On
one hand it promotes love and kindness among the children of Adam,
dismantling the barriers of the days of ignorance, which divided mankind
into race, region, class, and other distasteful forms of discrimination
and classification. On the other hand, Islam is a universal message
noted for its magnanimity and for its noble and humane tendency,
exempting none from its bounties, and treating none with injustice.

Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) was the highest ideal personifying these
lofty values and ideals. History is a witness to the splendid examples
of the saviour of humanity, the advocate of peace, Muhammad, displaying
the spirit of his message and testifying to the truth of his call. When
he was gravely wounded in the battle of Uhud, one of his companions
asked, "What, if you cursed them? He coolly replied, with his inimitable
kindness, "I have been sent not to curse, but to be a mercy: 0 my Allah!
Convert my people, as they do not know."

**4. PRACTICALITY:**

Islam is a religion of endeavor and a way of life, which helps the
human being towards the shores of salvation.

Such being the status and goals of the message, it cannot but be a
practical one, far from illusion, rigidity and irrationality. Thus, in
each and every law, idea and concept it takes into consideration man's
personal scope, his social requirements and his natural disposition.
This is unlike the laws coined by man and planned by his short-sighted,
superficial, and in perfect power of thinking - laws which he determined
without thinking of the possibility of their applicability and without
taking into consideration their responsiveness to nature and to the
spiritual, intellectual and physical realities which interact and impact
upon legislation and theory.

Perhaps the most obvious example of the positive theories and schools
of thought lacking practicality is the Marxist theory. Marx derived his
theory of communism under the pressure of a personal reaction against
the social circumstances surrounding his age and himself. He was a
correspondent for a London newspaper. He was denied his due wage
increase. This incident kindled in him the fire of hatred against the
prevalent economic and social conditions, and he began imagining a new
form of society based on abolishing individual possessions and religion,
and proclaiming common possession of the means of production and the
equal distribution of goods.

His vision called for a common nihilistic society, similar to the
primitive one which he imagined in his analysis and explanation of
history. But those who came after him and tried to apply his theory,
like Lenin and Stalin, had to enact a substitute which they termed
"socialism . Millions of peoples have been sacrificed at the altar of
this failing communist experience, by the Leninist and Stalinist
dictatorship throughout Russia and her satellites.

This system continued to be changed, amended and reformed, and a
gradual withdrawal from these imaginary structures began, since this
theory was far from being practically applicable, as it did not take
human nature into consideration.

Communism is not the only theory lacking practicality; capitalism is
also void of it in its general viewpoint, and even its general
proliferation does not guarantee its applicability.

For example, capitalist democracy advocates political and economic
freedom through its literature, ideas and theories and hails such
freedom as everybody's right. Yet, it does not offer any practical
guarantee to the individual enabling him to practice them. In reality
this freedom has become a door open only to a certain elite, and is
exclusively for the interest of the influential classes which control
wealth and political power, enabling them to dominate and exploit.

In this way, the idea of freedom in the capitalist world has become a
form of enslavement, and political and economic exploitation of the
deprived. It has degenerated into an excuse to colonize people and suck
their blood.

Islam, on the other hand, is realistic in its steps, and practical in
its course. This practicality is best shown in the biography of the
Almighty's final Messenger amidst his struggle to build the Islamic
society on the basis of the eternal principles and laws embodied in the
Holy Qur'an. Uthman ibn Madh'oon, ibn Mas'ood and others are quoted to
have said, "The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) used to teach ten (of
verses), and he would not move to other ones until we had learnt how
topractice them. In this way he taught the Qur'an together with how to
put it into practice."(I4)

If we reflect on the Islamic message and try to penetrate its depths,
we will find that the causes of Islam's practicality can be ascribed to
the following: a. Islam's consideration of man's innate disposition and
its methodology of responding to his natural instincts and inclinations,
balancing the obligations, responsibilities and diverse laws with man's
range of abilities and scope of activities.

b. Islam's recognition of the principle of repentance and keeping the
door of divine forgiveness open to all the rebels and the violaters of
the justice of the law: This enables man to be responsive and return to
the best norms of human behaviour, taking into consideration
psychological resolve and will. Everybody may commit some mistakes or
sins, except those whom Allah has immunized. Man may strive to follow a
straight path in his life, but he will not always be able to traverse
it. Hence, the principle of repentance as a legislative means enabling
man to set his attitudes aright, to correct the line of his progress,
and to ease his conscience from the pricks of sin and the feelings of
remorse which the sinners and the disobedient are afflicted with.

c. The principle of facility and ease.

d. Imposing legal penalties: This principle expresses Islam's realistic
evaluation of the nature of human motives and behaviour, as a vehicle
guaranteeing the application of divine law and protecting the order of
life. Allah, the Wise Legislator Who wants man to respond to the words
of truth and good, and to be guided by the divine law, is the One Who
knows the reality of man and his inclinations:

"Does He not know Who created?AndHeisSubtle, All-aware." Holy Qur'an
(67:14)

He does know that man will certainly commit sins and will disobey, and
so, He has opened to him the door of forgiveness for mistakes and
offences committed. The first step on the road of guidance, is man's
returning back to Allah, and his treading the path of light and
righteousness. Allah also knows that many people will not listen to the
word of truth, nor would they harmonize themselves with the laws of good
and justice. It happens that certain men do not think of retreating from
sin or changing their evil course in life. Thus, He has ordained
penalties to treat such deviants ones, who endanger the order of life
and try to destroy the pillars of good and peace, and spread corruption
in the earth. The repentance of such people is not accepted, because of
the nature of the crimes they have committed. They must be punished:

"And there is life for you in (the law of) retaliation, o men of
understanding, that you will be godfearing. Holy Qur'an (2:179)

"Certainly We sent Our apostles with dear arguments, and sent down with
them the Book and the balance that people may conduct themselves with
equity; and We cent iron, inwhkh there is strong power and benefit for
people so that Allah would know who helps Him and His apostles in
secret; Surely Allah is Strong, Mighty." Holy Qur'an (57:25)

One honourable tradition notes:

"Verily Allah may amend by force what He does not do by the Qur'an."

e. Gradualness and ljtihad: One of the systematic factors of its
legislation which gives Islam its attribute of being practical is its
method of gradually imposing the divine laws at the outset of its
mission. The law had been communicated to the people by stages over a
period of twenty three years. It not imposed on the people all at once,
nor were they burdened with its entirety on the very first day. This
gradualness is an expression of Islam's practicality, taking, as it
does, into consideration the intrinsic nature of man, and the social
environment which it wants to change. Ijtihad expresses the same thing.
It is an admission of the advancement of human life and the development
of its requirements. Ijtihad allows continual expansion of the Islamic
decision making process.

( 31)

which runs parallel with the growth and extension of the variety of
affairs and questions of life concerning individual and social conduct.
and related to politics, finance, jurisdiction. economy, organization,
administration, etc.

**5. RESPECTING THE INTELLECT:**

The Islamic religion is known for its being a religion of intellect and
sound reasoning. It is a message addressed to an inquisitive mind, and
it coincides with the mind's logic based on clear evidence and proof.
Thus, the Our'an conducts an open and continual argument with the
intellect. It ceaselessly calls upon man to think about himself and to
contemplate his world and the message addressed to him, as this builds
man's relation with his Creator and his world, on the basis of an
intellectual understanding and scientific method, devoid of falsehood,
deceit, and misguidance.

Allah, the Almighty, says:

"As for these similitudes, Wecoin them for mankind, but none will grasp
their meanings save the Wise ." Holy Our'an (29:43)

"And thereby He brings forth for you crops and olives and palms and
vines and all the fruit. Surely in that is a sign for people who
reflect. And He has made the night and the day and the sun and the moon
subservient to you; and the stars are subservient by His command. Surely
in that are signs for a people who understand." Holy Our'an (16:11-12)

"Surely the worst of animals in Allah's sight are the deaf, the dumb,
who do not understand." Holy Our'an (8:22)

Starting with this orderly basis of Islamic thought. the Qur'an rejects
wavering attachment to Islamic beliefs that wander through the
labyrinths of ignorance, doubt and instability, It confines faith to the
stage of firm belief and adherence: Allah, the Exalted, says:

"The (true) believers are those who believe in Allah and His messenger
and afterward doubt not, and who strive with their wealth and their
selves for the cause of Allah. These are they who are the truthful
ones." Holy Qur'an (49:15)

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a.s.), explaining the value and importance of the
mind in Islam and life, said, "On creating the mind, Allah made it talk
and said to it: Come! It came. Then He said to it: Go! it went. So, He
said: By My Might and Magnificence, I created no creature more amicable
to Me than you, and I will not bring you to perfection except in those
whom I love. Verily it is you to whom I issue My commands and My
prohibitions; and it is you whom I punish and reward!" (15)

On this understanding and evaluation of the mind is based the
fundamental rule declaring: "Whatever is acceptable to the mind is
acceptable to Islam ". (16)

**6. HARMONY AND NON-CONTRADICTION:**

The Islamic rules, concepts, systems, laws and beliefs are
distinguished by their following a unified and cogent argument.. Some
aspects of Islam have become the means and the force for implementing
others, or as preliminary ones assisting the others in being enacted,
without contradiction or conflict among them Believing in Allah and
adhering to good conduct are vital in the application of the Islamic
laws of politics, jurisdiction and economy. Observing the devotional
commitments, and performing the divine duties, are necessary for
self-purification, righteousness of conduct and keeping healthy.

Thus, all the concepts, values, rules, rites, etc. support one another,
within the framework of believing in Allah. forming a religious and
intellectual unity, supporting one another towards implementation, each
aspect smoothing the way for the other to carry out its task.

Let us take zakat (religious tax) as an example. Zakat is an economic,
devotional and moral principle. Its goal is to protect the balance of
the means of living, to efface class discrimination within the Islamic
society, and to purify the self from selfish and covetous drives. In
order to guarantee the success of this prescription in attaining its
goals, many ideas, concepts and other rules should work together.
Believing in Allah. in the hereafter, in moral education and in the
authority of the divine law, are all forces that play an effective role
in successfully enacting this rule.

A Muslim's faith in the hereafter's reward, his fear of divine
punishment, his growing moral motivation, such as generosity and
self-denial, are all nurtured in the conscience of the individual and
the society by Islam.

The presence of the element of abiding by the law and the state's right
to use force against the disobedient i.e. the greedy and these enslaved
by wealth, to pay their due zakat for the purpose of fulfilling this
rule's economic and moral ohtectives. are all factors which exert their
influence in strengthening the possibility of enactment. These elements
also help coordinate the practical results of the rules and concepts
aimed at fulfilling economic equity, reviving the society with material
resources and non-material noble humane values, and raising the Muslim's
spiritual and devotional level.

**7. NURTURING INTENTIONS AND OBJECTIVES:**

Islam attached great importance to intentions and objectives. It
regards them to be the spirit of the deed and the basis of its value,
because a doer, in the eyes of Islam, expresses his intention and
objective through his deed. whether good or bad. Therefore, Islam takes
care to enlighten the intention, and to correct man's direction and goal
in life, as a part of its educational method which is keen on amending
man's inner self, and building the inner feelings on the bases of
morality and good behaviour.

Since man's intention plays an effective role in the formation of his
personality and has an important impact on society, Islam has based both
the rewards and the consequences on intentions and the objectives,
according to which Allah's reward and punishment are deserved. Muhammad
(s.a.w.) has said,

"Verily deeds are as their intentions are, and everybody gets according
to his intention. So, whoever advances to Allah and His Messenger, his
advance will be to Allah and His Messenger; and whoever advances to
worldly possession, or to marry a woman, his advance will be to what he
has in his intention ."(17) The Prophet's grandson, the Imam Au bin
al-Hussain (a.s.), said,

"There is no deed without an intention ." Islam. however, distinguishes
between two kinds of deeds:

a. Deeds whose correctness depends on their intentions (the intention
of reaching the proximity of Allah the Exalted). These are devotional
and charitable deeds. b. Deeds whose correctness does not depend on
intending them to he for gaining Allah's proximity. such as commercial
transactions, trading, legal commitments, marriage, and the likes of
such social relations.

But this classification does not deprive the intention from its central
role, if we are to take into consideration the moral and spiritual
aspects connected to the legal aspect of these deeds.

For example: Whoever engages in commerce and is lenient in his
transactions according to the Islamic laws and regulations, intending,
by this, to be obedient to Allah's commands, has given his deed the
attribute of being "a devotional deed . He thus converts a business deal
into a moral and spiritual endeavor that deserves Allah's reward. The
effect of the intention upon the deed and the changing of its value is a
natural result of Islam's being more attentive to the realities of the
self, which does the deed, than of the deed itself. It is the doer who
is, in Islam, the principal factor, while the deed is but an effect and
a phenomenon denoting the movement of the doer.

Therefore, Islam attaches great importance and care to the cultivation
of good intentions and directs man toward them, so as to tie him to
Allah the Exalted and to serve Him alone.


