Supplement 3
============

Since the man was showing discouragement, the Adversary (Satan) decided
to enter the picture by placing thoughts into the weary mind: "you have
been pushing against that rock for a long time, and it hasn't moved."
Thus, giving the man the impression that the task was impossible and
that he was a failure.

These thoughts discouraged and disheartened the man. Satan said, "Why
kill yourself over this?" "Just put in your time, giving just the
minimum effort; and that will be good enough."

That's what he planned to do, but decided to make it a matter of prayer
and take his troubled thoughts to the God. "O' God," he said, "I have
labored long and hard in your service, putting all my strength to do
that which you have asked. Yet, after all this time, I have not even
budged that rock by half a millimeter. What is wrong? Why am I
failing?"

God responded compassionately, "My Servant, when I asked you to serve
Me and you accepted, I told you that your task was to push against the
rock with all of your strength, which you have done. Never did I mention
to you that I expected you to move it.

Your task was to push. And now you come to Me with your strength spent,
thinking that you have failed. But, is that really so? Look at yourself.
Your arms are strong and muscled, your back sinewy and brown, your hands
are callused from constant pressure, your legs have become massive and
hard.

Through opposition you have grown much, and your abilities now surpass
that which you used to have. Yet you haven't moved the rock. But your
calling was to be obedient and to push and to exercise your faith and
trust in My wisdom. This you have done. Now I, my servant, will move the
rock."

At times, when we hear a word from God, we tend to use our own
intellect to decipher what He wants, when actually what God wants is
just a simple obedience and faith in Him. By all means, exercise the
faith that moves mountains, but know that it is still God who moves
mountains.

When everything seems to go wrong ... just P.U.S.H!

When the job gets you down ... just P.U.S.H!

When people don't react the way you think they should ... just P.U.S.H!
When your money is "gone" and the bills are due ... just P.U.S.H!

When people just don't understand you ... just P.U.S.H!

P + U + S + H = Pray + Until + Something + Happens


**The Ultimate Truth of life!**

One more fictional story, only for the purpose of explanation and easy
understanding. A man who is constantly in trouble, prays to God one day
and due to his persistent and dedicated prayer, God appears in front of
him and pleasingly tells him "my dear servant, do tell me what your
doubts are about?"

The man happily starts to narrate this "Oh my merciful God, I have a
vision, in which I could see my past life and I have doubts on it which
I wanted you to clear." Smilingly God tells him to carry on.

The man says thus "God, I saw that in my past, whenever I was happy and
good things happened in my life, I could see two pairs of foot steps on
the path of life. One of them is mine; I could not understand the other
pair of footstep which was following me. Who does these belong to?"

God smiles and says "Dear, whenever you were having good time and
happy, I would silently walk behind you allowing you to enjoy the fruits
of your good deeds."

The man then asks "Ok, God, I saw that whenever am in troubles or sad
times I saw two pairs of footsteps again! And this time, the second pair
was beside me all along the path." Calmly, God says "Dear, whenever you
were in bad situations of life, I would walk beside you, guiding you
through the tough times into the good times ahead."

The man, satisfied with the reply, then looked puzzled and sad; says
"But God, I also had a vision that whenever am in the worst of troubles
and the most toughest times I have ever faced in my life, I saw only one
deep pair footsteps all along the path. Why have you deserted me when I
need you the most?"

Now God looks at him lovingly and says:

"Oh my slave, you could see only one pair of footsteps during the worst
part of your life because those belonged to mine, and I was carrying you
all along, on my shoulders! Remember this, I never have and will never
desert you, my dear slave." Thus saying The Almighty one disappears! The
ultimate truth of life! Never doubt the Almighty God and remember that
He never ever gives-up on us!

"If you would have trusted Allah (SWT) as HE (SWT) deserves to be
trusted then HE (SWT) would have fed you the way HE (SWT) feeds the
birds." (The holy Prophet of Islam (p.b.u.h) Few Observations about Dua
(A) Dua Is a Link:

The biggest benefit of Dua is that it is a kind of link between a man
and Almighty. Man is in great need to make contact with Almighty.

This need is present in all spheres of a man's life. One of these
spheres in which he feels this need is his psychological sphere (i.e.,
his Nafs = soul). 1. How? What do we mean by psychological need?

A man must have a balance in his personality and character. A balance
between his feeling weak and his feeling strong.

If a man feels weak and sees his soul weak, in face of difficulties and
problems, he will not be able to face life and will crumble. At the same
time, if a man is full of courage, then this leads him to be proud. So
there must be a balance in the soul of a person.

2. How and when can you get this balance? It can be obtained when you
link yourself with God and get into contact with God.

Dua gives man strength when he feels weak, because such a man sees that
all the troubles and all the forces against him are nothing compared to
God and His strength. But at the same time he doesn't get proud, because
he who remembers God and His position, will feel weak and disgraced when
he compares God's strength with his own.

For example, if you are in contact with a King or a ruler, you have
confidence that he will help you, since he has strength, and at the same
time when you compare his strength with your own, you won't be proud.

Thus Dua gives you confidence, and at the same time prevents you from
being proud. This is the reason why most of the Duas of our 14
Infallibles (Masoomeen) (p.b.u.h.) talk of the greatness of God, and
remind man of his weakness compared to Almighty God.

"O Allah! I ask you by Your mercy that encompasses everything. O Allah!
You are strong and I am weak."

The holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) says: "The best form of worship is Dua".
The laziest man is that who doesn't remember God by his lips or tongue,
in spite of being healthy and idle. The holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) says:
"The most incapable man is the one who neglects Dua".

Imam Ali (p.b.u.h.) says: "The best deed toward Allah is Dua".

Imam Baqir (p.b.u.h.) says: "Do not get bored with Dua as it is very
highly ranked by Allah".

Imam Ja'far Sadiq (p.b.u.h.) says: "Increase Dua because it is the key
to all mercy and fulfiller of every need".


