Introduction
============

The status quo of the Muslims nowadays is truly pitiful. Nations have
assailed them just as hungry people assail a coveted meal following the
success of imperialism in disseminating discord and dissension among the
members of one and the same nation. These nations have expanded the gap
between the Muslims in order to achieve their vicious objectives which
cannot be achieved except by Muslims colliding with each other.

It has been very difficult for the enemies of Islam to see the blessed
Islamic resurgence overwhelming the hearts of the members of our Islamic
nation. There have been efforts to let the Qur’ān and the Sunnah take
charge of our countries especially after the success of one such
attempts which caused international arrogance to be gravely shocked.
Such arrogance remains maintaining its efforts to put an end to such
efforts through various methods and means.

During the last few years, these folks have been stirring sectarian
differences and schisms among the Shī’ahs and the Sunnis. This task has
been vested upon the agents of imperialism in our Islamic world
especially the rulers of Hijaz [Saudi Arabia] who dominate the holy
places under the pretext of “serving both sacred precincts” .

In turn, they have instructed their hired hands from among the
preachers, who are appointed in order to praise their rulers throughout
the Arabian Peninsula and abroad, to write and publish various books to
attack the beliefs of the Shī’ahs and to charge them with apostasy,
accusing them of sharing their beliefs with the Zoroastrians, Jews and
Christians.

In addition to such nuances which unfortunately caused many
simple-minded people, as well as fanatics, to fall prey to such vicious
attacks, having believed, without first researching and verifying the
venom with which such books are filled. Millions of copies of such books
have been distributed all over the Islamic world...

Like other Muslims, I was exposed to this campaign which was undertaken
by some movements the objective of which is only to “protect the Sunnis
from the Shī’ite danger,” according to their claims, to “bring them
awareness about the beliefs of this sect which stems out of Judaism and
Zoroastrianism,” as they claim.

In the beginning, I resented such a campaign due to the rude and
nonsubjective method whereby they describe the Shī’a faith and which I
also noticed to often rely on exaggeration and sensationalism. Although
I was born in Palestine for a Sunni Palestinian couple, and although the
vast majority of Palestinians are “followers of the Sunnah and Jamā’ah,”
and despite my belief then that the sect following the “Sunnah and the
Jamā’ah” was the right one, yet I could not see how the Shī’ahs could be
“unbelievers.”

All I knew about them was their high regard for Ali (‘a), that they
prefer him over all other *sahābah.* But I did not know why other than
the status which most Sunnis believe he is worth of, that is, his being
no more than the fourth of the “righteous caliphs;” he is simply a
*sahābi* whose status they equated with that of other *sahābah*,
including Mu’āwiyah and ‘Amr ibn al-’Ās.

But this “exaggeration” in raising the status of Ali (‘a), in my view,
did not warrant their expulsion from the Islamic creed altogether,
despite many of their claims that the Shī’ahs prefer Ali (‘a) over the
Seal of Prophets (ṣ), that they believe Gabriel made a mistake in
bringing the divine message down, even the claim often put forth that
they consider Ali (‘a) as a Allāh, that they have a copy of the Qur’ān
different from theirs, in addition to other such claims.

But I did not pay attention to any of that because as long as I live, I
shall never forget what my theology teacher at the high school once
said: “Shī’ahs are many sects some of which do, indeed, regard Ali (‘a)
as a Allāh. But the Shī’ah Ithna-’Ashari sect, also called the Ja’fari
sect, is the closest one to the Sunnis, and those who adhere to it are
Muslims.” Since these words came from someone whose righteousness,
piety, vast knowledge and information acquired, in addition to his
moderation and subjectivity when criticizing those whose views differed
from those of Islam or from his Sunni sect, these words kept ringing in
my ears for many days and years.

Add to this the fact that I was very much influenced by one of my
relatives who invited others to the Path of Allāh and I have no doubt in
his sincerity and concern about the unity of the Muslims, Sunnis and
Shī’ahs. This concept found its firm grounds in my soul till it became a
de facto reality especially when I came to know that most Sunni scholars
and callers of our time regard the Shī’ahs as Muslims who believe in the
Unity of Allāh.

Among them is the martyr Hassan al-Banna, the martyr Sayyid Qutb,
*‘allāma* Mawdoodi, Shaykh Muhammad Kashak, *‘allāma* Shaykh Muhammad
al-Ghazāli, Shaykh Muhammad Shaltut, Professor al-Bahansawi,
al-Talmasani, Anwar al-Jundi, Hassan Ayyūb, Sa’īd Hawi, Fathi Yakun, Abu
Zuhrah, Yousuf al-’Azm, [Prof. Rāshid] al-Ghannūchi and many, many
others whose works I have been honored to read and which have filled the
shelves of libraries frequented by a generation that is witnessing an
Islamic resurgence.

Thus, no doubt ever entertained my mind that the Shī’ahs are Muslims. I
did not make any distinction between a Sunni and a Shī’ah person because
I decided to overlook their differences which in no way label one of
them as “Muslim” and the other as “non-Muslim”, differences the details
of which I did not fully know, nor was I ready to even think about them
or even research due to my feeling that there was no need to conduct
such researches which require digging through history and arriving at
mazes which do not get anyone to reach any outcome.

I was convinced at that time that researching these differences was a
norm of dissension from which one should stay away or discuss especially
since both parties are Muslim. I looked upon the Sunnis and the Shī’ahs
in the same light wherein I used to look at both Ali (‘a) and Mu’āwiyah:
that they both were Muslims despite all what went on between them.

My trip to Western lands, in order to pursue my graduate study,
coincided in the 1980s when this dissension intensified in heat and when
many voices were raised warning against the Shī’ah creed, voices which
were accompanied by charges against the Islamic revolution in Iran and
against its leader who I believed was the real target of that campaign.

Quite often, I found myself the object of criticism for no reason other
than my conviction that the Shī’ahs were in no way apostates. Whenever I
wanted to defend myself against one assault, the next assault came more
fiercely than its predecessor, so much so that someone once said to me
that I had to choose one path, that is, to clearly define my sect, since
I could not be both a Sunni and at the same time a sympathizer with the
Shī’ahs and a supporter of the Islamic revolution in Iran because this
issue, in his view, was an issue of the “doctrine”, one which did not
permit any compromise.

I cannot hide the fact that some hard and embarrassing moments
confronted me because of my lack of knowledge of the details of the
Shī’ah sect. I did not know how to respond to the claims of some people
that the beliefs held by the Shī’ahs, such as Imāmate, Infallibility,
Taqiyya and labeling some *sahābah* as apostates took them out of the
creed altogether. I developed a great deal of interest in familiarizing
myself with such “beliefs”. Thus, I found myself prompted to do what
many others flee from: the pursuit of the truth, in an attempt to put an
end to lengthy months of doubt and puzzlement.

But how would I do that? Shall I be satisfied with what Sunni writers,
who consider the Shī’ahs as apostates, have written? I had by then read
many of them and was not convinced by them at all because most of such
writers departed from good manners and from the scientific spirit which
mandates subjectivity and the providing of evidence.

And should I be satisfied with the views of moderate Sunnis who consider
the ideological differences between the Shī’ahs and the Sunnis as an
artificial fuss? These include al-Ghazāli, al-Bahansawi, Izzid-Deen
Ibrāhīm and others. But these views did not solve the problem. Rather,
they keep it suspended where it started.

I had no choice except to seek the truth from books written by the
Shī’ahs themselves. But in the beginning I dismissed this option because
I thought that in their works, the Shī’ahs would support their views
from traditions narrated through their own venues which, of course,
cannot be accepted by us [Sunnis].

But later I came to acquire a book titled *Al-Muraja’āt*[^1] as a loan
from a friend of mine and with which I became familiar. Luckily, that
friend, too, was like me: a seeker of the truth. In his turn, he had
acquired this book from one of his Shī’ah friends who advised him to
read it after my friend had requested him to give him a book that would
make him familiar with the beliefs of the Shī’ahs.

Although the writer of this book, *Al-Muraja’āt*, is a Shī’ah, yet he,
to my great surprise, supports his arguments with regard to Shī’ah
beliefs from books of tradition in circulation among Sunnis, especially
both *Sahīh* books. I actually found in it what encouraged me to seek
the truth, the truth which puzzled and divided people.

I always used to participate with my friends in researching and
discussing the contents of this book which is comprised of
correspondence between a Sunni scholar, namely Shaykh Saleem al-Bishri,
[then] rector of al-Azhar, and a Shī’ah Lebanese scholar, namely *imām*
Sharafud-Deen Sadr ad-Deen al-’Āmili al-Mūsawi. The said correspondence
revolves around the most important issues wherein the Sunnis and the
Shī’ahs differ.

I do not hide the fact that what I read in that book was a great
surprise to me, and I do not exaggerate when I say that it was the shock
of my life. I did not expect at all to find the difference between the
Sunnis and the Shī’ahs to be as I saw it depicted in that book. I
discovered that I was ignorant of the [Islamic] history and of *hadīth*,
as is the case with anyone who tackled this subject from among those
whom I saw and met, including those who had Ph.D. degrees in Sharī’a as
you will see from the details of this research.

Because of the extent of the shock produced by the facts stated in that
book, and despite the claim of its writer that he draws his arguments
from the Qur’ān and from both *Sahīh* books [of al-Bukhāri and Muslim,
two of what is called *Al-Sihāh al-Sitta*, the six books of authentic
traditions held by the Sunnis as the most reliable], some of us started
doubting the authenticity of these books, so much so that one of my
friends said, “If what this Shī’ah writer claims is true, that is, there
are such facts in al-Bukhāri’s *Sahīh* book, I shall disbelieve in all
traditions narrated by al-Bukhāri from this day onward.”

But he did not mean what he said. He only meant to say that it was
impossible for that Shī’ah writer to be accurate. We all felt that had
the contents of his book been true, this would mean a lot for us in as
far as our understanding of the truth behind the difference between the
Sunnis and the Shī’ahs is concerned.

It became necessary to verify the contents of *Al-Muraja’āt* from our
own review of al-Bukhāri’s *Sahīh*. Allāh did, indeed, grant us success,
after exerting a great deal of effort, in coming across a copy of
al-Bukhāri’s *Sahīh* book.

I was not at all surprised when I found in al-Bukhāri’s *Sahīh* all the
places to which the Shī’ah writer referred. Some may wonder: “Why such
emphasis on al-Bukhāri’s *Sahīh*?” This is so because the arguments
which he derives from the Book of Allāh are often subject to
interpretation, and one verse may bear more than one meaning, depending,
of course, on one’s own interpretation. For example, the verse saying,

***“He frowned and turned away because the blind man came to him...,
etc.” (Qur’ān, 80:1-2).***

These couple of verses do not state the name of the person who frowned,
nor that of the blind man, hence the role of tradition in explaining all
of that.

Thus, al-Al-Bukhāri’s *Sahīh* came to occupy the first position with
regard to “authenticity” after the Book of Allāh, according to the
Sunnis who held themselves bound to accept all of its contents. This is
why tradition solves any differences with regard to interpreting the
verses of the Glorious Book of Allāh.

Whenever I read additional books which deal with this topic, the truth
kept getting clearer to me till in the end it manifested itself most
gloriously in a way which accepts no doubt whatsoever.

But the question which always kept bothering me revolved around the
reason behind hiding so many historical events, as well as the
traditions of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ), despite their authentication
in the references which the Sunnis regard as reliable and which may
remove a great deal of ambiguity accompanying the issue of the
differences between the Sunnis and the Shī’ahs during the past
centuries.

Is the method of hiding the facts, or enforcing a blackout in their
regard, or creating confusion about them..., etc., can be accepted as a
justification for avoiding dissension, as they claim? Is it not
dissension when facts are hidden and distorted?!

When I started investigating this sensitive issue, my ultimate goal was
to make sure whether the Shī’ahs are Muslims or not. I had no doubt at
all that the method [of worship] of the followers of the “Sunnah and
Jamā’ah” was the right one.

But after having reviewed, researched and carefully considered this
matter, the result which I reached was an amazing contradiction, yet I
did not hesitate for one moment to accept the fact which I discovered.

Why should I not accept it so long as there are those who support it
with proofs and evidences which all are considered by the Sunnis as
accepted arguments, and so long as they agree with reason which Allāh,
the most Sublime, the most High, regards as evidence against all
creation?

The same fact has been accepted by a good number of our students,
something which irritated some fanatics and those who issued verdicts
that we [Shī’ahs] are apostates, even saying that it is not permissible
to reciprocate the greeting whereby we greet them [Sunnis]. They
circulated against us rumors the lightest of which was the receipt by
everyone who becomes Shī’ah of $300 from the Iranian Embassy as a
reward.

As regarding al-Bukhāri’s *Sahīh*, which we used as our argument against
them, they said that it was a forgery and is not the true *Sahīh* of
al-Bukhāri! Facing such ignorance and fanaticism on one hand, and seeing
how oppressed the Shī’ahs are on the other, I was of the view to write a
summary of my research then present it to every seeker of the truth so
that people may review it as well.

As long as there are those who tell lies about the Shī’ahs in order to
mislead others, and *there are* some people who tell such lies, that
doing so is permissible, the truth is more worthy of being written and
published. Despite the pains and the wounds which this book may cause to
some fanatics, I ask them: “Who is to blame?!”

As for the book, which presents the views of both parties and the
refutation of each with regard to the most significant issues of
contention, there is no claim in it except that it is supported by
proofs and arguments from what the Sunnis hold in high esteem and in
which they believe, such as both *Sahīh* books of al-Bukhāri and Muslim
in the first place.

So, why do they *not* blame the ignorance which prohibited them from
knowing these facts? Or did their fanatical religious leaders hide such
facts deliberately from them? Or why do they *not* blame al-Bukhāri and
Muslim and others from among the scholars of *hadīth* with regard to
what they wrote in their books, texts which caused them such a shock?!
But how can this be since the Sunnis have taken upon themselves to
follow everything both *Sahīh* books contain?

The sect of the Imāmite Shī’ahs, to which we refer in this research, is
the one the adherents to which believe in following the caliphate of Ali
(‘a) and the rest of the twelve Imāms from among Ahlul Bayt (‘a) after
the Prophet (ṣ). As regarding other sects included under the label of
“Shī’a”, such as those who believe in the godhead or prophethood of Ali
(‘a), or other sects, the Shī’ahs dissociate themselves from them.

So, why do some people insist that these sects are Shī’ah? And why do
they and their likes undertake the circulation of such nonsense in order
to mislead Muslim commoners and the ignorant ones among them? And why
such shameful forgery in the history of the Muslims and in their
tolerant creed?!

[^1]: The English translation of Al-Muraja\`āt titled Al-Muraja\`āt: A
Shī\`ite-Sunni Dialogue was completed by Yasin T. al-Jibouri and
published in Beirut, Lebanon, in 1415 A.H./1995 A.D. by Imām Hussain
Foundation. A larger-size second edition of the same was then published
in Qum, Islamic Republic of Iran, by Ansariyan Publications in 1422
A.H./2001 A.D., and the entire translation is available on the Internet
on this web site
address:http://www.al-islam.org/al-murajaat-shii-sunni-dialogue-sharaf-al-din-al...
\_\_ Tr.


