Imāmate
=======

Imāmate or caliphate means leadership. It has become a term for leading
the Muslims after the demise of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ), a term which
nobody can deny because leadership is an instinctive need for any group
of people. Muslims, Sunnis or Shī’ahs, disagreed with regard to how to
appoint an *imām,* or a caliph, and what role he should assume.

This is one of the most serious of their disagreements, and other
disagreements are no more than a natural outcome of this great
difference. This is so because Imāmate, as viewed by the Shī’ahs, has to
be supported by a text from the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ), and it is
specifically relevant to the Twelve Imāms from among Ahlul Bayt (‘a).

Knowing the Islamic injunctions, following the departure from this world
of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ), is achieved only by referring to these
Imāms (‘a) or to accurate transmissions reported about them. When their
statements disagree with those of others, what Ahlul Bayt (‘a) state
must be accepted, since they are the safe custodians of the Sunnah of
the Chosen One (ṣ).

With regard to Imāmate, the Sunnis say that an *imām* is to be elected
according to the principle of *shūra* (mutual consultation), but they do
not object if such an *imām* is appointed through the recommendation of
an outgoing caliph to the one who would be his successor, as was the
case with caliph Abū Bakr who recommended ‘Umar to be his successor.
Also, they permit caliphate to be taken by force, by the sword, as was
the case with the Umayyad, ‘Abbāside and Ottoman caliphates.

As regarding learning the Islamic injunctions, it according to them is
to be acquired by consulting what is “authentic” of what the *sahābah*
had narrated, without making any distinction among these *sahābah*.

They, thus, regarded all *sahābah* as equitable and trustworthy despite
the fact that many of them became involved in both battles of the Camel
and of Siffeen, and they took part in killing each other on those and
other occasions, something which places a question mark about the
“equity” of many of them and raises many questions. You will review
ample details about the “equity” of the *sahābah* in a chapter to come,
by the Will of Allāh.

Since the case is as such, since there are differences between the
Shī’ahs and the Sunnis, and before we issue a verdict labeling a
particular sect as “invalid” or preferring one method over another, we
ought to take the time to look into the proofs and arguments of each
party. We have dedicated our research for this purpose. We will be
summarizing the texts which the Shī’ahs regard as proofs for upholding
their Imāmite sect as well as the rebuttal of the Sunnis of the same:

1) Proofs Confirming the Imāmate of Ahlul Bayt (‘a)

2) Proofs Confirming the Number of Imāms from among Ahlul Bayt (‘a)

3) Proofs Regarding the Appointment by the Prophet (ṣ) of Ali ibn Abū
Tālib (‘a) [as his successor]

Texts Relevant To Imāmate
-------------------------

### 1. Proofs Confirming the Imāmate of Ahlul Bayt (‘a)

Texts quoted from the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) referring to the Imāmate,
after his demise, of the nation’s Ahlul Bayt (‘a) are numerous; here are
the most famous among them:

According to Muslim’s *Sahīh*, relying on *isnād* which goes back to
Zaid ibn Arqam, the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ), so Zaid narrated, said, “O
people! I am a human upon whom the messenger of my Lord is about to
call. I will surrender to the call, and I am leaving among you two
weighty things: the first of them is the Book of Allāh wherein there is
guidance and *noor*.

So, take the Book of Allāh, for in it there is guidance and there is
*noor*. Uphold the Book of Allāh and adhere to it. And (the other are)
my Ahlul Bayt (‘a). I commend to you, in the Name of Allāh, my Ahlul
Bayt (‘a);I commend to you, in the Name of Allāh, my Ahlul Bayt (‘a); I
commend to you, in the Name of Allāh, my Ahlul Bayt (‘a).[^1]

In al-Tirmidhi’s *Sahīh*, through *isnād* traced to Jābir ibn Abdullāh
[al-Ansāri], the latter said, “I saw the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) on the
Day of ‘Arafa when he performed his [last] pilgrimage. He was riding his
she-camel Quswa. He delivered a sermon, and I heard him saying, ‘O
people! I have left among you that, so long as you uphold to it, you
shall never stray: The Book of Allāh and my *‘itrat*, my Ahlul
Bayt’.[^2]

Had there been only this *hadīth*, it would have sufficed to prove the
authenticity of the Shī’ah sect which obligates clinging to Ahlul Bayt
(‘a) in addition to clinging to the Glorious Book of Allāh. We find in
this *hadīth* the order of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ), as clearly as can
be, that we should uphold Ahlul Bayt (‘a) after his demise, and that
such upholding, in addition to adhering to the Glorious Qur’ān, is the
condition for one’s salvation *versus* straying.

Although Muslim and many other scholars of *hadīth* from among the
Sunnis have included this *hadīth* in their *Sahīh* and *musnad* books,
it is to my great amazement that I find most Sunnis not familiar with
it. They deny it when they hear about it, as if it does not exist,
saying that what is accurate in this regard is what Abū Hurayrah had
said, that is, the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) said, “I have left among you
two things that will never let you stray so long as you adhere to them
or act upon them: the Book of Allāh and my Sunnah.”[^3]

Having investigated the source of this tradition, I found out that it
was not recorded in any of the *Sahīh* books. Al-Bukhāri, al-Nisā’i,
al-Dhahabi and others have labelled it as “weak”[^4]. It is narrated by
al-Hākim in his *Mustadrak* which, according to the consensus of Sunni
scholars, is regarded as being less [in prestige] than the *Sahīh* book
of Muslim who stated it in this wording: “...the Book of Allāh and my
*‘itrat*, my Ahlul Bayt (‘a).”

Even if we suppose there is no difference between both narratives, we
have to surrender to the fact that what is meant by the phrase “my
Sunnah”, as it exists in al-Hākim’s narrative, is the Sunnah derived
from the venue of the Household of the Prophet (ṣ), not from that of
others, as is quite obvious in Muslim’s narrative. As for sticking to
the narrative of al-Hākim wherein he says, “... the Book of Allāh and my
Sunnah,” rejecting Muslim’s version of “... the Book of Allāh and my
*‘itrat*, my Ahlul Bayt (‘a),”

This goes against not only the consensus of the Sunni scholars of
*hadīth,* who all regard the traditions narrated by Muslim with higher
regards than those narrated by al-Hākim, it is also contrary to logic
and reason because the word “Sunnah” by itself as narrated by al-Hākim
does not convey a specific meaning, since all Islamic sects claim they
follow the Sunnah of the Prophet (ṣ).

Moreover, there are many differences among these sects, and the reasons
behind such differences are rendered to the differences in how the
Prophet’s Sunnah was transmitted to them, i.e. through various venues,
the Sunnah which explains and complements the Holy Qur’ān, the Sunnah
the accuracy of which is agreed upon by all Islamic sects.

Hence, the differences in the transmitted *hadīth* led also to
differences in interpreting the Qur’ān. The Sunnah of the Prophet (ṣ),
therefore, became many Sunnahs and the Muslims, accordingly, split into
sects and groups which are said to number thirty-seven. So, which of
these Sunnahs is more worthy of being followed?

This question comes naturally to the mind of anyone who deeply discerns
such differences. The above-quoted *hadīth* came to respond to such
differences so that the Muslims would not be left puzzled with regard to
their Islamic faith following the departure from this world of the one
who convey it to them.

This is why there have been sacred instructions by the Prophet (ṣ)
mandating that the purified Sunnah of he Prophet (ṣ) must be derived
from the venue of the Ahlul Bayt (‘a) of the Prophet (ṣ), those who are
described by the Qur’ān as *tāhir*, Purified, a description which is
quite clear and accepts no other meaning. Such a derivation, and only
such a derivation, brings security against dissension and straying.

It is here that two questions are put forth. The picture can never be
completely clear unless we answer them:

**First:** Who are “Ahlul Bayt (‘a)” to whom reference is made by the
tradition cited above?

**Second:** Why did the said tradition specify the derivation [of the
Islamic injunctions] only from Ahlul Bayt (‘a) rather than from all the
*sahābah*, as the Sunnis advocate?

#### Who Are Ahlul Bayt (‘a)?

In his *Sahīh*, relying on the *isnād* of Safiyya daughter of Shaybah,
Muslim quotes the latter saying that ‘Ā’isha said, “The Messenger of
Allāh (ṣ) came out wearing an unsown garment of black [camel] hair. He
brought al-Hasan ibn Ali (‘a) and let him in. Then al-Husayn (‘a) came
and he let him, too, in. Then Fātima (‘a) came in and he let her, too,
in. Then Ali (‘a) came. He let him, too. Then he said [i.e. quoted the
following verse],

***‘Surely Allāh wishes to remove all abomination from you, O People of
the House [of the Prophet] and to purify you with a perfect
purification’*** (Qur’ān, 33:33).”[^5]

Also in Muslim’s *Sahīh* we read the following:

***“When this verse was revealed: ‘Say: Come! Let us gather together our
sons and your sons, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves,
then let us earnestly pray and invoke Allāh’s curse on the liars’***
(Qur’ān, 3:61),

the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) called upon Ali (‘a), Fātima (‘a), al-Hasan
(‘a) and al-Husayn (‘a) then said, ‘Lord! These are my Ahlul Bayt’.”[^6]

From both of these traditions, it is quite clear that Ahlul Bayt (‘a),
during the lifetime of the Prophet (ṣ), were: Ali (‘a), Fātima (‘a) and
both their sons (‘a).

#### But What About the Wives of the Prophet (ṣ)?

In his *Sahīh*, Muslim quotes Zaid ibn Arqam citing the Prophet (ṣ)
saying, “I am leaving with you two weighty things: one of them is the
Book of Allāh, the most Exalted, the most Great, and it is the Rope of
Allāh; whoever adheres to it is guided and whoever abandons it strays.”
In the same tradition, people inquired whether his Ahlul Bayt (‘a)
included his wives. “No,” said he, “By Allāh! A woman remains with the
man for a period of time, then he may divorce her, whereupon she returns
to her father and people. His Ahlul Bayt (‘a) come from his loins, his
nearest in kin who are prohibited from taking charity after his
demise.”[^7]

To quote al-Tirmidhi’s *Sahīh*, where the compiler relies on the
authority of ‘Amr ibn Abū Salamah, who was raised by the Prophet (ṣ),
‘Amr said,

***“When this verse was revealed: ‘Surely Allāh wishes to remove all
abomination from you, O People of the House [of the Prophet] and to
purify you with a perfect purification***’ (Qur’ān, 33:33)’

at the house of Umm Salamah, the Prophet (ṣ) called upon Fātima (‘a),
Hasan (‘a) and Husayn (‘a). He put a garment over them while Ali (‘a)
was behind him.

He placed the garment over them all then supplicated thus: ‘Lord! These
are my Ahlul Bayt (‘a); so, do remove abomination from them and purify
them with a perfect purification.’ Umm Salamah asked him, ‘May I be
included with them, O Prophet of Allāh?’ He said, ‘Stay where you are,
and you are in goodness.’”[^8]

In his *Musnad*, [imām] Ahmad [ibn Hanbal] quotes Umm Salamah saying,
“The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) said to Fātima (‘a): ‘Bring me your husband
and both sons.’ She brought them in. He put a garment made in Fadak then
put his hand on them and said, ‘Lord! These are the Progeny of Muhammad;
so, let Your salutations and blessings be upon Muhammad and the Progeny
of Muhammad; surely You are the Praised One, the most Glorified.’ I
lifted the garment in order to join them, but he pulled it from my hand
and said, ‘You are in goodness.’”[^9]

Despite the clarity of the previous proofs in identifying who Ahlul Bayt
(‘a) are, some people oppose it and base their argument on the following
verses from Surat al-Ahzab (Chapter 33 of the Holy Qur’ān), claiming
that the term “Ahlul Bayt (‘a)” includes the wives of the Prophet (ṣ):

***O Prophet! Say to your consorts: “If you desire the life of this
world, and its glitter, then come! I will provide for your enjoyment and
set you free in a handsome manner. But if you seek Allāh and His
Prophet, and the abode of the hereafter, truly Allāh has prepared a
great reward for the well-doers from among you.” O consorts of the
Prophet! If any of you were guilty of evident unseemly conduct, the
punishment would be doubled to her, and that is easy for Allāh. But any
of you who is devout in the service of Allāh and His Prophet, and does
righteous deeds, to her We shall grant a reward twice as much and We
have prepared a generous sustenance for her. O consorts of the Prophet!
You are not like any (other) women: If you fear (Allāh), do not be too
complaisant of speech, lest one in whose heart there is a disease should
be moved with desire: But speak a speech (that is) just. And stay in
your houses, do not make a dazzling display, like that in the former
times of ignorance, establish regular prayer and give regular charity,
and obey Allāh and His Prophet. And Allāh only wishes to remove all
abomination from you, you members of the family, and to make you pure
and spotless.*** ***Qur’ān, 33:28-33***

As is quite clear, the argument of those who say that “Ahlul Bayt (‘a)”
is a term which includes the wives of the Prophet (ṣ) is based on “...
And Allāh only wishes to remove all abomination from you, you members of
the family, and to make you pure and spotless” falling in the same verse
a portion of which deals with the wives of the Prophet (ṣ).

This claim can be refuted from many angles; here are some of them:

1. The revelation of Qur’ānic verses in reference to threatening the
wives of the Prophet (ṣ) that they could be divorced followed by the
Will of Allāh to purify Ahlul Bayt (‘a) with a perfect purification does
not necessarily mean that on both occasions, the wives of the Prophet
(ṣ) are implied simply because there are many verses in the Holy Qur’ān
of this sort containing two different issues.

The reason why they both fall in the same verse is perhaps due to their
coincidently took place at the same time. One such an example is derived
from these verses: “Forbidden to you (for food) are: dead meat, blood,
the flesh of swine and that on which a name other than that of Allāh has
been invoked, that which has been killed by strangling, or by a violent
blow, or by a headlong fall, or by being gored to death, that which has
been (partly) eaten by a wild animal, unless you are able to slaughter
it (in due way), that which is sacrificed on stone (altars).

***The division (of meat) by raffling with arrows is also (forbidden):
That is impiety. This Day those who reject faith have given up all hope
of your religion: Yet do not fear them, but fear Me. This Day I have
perfected your religion for you, completed My favor upon you, and have
chosen Islam for you as your religion” (Qur’ān, 5:3).***

You find in this verse how the subject revolving round the perfecting of
the creed falls in the middle of the subject dealing with prohibitive
foods!

2. What underscores the fact that the wives of the Prophet (ṣ) are not
included in the meaning of this verse is that the subject relevant to
the wives of the Prophet (ṣ) came in an Arabic pronoun specifically
relevant to a group of females, whereas when the topic shifted to the
purification of Ahlul Bayt (‘a), the pronoun changed to one relevant to
a group of males.

3. The previously quoted authentic traditions recorded in the *Sahīh*
books of both Muslim and al-Tirmidhi, as well as in Ahmad’s *Musnad* and
in others all prove unequivocally that the wives of the Prophet (ṣ) are
not included among Ahlul Bayt (‘a). When Umm Salamah, may Allāh be
pleased with her, asked the Prophet (ṣ), “May I be included with them, O
Prophet of Allāh?,” He said to her, “Stay where you are, and you are in
goodness.” In Muslim’s narrative, people inquired whether his wives were
among his Ahlul Bayt (‘a), and the answer came in the negative.

4. In the tradition of the two weighty things which Muslim, Ahmad and
others narrate, the Prophet (ṣ) is cited as having said, “O people! I am
leaving among you two things which, so long as you uphold them [both
simultaneously], you shall never stray: the Book of Allāh and my
*‘itra*, my Ahlul Bayt,” it is quite clear that they have to be followed
[with regard to all religious and secular issues].

If we suppose, just for the sake of debating, that the wives of the
Prophet (ṣ) are the ones meant, or implied, in this tradition, in what
way will the Muslims uphold them after the demise of the Messenger of
Allāh (ṣ), bearing in mind that they were obligated to remain in their
homes? How would one answer this question, knowing that they all lived
in one and the same century? If one says that upholding them means
citing the traditions from them, we would respond by saying that among
them are those who did not narrate one single tradition!

The “abomination” [*rijs*] which occurs in the verse saying, ““... And
Allāh only wishes to remove all abomination from you, you members of the
family, and to make you pure and spotless” means linguistically
something filthy: a reference to sinning, while *tahāra* (cleansiness)
linguistically connotes piety.

The meaning of the will of the Almighty, Praised and Glorified is He, to
remove abomination from them, is to clear them of any sin and to raise
their status above committing anything which points out to shortcomings
in them. A sin, no matter how minor, is indicative of a flaw in the
person who commits it. This means that Allāh Almighty wanted to purify
Ahlul Bayt (‘a) from committing any sin, minor or major, and this is
nothing but a proof of Infallibility and, hence, purification.

As regarding what is said that the meaning of “purification” in this
verse is merely an indication of religious piety, that is, their own
avoidance of committing what Allāh has prohibited them from committing
while acting upon His Commandments, this claim is rejected because
“purification” in such a sense is not relevant only to Ahlul Bayt (‘a)
but to all Muslims. The Muslims are all obligated to act upon the
injunctions of their creed:

***“Allāh does not desire to put any hardship on you but to purify you,
and so that He may complete His favor on you, perhaps you will be
grateful” (Qur’ān, 5:6).***

Thus, if we agree that those regarding whom this verse was revealed are
infallible, we will find out that the wives of the Prophet (ṣ) are *not*
among them because they are *not* infallible, let alone the fact that
nobody, be he from the early generations or from the latter ones, made
such a claim, knowing fully well that the Prophet (ṣ) threatened to
divorce them and made other threats against some of them as you will see
in a chapter to come.

#### Additional Proofs For The Infallibility Of Ahlul Bayt (‘a)

**1.** ***Hadīth al-Thaqalayn*****:** Text of the tradition of the two
weighty things: “O people! I am leaving among you two things which, so
long as you uphold to them [both simultaneously], you shall never stray:
the Book of Allāh and my *‘itra*, my Ahlul Bayt (‘a),” where there is a
directive from the Prophet (ṣ) that the condition for not straying is
upholding the Book of Allāh (ṣ) and his *‘itra*, Progeny.

It is not rational for anyone who believes there is a possibility that
there is something wrong, or any crookedness, in it can expect it to be
a safe haven against straying. This proves the Infallibility of both
weighty things: the Book of Allāh, i.e. the greater weight which no
falsehood can approach from front or back, and Ahlul Bayt (‘a), the
great weight.

2. **This Qur’ānic Verse:**

***“And remember that Abraham was tried by his Lord with certain
commands which he fulfilled. He said, ‘I will make you an Imām (guide)
to the nations.’ He pleaded: ‘What about my offspring?!’ He answered,
‘My promise is not within the reach of evil-doers’” (Qur’ān, 2:124).***

Besides pointing out to the lofty status of Imāmate, this verse also
indicates that the “promise” of Allāh, that is, Imāmate, cannot be the
lot of an oppressor. A sin, minor or major, renders one who commits it
an oppressor. Hence, an Imām has to be divinely protected from
committing any sin or wrongdoing.

**3. Evidence in** ***Mustadrak al-Sahīhayn*****:** Relying on the
*isnād* of Hanash al-Kināni, al-Hākim cites the man saying that he heard
Abū Dharr saying the following as he was holding to the door of he
Ka’ba: “O people! Whoever knows me, I am who I am, and whoever does not,
I am Abū Dharr. I heard the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) saying, ‘The
similitude of my Ahlul Bayt (‘a) among you is like the ark of Noah:
whoever boards it is safe [from drowning], and who ever lags behind it
is drowned.”[^10] Al-Hākim adds saying that the *isnād* of this
tradition is authentic.

**4. Also in** ***Mustadrak al-Sahīhayn*****:** Through the *isnād*
traced to Ibn ‘Abbās, the same reference cites Ibn ‘Abbās quoting the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) saying, “The stars offer security for the people
of the earth against drowning, while my Ahlul Bayt (‘a) are the security
of my nation against dissension. If a tribe from among the Arabs opposes
them, it will become the party of Eblis.”[^11]

**5. In al-Bukhāri’s** ***Sahīh*****:** In order to further clarify the
lofty status with which Ahlul Bayt (‘a) were blessed, we would like to
quote some traditions narrated in al-Bukhāri’s *Sahīh* and which address
Ahlul Bayt (‘a) with “*alaihimis-salām*” (peace be upon them). They,
rather than anyone else from among all the *sahābah* or the wives of the
Prophet (ṣ), were thus addressed. Following are examples narrated by
al-Bukhāri in his *Sahīh*:

Ali (‘a) has said, “I used to have an established portion of the war
booties, and the Prophet (ṣ) gave me an established portion of the
*khums*. When I was going to have a daughter by Fātima (‘a), peace be
upon her, daughter of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ)..., etc.”[^12]

Al-Bukhāri also wrote saying, “... and the Prophet (ṣ) knocked at the
door of Fātima (‘a) and Ali (‘a), peace be upon both of them, on a night
for the prayers..., etc.”[^13]

In another narration, the following is stated: “... He said, ‘I saw the
Prophet (ṣ), and al-Hasan (‘a) son of Ali (‘a), peace be upon both of
them, looked like him..., etc.’”[^14]

Also, the following is stated in the same reference: “... from Ali (‘a)
son of al-Husayn (‘a), peace be upon both of them, he told him...,
etc.”[^15]

One may argue saying that this does not prove their distinction, but the
question will then be, “Why then were they, rather than anyone else,
thus greeted?”

**6. Evidence From** ***Hadīth*****:** The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) has
ordered anyone who blesses him to also bless his Progeny concurrently.
In a tradition recorded by al-Bukhāri in his *Sahīh*, relying on the
*isnād* of Abdul-Rahmān ibn Abū Layla, it is recorded that “... He said,
‘Ka’b ibn ‘Ajrah met me and said, ‘Grant me a gift!’ The Prophet (ṣ)
came out to see us, so we said to him, ‘O Messenger of Allāh! We have
already come to know how to greet you, but how should we bless you?’ He
(ṣ) said, ‘You should say: *O Allāh! Bless Muhammad (ṣ) and the Progeny
of Muhammad (ṣ) as You blessed Ibrāhīm and the progeny of Ibrāhīm;
surely You are the oft-Praised, the oft-Glorified*’.”[^16]

The point of connection in this tradition between our master Ibrāhīm,
peace be upon him and upon his progeny, on one hand, and our master
Muhammad (ṣ) and his Progeny on the other is that Ibrāhīm, peace be upon
him, was also a prophet, and his offspring were prophets to whom people
referred after his demise.

Likewise, the offspring of Muhammad (ṣ) were the custodians of the
Message brought by Muhammad (ṣ). The Muslims were ordered to refer to
them after the demise of the Chosen One (ṣ) except they were Imāms (‘a),
not prophets, as was the case with the progeny of Ibrāhīm. In a dialogue
between the Prophet (ṣ) and Ali (‘a), the Prophet (ṣ) said, “Are you not
pleased that your status with me is like that of Aaron to Moses except
there is no prophet after me?”[^17] We will later discuss this
tradition.

It is concluded from all the above that Allāh, the most Sublime and the
most Great, specifically granted purification and Infallibility to Ahlul
Bayt (‘a) in their capacity as the ones to fill the vacuum left by the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) with regard to transmitting the Message to future
generations, to safeguard it from those who distort or cast doubt about
it.

What is the benefit of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) conveying the Divine
Sharī’a if it is not safeguarded after his death by trustworthy persons?
What happened to past creeds suffices to answer this question. The
followers of the latter creeds used to derive their legislation from any
source after the departure from this world of those who conveyed such
creeds to them.

This is why distortion afflicted them as the most Great and the most
Exalted One has said:

***“Can you (O men of faith!) entertain the hope that they will believe
in you, seeing that a party of them heard the word of Allāh, and
distorted it knowingly after having understood it?” (Qur’ān, 2:75).***

It needs not mentioned that safeguarding the texts of the Qur’ān against
any addition or deletion is not by itself sufficient at any rate to
safeguard the Divine Sharī’a from being distorted. Imāmate, thus, is
considered as an extension of prophethood with regard to its general
functions except what is relevant to the *wahi*, which is one of the
particularities of prophethood.

What is meant by the Imāmate being the extension of prophethood is the
safeguarding of the Sharī’a with knowledge and application. Hence, the
Infallibility of the Imāms (‘a) is a must for transmitting the divine
legislation to posterity via pure and genuine venues represented by the
Twelve Imāms (‘a) who all belong to the Household of the Prophet (ṣ).

### 2) Proofs Confirming the Number of Imāms from among Ahlul Bayt (‘a)

The Chosen One (ṣ) has stated that the Imāms, or caliphs, after him were
from Quraysh, and that their number is twelve. Relying on the authority
of Jābir ibn Samrah, al-Bukhāri quotes Jābir saying that he heard the
Prophet (ṣ) saying, “There shall be twelve *amīrs.*..” He goes on to say
that the Prophet (ṣ) said something which he (Jābir) did not hear,
adding, “My father said to me [that what I did not hear was:] ‘All of
them are from Quraysh.’”[^18]

In Muslim’s *Sahīh*, one *hadīth* reads: “The faith shall remain
standing till the time of the Hour, or you will be ruled by twelve
caliphs, all from Quraysh.”[^19] In the same reference, the following
text exists: “People’s affairs will be in effect so long as they are
ruled by twelve men.”[^20]

In Ahmad’s *Musnad*, where the compiler relies on the *isnād* of
Abdullāh ibn Mas’ūd, the latter says that he once asked the Messenger of
Allāh (ṣ) about those “caliphs.” The Prophet (ṣ) said to him, “They are
twelve in number, as many as the tribes of the Children of Israel.”[^21]

A text in the Torah of the People of the Book carries this meaning:
“Allāh Almighty conveyed the glad tiding of [the birth of] Ishmael to
Abraham and that He would multiply his progeny exceedingly and bring
about from among his offspring twelve princes and a great nation.”[^22]

The “great nation” referred to here is the nation of our master Muhammad
(ṣ) whose lineage descended from Ishmael, peace be upon him. As for the
twelve princes, they are the Imāms (‘a), or the caliphs, who succeeded
the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) and who also descended from him. They are the
ones referred to in the authentic traditions cited above.

This issue may be regarded as the most perplexing to the Sunni scholars
who could not provide one single explanation, or any convincing
argument, identifying these twelve caliphs referred to by many authentic
traditions recorded in their own *Sahīh* books, so much so that this
issue has become a puzzling riddle to them. Their interpretations of it
are shaky, often reaching a dead end because of the inapplicability of
the number “twelve” to any group of caliphs starting from the first four
and passing by the Umayyads, the ‘Abbāsides and the Ottomans, or are
they to be selected from all of these?!

We would like to bring about an example portraying the extent of their
confusion while interpreting this tradition: Al-Suyūti has said, “From
among the twelve [caliphs] are: the [first] four caliphs, al-Hasan (‘a),
Mu’āwiyah, [‘Abdullāh] ibn al-Zubayr, ‘Umar ibn ‘Abdul-Azīz. These are
eight, and it is possible that the Mahdi, the ‘Abbāside [caliph] may be
added to them since he is to the ‘Abbāsides what ‘Umar ibn ‘Abdul-Azīz
is to the Umayyads. And al-Tāhir, the ‘Abbāside [caliph], too, [is among
them] on account of his equity. Two remain; these are the awaited ones;
one of them is al-Mahdi because he belongs to Ahlul Bayt.”[^23]

When we talk about their puzzlement in solving the “riddle” of the
twelve caliphs, we mean their scholars are the ones who are puzzled. As
for their commoners, they most often never heard such traditions which
fix the number of the successors of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) or the
*hadīth* which enjoins upholding the two weighty things and many others
which all point out to the merits of Ahlul Bayt (‘a) despite such
occurrence in their *Sahīh* books.

I was quite astonished when Dr. Ahmad Nawfal, a professor at the College
of Sharī’a, University of Jordan, as I debated with him, said that the
tradition of the twelve caliphs is of my own invention, and that it does
not exist in the Sunni books of *hadīth*.

Having said so, he immediately left, refusing to continue the debate.
This took place after he had delivered a lecture in Manilla, answering
questions raised by some attendants about the origin of Shī’ahs and
Shī’ism. His answers were contrary to the truth, thus prompting me to
oppose his falsification. I provided some traditions which prove that
Shī’ahs follow Muhammad (ṣ), *not* Ibn Saba’, as he claimed.

We do not, by mentioning this incident, mean to scandalize this virtuous
professor, may Allāh forgive him. We simply like to point out to the
truth which has to be made clear, that is, fanaticism prompts some
people to do more than that. This is really strange. How can one have
the courage to answer questions about a subject while he is ignorant of
the basic facts relevant to it? What if the issue deals with religious
affairs? What is the judgment against one who issues verdicts without
knowledge? Surely there is no power nor might except in Allāh.

So, while we see the Sunnis puzzled by the “riddle” of the twelve
caliphs, while many of them are ignorant of the glittering authentic
traditions leading to it, Imāmite Shī’ahs, followers of the Household of
the family of the Prophet (ṣ), have already clarified the matter in this
regard, explaining that those implied in the traditions cited above are
the Twelve Imāms (‘a) from among the family of the Prophet (ṣ).
Moreover, they derived proofs from traditions narrated through the venue
of the Purified *‘itra* and which exist in their books of *hadīth*
clearly stating their names in a way which leaves no room for doubt.
They are:

1. Ali ibn Abū Tālib (‘a), *Ameerul-Mu’mineen* (the Commander of the
Faithful)

2. Al-Hasan ibn Ali (‘a), *al-Sibt* (the oldest grandson of the Prophet
[‰])

3. Al-Husayn (‘a) ibn Ali (‘a), *Sayyidul-Shuhadā’* (the master of
martyrs)

4. Ali ibn al-Husayn (‘a), *Zaynul-’Ābidīn* (the best of worshipers)

5. Muhammad ibn Ali (‘a), *al-Bāqir* (the one who pierces through
knowledge)

6. Ja’far ibn Muhammad (‘a), *al-Sādiq* (the truthful)

7. Mousa ibn Ja’far (‘a), *al-Kāzim* (the one who suppresses his anger)

8. Ali ibn Mousa (‘a), *al-Rida* (the one who accepts destiny)

9. Muhammad ibn Ali (‘a), *al-Jawād* (the generous one)

10. Ali ibn Muhammad (‘a), *al-Hādi* (the guide)

11. Al-Hasan ibn Ali (‘a), *al-’Askari* (the man in charge of the
troops)

12. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan (‘a), *al-Mahdi al-Muntazar* (the awaited
savior, the divinely-guided one, may Allāh hasten his holy
reappearance).

#### Proofs Regarding the Appointment by the Prophet (ṣ) of Ali ibn Abū Tālib (‘a)

We have already explained the proofs testifying to the Imāmate of Ahlul
Bayt (‘a) and the number of caliphs from among them as stated by the
Prophet (ṣ) who indicated that they should be his successors in his
nation. Following are proofs regarding the appointment by the Prophet
(ṣ) of Ali ibn Abū Tālib (‘a). In addition to the above, there are
unequivocal proofs testifying to the same, especially to the *hadīth* of
the two weighty things.

Among the most famous narratives regarding the caliphate of Ali (‘a) is
the one known as the sermon of al-Ghadīr after the conclusion of the
Farewell Pilgrimage (*Hijjatul-Wadā’*) in 11 A.H. (632 A.D.) It was
there and then that the Prophet (ṣ) declared to the people stating, at
its conclusion, as narrated by al-Tirmidhi who relies on the *isnād*
traced to Zaid ibn Arqam, the following: “To whosoever I have been the
master, Ali henceforth is his master, etc.”[^24]

Ibn Majah has included in his *Sahīh* a portion of this detailed sermon
through *isnād* traced to al-Barā’ ibn ‘Āzib who said, “We accompanied
the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) during his pilgrimage. He alighted at a
distance of the road and ordered congregational prayers to be held.

Then he took the hand of Ali, peace be upon him, and said, ‘Do not I
have more rights on the Muslims than the Muslims themselves have?’ They
answered in the affirmative. Then he said, ‘Do not I have right over
every believer more than he himself has?’ They answered in the
affirmative. He then said, ‘This [Ali] is the master of whoever accepted
me as his master. Lord! Be the friend of anyone who befriends him, and
be the enemy of whoever antagonizes him.’”[^25]

It exists in the *Musnad* of Ahmad ibn Hanbal who relies on the *isnād*
of also al-Barā’ ibn ‘Āzib. The latter says, “We were in the company of
the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) on a trip. We stayed at Ghadīr Khumm. We were
called upon to perform congregational prayers.

A couple of trees were swept under for the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) who
performed the noon prayers then took the hand of Ali, peace be upon him,
and said, ‘Do not you know that I have more rights on the believers than
the believers themselves have?’ They answered in the affirmative. He (ṣ)
asked them, ‘Do not you know that I have more rights on every believer
than the believer himself has?’ They answered in the affirmative.

He then took Ali, peace be upon him, by the hand and said, ‘To
whomsoever I have been the master, Ali [henceforth] is his master. O
Lord! Befriend whoever befriends him and be the enemy of whoever
antagonizes him.’ ‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb met him thereafter and said to
him, ‘Congratulations to you, O son of Abū Tālib! You have received the
dawn and the sunset as the master of every believing man and
woman.’”[^26]

This *hadīth* is famous as the “Ghadīr *hadīth*” on account of this
incident taking place at an area known as “Ghadīr Khumm” (Khumm swamp)
which is located near Mecca. This is something the authenticity of which
nobody can doubt especially since it has been narrated in many Sunni
books of *hadīth*, so much so that some scholars have stated as many as
80 venues for it only from the Sunnis.

It becomes clear from the previous traditions that the Messenger of
Allāh (ṣ) extracted the Muslims’ admission of his mastership over them
when he asked them, “Do not you know that I have more rights on the
believers than the believers themselves have?... Do not you know that I
have more rights on every believer than the believer himself has?”

It is understood that anyone who enjoys the status of having more
authority over the believers than the believers themselves have is the
believers’ leader as was, indeed, the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ): a leader.
When he included Ali (‘a) besides himself in such a description by
saying, “To whomsoever I have been the master, Ali [henceforth] is his
master,” he practically bestowed upon Ali (‘a) the leadership after his
own demise.

Shī’ahs celebrate this occasion every year on the 18th of Dhul-Hijjah
which they call “Eid al-Ghadīr.” As for the Sunnis, they interpret this
*hadīth* differently, claiming it does not refer to any caliphate. They
interpret the word “*mawla*” [which exists in the original Arabic text]
as “loved one” or “friend,” not “wali amr,” person in charge.

In their view, the meaning of this tradition is: “Anyone whose friend I
am, this Ali is his friend, too”!!! The fact is that the word “mawla”
has many meanings in Arabic. It is said that it has seventeen meanings
including “one who is emancipated” or “servant,” etc. The word “mawla”
in this *hadīth* is to be understood, besides what is stated above
through many proofs, to connote leadership. Among such proofs are the
following:

1. The verse saying,

***“O Messenger! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord,
and if you do not do it, then you will have not delivered His message
(at all), and Allāh will protect you from the (evil) people” (Qur’ān,
5:67)***

which was revealed, as stated in many books of *tafsīr*, shortly before
the Ghadīr sermon. It contains the sense that there is an order from
Allāh Almighty that has to be conveyed, and this order, as the wording
of the verse suggests and from its very sharp tone, is of an extreme
significance, point in the direction that what is meant is not mere
friendship and support.

2. The verse saying

***“This Day have I perfected your religion for you, completed My favor
upon you, and have*** ***chosen Islam for you as your religion” (Qur’ān,
5:4)***

was revealed, according to many scholars of exegesis, after the Ghadīr
incident. It conveys the completion of conveying Muhammad’s message,
something which could not have been completed without the appointment of
Ali (‘a) and Ahlul Bayt (‘a) in general as the masters. It is
far-fetched to say that the conveying became complete when the Messenger
of Allāh (ṣ) was told about his friendship with and love for Ali (‘a)!

3. The circumstances during which the Prophet (ṣ) delivered the Ghadīr
sermon, in a burning desert, after having ordered the Muslims, who were
said to have numbered more than ninety thousand, to assemble in order to
extract from them an admission that Allāh and His Messenger were their
masters before ordering them to accept the mastership of Ali (‘a) proves
that the matter was not relevant to merely loving and befriending Ali
(‘a).

4. The previous *ahādīth,* especially the one about the Two Weighty
Things, in addition to the following ones, point as a whole to the
caliphate of Ali (‘a) without permitting any room for doubt.

#### Additional Proofs for Ali’s Caliphate

In al-Tirmidhi’s *Sahīh*, relying on the *isnād* of ‘Imrān ibn Hasīn,
the latter says, “The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) dispatched an army under
the command of Ali ibn Abū Tālib (‘a). The campaign was carried out, and
Ali (‘a) won a female captive as his share of the booty.

Some people faulted him for doing so. Four of the companions of the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) pledged to complain against him to the Prophet
(ṣ). With signs of anger on his holy face clearly visible, the Messenger
of Allāh (ṣ) said to them, “What do you want from Ali? Ali is from me,
and I am from Ali, and he is the master of every believer after
me.”[^27]

And consider the following verse of the Almighty: “

***Your Master is Allāh and His Messenger and the Believers who uphold
prayers and pay*** ***zakat*** ***even while prostrating (Qur’ān,
5:58).”***

Most Sunni scholars of exegesis have stated that it was revealed in
honor of Ali (‘a) when he gave his ring by way of charity, as he was
prostrating during his performance of the prayers, to a poor man.

In al-Bukhāri’s *Sahīh*, Mis’ab ibn Sa’d quotes his father saying, “The
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) marched out to Tabuk after having left Ali (‘a)
behind. Ali (‘a) said to him, ‘Are you going to leave me with the
children and the women?’ He (ṣ) said to him, ‘Are you not pleased that
your status to me is like that of Aaron to Moses except there shall be
no prophet after me?’”[^28]

This tradition proves that Ali (‘a) had all the positions occupied by
Aaron, peace be upon him, among the Children of Israel with the
exception of prophethood and which is explained by the Almighty, Praise
and Exaltation are His, in these verses: “‘And give me a minister from
my family, Aaron, my brother. Add to my strength through him, and make
him share my task: So that we may celebrate Your praise without stint
and remember You without stint: For You are He Who (ever) regards us.’
(Allāh) said, ‘Your prayer is granted, O Moses!’” It is clear from these
verses that Aaron, peace be upon him was a vizier of Moses, a special
aide and a partner in leading the nation.

What emphasizes this lofty status in his appointment as the caliph of
the nation is that he was the most knowledgeable among all the *sahābah*
according to what al-Bukhāri narrates from ‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb . Ibn
‘Abbās has said, “‘Umar said, ‘The one who recites the Qur’ān the best
is my father, while the most judicious among us is Ali.”[^29]

One who is the most knowledgeable of the injunctions and the laws, as is
well known, is the one who makes the best judge. Suffices to prove that
he is the most knowledgeable among all the companions and the most wise
is that he was the gate of the city of knowledge of the Messenger of
Allāh (ṣ). In *Mustadrak al-Sahīhayn,* relying on the *isnād* of Ibn
‘Abbās, the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) said, “I am the city of knowledge and
Ali (‘a) is its gate. Whoever seek knowledge has to approach through the
gate.”[^30]

In al-Tirmidhi’s *Sahīh*, the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) is quoted as having
said, “I am the city of wisdom and Ali is its gate.”[^31] In *Mustadrak
al-Sahīhayn*, it is stated that the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) said to Ali
(‘a), “You must explain to my nation after me anything wherein they
differ.”[^32]

The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) even made the mark of hating Ali (‘a) as one
of the indications of hypocrisy as is clear from the narrative included
by Muslim in his *Sahīh* with its *isnād* to Ali (‘a) who said, “By the
One Who split the seed and created the breeze, it is a covenant from the
Ummi Prophet (ṣ) to me that none loves me except a believer (*mu’min*)
and none hates me except a hypocrite.”[^33]

Even if the Prophet (ṣ) did not appoint a successor after him, is not
the nation supposed to choose the one who has the most knowledge and
with the most distinctions in order to be its leader? We have already
clarified that Ali (‘a) was the most knowledgeable among the companions.
They used to refer to him whenever they confronted a complex theological
problem.

Similar to this is included by Abū Dawud in his *isnād* to Ibn ‘Abbās
who said, “‘Umar brought a mentally retarded woman who had committed
adultery. He consulted some people in her regard. ‘Umar ordered her
stoned. Ali ibn Abū Tālib (‘a) passed by her and inquired about her. He
was told that she was a mad woman by so-and-so who had committed
adultery, so she was ordered to be stoned. He told them to take her
back.

Then he went to him [to ‘Umar] and said to him, ‘O ‘Umar! Don’t you know
that judgment against three categories of people is lifted: the mad
person till he recovers, the one sleeping till he wakes up and the child
till he attains mental maturity?’ He said, ‘Yes.’ Ali (‘a) said, ‘Then
what is the matter with this woman that she should be stoned?’ ‘Umar
said, ‘Nothing.’ She was sent back. ‘Umar kept making *takbeer*.”[^34]
Al-Bukhāri, too, includes part of the same incident in his own
*Sahīh*.[^35]

Moreover, Imām Ali (‘a) was famous as the “Imām of the ascetics” and he
was also famous for his courage and extra-ordinary daring feats. He was
the first commando in Islam. In every Islamic battle, he played a
decisive role on the side of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ). In the Battle
of Badr, he killed with his sword, Sayf al-Fiqār, thirty Qurayshite
heroes.

In the battles of Uhud and Hunayn, he undertook a historic stand,
jeopardizing his own life in defense of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ)
following the flight of the vast majority of the sahābah! In the Battle
of Khandaq (moat), he stood to duel the giant of the polytheists, namely
‘Amr ibn Wudd al-’Āmiri whom he killed at the time when none of the
other *sahābah* dared to face him although the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ)
had three times called upon them to do so.

He (ṣ) finally permitted Ali (‘a) to face the man although Ali (‘a) was
quite young compared to most *sahābah*. In the battle for Khaybar, Allāh
granted victory at his hands, so he was able to open the gate of the
fort after the Muslims at the time could not do so. A large number of
the *sahābah* failed collectively to open it.

Imām Ali (‘a) distinguished himself from the other *sahābah* by the fact
that the time of *jāhiliyya* did not pollute him with its idols. He
received his unique upbringing at the hands of the First Teacher of
Humanity, Muhammad (ṣ), from whom he did not part for one moment as long
as the Prophet (ṣ) lived. When the Prophet (ṣ) passed away, Ali (‘a) was
tending to him. He, therefore, remained all his life receiving knowledge
and wisdom from the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ).

Hence, he deserved to be the gate of the city of knowledge of the
Prophet (ṣ), of his wisdom, and his brother. Al-Bukhāri narrates in his
*Sahīh*, relying on the *isnād* of Abdullāh ibn ‘Umar saying, “The
Prophet (ṣ) established ties of fraternity among his companions. Ali
(‘a) came with tearful eyes and said, ‘O Messenger of Allāh! You have
established ties of fraternity among your companions but did not
establish a tie of fraternity between me and anyone else.’ The Messenger
of Allāh (ṣ) said, ‘You are MY brother in the life of this world and in
the Hereafter.’”[^36] The Prophet (ṣ) even considered Ali (‘a) as being
of him as al-Bukhāri has narrated: “The Prophet (ṣ) said to Ali (‘a),
‘You are of me, and I am of you.’”[^37]

Ali (‘a) distinguished himself from the rest of the *sahābah* by
acquiring the most merits as we are told by al-Hākim in his *Mustadrak*
where he quotes Ahmad ibn Hanbal saying, “None among the companions of
the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) acquired as many virtues as Ali son of Abū
Talib (‘a).”[^38] And in *Kanz al-’Ummāl*, the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) is
quoted as having said, “Allāh ordered me to marry Fātimah (‘a) off to
Ali.”[^39]

This happened after having rejected the offer of marriage from a number
of the *sahābah* who sought her hand in order to earn the great honor of
marrying a lady who was “part” of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ), the Head
of the Believing Women and of the residents of Paradise, the lady
because of whose anger Allāh would be angry. It is quite true what one
said: “Had Ali (‘a) not been created, Fātimah (‘a) would have had no
match for marriage.”[^40]

Having stated all the above, had the selection of the caliph been truly
in the hands of the people, Ali (‘a) was the most distinguished among
the *sahābah*, hence he was the most deserving of the caliphate.

The Majority Of The Muslims Went Against The Ahādīth Relevant To Imāmate
------------------------------------------------------------------------

We have already explained the evidences proving that mastership is the
right of Ahlul Bayt (‘a) in general, that the Twelve Imāms (‘a) from
among them were to be the caliphs over the nation, starting with Imām
Ali (‘a), following the departure of the Chosen One, Muhammad (ṣ), to
the Most High Companion. One decisive question remains to be answered in
order to remove a great deal of the ambiguity that coincided with the
tale of the dispute between Ahl al-Sunnah and the Shī’ahs throughout the
Islamic history. The question is: “If the previous texts truly prove the
Imāmate of Ahlul Bayt (‘a), why and how did the caliphate become the lot
of others? Were not the *sahābah* following the Prophet (ṣ) in
everything in which he ordered them?”

In order to answer this question, we have to bring about some important
historical events at the dawn of Islam which had the major impact in
altering the direction of the Islamic history, letting the reader pass
his own judgment thereafter. Among the weighty events were the
following:

1. Some *sahābah* of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) prohibited him from
writing his will.

2. Some *sahābah* lagged behind and did not join Usamah’s military
campaign, casting doubts about his leadership.

3. events of the *saqīfa* and the swearing of allegiance to Abū Bakr

4. caliphate of ‘Umar

5. caliphate of ‘Uthmān

6. Battle of the Camel and the march of the Mother of the Faithful (‘a)

7. Battle of Siffīn and the rebellion of Mu’āwiyah

8. Martyrdom of Imām Ali (‘a)

9. reconciliation treaty and the martyrdom of Imām al-Hasan (‘a)

10. Karbalā’ Revolution and the Martyrdom of Imām al-Husayn (‘a)

We will discuss each of these events in some details as follows:

### I. Some Sahābah of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) prohibited him from writing his will.

In his *Sahīh*, al-Bukhāri records six narratives about this incident
which took place four days only before the demise of the Prophet (ṣ).
Ibn ‘Abbās, may Allāh be pleased with him, is quoted as having said,
“Thursday! What a Thursday it was! The pain of the Messenger of Allāh
(ṣ) intensified, so he said, ‘Bring me something so I may write for you
a document that will never let you stray thereafter.’

They disputed with each other, and nobody should dispute near a prophet.
They said, ‘What is the matter with him?! Has he hallucinated? Inquire
of him.’ They went to him, whereupon he said, ‘Leave me alone, for the
pain in which I am is better than what you are attributing to me.’”[^41]

In another narrative, Ibn ‘Abbās is quoted as having said, “When death
approached the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ), and there were men in the house,
the Prophet (ṣ) said, ‘Let me write for you a document after which you
shall never stray.’ Some of them said, ‘The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) has
been overcome by pain, and you have with you the Qur’ān. Suffices us the
Book of Allāh.’ The people of the house differed with each other and
disputed.

Some of them said, ‘Come close to him so he may write you a document
after which you shall never stray,’ while others repeated what ‘Umar had
said. When their fuss and dissension intensified, the Messenger of Allāh
(ṣ) said, ‘Get away!’” Ubaydullāh said, “Ibn ‘Abbās used to say, ‘The
real calamity, the whole calamity, is what stopped the Messenger of
Allāh (ṣ) from writing that document for them because of their
dissension and arguing.’”[^42]

According to a third narrative, Ibn ‘Abbās said, “When death approached
the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ), and there were men in the house including
‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb, the Prophet (ṣ) said, ‘Let me write you something
after (the writing of) which you shall never stray.’ ‘Umar said, ‘The
Prophet (ṣ) has been overcome by pain, and you have with you the Qur’ān.
Suffices us the Book of Allāh (ṣ).’

The people at the house disputed with each other and disagreed. Some of
them were saying, ‘Get close [to the Prophet (ṣ)] so the Prophet (ṣ) may
write you a book after which you shall never stray,’ while others
repeated what ‘Umar had said. When their fuss and dispute near the
Prophet (ṣ) intensified, the Messenger of Allāh said, ‘Get away!’
Ubaydullāh said, ‘Ibn ‘Abbās used to say that the calamity, the whole
calamity, is what stopped the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) from writing them
such a document because of their dispute and fuss.’”[^43]

In Muslim’s *Sahīh*, their response was: “... *they* said that the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) was hallucinating.”[^44]

In another narrative, the following is stated: “... ‘Umar made a
statement indicating that the pain had overcome the Messenger of Allāh
(ṣ) then said, ‘We have with us the Qur’ān. Suffices us the Book of
Allah.”[^45] As you can see, the word “hallucinating” was replaced in
this latest narrative with a more polite reference to pain.

Discerning the above-quoted narratives, we become certain that the first
person who ascribed hallucination to the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) was
‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb and who was supported by some *sahābah* who were
present there, causing the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) to be angry and to
dismiss them with “Get away from me!”

The truth is that this incident gives the impression which permits no
doubt that the dignity of the Gracious Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) was
harmed. This brought me a great shock when I came to know about it and,
I believe, the vast majority of Sunnis are ignorant of it despite the
horrors of its implications. Many individuals to whom I related this
incident did not believe it because of the weight of the shock.

One of them even solemnly swore that if there was any possibility at all
that such an incident is, indeed, recorded in Bukhāri’s *Sahīh*, he will
never trust any other narrative in such *Sahīh*. Some of them believed
this incident but, having come to know that caliph ‘Umar was the first
to charge the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) with hallucination, became
extremely angry and refused to believe it. They even went as far as not
trusting al-Bukhāri nor any of the books of *hadīth* which narrate
incidents such as this that tarnish the image of the “righteous
ancestors,” according to his view.

The secret behind the amazement in this incident is that all the
*sahābah* who were then present should have given priority, without any
delay, to what the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) had ordered them to do so that
he could write for them his last will, the will that carried the destiny
of including what would bring the Muslims after his demise security
against straying, if they upheld and obeyed, as is clear from this
narrative.

Who, from among the Sunnis, could expect that the last meeting between
the Prophet (ṣ) and the senior *sahābah* would end up in his dismissal
of them after they had bidden him farewell in such a pain-inflicting
word which could have only one single implication? This implication is
mentioned by al-Nawawi in his *Sharh* [commentary] of Muslim’s *Sahīh*.
This implication is stated there as nothing other than “hallucination”;
we seek refuge with Allāh.

According to Imām Sharaf ad-Dīn, “If you contemplate on the statement of
the Prophet (ṣ) wherein he says, ‘Bring me something so I may write for
you a document after [the writing of] which you shall never stray’ and
his statement in the *Hadīth* of the Two Weighty Things wherein he says,
‘I have left among you that which, if you uphold it, you shall never
stray: the Book of Allāh (ṣ) and my *‘itra*, my Ahlul Bayt (‘a)’, you
will learn that the objective of both *ahādīth* is one and the same.

During his sickness, the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) wanted to write for them
the details of what the *Hadīth* of the Two Weighty Things obligates,
but he changed his mind about writing it following their statement with
which they surprised him and which forced him to change his mind lest
some people should succeed in opening a gate to cast doubt about the
Prophethood.

This is so because no effect for such writing remained except dissension
and disagreement after him whether he “hallucinated” in what he wrote or
not; we seek refuge with Allāh, since they disputed in this regard in
his own presence as the previous traditions demonstrate.

They contented themselves with what they have of the Qur’ān, justifying
their turning away from carrying out what the Prophet (ṣ) had told them
to do as he was in a condition of sickness. It is as though they had
forgotten what the Almighty had said about His Glorious Prophet (ṣ):

***“... Nor does he say (anything) of (his own) desire. It is no less
than inspiration sent down to*** ***him: He was taught by One mighty in
power” (Qur’ān, 53:3-5)***

as well as in the following verse:

***“What Allāh has bestowed on His Prophet (and taken away) from the
people of the towns*** ***belongs to Allāh, to His Prophet, and to
kindred and orphans, the needy and the wayfarers, so*** ***that it may
not be taken in turn by the rich among you. So take what the Prophet
assigns to*** ***you, and abstain from what he withholds from you”
(Qur’ān, 59:7)***

as well as in this verse:

***“Truly this is the word of a most honorable messenger, endowed with
power, with rank before the Lord of the throne, with authority there,
(and) faithful of his trust. And (O people!) your Companion is not
possessed” (Qur’ān, 81:22).***[^46]

Ibn ‘Abbās described the latter situation very well when he said, “The
calamity, the whole calamity, is what stopped the Messenger of Allāh
from writing that document for them because of their disputing and
fussing.”

Despite all of this, and according to what Ibn ‘Abbās had narrated and
what al-Bukhāri had included in his *Sahīh*, the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ)
did not die before making this statement: “... Leave me alone, for the
pain in which I am is better than what you are attributing to me.” Then
he enjoined them, by way of a will, to uphold three things: to get the
polytheist people out of the Arabian Peninsula, to treat the envoy as
handsomely as he [the Prophet (ṣ)] used to do, and he abstained from
mentioning the third one, or he said he forgot it!”[^47]

It is certain that the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) had articulated these
recommendations in the presence of his family and some of his relatives,
including Abdullāh ibn ‘Abbās, his cousin, in one of the four days which
followed the day of the calamity, the Thursday Calamity.

But what is odd is that the third item on the will, based on the
integrity of al-Bukhāri, is not mentioned by Ibn ‘Abbās because he was
too reluctant to do so. At any rate, the Shī’ah, according to the
narratives of Ahlul Bayt (‘a), have stated that the “forgotten” issue or
the one shrouded with silence is the appointment of Ali (‘a) as the
caliph.

### II. Some Sahābah Lagged Behind Usāmah’s Military Expedition and Cast Doubts about His Leadership

All Muslims know that the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) tied the knot for the
military expedition under the command of Usāmah son of Zayd to invade
the Romans. Usāmah was then seventeen. This was the last military
expedition during the life-time of the Prophet (ṣ). None from among the
prominent Muhājirūn and Ansār, such as Abū Bakr, ‘Umar, Abū ‘Ubaydah,
Sa’d and their likes, was excluded from being enlisted by the
Prophet[^48]. This fact is unanimously accepted by writers of
biographies and of history books; it is taken for granted.

The Prophet (ṣ) ordered Usāmah to march, but they dragged their feet,
and some of them cast doubts about his leadership, so much so that the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) ascended the pulpit, as al-Bukhāri records
according to his reliance on Ibn ‘Umar, to address them. The latter
says, “The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) placed Usāmah as commander of the
people. They cast doubts about such an appointment, so he (ṣ) said, ‘If
you cast doubts about his appointment, you did, indeed, cast doubt about
the appointment of his father before him. By Allāh! He [his father] was
worthy of being in charge, and he was among the people whom I loved the
most, and this one [his son] is the one I love the most after him.’[^49]

Then he (ṣ) urged them once more to march and to hurry,” but they again
dragged their feet. The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) passed away before they
marched out.

From this incident, we deduct the following:

1. Some *sahābah* followed their own *ijtihād* despite the presence of a
statement made by the Prophet (ṣ), objecting to his appointment of
Usāmah over them on account of his young age although the Messenger of
Allāh (ṣ) had tied his flag with his own hand. If we understand all of
this, it will be difficult for us to understand how and why they
followed their own *ijtihād* with regard to bigger issues such as the
caliphate of Ali (‘a) and his being the Imām as you will see later.

2. The appointment by the Prophet (ṣ) of Usāmah as their military leader
although he was only seventeen was a practical lesson for the *sahābah*
in the issue of accepting the leadership of someone who is younger than
them especially since signs of his extreme anger became evident when
they cast doubts about his choice of the young man as their military
field commander.

3. When the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) tied the knot for Usāmah, he knew
that he was about to depart to the most Exalted Companion, and
undoubtedly he was contemplating on the dispute over the caliphate that
would follow; therefore, his extreme wisdom dictated that senior
Muhājirūn and Ansār should be placed in that detachment which he (ṣ)
ordered to march out only a few days before his demise so that there
would be no time to dispute over the leadership issue, let alone using
*ijtihād* in its regard.

Ali (‘a) kept the Prophet (ṣ) company during the entire period of his
sickness. After the demise of the Prophet (ṣ), Ali (‘a) remained busy
giving him his burial bath while the Muhājirūn and the Ansār went to the
shed of Banī Sā’idah to dispute with one another about the issue of
leadership after having dragged their feet and refused to march out in
the military campaign of Usāmah in which they had already been enlisted
apparently out of their own *ijtihād* and “worry” about what would
happen in their absence after the death of the Prophet (ṣ)!

Thus, it is difficult to accept or to absorb the issue of the refusal of
some *sahābah* to accept Ali ibn Abū Tālib (‘a) as their Imām;
otherwise, how can one interpret the refusal of the same folks of Usāmah
as their leader and their casting doubts about it although it, too, was
issued as an order by the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ)?

Since both incidents of the “Thursday Calamity” and the casting of doubt
about the leadership of Usāmah took place during the life-time of the
Prophet (ṣ), bearing in mind all the horrors of their implications, what
would one expect to happen after his own demise (ṣ)?!

### III. The Saqīfa Events and Abū Bakr’s Inauguration

While Ali (‘a) and those in his company from among the relatives of the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) were busy making preparations for the burial of
the Prophet (ṣ) after his departure from this life, ‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb
announced his rejection of the notion that the Prophet (ṣ) had already
died and threatened to kill anyone who said otherwise.

He did not believe that he (ṣ) had died till Abū Bakr returned from a
place outside Medīna called al-Sankh. As mentioned by al-Bukhāri in his
*Sahīh*, relying on ‘Ā’isha , the latter said, “The Messenger of Allāh
(ṣ) died when Abū Bakr was at al-Sankh.” Ismā’īl says, “She means the
highland.” ‘Umar kept saying, “By Allāh! The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) did
not die!”

‘Ā’isha went on to say, “‘Umar also said, ‘By Allāh! Never did I like
anything except that, and Allāh shall send him back, and he will cut off
men’s hands and legs.” Abū Bakr came, uncovered the face of the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) and kissed him.

Then he said, “By my father and mother, you are good alive and dead! By
Allāh Who holds my soul in His hand, Allāh shall never permit you to
taste death twice,” then he left as he said, “O one who keeps swearing
[meaning ‘Umar]! Do calm down!”[^50]

As for the Ansār, they met at their shed, that is, “the Saqīfa of Banī
Sā’idah,” and nominated Sa’d ibn ‘Abādah to succeed the Messenger of
Allāh (ṣ) as the man in charge. When senior Muhājirūn (i.e. Abū Bakr,
‘Umar and Abū ‘Ubaydah) came to know about it, they immediately went
there and announced that they themselves were more worthy of it. An
argument arose between the Muhājirūn and the Ansār wherein a dispute
erupted.

Sa’d ibn ‘Abādah, leader of the Ansār, stood up and said, “We are the
supporters of Islam and its regiment while you, folks of the Muhājirūn,
are his kinsfolk. A drummer from among your people has beaten her drum,
hence they want to reduce us from our own roots and to hold us back from
the matter.”[^51]

Abū Bakr stood up and delivered a speech in which he referred to the
merits of al-Muhājirūn, deriving his argument from their descent from
Quraysh in order to prove their being more worthy of the caliphate as
al-Bukhāri mentions in his *Sahīh*. “... so Abū Bakr al-Siddiq, ‘Umar
ibn al-Khattāb and Abū ‘Ubaydah ibn al-Jarrāh went to them. ‘Umar
started to talk, but Abū Bakr silenced him.”[^52]

Abū Bakr said, “... No; but we are the princes while you are the
viziers. But we are the princes and you are the viziers. And they are
the best among the Arabs in status and in lineage[^53]..., and I have
recommended for you one of these two men.”[^54] So they swore the oath
of allegiance to ‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb or to Abū ‘Ubaydah ibn
al-Jarrāh[^55]. One of the prominent Ansārs, namely al-Habāb ibn
al-Mundhir, responded to him by saying, ‘No by Allāh, we shall not do
that! One of us shall be an *amīr* and one of you [too] shall be an
*amīr*”[^56]

In another narrative, the Ansār responded thus: “A speaker from among
the Ansār said, ‘We are its cultivated stump and anticipated cluster. An
*amīr* should be [chosen] from among us, and an *amīr* should be chosen
from among you [too], O people of Quraysh!’ Voices of dissent rose and
there was a lot of fuss, so much so that dissension was feared.”[^57]

When the crisis reached such an extent, ‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb’s role
came. Said he, “Far away it is for two to share one and the same horn!
By Allāh! The Arabs shall never accept you as their *amirs* while their
Prophet (ṣ) is not from among you. We have in this the argument against
whoever dissents.”

Al-Habab ibn al-Mundhir, one of the Ansār dignitaries, responded to him
by saying, “O folks of the Ansār! Unite your views; do not listen to
this man’s statement or to that of his fellows, for you are more worthy
of this matter.” But the Ansār, meanwhile, disagreed among themselves.
Aseed ibn Hadheer, leader of the Aws tribe, who opposed Sa’d ibn
‘Abādah, leader of the Khazraj tribe, went and announced to the
Muhājirūn his own support for them, promising them to swear the oath of
allegiance to them.

It was then that ‘Umar stood up and said to Abū Bakr, “Stretch your hand
so I may swear fealty to you.” ‘Umar swore the oath of allegiance to him
and so did some Muhājirūn and Ansār. As al-Bukhāri, who relies on
‘Ā’isha, narrates, ‘Umar took the oath of allegiance for Abū Bakr
through threats and intimidations.

He quotes ‘Ā’isha as having said, “Their address was rendered by Allāh
as beneficial: ‘Umar scared people. There was hypocrisy among them, so
Allāh responded thus to it.”[^58] At the time, with regard to Sa’d ibn
‘Abādah’s refusal to swear fealty, and he was an old man, al-Bukhāri
states in his *Sahīh* saying that ‘Umar then said, “Rather, Allāh did
kill him!”[^59]

This much suffices to let the curtain fall down on the Saqīfa stage act
of events which concluded with Abū Bakr being inaugurated after a
publicly witnessed struggle between the Muhājirūn and the Ansār over the
caliphate.

This struggle was tinted by a *jāhili* attitude as clearly appears from
discerning the nature of the arguments between both parties and the
arguments which each party used against the other. Caliph ‘Umar ibn
al-Khattāb admitted near the end of his life that swearing the oath of
allegiance to Abū Bakr was “a slip, but Allāh protected us from its
evil,” according to his own view.[^60]

Everyone knows that Imām Ali (‘a) and all his supporters from among Banū
Hāshim and other *sahābah*, such as al-Zubair, Talhah, ‘Ammār, Salmān,
Miqdād, Abū Dharr, Khuzaymah (the man with the two testimonies), Khālid
ibn Sa’eed, Ubayy ibn Ka’b, Abū Ayyūb al-Ansāri and others, were not
present at all during such a swearing, nor did they enter the Saqīfa
that day at all because they were all entirely preoccupied with the
great calamity: the demise of the Prophet (ṣ) and their performance of
the obligation to prepare his corpse for burial and to lay his pure body
to rest.

The fellows of the Saqīfa sealed that deal with Abū Bakr; therefore, Ali
(‘a) and his followers had no choice except to express their dissent and
to refuse to swear fealty as appears from the following narrative by
‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb: “... We were fully aware of the event when Allāh
caused His Prophet (ṣ) to die, but the Ansār disagreed with us, and they
assembled in their entirety at the Saqīfa of Banī Sā’idah. Among those
who dissented were: Ali and al-Zubair and those with them.”[^61]

Imām Ali ibn Abū Tālib (‘a) saw no result for protesting against them
except dissension. He preferred to lose his own right rather than see
such a dissension during such circumstances because of the serious
perils that surrounded Islam from all directions. There was a danger
against Islam from the hypocrites of Medīna and those around them from
among the bedouins who felt emboldened after the departure of the Chosen
One (ṣ).

Add to this the danger of Musaylamah the Liar, Tulayhah the
mischief-maker and Sajāh, the woman of trickery, in addition to the
Kaisers and Caesars and others who were lying in ambush against the
Muslims.

There were other dangers threatening the very existence of Islam. It was
only natural that Imām Ali ibn Abū Tālib (‘a) should sacrifice his right
but not obliterating the argument of his being already nominated [by the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ)] for it. He wanted to keep his right for the
caliphate and the ability to argue against those who followed their own
way of thinking.

He wanted to do all of this in order not to cause the dissension the
opportunity for which the enemies of Islam wished to take advantage of.
He, therefore, sat at home and did not go to participate in the
inauguration. And so did those with him. This lasted for six whole
months.[^62]

Al-Bukhāri narrates another incident. It, too, proves that had Ali (‘a)
had the sufficient force to extract his right by force at that time
without dissension taking place, he would have done just that. ‘Ā’isha
is quoted as having said, “She [Fātima (‘a)] survived the Prophet (ṣ)
for only six months. When she died, her husband Ali (‘a) buried her at
night. Abū Bakr neither called the *adhān* nor performed the funeral
prayers for her. Ali (‘a) enjoyed prestige among the people during the
life-time of Fātima (‘a). When she died, people turned their faces away
from him, so he sought to reconcile with Abū Bakr and swear fealty to
him.

During those months, he was never willing to do so. He sent a message to
Abū Bakr saying, ‘You may come to visit us, provided nobody accompanies
you,’ out of his concern that ‘Umar might be present. ‘Umar said, ‘No,
by Allāh! You should not enter their house alone.’ Abū Bakr said, ‘Why
not?! What do you think they might do to me?! By Allāh! I shall go to
visit them.’”[^63]

Imām Sharaf ad-Dīn [Sadr ad-Dīn al-Mūsawi] has interpreted this conduct
of Imām Ali (‘a) by saying, “Had Ali (‘a) hastened to swear fealty to
them at the time, he would not have driven his argument home, nor would
have the argument of his followers, but he combined, in his action, both
safeguarding the creed and keeping his own right for the caliphate.

The circumstances then did not permit resistance by the sword, nor
debating one argument against another.”[^64] This fact appears quite
clearly when Abū Sufyān tried more than once to persuade him to uphold
his right to the caliphate. He said to Imām Ali (‘a), “If you wish, I
shall fill the land with cavalry and with infantry to confront them, and
I shall block their exit therefrom.”[^65]

But Imām Ali (‘a) refused such type of “assistance” every time because
he knew what Abū Sufyān had in mind: igniting the fire of dissension and
waging a war after which Islam would never stand on its feet.

#### Wrath of Fātima (‘a)

Fātima (‘a) passed away while being angry with Abū Bakr because he had
deprived her of the inheritance left for her by her father, the Prophet
(ṣ). Relying on the authority of ‘Ā’isha, al-Bukhāri quotes the latter
as saying, “... Fātima (‘a) daughter of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) was
to receive the inheritance left for her from the *fay’* [property gained
as a peace offering from a hostile party] which Allāh had bestowed upon
His Messenger (ṣ).

Abū Bakr said to her, ‘The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) had said, ‘We
[prophets] leave no inheritance; what we leave behind is charity;’
therefore, Fātima (‘a) daughter of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) became
angry. She dissociated herself from Abū Bakr till she died.

She lived for only six months after the death of the Messenger of Allāh
(ṣ).” ‘Ā’isha adds saying, “And Fātima (‘a) demanded that Abū Bakr give
her the share to which she was entitled of the inheritance of the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) from Khaybar, namely Fadak, and the Medīna
charity, but Abū Bakr refused saying, ‘I shall not leave out anything
which the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) used to do.’”[^66]

Her anger with Abū Bakr was so great that it prompted her to go as far
as leaving a will with Ali (‘a) that Abū Bakr should not perform the
funeral prayers for her after her demise, nor to even walk behind her
coffin. Imām Ali (‘a) buried her pure body secretly at night as
al-Bukhāri states in his *Sahīh*, relying on ‘Ā’isha who said, “... Abū
Bakr refused that anything should be paid to Fātima (‘a).

Fātima (‘a), therefore, was extremely angry with him, so much so that
she dissociated herself from him and never spoke to him till she died.
She lived after the demise of the Prophet (ṣ) for six months. When she
died, her husband buried her at night. Abū Bakr never called the *adhān*
[to announce her death], nor did he perform the funeral prayers for
her.”[^67]

The land of Fadak which Fātima (‘a) demanded is a village in Hijāz which
used to be inhabited by some Jews. When the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ)
commenced the conquest of Khayber, Allāh cast fear in the hearts of
those Jews; therefore, they reconciled with the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ)
in exchange for Fadak.

Thus, Fadak became the property of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) because
neither cavalry nor infantry was ever involved in its conquest. Then he
gave it to his daughter Fātima (‘a) in addition to what the Messenger of
Allāh (ṣ) had owned out of the levy of the *khums* from Khayber and his
own charities. All of these used to be the personal property of the
Messenger of Allāh; nobody else had any right in it besides him.

Fātima (‘a), then, according to Abū Bakr’s view, was demanding to get
what was not hers. She, according to this view, had to be doing either
one of two things without any third possibility:

**First:** She was ignorant and did not know the rulings applicable to
the inheritance of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) (while Abū Bakr knew), or

**Second:** She was a liar who coveted to take what did not belong to
her.

The fact is that both are impossible to attribute to al-Zahra (‘a) for
whose anger Allāh used to become angry, the Head of the Believing Women
and of the people of Paradise that she was, the lady who was purified by
Allāh Almighty from any sin or impurity as has already been stated
above. According to what is recorded by al-Bukhāri in his *Sahīh*, the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) said, “O Fātima! Are you not pleased with being
the Head of the believing women or the Head of the women of this
nation?!”[^68] “Fātima (‘a) is part of me; whoever makes her angry makes
me angry”[^69] “Fātima (‘a) is the Head of the women of Paradise.”[^70]

Even if we submit that Fātima (‘a) was like any other woman and did not
have all such distinctions, as the narratives above indicate, her being
the daughter of the teacher of humanity and the wife of the Commander of
the Faithful Ali (‘a) for whom they testified that he was the most
judicious of all, the most knowledgeable, it negates from her any
possibility of being ignorant.

This is so because had Fātima (‘a) been demanding what did not belong to
her, and that the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) was not to leave any
inheritance, according to the view of Abū Bakr, either her father (ṣ) or
her husband (‘a) was supposed to inform her, especially since her anger
with Abū Bakr lasted for six months. This was the entire period which
Fātima (‘a) lived after the departure of the Chosen One (ṣ) from this
world.

But far it is for Fātima (‘a) to be as such. We seek refuge with Allāh
against thinking like that of her. When she came to know that Abū Bakr
deprived her of her right of ownership of Fadak and the property which
Allāh had bestowed upon His Prophet (ṣ) in Medīna, in addition to the
*khums* of Khayber, she (‘a) went to meet him, and he was among a crowd
of the Muhājirūn and the Ansār. She delivered a speech which caused the
people to burst in tears, a speech from which we would like to quote the
following:

... while you claim that we have neither inheritance nor any share; do
you wish to implement the judgment of the days of *jāhiliyya*? Whose
judgment is better than that of Allāh for people who have conviction? O
folks of Islam! Does the Book of Allāh say that you can get your
inheritance from your father while I have no inheritance at all? You
will truly then bring about falsehood.

Then she recited the verse saying,

***“Muhammad is no more than a Prophet: Many prophets passed away before
him. If he died or were killed, would you then turn back on your heels?
If any did turn back on his heels, he would not harm Allāh in the least,
but Allāh (on the other hand) will swiftly reward those who (serve Him)
with gratitude” (Qur’ān, 3:144).***

Then she went on to say, “O people of Qayla! Should I thus complain
about the injustice of being deprived of inheritance from my father
while you see and hear me?” up to the end of that speech.[^71]

Moreover, the meaning of the statement “We [prophets] leave no
inheritance” which the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) made does not convey the
inapplicability of the laws of inheritance to prophets according to the
*ijtihād* of Abū Bakr. The Holy Qur’ān states the following:

***“And Solomon was David’s heir” (Qur’ān, 27:16).***

Zakariyya [Zacharias] pleaded to the Almighty to grant him someone who
would be his heir, so Allāh granted him Yahya [John the Baptist]:

***“... ‘(one who) will (truly) inherit me, and represent the posterity
of Jacob, and make him, O Lord, one with whom You are well pleased!’
(His prayer was answered:) ‘O Zakariyya! We give you glad tidings of a
son: His name shall be Yahya (John): We have never conferred distinction
on any by that name before’” (Qur’ān, 19:6-7).***

Hence, the meaning of “... inherit me” in the previous verse does not
convey the sense of inheriting his [Zakariyya’s] status as a prophet,
for prophethood is not hereditary. Thus, the meaning of “We [prophets]
leave no inheritance” in the statement of the Prophet (ṣ) means that
prophets do not hoard gold and silver so it may be their legacy after
them as do kings and those who seek the life of this world.

With Abū Bakr thus depriving Fātima (‘a) of inheriting the Prophet (ṣ)
gave the opportunity to some people to claim that this was the real
reason why Ali (‘a) was reluctant to swear fealty to Abū Bakr, not
because he (‘a) saw himself as the legitimate claimant to the post of
caliph. Had the matter been as such, how do you explain the reluctance
of a large number of the *sahābah* to swear fealty to Abū Bakr while
granting their support to Ali (‘a)?

And how do you explain this statement of ‘Ā’isha: “Ali (‘a) sent a
message to Abū Bakr saying, ‘You may come to visit us, provided nobody
accompanies you,’ out of his concern that ‘Umar might be present”? ‘Umar
ibn al-Khattāb had nothing to do with the issue of contention regarding
the inheritance of the Prophet (ṣ), whereas he played a decisive role in
ending the dispute at the Saqīfa in Abū Bakr’s favor.

Moreover, the issue of the inheritance is not considered a stumbling
block or a justification under any condition for the refusal of Ali (‘a)
and Fātima (‘a) to swear fealty to Abū Bakr or even for their reluctance
to do so.

#### Did Fātima (‘a) Die the Death of Jāhiliyya?

Relying on the authority of [Abdullāh] ibn Abbās, al-Bukhāri has quoted
the latter saying that the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) said, “One who detests
something which his *amīr* does must be patient, for anyone who deviates
the distance of a span from authority dies the death of the days of
ignorance [*jāhiliyya]*.”[^72] And in his *Sahīh*, Muslim cites the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) saying, “One who dies without the responsibility
of a fealty dies the days of *jāhiliyya*.”[^73]

And in Ahmad’s *Musnad*, the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) is quoted as having
said, “Whoever dies without an Imām dies the death of *jahiliyya*.”[^74]
These three traditions prove decisively that anyone who dies without
swearing fealty to an *amīr* or an Imām dies the death of *jāhiliyya*.
There is no doubt that what is meant here is the Imām obedience to whom
is obligatory according to the divine Sharī’ah and nobody else.

Fātima al-Zahrā’ (‘a) passed away without swearing fealty to Abū Bakr.
Furthermore, she died while being angry with him, leaving a will that he
should not perform the funeral prayers for her nor even walk behind her
coffin according to what al-Bukhāri states in his *Sahīh*, citing
‘Ā’isha relating about how Abū Bakr had deprived Fātima (‘a) of her
inheritance from the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ):

“Fātima (‘a), therefore, was extremely angry with him, so much so that
she dissociated herself from him and never spoke to him till she died.
She lived after the demise of the Prophet (ṣ) for six months. When she
died, her husband buried her at night. Abū Bakr never called the *adhān*
[to announce her death], nor did he perform the funeral prayers for
her.”[^75]

How, then, can anyone say that al-Zahrā’ (‘a) did not follow the
Prophetic instructions in the previous traditions? Rather, she
demonstrated her patience about what she saw and hated of caliph Abū
Bakr’s action. She did not obey him. She objected to his caliphate. She
was angry with him. And she left a will that he should not perform the
funeral prayers for her, nor should he even walk in her funeral
procession, something which pointed to the fact that not only did she
distance herself from the authority of Abū Bakr for one span but rather
many miles!

How can one say, therefore, that Fātima al-Zahrā’ (‘a) died the death of
*jāhiliyya*? But Fātima (‘a), according to the consensus of all Islamic
sects, was the Head of believing women, the Head of the women of
Paradise, as al-Bukhāri confirmed in his *Sahīh*, citing the Prophet (ṣ)
saying, “O Fātima! Are you not pleased with being the Head of the
believing women or the Head of the women of this nation?!”[^76]

Moreover, the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) used to be angry whenever she was
angry. This undoubtedly means that Allāh Almighty would become angry
whenever she was angry according to this tradition: “The Prophet (ṣ)
said, ‘Fātima is part of me. Whoever angers her angers me (too)’.”[^77]
The Imām (or *amīr*) obedience to whom is obligatory, and one who does
not swear the oath of allegiance to him dies the death of *jāhiliyya,*
is surely neither Abū Bakr, nor Mu’āwiyah the blood-shedder, nor their
likes.

### IV ‘Umar’s Caliphate

When Abū Bakr became sick, he called ‘Uthmān ibn ‘Affān to his presence
and said to him, “Write the following: In the Name of Allāh, the most
Gracious, the most Merciful. This is a covenant from Abū Bakr son of Abū
Quhāfah to the Muslims.” It was then that he became unconscious.
‘Uthmān, therefore, went on to write the following: “I leave as my
successor over you ‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb, and I do not hide from you
anything good.”

Then Abū Bakr regained his consciousness, so ‘Uthmān said to him, “I see
that you feared lest the Muslims would dispute if I passed away during
my unconsciousness; is that so?” Abū Bakr answered in the affirmative,
whereupon ‘Uthmān said, “May Allāh reward you with goodness on behalf of
Islam and Muslims.” The writing was kept where it had been.[^78]

It is also narrated that ‘Umar was holding in his hand the sheet on
which Abū Bakr named him as his successor on the day of the Saqīfa when
he scared people and thus took from them the oath of allegiance for Abū
Bakr through his coercion as has already been proven above, taking
advantage of the split in the ranks of the Ansār and in the presence of
those who held in their hands the legitimate right to be the caliphs and
who were busy preparing for the funeral of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ).

Abū Bakr also played the same role by installing ‘Umar as the caliph
after him. It cost him nothing but a little ink. Despite the extreme
pain of Abū Bakr’s ailment during the writing of that will, even during
his unconsciousness at the time, nobody at all said that Abū Bakr was
hallucinating regarding what was written.

Contrariwise, caliph ‘Umar and those who supported him did not hesitate
to accuse the Prophet (ṣ) with such a painful word [“*yahjur*,
hallucinating”] when the Prophet (ṣ) asked them to get him some writing
material so that a statement would be written for them after the writing
of which they would never stray.

Abū Bakr claimed that the reason why he named ‘Umar as the caliph after
him was his fear lest dissension should take place after his death. Thus
did the Sunnis accept his excuse after he had violated the principle of
*shūra* which they claim should be the principle according to which the
Muslims should elect their caliph. You will see later how they also
accepted the caliphate of Mu’āwiyah and his son Yazīd after his death
although these ascended to power through intimidation and the force of
the sword, killing many Muslims in the process, especially the
descendants of the pure *‘itra* of Ahlul Bayt (‘a).

But the question which we wished to put forth here is this: “Why did the
Sunnis refuse the notion that the Prophet (ṣ) did, indeed, name the
caliph who was to succeed him as they did accept it from Abū Bakr
especially since the dispute about the caliphate at the time of the
death of the Prophet (ṣ) was much greater than those when Abū Bakr died,
in addition to the clear texts about the importance of referring to
Ahlul Bayt (‘a) whenever the Muslims disputed with each other after the
departure of the Chosen One (ṣ)? And the caliphate of Ali (‘a)?!”

### V ‘Uthmān’s Caliphate

When caliph ‘Umar was stabbed, he was told that his successor had
already been named, so he said, “Had Abū ‘Ubaydah ibn al-Jarrāh been
alive, I would have named him as my successor. And had Sālim, slave of
Abū Hudhayfah, been alive, I would have named him as my successor.” Then
he said to them, “Some men say that the swearing of fealty to Abū Bakr
was a slip from the evil of which Allāh protected us, and that the
fealty to ‘Umar lacked consultation, and the issue after me is to be
resolved through *shūra*.”[^79]

Said he, “I have determined your issue to be resolved by a number of
early Muhājirūn” whom he named saying, “Call to me Ali (‘a), ‘Uthmān,
Talhah, al-Zubayr, Abd al-Rahmān ibn ‘Awf and Sa’d ibn Abū Waqqās. If
four persons agree [to choose the same person], the remaining two must
follow the view of the [first] four. And if the views are split between
three and three, you should follow the view of Abd al-Rahmān ibn ‘Awf;
therefore, listen [to him] and obey...”[^80]

From the above narrative it becomes obvious that caliph ‘Umar arranged
for the candidate to be named by Abd al-Rahmān ibn ‘Awf. This is a third
portrait of the type of *shūra* which they [Sunnis] advocate... Caliph
‘Umar ordered Abd al-Rahmān ibn ‘Awf to require a condition in the
candidate for whom fealty would be sworn. This condition is that he
should act upon the line of both senior *sahābis* (Abū Bakr and ‘Umar)
in addition to acting upon the Book of Allāh and the Sunnah of His
Prophet (ṣ).

As was expected, the six persons split into two parties: three persons
and two candidates. The first three were: Ali (‘a), Talhah and
al-Zubayr, and their candidate was Ali (‘a). As for the three in the
other party, they were: Sa’d, ‘Uthmān and Talhah, and their candidate
was ‘Uthmān. Imām Ali (‘a) rejected the condition of acting upon the
line of both senior *sahābis* saying, “I shall follow the Book of Allāh
(ṣ) and the Sunnah of His Prophet (ṣ) and my own *ijtihād,*”[^81]
whereas ‘Uthmān accepted the condition, becoming a caliph accordingly.

Al-Bukhāri records a portion of this incident in his own *Sahīh*. He
cites al-Hasūr ibn Makhramah saying, “Abd al-Rahmān [ibn ‘Awf] knocked
at my door after a good portion of the night had already lapsed till I
woke up. He said, ‘I see that you are asleep. By Allāh, my eyes have not
tasted much sleep. Come, call al-Zubayr and Sa’d to my presence.’ I told
them to meet him, so he consulted with them.

Then he called upon me and said, ‘Call Ali (‘a) to my presence.’ I
invited him [Ali (‘a)] to meet with him. He talked privately with him
till the night’s color started to fade. Then Ali (‘a) left him
optimistically. Then he said to me, ‘Call ‘Uthmān to my presence.’ I
did. He talked privately with him till the call of the *mu’athin* to the
*fajr* prayers separated them from each other.

Having led the people for the morning prayers, and once the same
individuals assembled near the pulpit [of the Prophet (ṣ)], he called to
his presence those of the Muhājirūn and the Ansār who were present and
also sent messages for the commanders of the troops to meet there, and
these were all loyal to ‘Umar. Once they all gathered together, Abd
al-Rahmān recited both testimonies [that “There is God except Allāh and
Muhammad (ṣ) is the Messenger of Allāh], Abd al-Rahmān said, ‘O Ali! I
have looked into the affairs of the people and found no peer among them
for ‘Uthmān; so, do not put your own safety to jeopardy.’

To ‘Uthmān he said, ‘I swear allegiance to you according to the Sunnah
of Allāh (ṣ) and His Messenger and [the line] of both caliphs [Abū Bakr
and ‘Umar] after him.’ Thus did Abd al-Rahmān swear the oath of
allegiance to him [to ‘Uthmān], and so did the people.”[^82]

Thus it becomes obvious that when caliph ‘Umar preconditioned for the
one to whom people must swear the oath of allegiance to act upon the way
of both senior *sahābis*, in addition to acting upon the Book of Allāh
(ṣ) and the Sunnah of His Prophet (ṣ), he had already determined the
caliphate for ‘Uthmān right then because he knew the attitude of Imām
Ali (‘a) *vis-a-vis* this condition in addition to his knowledge that
Talhah and al-Zubayr would both side with Ali (‘a) because he had
already noticed their stand, which was supportive of Ali (‘a), on the
day of the Saqīfa. Add to all the above the fact that ‘Umar had already
granted the right to make a preference in favor of Abd al-Rahmān ibn
‘Awf, thus it becomes quite clear to you what sort of *shūra* they
claim...

#### Murder of Caliph ‘Uthmān

A great deal was said about how ‘Uthmān was assassinated. Many
statements and narratives clashed with each other in this regard
especially with reference to the group which used to urge others to kill
him, the reasons which prompted them to do so and such events reaching
their climax with his murder. The most rational explanations are
embedded in the practices on the government level, the appointment of
provincial rulers who were relatives of ‘Uthmān and the money these used
to be given from the State’s treasury. All this prompted critics and
rebels to turn against ‘Uthmān.

The famous writer, Khālid Muhammad Khālid, says, “We do not doubt that
‘Uthmān, too, used to realize that most of those who welcomed his
appointment for the caliphate, rather than Ali, Allāh glorifies his
countenance, wanted to be freed from life’s strictness and stringency
from which people suffered for a long period of time and which could
have added to their burdens had Ali (‘a) received the matters in his own
hands. Through his strict system, exact justice, asceticism and piety,
he (‘a) represented an extension of the strictness, justice, stringency
and piety of ‘Umar...”[^83]

The hands of the relatives of caliph ‘Uthmān from among Banū Umayyah
played havoc with the State treasury to the extent that some people
think that the Umayyad government started ruling since choosing ‘Uthmān
as the caliph and swearing the oath of allegiance to him.

Here is Abū Sufyān supports this view when he says the following to
caliph ‘Uthmān after the latter had received the oath of allegiance: “O
Banū Umayyah! Receive it as a ball is received, for by the One by Whom
Abū Sufyān swears, I remain optimistic that you (too) will receive it,
and it shall be received by your children by way of inheritance.”[^84]
According to another narrative of the same statement, he said, “Receive
it as a ball is received, for there is neither Paradise nor
Hell...”[^85]

Among those who opposed caliph ‘Uthmān were some of the best *sahābah*.
The most famous of these are: Abū Dharr, may Allāh be pleased with him,
Abdullāh ibn Mas’ūd and ‘Ammār ibn Yāsir. The said caliph took a very
fanatical stand against them, punishing them severely. As for Abū Dharr,
he met his death in the [desert of] al-Rabatha as his punishment for
opposing [the appointment of] Mu’āwiyah as the provincial governor [then
self-declared absolute ruler] of Syria. Abū Dharr resented how Mu’āwiyah
was hoarding gold and squandering money at the expense of the Muslims’
wealth. Zayd ibn Wahbah has said, “I passed by al-Rabathah and saw Abū
Dharr, may Allāh be pleased with him, so I said to him, ‘What brought
you [to such a pathetic condition of banishment] here?’

He said, ‘I was in Syria and had a dispute with Mu’āwiyah regarding the
verse saying,

***And there are those who hoard up gold and silver and do not spend in
the way of Allāh*** ***(Qur’ān, 9:34).***

Mu’āwiyah said that it was revealed about the People of the Book. I said
that it was revealed about us and about them; therefore, this was the
source of disagreement between him and myself.

He wrote ‘Uthmān, may Allāh be pleased with him, complaining about me.
‘Uthmān wrote me ordering me to go to Medīna. I went there. Many people
came to see me as if they never saw me before, so I mentioned this to
‘Uthmān. He [‘Uthmān] said to me, ‘If you wish, you may stay away
nearby.’ This caused my present condition. Had they assigned an
Ethiopian as an *amīr*, I would have listened to him and obeyed.’”[^86]

As regarding Abdullāh ibn Mas’ūd, the man in charge of Kūfa’s *bayt
al-māl*, his ribs were broken as a result of being beaten by ‘Uthmān’s
slave as his punishment because of his objection to the conduct of
al-Walīd ibn Mu’eet, caliph ‘Uthmān’s brother by his mother and his
*wāli* over Kūfa following the deposition of Sa’d ibn Abū Waqqās. This
son of Abū Mu’eet took money from the Muslims’ *bayt al-māl* and never
returned it.[^87]

As for ‘Ammār ibn Yāsir, he became sick with hernia as a result of being
severely beaten by ‘Uthmān’s slave as his punishment for having
performed the funeral prayers for Ibn Mas’ūd without informing the
caliph of it. Actually, ‘Ammār did so in honor of the will of Ibn Mas’ūd
so that the caliph might not perform the said prayers service for him
instead.[^88]

Others are many among those who objected to the extravagance of the
caliph’s relatives from among Banū Umayyah of the common wealth of the
State. Marwān ibn al-Hakam, for example, took a fifth of the *khirāj*
tax of Africa. Refer to more stories about caliph ‘Uthmān in the book
titled *Khilāfah wa Milookiyyah* (caliphate and monarchy) by *‘allāma*
Mawdoodi.

A profound effect resulted from the anger of the Mother of the Faithful
‘Ā’isha and her objection to caliph ‘Uthmān, even to her instigation
that he should be killed such as when she said, “Kill Naathal for he has
committed apostasy.”[^89] She did so after accusing him of altering the
Sunnah of the Prophet (ṣ). This aggravated the revolution against him.
Many citizens of Medīna, as well as people who came from Egypt, Syria
and Kūfa, gathered and collectively killed him.

#### Caliphate of Imām Ali (‘a)

After ‘Uthmān had been killed, people went in drones to Imām Ali (‘a)
seeking to swear the oath of allegiance to him (as the caliph). They
said to him, “This man [‘Uthmān] has been killed, and people have to
have an Imām. Nowadays, we find none worthy of such an undertaking
besides you.” The swearing of allegiance was completed.

Imām Ali (‘a) wanted to implement justice among the people, establishing
equity between those who were weak and those who were mighty. He wanted
to establish the rulings which Allāh revealed in His Book. Some of them
objected. They enticed dissension and gathered troops, publically
announcing their rebellion and mutiny against him. This let to many
battles the most significant of which were those of the Camel and of
Siffīn.

### VI Battle of al-Jamal; Mother of the Believers Goes Out to Fight Ali (‘a)

When Mother of the Believers ‘Ā’isha came to know that ‘Uthmān had been
killed and that people swore the oath of allegiance to Ali (‘a), she
said to ‘Ubaydullāh ibn Kilāb, who informed her of it, “By Allāh! I wish
this [heavens] had crashed with this [earth] if, indeed, the matter has
been concluded to the advantage of your friend. Woe unto you! Look into
what you are saying!” ‘Ubaydullāh said to her, “It is just as I have
told you, O Mother of the Faithful!”

She pronounced statements expressing her frustration, whereupon he said
to her, “Why should it concern you [so much], O Mother of the Faithful?!
By Allāh, I know nobody more worthy of it [caliphate] than him [than Ali
(‘a)]; so, why do you hate for him to be the caliph?” The Mother of the
Faithful cried out, “Take me back! Take me back!” She returned to Medīna
saying, “‘Uthmān, by Allāh, was killed unjustly. By Allāh! I shall seek
revenge for the shedding of his blood!”

‘Ubaydullāh said to her, “Why?! By Allāh, the first person to legitimize
the shedding of his blood is your own self! You used to say, ‘Kill
Naathal for he has committed apostasy’.” She said, “They got him to
regret, then they killed him. I have said what I said, and so have they,
and my last statement is better than my first.” She went to Mecca and
alighted at the Mosque’s door where many people gathered around her. She
said to them, “O people! ‘Uthmān has been unjustly killed. By Allāh! I
shall seek revenge for his murder.”[^90]

The anger of Mother of the Faithful ‘Ā’isha agreed with the anger of
Talhah and al-Zubayr after Imām Ali (‘a) had deposed them from their
posts as the *wālis* of Yemen and Bahrain respectively; therefore, they
both reneged from their oath of allegiance to Imām Ali (‘a) and went to
Mecca to urge the same Mother of the Faithful to fight Ali (‘a).

They went out accompanied by a huge army under the military command of
the Mother of the Faithful in the direction of Basra where a crushing
war, known as the Battle of the Camel (*harb al-jamal*), took place.
Victory was on the side of the army led by Imām Ali (‘a), and in it both
Talhah and al-Zubayr were killed as well as thirteen thousand Muslims.

All these were the victims of the call ushered by the Mother of the
Faithful to avenge the killing of ‘Uthmān. She claimed that the killers
had found their way to the Imām’s army. No matter what, was she not
supposed to let such issues be decided by *wali al-amr* especially since
Allāh Almighty had ordered her to

***“... stay in your houses” (Qur’ān, 33:33)?***

And why should she have anything to do with that since ‘Uthmān is a man
from Banū Umayyah while she is from [the tribe of] Taym except when
there is another reason for her thus marching out?! Although the reality
of this incident answers this question clearly, add to it the prophecy
of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) about this dissension and his making a
reference to those behind it.

For example, Abdullāh [ibn Abbās] has said, “The Prophet (ṣ) stood up to
deliver a sermon. He pointed in the direction of the residence of
‘Ā’isha and said, ‘Dissension is right there,’ repeating his statement
three times. He went on to say, ‘It is from there that Satan’s horn
shall come out.’”[^91]

‘Ammār ibn Yāsir considered obedience to ‘Ā’isha in such a deed as being
at the expense of obedience to Allāh, the most Great, the most Exalted
One. Ibn Ziyād al-Asadi has said, “... so I heard ‘Ammār saying,
‘‘Ā’isha marched out to Basra. By Allāh! She is the wife of your Prophet
(ṣ) in the life of this world and in the Hereafter, but Allāh, the most
Praised, the most Exalted One, has tested you in order to see whether
you obey Him or you obey her.’”[^92]

Long before this incident, ‘Ā’isha was very well known of being
extremely spiteful of Ali (‘a). She could not even bear hearing his name
mentioned. Abdullāh ibn ‘Utbah is quoted as having said, “‘Ā’isha said,
‘When heaviness covered the Prophet (ṣ) and his pain intensified, he
sought permission of his wives to be treated at my chamber, and they
granted him permission.

The Prophet (ṣ) went out assisted by two men, dragging his feet on the
ground. He was between Abbās and another man.’” ‘Ubaydullāh went on to
say, “I related this to [Abdullāh] ibn Abbās who asked me, ‘Do you know
who the other man was?’ I said, ‘No.’ He said, ‘That was Ali.’”[^93]

Perhaps what ‘Ā’isha had heard was what Ali (‘a) said to the Messenger
of Allāh (ṣ) in her regard in the incident wherein she was charged. This
was the reason for such spite and hatred. ‘Ubaydullāh ibn Mas’ūd has
said, “... As for Ali ibn Abū Tālib (‘a), he said, ‘O Messenger of
Allāh! Allāh has not placed any pressure on you, and women besides her
are numerous, indeed.’”[^94]

The “prince of poets,” Ahmad Shawqi, has described ‘Ā’isha’s spite
[towards Ali (‘a)] in poetic verses wherein he addresses Imām Ali (‘a)
as follows: “O mountain! The weight that you carry is rejected by other
mountains; what load did the Owner of the Camel [‘Ā’isha] throw on you?
Was it the effect of ‘Uthmān causing her to grieve? Or was it choking
the grief which was never extracted? Such was a rift none ever expected.
Women’s schemes weaken mountains, and the Mother of the Faithful was
only a woman. What got that pure and exonerated woman out of her chamber
and Sunnah was the same spite that remains all the time.”

#### The Myth of Abdullāh ibn Saba’

The summary of this myth is: “A man named Abdullāh ibn Saba’, a Jew from
Yemen, pretended to be a follower of Islam during the reign of ‘Uthmān
in order to cause mischief to the Muslims. He moved about the main
Islamic metropolises in Egypt, Syria, Basra and Kūfa, spreading the
“glad tiding” that the Prophet (ṣ) would return to life, that Ali (‘a)
was his *wasi*, and that ‘Uthmān was the usurper of the right of this
*wasi*. Groups from among senior *sahābah* and *tābi’īn* such as ‘Ammār
ibn Yāsir, Abū Dharr, Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah and others. He was able
to raise armies to kill caliph ‘Uthmān at his own house.”

Thus does the series of events of this fabricated myth continue till it
ends with the Battle of the Camel when Abdullāh ibn Saba’ orders his
followers to sneak into the army of Ali (‘a) and of ‘Ā’isha without
their knowledge in order to stir a war, and “thus did the Battle of the
Camel take place.”[^95] Sayyid Murtadha al-’Askari[^96], who stood to
expose the fallacy of this imagined myth, states that “The person who
fabricated this personality [Abdullāh ibn Saba’] is Sayf ibn ‘Amr
al-Tamīmi al-Barjami al-Kūfi, who died in A.H. 170 (A.D. 786), and from
him all other historians quoted it.

Then this fabricated incident gained fame and spread in history books
acrossx the centuries and till our time, so much so that it has become
one of the famous incidents the authenticity of which nobody doubts. The
vast majority of writers and historians in the East as well as
Orientalists have been blinded to the fact that this incident was the
brainchild of one single narrator, a lone individual who acted on his
own, and that this narrator, namely Sayf ibn ‘Amr, is very well known by
ancient scholars of *hadīth* as a fabricator and is even accused of
being an unbeliever.

Ibn Dāwūd says the following about him: “He is nothing; he is a liar.”
Ibn Abd al-Birr says, “Sayf is rejected. We have cited his tradition
only to inform you of it.” Al-Nisā’i says this about him: “His
traditions are weak. He is not trusted, and nobody has any faith in
him.”Yet this same lying narrator is quoted by al-Tabari, Ibn ‘Asākir,
Ibn Abū Bakr, etc., and al-Tabari has been and is being quoted by all
other writers and historians till our time.[^97]

It is well known that incidents narrated by one single person do not
satisfy the scientific thinking, nor can they be used as evidence. How
is it, then, when this same narrator is not trusted and was famous for
being a liar and an unbeliever? Can his narrative be accepted? How can
one accept to pass a judgment against a large segment of the Muslims by
simply relying on incidents related by lone individuals who have been
proven to be liars while there are *ahadīth* that are consecutively
reported [*mutawātir*] from the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) which prove the
opposite?

One of the greatest historical farces is to attribute Shī’ism to a
mythical man, namely Abdullāh ibn Saba’, claiming he was the one who
disseminated the concept of “Ali (‘a) the *wasi*” despite the existence
of a huge number of authentic texts proving that Shī’ism has always been
to follow Muhammad (ṣ) and nobody else.

Refer to the Imāmate texts on the previous pages to see where this
Abdullāh ibn Saba’ fits. Is Abdullāh ibn Saba’ the one who said, “I am
leaving among you that which, if you uphold them, you shall never stray:
the Book of Allāh and my *‘itrat*, my Ahlul Bayt”? Or is he the one who
said, “Anyone who has accepted me as his master, Ali is his master”? Or
is he the one who said that the Imāms are twelve in number?

What a ridiculous tale it is that says that a Jew has come from Yemen to
hypocritically declare his acceptance of Islam then carries out all
these extra-ordinary deeds which reach the limit of getting Muslim
armies to battle each other without anyone discovering his true
identity?! Is it reasonable to accept that Imām Ali (‘a), about whom the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) said, “I am the city of wisdom and Ali is its
gate,” fall a victim to the trickery of this Jew? Surely one who says so
has strayed far, far away from the right track.

### VII The Battle of Siffīn and the Rebellion of Mu’āwiyah

Having achieved victory in the Battle of the Camel, the Imām (‘a)
concentrated the effort of his army to eliminate the opposition led by
Mu’āwiyah ibn Abū Sufyān in Syria. Both armies stood face to face near
the Euphrates. The Imām (‘a) tried to correct the situation through
peaceful means, but the answer given by Mu’āwiyah to the deputation sent
to him by the Imam (‘a) was this: “Get away from me, for I have nothing
for you except the sword.”[^98]

Thus, both armies were engaged in battle. When signs of victory for the
army led by the Imām (‘a) became clear, Mu’āwiyah staged the “trick of
the copies of the Qur’ān”. Mu’āwiyah ordered his soldiers to raise the
copies of the Qur’ān on the tips of their lances and swords.

Although the Imām (‘a) stood to expose this plot which was intended to
put hurdles in the path of the victory which dawned quite near the army
of Imām Ali (‘a), those fighters in his army who were demanding a
cease-fire did not respond to his repeated calls, forcing him to accept
arbitration.

And the Imām (‘a) strongly protested the choice of Abū Mūsa al-Ash’ari
as the representative of his army during the arbitration process due to
this man’s weakness and the feebleness of his views. Imām Ali (‘a) had
said, “I do not see that you should grant Abū Mūsa such an official
task, for he is too weak to confront the trickery of ‘Amr [ibn
al-’Ās].”[^99] Ali (‘a) had already deposed Abū Mūsa al-Ash’ari from his
post as the *wāli* of Kūfa.

There was a prior plan to raise the copies of the Qur’ān and to
coordinate it with a movement supportive of Mu’āwiyah that had sneaked
into the Imām’s army and which demanded the acceptance of the
arbitration and the choice of Abū Mūsa al-Ash’ari [as the negotiator
during the arbitration process]. The results of the arbitration, as the
Imām (‘a) had expected, came in favor of Mu’āwiyah.

For the latter, the situation started to gradually stabilize in his own
interest following this major rebellion and when the caliph of the
Muslims was thus disobeyed, hoping he would earn a worldly pleasure of
which he always dreamed.

In the past, I used to wonder about this incident in which more than
ninety-thousand Muslims from both sides were killed. Whenever I asked
[the Sunnis about it], the answer came as a cliche as follows: “It was
merely a dissension between two great *sahābis*. Each of them followed
his own *ijtihād*. The one whose *ijtihād* was right earned two rewards,
while the one whose *ijtihād* proved wrong earned one. Nobody ought to
think about it.

That was a nation that passed by; for it are the rewards of the good
deeds which it earned, and for you are your own rewards.” They have
other such answers whereby they close any door that may uncover the
causes of this “dissension”, as they call it.

Thus does this issue remain according to Ahl al-Sunnah suspended like a
mysterious riddle without a solution. This opened the door wide for
Orientalist scholars to state their own views about our religion, so
much so that some of them claimed that there is contradiction in Islam,
pointing out to the tradition of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) wherein he
said, “If two Muslims face each other with their swords in hand, both
the killer and the killed shall be lodged in hell.”

This tradition contradicts the claim of the Sunnis that both parties
during the Battle of Siffīn were Muslim, and their commanders were great
*sahābis*! So, why such insistence on refusing to distinguish between
what is right and what is wrong? Why should the truth not be said? Is it
really that ambiguous?

Anyhow, anyone who is confused about the truth regarding Mu’āwiyah must
carefully discern the following proofs, and let the reader issue his own
judgment after that:

In his *Sahīh*, Muslim cites the following statement of Ali (‘a): “I
swear by the One Who created the seed and initiated the breeze that the
Ummi Prophet (ṣ) pledged that nobody except a believer loves me, and
nobody except a hypocrite hates me.”[^100] So, what would you say about
one who raises armies to fight him (‘a)?! And what is the judgment of
Ahl al-Sunnah regarding one who disobeys the Imām of the Muslims
obedience to whom is obligatory?

In al-Bukhāri’s *Sahīh*, there are references pointing to the oppression
committed by Mu’āwiyah. Abū Sa’eed al-Khudri is quoted as having said,
“We were once carrying the Mosque’s blocks one by one while ‘Ammār was
carrying them two at a time. The Prophet (ṣ) passed by him, rubbed the
dust from his head and said, ‘What a pity for ‘Ammār! He shall be killed
by the oppressive party; ‘Ammār invites them to Allāh while they invite
him to the Fire.”[^101] This prediction of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ)
proved true when ‘Ammār was martyred as he was fighting under the flag
of Imām Ali (‘a) during the Battle of Siffīn.

In *Al-Mustadrak ‘Alal Sahīhayn*, relying on the authority of Khālid
al-’Arabi, the author quotes the latter as having said, “I and Abū Sa’īd
al-Khudri met Hudhayfah [al-Yamāni] and said, ‘O Abū Abdullāh! Relate to
us what you have heard the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) say about the
dissension.’ Hudhayfah said, ‘The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) said, ‘Stick to
the Book [of Allāh, i.e. the Holy Qur’ān] wherever it goes.’

We said, ‘If people differ with each other, with whom should we be?’ He
(ṣ) said, ‘Look up to the group wherein the son of Sumayya [i.e. ‘Ammār
ibn Yāsir] is and hold on to it, for he goes where the Book of Allāh
goes.’ I heard the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) say to ‘Ammār, ‘O son of
al-Yaqdhān! You shall not die till the oppressive group that lies in
ambush kills you.’”[^102]

The oppression and rebellion of Mu’āwiyah were all expected. Since he
became the *wāli* of Syria during the reign of ‘Umar, wealth, authority
and mansions which he had built for him followed, and he expanded such
affluence during the reign of caliph ‘Uthmān. It was not easy for a man
like him to give all of this up. He knew for sure that if Imām Ali (‘a)
did not remove him from office, he would at least strip him off all what
he had acquired at the expense of the Muslims’ *bayt al-māl* and that he
would treat him on equal footing as he would any other Muslim.

What went on between him and the highly revered *sahābi*, Abū Dharr
al-Ghifāri, during the caliphate of ‘Uthmān also proves what we have
stated, that is, he was running after the wares of the life in this
world and his squandering of the State’s public funds. The objection of
Abū Dharr to Mu’āwiyah’s conduct resulted in caliph ‘Uthmān banishing
him to al-Rabathah after having him brought to him in Medīna. Zayd ibn
Wahab is quoted as having said, “I passed by Abū Dharr in al-Rabathah
and asked him, ‘What brought you to this [desolate] land?’ He said, ‘We
were in Syria.

The verse saying

***‘And there are those who hoard up gold and silver and do not spend in
God’s way: Announce a most grievous penalty to them’ (Qur’ān, 9:34)***

was revealed. Mu’āwiyah said that it was not revealed about the Muslims
but rather about the People of the Book. I said that it was about us and
about them as well.’”[^103]

Thus was Abū Dharr punished with banishment despite the testimony of the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) for him that he was truthful. The Prophet (ṣ)
said, “No tree has shaded nor the desert has seen a man more truthful
than Abū Dharr”[^104] This incident makes it clear how Mu’āwiyah
tampered with the meaning of the Qur’ān in order to cover his
squandering of the nation’s funds, the funds with which he had no right
to deal according to his own personal desires. The problem is that
al-Bukhāri has stated in his *Sahīh* what “qualifies” Mu’āwiyah to be a
*faqīh*!

Abū Maleeka has said, “Mu’āwiyah prayed one single *rek’a* for the
*witr* prayers after the evening prayers, and a slave of Ibn Abbās was
in his company. Ibn Abbās came and said [to his slave], ‘Leave him, for
he was a companion of the Messenger of Allah’!”[^105] In another version
in the narration of this same incident, he [Ibn Abbās] said that
Mu’āwiyah was a “faqih”![^106]

If you come to know that Mu’āwiyah spent twenty years as “caliph” of the
Muslims, and before that he was *wāli* [provincial governor] over Syria,
the reader may imagine the extent to which Mu’āwiyah exercised his own
influence on the fabrication and transmission of *ahādīth* attributed to
the Prophet (ṣ) in order to justify his actions. Despite all the efforts
which he exerted to cover them up, they have become quite clear in the
books of *hadīth* and history in a way which leaves no room for
confusion in getting to know the truth about this “caliph” whom they
[Sunnis] also regard as the “commander of the faithful”!

The conduct of Mu’āwiyah with regard to his government and authority has
its own roots in his Sufyāni family. His father [Abū Sufyān] said to
‘Uthmān after the latter had received the oath of allegiance, “Receive
it as a ball is received, for by the One by Whom Abū Sufyān swears, I
remain optimistic that you [Umayyads], too, will receive it, and it
shall be received by your children by way of inheritance.”[^107]

According to another narrative of the same statement, he said, “Receive
it as a ball is received, for there is neither Paradise nor Hell,” thus
pointing out to the true reason why this family pretended to have
accepted Islam following the conquest of Mecca and when all Meccans
embraced Islam. Look into the following incident to realize what sort of
Islam they quite reluctantly embraced:

Abdullāh ibn Abbās has said, “Abū Sufyān said, ‘By Allāh! I remained in
humiliation, feeling sure that his [Prophet’s] call would gain the upper
hand till Allāh caused Islam to enter my heart against my wish.”[^108]
If Abū Sufyān’s tongue thus admits, imagine what his heart would say had
it been enabled to speak about what it contains!

#### What the Prophet (ṣ) Said about Mu’āwiyah

The following is stated by Muslim in his *Sahīh*: “The Prophet (ṣ) one
day sent him [Mu’āwiyah] Ibn Abbās inviting him to come to write
something for him. Ibn Abbās found him eating. The Prophet (ṣ) sent him
[Ibn Abbās] again to Mu’āwiyah, and Ibn Abbās again found him eating.
This took place a third time. The Prophet (ṣ) said, ‘May Allāh never
cause his [Mu’āwiyah’s] stomach to feel satisfied.’”[^109]

Also in Muslim’s *Sahīh* is the following text: “The Messenger of Allāh
(ṣ) said, ‘... As for Mu’āwiyah, he is a penniless and spiritless
person.”[^110] In Ahmad’s *Musnad,* the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) is quoted
as having said the following about Mu’āwiyah and ‘Amr ibn al-Ās: “O
Lord! Hurl them into dissension headlong, and lodge them into hell,” in
addition to many other narratives exposing the truth about “commander of
the faithful” Mu’āwiyah, son of the liver-eater, who sealed his deeds in
the life of this world by installing his son, the drunkard and the
debauchee Yazīd, as “caliph” over the Muslims after him.

Yazīd was then no more than twenty years old. Thus, Mu’āwiyah violated
the reconciliation treaty which he had signed with Imām al-Hasan (‘a),
actually going against the Commandments of Allāh (ṣ) and of His
Messenger (ṣ) as well as violating the “sunnah” of both Shaykhs [Abū
Bakr and ‘Umar] and all other traditions discussed by the “Ahl
al-Sunnah”.

### VIII Martyrdom of Imām Ali (‘a)

The last battle waged by Imām Ali (‘a) was that of al-Nahrawan. He
fought in it the group which forced him to accept the arbitration in
Siffīn but then regretted it a few days later, reneging from its
covenant and violating the oath of allegiance to the Imām. Later on,
these were called the “Khawāraj” [or Khārijites] or the “Māriqīn”.

He (‘a) scored a victory over them and was getting ready to fight the
rebels in Syria following the failure of the arbitration talks, but the
Imām (‘a) was martyred at the hands of a member of the Khawārijis named
Abd al-Rahmān ibn Muljim who stabbed the Imām (‘a) as he was prostrating
during his Fajr prayers at the Grand Kūfa Mosque in the morning of the
19th of the month of Ramadan, 40 A.H. (January 26, 661 A.D.), five years
after having taken charge. The Imām (‘a) remained suffering from the
attack for three days during which he handed over the Imāmate to his son
al-Hasan (‘a), older grandson of the Prophet (ṣ), so that he might carry
out after his own demise the duties in leading the nation.

This assignment of the caliphate was not based on the mere fact that
al-Hasan (‘a) was a son of Ali (‘a) or on his being the most fit for it,
in his own personal view, to be the caliph. Rather, it was done in
obedience to the Command of Allāh Almighty Who chose the twelve
successors of His Messenger (ṣ), as we have already stated, with Imām
al-Hasan (‘a) being the second on the list.

### IX The Reconciliation Treaty, Martyrdom of Imām al-Hasan (‘a)

After the martyrdom of Imām Ali (‘a), Imām al-Hasan (‘a) ascended the
pulpit and the people of Kūfa swore the oath of allegiance to him as the
successor of the Prophet (ṣ) and the Imām of the nation. But this did
not last for more than six months.

When the news reached Syria that Imām Ali (‘a) had been martyred,
Mu’āwiyah led a large army towards Kūfa in order to personally take
charge of the leadership of the Muslims and to force Imām al-Hasan (‘a)
son of Imām Ali (‘a) to surrender to him. Imām al-Hasan (‘a) found no
alternative to reconciling and signing a treaty with Mu’āwiyah.

As regarding the reasons which forced him to sign such a reconciliation
agreement, these were: the disintegration of his army, the internal and
unstable domestic situation in Iraq, and the Roman Empire which was
looking for an opportunity to attack Islam, having stood ready with a
huge army to fight the Muslims.

Had a war been waged between Mu’āwiyah and Imām al-Hasan (‘a) under such
circumstances, the winner would have been the Roman Empire, neither Imām
al-Hasan (‘a) nor Mu’āwiyah. Thus, Imām al-Hasan (‘a), having opted for
peace, removed a very serious danger against Islam. As for the terms of
the Reconciliation Treaty, these were:

1. Al-Hasan (‘a) was to hand over the government and the management of
affairs to Mu’āwiyah provided the latter should adhere to the Qur’ān and
to the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ).

2. Caliphate after the death of Mu’āwiyah should be a right specifically
belonging to Imām al-Hasan (‘a). If something happened to him, caliphate
would then go to his brother, Imām al-Husayn (‘a).

3. All condemnations and insults against Imām Ali (‘a) should be
prohibited, be they launched from the pulpit or from anywhere else.

4. Five million dirhams, which were then present at *bayt al-māl* in
Kūfa, would be put under the supervision of Imām al-Hasan (‘a) and
Mu’āwiyah was to send one million dirhams a year from the *khirāj* tax
to Imām al-Hasan (‘a) for distribution to the families of those who were
martyred in the battles of the Camel and of Siffīn on the side of Imām
Ali (‘a).

5. Mu’āwiyah was to pledge that he would leave all people, regardless of
their race or ethnic origin, and not chase or harm them, and he should
also pledge to carry out the terms of this Agreement with precision and
make the public his witnesses.

But Imām al-Hasan (‘a) was martyred in 50 A.H. (670 A.D.) as a result of
his wife, Ju’da daughter of al-Ash’ath ibn Qays, having laced something
which she had given him with poison. This wife belonged to a family
which followed a course of living and believing contrary to that of the
descendants of Imām Ali (‘a). Mu’āwiyah had instigated her to commit
this terrible crime by sending her one hundred thousand dirhams and by
promising her to marry her off to his son, Yazīd, if she poisoned her
husband, Imām al-Hasan (‘a). Mu’āwiyah was elated when he heard about
the martyrdom of Imām al-Hasan (‘a).

He saw in it the removal of the greatest hurdle in his way to achieve
his objectives, thus firming the foundations of the Umayyad dynasty’s
rule. Thus, Mu’āwiyah achieved all of that thereafter and was able to
install his pornographic teenage son, Yazīd, over the nation by force.
So, where does this fit in the Sunnis’ belief that caliphate must take
place through consultation? Did they not reject the texts which mandate
the caliphate of the Imāms from among Ahlul Bayt (‘a) in the pretext
that such Imāmate must be through consultation?

Does this not prove that caliphate, according to their view, is not
legitimate if not done through consultation? But why did they consider
the “caliphate” of Yazīd as legitimate?! And how did they agree to call
him “commander of the faithful”?!

Consider the following so you may view some black pages of our Islamic
history. Consider a narrative of glittering glimpses of the life of
“commander of the faithful Yazīd son of Abū Sufyān”!

### X The Karbalā’ Revolution and the Martyrdom of Imām al-Husayn (‘a)

After the demise of Imām al-Hasan (‘a) in 50 A.H.(670 A.D.), the Shī’ahs
of Iraq started writing al-Husayn (‘a) to request him to remove
Mu’āwiyah from his self-installed post of ruling over the Muslims. But
al-Husayn (‘a) stated in his answer to them that he had with Mu’āwiyah a
treaty, an agreement, and that he could not violate it.

As for Mu’āwiyah, for the period of twenty years of his rule, he used to
prepare to firm the foundations of the rule of his debauchee son, Yazīd,
in order to make him a “commander of the faithful”, thus violating his
treaty with Imām al-Hasan (‘a) to which he had agreed and, moreover,
rejecting and violating what the Sunis had agreed upon, that is, their
belief that the selection of a caliph is done through consultation with
the condition that he must be righteous and pious.

If you consider all of this, you will see the extent of the crime
committed by Mu’āwiyah against Islam and Muslims. His line of action was
followed by the rest of Umayyad, Abbāside and Ottoman caliphs most of
whom could not be distinguished from the Muslims’ debauchee and corrupt
rulers of our time.

After the death of Mu’āwiyah in 60 A.H. (680 A.D.), Yazīd seated himself
as the ruler. His palace was a nucleus of corruption and sin. He,
according to the admission of all Islamic groups, used to publicly drink
wine during his crowded night parties. Among his well recorded
statements are shallow poetic verses from which we would like to quote
the following:

*Musical tones distracted me from the sound of the* adhān*,*

*Instead of the hūris, I took to myself an old hag in the chambers.*

This does not surprise us. Yazīd was brought up by a Christian
governess. He, as described by historians, was a reckless youth, a
licentious, extravagant, immoral, short-sighted, off-guard young man who
surrounded himself with luxury. He is always reported as having led the
Friday congregational prayer service on a Wednesday [rather than Friday]
and led the *fajr* prayers in four *rek’ats* [instead of two] because he
was quite drunk. Other such incidents are reported about him the
narration of which does not serve our purpose.

We have mentioned his violations in order to shed a light on the
circumstances during which Imām al-Husayn (‘a) saw that an uprising and
a revolution were necessary to resurrect Islam and the religious *sunan*
after they had become threatened with distortion and extinction. The
objective of Imām al-Husayn (‘a) behind his revolution was not to take
control of the caliphate or run after authority, for he knew that the
Umayyads were more prepared to secure it for themselves especially after
the people of Iraq had reneged, fearing the Umayyads.

In one of his sermons near Karbalā’, Imām al-Husayn (‘a) states the
reason behind his uprising as follows: “O people! Whoever sees an
oppressive *imām* permitting what Allāh prohibits, violating Allāh’s
covenant after confirming it, behaving contrarily to the Sunnah of His
Prophet (ṣ), ruling among the servants of Allāh (ṣ) with sin and
oppression, Allāh will hurl him together with the same person into the
Fire.” In another statement, he said, “O people! They [Umayyads] obeyed
Satan, disobeyed the most Merciful One, caused corruption in the land,
suspended the implementation of the *sunan*, took to themselves what
belonged to the Muslims, permitted what Allāh prohibits, forbade what
Allāh permits, and I, more than anyone else, am more worthy of opposing
them.”

When Imām al-Husayn (‘a) came to know about the reneging and violation
of the covenant with him which took place in Kūfa, he gathered his
companions and family members, who were in his company, and frankly said
the following to them: “Our Shī’ahs have betrayed us. Anyone who likes
to go away may do so; he is not obligated to us.” They dispersed from
him right and left, so much so that only those who had come with him
from Mecca and Medīna stayed. But Imām al-Husayn (‘a) kept upholding his
decision and in the same determination whereby he set out from Mecca the
Venerable.

As described by a poet, his condition was: “If the religion of Muhammad
(ṣ) cannot stay straight except if I am killed, then take me, O swords!”
He met with ‘Umar ibn Sa’d, commander of the army sent to fight him by
the provincial governor of Kūfa,’Ubaydullāh ibn Ziyād, who was appointed
by the Umayyad “caliph”, Yazīd, which was made up of thirty-two thousand
strong, according to some narratives.

It was only natural for the force of the army of Yazīd son of Mu’āwiyah
to be able to kill such a small numbered band. On that day, the tragedy
of Ahlul Bayt (‘a) was personified, how they were wronged, in the most
clear way. Yazīd son of Mu’āwiyah, in this massacre, was paying the
“reward” which the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) had required him:

***“Say: ‘I ask no reward of you for this [Islamic creed] except love
for my near in kin’” (Qur’ān, 42:23)***

... History narrates tragic scenes too difficult for anyone to describe
as they were in reality.

One of them is the tragedy of the infant son of Imām Husayn (‘a), namely
Abdullāh, whom the Imām carried to the battlefield asking for a drink of
water for him after a blockade was enforced on Imām Husayn (‘a)’s camp,
depriving him of any access to the Euphrates. Thirst, hence, took its
heavy toll on them. The Imām carried Abdullāh asking for some water for
him and to stir their conscience and human feeling. But they shot the
infant with an arrow, killing him instantly. Martyrs from among the
followers of Imām Husayn (‘a) and from his Ahlul Bayt (‘a) fell one
after the other.

Al-Husayn (‘a) was the last to be martyred in that decisive battle. Yet
they were not satisfied with killing the Master of the Youths of
Paradise but severed his head from his body then carried it together
with the heads of his companions as gifts to the killers, raising them
on their spears on their way to Yazīd son of Mu’āwiyah in Syria. Some
Muslims keep insisting on calling him “commander of the faithful”...;
so, there is no will nor might except in Allāh...!

Having narrated these events, which clearly show the lofty objectives
for which al-Husayn (‘a) started his revolution, a revolution which was
described by a great Islamist, namely Dr. ‘Amr Abd al-Rahmān, thus, “The
martyrdom of al-Husayn (‘a) is a thousand times greater than his staying
alive.” But there are those who minimize the value of this great
revolution because of their falling victim to the misleading Umayyad
propaganda.

Such a propaganda has tried very hard to distort history. And they fell
victim to contemptible sectarian fanaticism. They, thus, are forced to
adopt such a shameful distortion of the facts such as the statement of
so-called “shaikh al-Islam” Ibn Taymiyyah in this sense: “Imām al-Husayn
(‘a), in his revolution, caused a dissension in the Islamic nation when
he disobeyed the one who was in charge of the affairs of the
Muslims”...!!!

If we ask this so-called “shaikh al-Islam” about Mu’āwiyah who disobeyed
Imām Ali (‘a) (who was then in charge of the affairs of the Muslims), he
will not see in it any dissension, nor will he see any sin in it for
them. The same applies to ‘Ā’isha who disobeyed Imām Ali (‘a)... This is
nothing but a norm of attempts to openly falsify our Islamic history;
otherwise, how can we explain how most Sunnis ignore this historic
tragedy in which the descendants of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) were
killed in the most horrible and painful way?

All the descendants of Mu’āwiyah and his son, Yazīd, followed in the
footsteps of the Umayyads and of the Abbasides. They crushed any
opposition to their authority, especially when it came from the Members
of the Household of the Prophet (ṣ) who were always pursued with
discrimination, banishment, killing and torture.

Such oppression was not confined to the Members of the Household of the
Prophet (ṣ) alone. Among the victims of the Umayyad oppression from
among those who did not belong to Ahlul Bayt (‘a) was, for example,
Abdullāh ibn al-Zubayr. History has recorded the tragic scene inside the
precinct of Mecca where Abdullāh ibn al-Zubayr was slaughtered and
skinned.

The sanctity of that place which even people during the *jāhiliyya*
period held as sacred and holy and did not permit the slaughter of
animals, let alone of humans, inside it. And the Venerable Ka’ba could
not help him against the Umayyad rulers when he clung to its curtains.

This same Ka’ba was bombarded with catapults during the time of Abd
al-Malik ibn Marwān who gave a free hand to his tyrant, al-Hajjāj, to
kill people without a just cause. About both men, al-Hasan al-Basri
said, “Had Abd al-Malik committed only the sin of [giving a free hand
to] al-Hajjāj, it would have sufficed him [i.e. was sufficient for his
condemnation].” And ‘Umar ibn Abd al-Azīz said, “Had each nation brought
forth its oppressor, and had we [Umayyads] brought forth al-Hajjāj, we
would have out-weighed them [in the measure of oppressiveness].”

So, do these deeds qualify their doer to be a Muslim, let alone to being
the caliph of the Muslims or the “commander of the faithful”??!
Undoubtedly, we nowadays need to take a second look at our history[^111]
and to discern many of its events then ask to speak to us due to their
strong ties to sketching the outlines of the Islamic sects to which the
Muslims nowadays adhere.

They have in them what helps truly get to know this sect or that away
from oppression and injustice. Because of those incidents, the Muslims
slipped away from the original Islamic line of Muhammad (ṣ), becoming
diverse sects and groups each one of which claims it is the one that
will receive salvation. None of us needs to wait for Divine Wahi to tell
him the name of this sect. Allāh, the most Great and the most Exalted
One, has granted us the mind whereby we can distinguish what is foul
from what is good, making it an argument against His servants,
prohibiting us from blindly imitating others, saying,

***“What! Even though their fathers were void of wisdom and guidance?!”
(Qur’ān, 2:170).***

He has also said,

***“We have sent them admonishment, but most of them hate admonishment”
(Qur’ān, 23:71).***

He has required us to investigate and research before believing each and
every one, saying,

***“O you who believe! If a wicked person comes to you with any news,
ascertain the truth, lest you should harm people unwittingly and
afterwards become full of repentance for what you have done” (Qur’ān,
49:6).***

[^1]: Muslim\`s Sahīh, in a chapter about the virtues of Ali (\`a), Vol.
5, p. 272, published by Dār Sādir, citing al-Nawawi\`s Sharh.

[^2]: Al-Tirmidhi, Sahīh, Vol. 2, p. 308.

[^3]: Al-Hākim, Al-Mustadrak, Vol. 1, p. 93.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Muslim, Sahīh, Vol. 5, p. 287, in a chapter dealing with the
virtues of al-Hasan (\`a) and al-Husayn (\`a), published by Dār
al-Sha\`ab.

[^6]: Muslim, Sahīh, Vol. 5, p. 268 (Dār al-Sha\`ab), in a chapter
dealing with the virtues of Ali (\`a).

[^7]: Ibid., Vol. 5, p. 274.

[^8]: Al-Tirmidhi, Sahīh, Vol. 2, p. 209.

[^9]: Ahmad, Musnad, Vol. 6, p. 306.

[^10]: Al-Hākim, Mustadrak al-Sahīhayn, Vol. 2, p. 343.

[^11]: Ibid., Vol. 3, p. 149.

[^12]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 3, p. 171, in the Book of Sales, in a
chapter dealing with handicrafts (published by the modern Riyadh
library).

[^13]: Ibid., Vol. 2, p. 126, in the Book of Tahajjud.

[^14]: Ibid., Vol. 4, p. 486, in the Book of Merits, in a chapter about
how the Prophet (ṣ) looked like.

[^15]: Ibid., Vol. 9, p. 418, in the Book of Tawhīd, in a chapter
dealing with the will and the power of determination.

[^16]: Ibid., Vol. 8, p. 245, in the Book of Supplications, in a chapter
dealing with saluting the Prophet (ṣ).

[^17]: Ibid., Vol. 5, p. 492, in the Book of Military Campaigns, in a
chapter dealing with the Tabuk Campaign.

[^18]: Ibid., Vol. 9, p. 250, in the Book of Ahkām, in a chapter titled
“There will be twelve princes.”

[^19]: Muslim, Sahīh, Vol. 4, p. 482, in the Book of Imāra, in a chapter
about “People to follow Quraysh” (Dār al-Sha\`ab), mentioned in
al-Nawawi\`s Sharh.

[^20]: Ibid.

[^21]: Ahmad, Musnad, Vol. 1, p. 389.

[^22]: The Old Testament, Genesis, 17:20.

[^23]: Al-Suyūti, Tārīkh, p. 12.

[^24]: Al-Tirmidhi, Sahīh, Vol. 2, p. 298.

[^25]: Ibn Mājah, Sunan, Vol. 1, p. 43, in a chapter about the
distinction of Ali ibn Abū Tālib (\`a) (published by Dār Ihyā\`
al-Turāth al-\`Arabi).

[^26]: Ahmad, Musnad, Vol. 4, p. 281.

[^27]: Al-Tirmidhi, Sahīh, Vol. 2, p. 297.

[^28]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 5, p. 492, the book of military
campaigns.

[^29]: Ibid., Vol. 6, p. 10, in the book of exegesis.

[^30]: Mustadrak al-Sahīhayn, Vol. 3, p. 126.

[^31]: Al-Tirmidhi, Sahīh, Vol. 2, p. 299.

[^32]: Mustadrak al-Sahīhayn, Vol. 3, p. 122.

[^33]: Muslim, Sahīh, in the book of imān, in a chapter about loving Ali
(\`a), Allāh glorified his countenance, one of the dignitaries, Vol. 1,
p. 262 (Dār al-Sha\`ab edition).

[^34]: Ibn Dawūd, Sunan, in a chapter about a mad person stealing or
being penalized according to the Sharī\`a.

[^35]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, the book of warriors, in a chapter about a mad
man or woman should not be stoned.

[^36]: Al-Tirmidhi, Sahīh, Vol. 2, p. 299.

[^37]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 5, p. 43, in the book of the virtues of
the sahābah.

[^38]: Mustadrak al-Sahīhayn, Vol. 3, p. 107.

[^39]: Kanz al-\`Ummāl, Vol. 13, hadīth 37753. Dhakhā\`ir al-\`Uqba.

[^40]: Al-Manāwi, Kunooz al-Haqā\`iq. It is also recorded by al-Daylami.

[^41]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 5, p. 511, in the book about military
campaigns in a chapter about the sickness and death of the Prophet (ṣ).

[^42]: Ibid., Vol. 5, p. 512, in the book of campaigns, in a chapter
about the sickness and death of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ).

[^43]: Ibid., Vol. 7, p. 389, in the book of the sick in a chapter about
a sick person saying, “Get away from me!”

[^44]: Muslim, Sahīh, in the book of wills in a chapter about not
leaving a will when one has nothing to leave behind, Vol. 4, p. 175.

[^45]: Abū Bakr al-Jawāhiri, Al-Saqīfa.

[^46]: Excerpted from Al-Muraja\`āt of Sharaf ad-Dīn Sadr ad-Dīn
al-Mūsawi.

[^47]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 5, p. 511, in the book of campaigns in a
chapter about the sickness and the demise of the Prophet (ṣ).

[^48]: Khālid Muhammad Khālid, Men Around the Prophet (ṣ), p. 548, 8th
ed. Al-Tabari, Tārīkh. Ibn al-Athīr. Ibn Sa\`d, Tabaqāt.

[^49]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 5, p. 387, in the book of military
campaigns in a chapter about the campaign of Zayd son of Hārithah.

[^50]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 5, p. 13, in the book about the virtues
of the sahābah in a chapter about “... If you find no prophet, Abū
Bakr...”

[^51]: Ibid., Vol. 8, p. 541, in a book about the fighters from among
the people of apostasy in a chapter about stoning the woman who got
pregnant through adultery.

[^52]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 5, p. 14, in a book about the virtues of
the sahābah in a chapter about “... If you find no prophet, then Abū
Bakr...”

[^53]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 5, p. 14, in a volume about the virtues
of the sahābah in a chapter about “... If you find no prophet, then Abū
Bakr...”

[^54]: Ibid., p. 8, p. 542, in a volume about the fighters from the
people of apostasy in a chapter about stoning a women who got pregnant
through adultery.

[^55]: Ibid., Vol. 5, p. 14, in a volume dealing with the virtues of the
sahābah in a chapter about “... If you find no prophet, then Abū
Bakr...”

[^56]: Ibid.

[^57]: Ibid., Vol. 8, p. 542 in the book about the fighters from among
the people of apostasy in a chapter about stoning a woman who became
pregnant through adultery.

[^58]: Ibid., Vol. 5, p. 15, in a book about the virtues of the sahābah
in a chapter about “... If you find no prophet, then Abū Bakr...”

[^59]: Ibid., Vol. 8, p. 542; Vol. 5, p. 14.

[^60]: Ibid., Vol. 8, p. 540 in a volume about the fights from the
people of apostasy in a chapter about stoning a woman who became
pregnant through adultery.

[^61]: Ibid., Vol. 8, p. 540 in the book of fighters from among the
people of apostasy in a chapter about stoning a woman who became
pregnant through adultery.

[^62]: Excerpted and edited from Al-Murāja\`āt by Sharaf ad-Dīn Sadr
ad-Dīn. (This important reference, Al-Murāja\`āt, was translated
directly from the Arabic into English by Yasin T. al-Jibouri for Imām
Husayn Foundation and was published by the said Foundation in Beirut,
Lebanon and by Ansariyan Publications in Qum, Islamic Republic of Iran).

[^63]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 5, p. 382, in the book of military
campaigns in a chapter about the invasion of Khayber.

[^64]: Excerpted and edited from Al-Murāja\`āt by Sharaf ad-Dīn Sadr
ad-Dīn.

[^65]: Khālid Muhammad Khālid, Khulafā\` al-Rasool, p. 418, 8th edition.

[^66]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 4, p. 208, in the book of khums in a
chapter about obligations.

[^67]: Ibid., Vol. 5, p. 382, in the book about military campaigns in a
chapter about the invasion of Khayber.

[^68]: Ibid., Vol. 8, p. 202, in the book about seeking permission to
enter in a chapter about one who addressed the people.

[^69]: Ibid., Vol. 5, p. 75, in the book about the virtues of the
sahābah in a chapter about the merits of Fātima, Allāh be pleased with
her.

[^70]: Ibid., Vol. 5, p. 74.

[^71]: Ibn al-Athīr, Manāl al-Tālib fi Sharh Tiwāl al-Gharā\`ib, p. 501
(printed at Al-Madani press).

[^72]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 9, p. 145, in the book of dissensions in
a chapter titled “After me, you shall witness things which you shall
abhor.”

[^73]: Muslim, Sahīh, in the book of imāra in a chapter about the
necessity of supporting what the majority of Muslims support, Vol. 4, p.
517 (published by Dār al-Sha\`b press].

[^74]: Ahmad, Musnad, Vol. 3, p. 446.

[^75]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 5, p. 382, in the book of military
campaigns in a chapter about the invasion of Khayber.

[^76]: Ibid., Vol. 5, p. 74, in a volume about the virtues of the
sahābah in a chapter about the virtues of Fātima, Allāh be pleased with
her.

[^77]: Ibid., Vol. 5, p. 75, in a volume about the virtues of the
sahābah in a chapter about the virtues of Fātima, Allāh be pleased with
her.

[^78]: Al-Tabari, Tārīkh. Ibn \`Asākir, Tārīkh Dimashq.

[^79]: Ibid.

[^80]: Ibid.

[^81]: Khālid Muhammad Khālid, Khulafā\` Rasool Allāh, p. 272, 8th
edition.

[^82]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 9, p. 239, in the book of ahkām in a
chapter about how an imām receives the oath of fealty from the people.

[^83]: Khālid Muhammad Khālid, Khulafā\` Rasool Allāh, p. 276, 8th
edition.

[^84]: Al-Tabari, Tārīkh. Al-Mas\`ūdi. Ibn al-Athīr, Al-Istī\`āb.

[^85]: Ibn al-Athīr. Al-Mas\`ūdi. Al-Tabari, Tārīkh.

[^86]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 2, p. 278, in the Book of Zakāt.

[^87]: Al-Balādhuri, Ansāb al-Ashrāf. Al-Wāqidi. Al-Ya\`qūbi, Tārīkh.

[^88]: Ibn Abul-Hadīd, Sharh Nahjul-Balāghah.

[^89]: Al-Tabari, Tārīkh, Vol. 4, p. 277 (Cairo edition of 1357 A.H.).
Ibn al-Athīr, Al-Nihāyah.

[^90]: Ibid., Vol. 5, p. 172. Ibn al-Athīr. Ibn Sa\`d.

[^91]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 4, p. 217, in the Book of Khums in a
chapter about what went on in the houses of the Prophet\`s wives.

[^92]: Ibid., Vol. 9, p. 171, in the Book of Dissensions in a chapter
about a dissension that would move like high sea waves.

[^93]: Ibid., Vol. 1, p. 133, in the Book of Ablution in a chapter about
the Prophet (ṣ) pouring water on someone who lost his consciousness.

[^94]: Ibid., Vol. 6, p. 252 in the Book of Tafsīr in a chapter about
“... had you only heard him say it.”

[^95]: \`Allāma al-\`Askari, Ahādīth Umm al-Mu\`mineen, p. 272.

[^96]: Besides him, a number of scholarly researchers, such as Taha
Husayn in Vol. 1 of his book titled Al-Fitna al-Kubra (the great
dissension) and Dr. Kāmil al-Shaybi in his book titled Al-Sila Bayna
al-Tashayyu\` wal Tasawwuf (the relationship between Shi\`ism and
Sufism), have all rejected the notion that such an individual ever
existed in reality.

[^97]: Excerpted and edited from the book titled Abdullāh ibn Saba\` by
\`allāma Sayyid Murtadha al-\`Askari.

[^98]: Ibn al-Sabbāgh al-Māliki, Al-Fusūl al-Muhimma, p. 83 (the Dār
al-Adhwaa\` edition).

[^99]: Al-Sibt ibn al-Jawzi, Tathkirat al-Khawāss, p. 79.

[^100]: Muslim, Sahīh, in the Book of Imān in a chapter about love for
Ali, may Allāh glorify his countenance, as a sign of imān, Vol. 1, p.
262 (Dār al-Sha\`ab edition).

[^101]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 4, p. 52 in the Book of Jihād in a
chapter about removing one\`s dust seeking the Pleasure of Allah.

[^102]: Al-Mustadrak \`Alal Sahīhayn, Vol. 2, p. 148 (Dār al-Kitāb
al-\`Arabi edition).

[^103]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 6, p. 146 in the Book of Tafsīr in a
chapter about this verse.

[^104]: Al-Tirmidhi, Sahīh, Vol. 13, p. 210 in a chapter about the
merits of Abū Dharr .

[^105]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 5, p. 73 in a book about the merits of
the sahābah in a chapter about Mu\`āwiyah.

[^106]: Ibid., Vol. 5, p. 74 in a book about the merits of the sahābah
in a chapter about Mu\`āwiyah.

[^107]: Al-Tabari, Tārīkh.

[^108]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 4, p. 122 in the Book of Jihād.

[^109]: Muslim, Sahīh, Vol. 5, p. 462 in the Book of Kindness, Charity
and Etiquette in a chapter about one cursed by the Prophet (ṣ) (Dār
al-Sha\`ab edition) as cited in al-Nawawi\`s Sharh.

[^110]: Ibid., Vol. 3, p. 693 in the Book of Divorce in a chapter about
a woman whose divorce is irrevocable not having the right for any
financial support after the divorce (Dār al-Sha\`ab edition).

[^111]: Take a look at the picture attacked to the cover of the book
titled Haqaaiq an Ameer al-Momineen Yazīd [facts about the commander of
the faithful Yazīd] so you may see to what extent some people have gone
in their falsification of the Islamic history...!


