Shī’ahs And The Holy Qur’ān
===========================

Shī’ahs believe that “The Qur’ān is the Divine *wahi* revealed by Allāh
Almighty to His greatest Prophet (ṣ) in order to explain everything. It
is His eternal miracle which has proven that humans are unable to
challenge its oratory and clarity. While it contains facts and sublime
knowledge, no falsehood can approach it nor can its words be replaced,
changed or distorted. What we recite is the same Qur’ān which was
revealed to the Prophet (ṣ). Anyone who claims anything else different
from this is a violator or a promoter of falsehood or simply confused,
and all these are not on the path of guidance.

It is the speech of Allāh (ṣ) which no falsehood can approach from
before it or from behind it.”[^1] The mentor of traditionists, Muhammad
ibn Ali al-Qummi, who is given the title “al-Sadūq” [the truthful],
says, “Our belief in as far as the Qur’ān which was revealed by Allāh
Almighty to His Prophet Muhammad (ṣ) is concerned is that it is the one
in existence among both branches of the Islamic nation [Sunnis and
Shī’ahs], and it is what people have in circulation and nothing more.
Anyone who claims that we [Shī’ahs] say anything more than this is a
liar.”[^2]

The above is underscored by Prof. al-Bahinsāwi, one of the intellectuals
of Al-Ikhwān al-Muslimūn [the Muslim Brotherhood], who adds saying, “The
Shī’ah Ja’fari Twelvers are of the view that anyone who distorts the
Qur’ān about which all the nation agrees since the dawn of Islam... The
book [Qur’ān] which exists among Ahl al-Sunnah is the same in existence
at mosques and homes of the Shī’ahs.” He goes on to say the following in
the field of rebutting the claims of Zahir and a-Khateeb: “What is known
among the Muslims is that the Qur’ān has never suffered any distortion,
and that what we have is all the Qur’ān revealed to the greatest
Prophet.”[^3]

As for Shaykh Muhammad al-Ghazāli, he says the following in his book
titled *Difā’ an al-’Aqeeda wal Sharī’ah dhidd Matā’in al-Mustashriqeen*
(a defense of the faith and the Islamic legislative system against the
charges of the Orientalists): “I heard someone at a scholarly meeting
saying that the Shī’ahs have another Qur’ān which is more and less than
the well known Qur’ān. I, therefore, said to him, ‘Where is this Qur’ān?
And why neither mankind nor the jinns have seen a copy of it throughout
this lengthy history? And why such a charge is created? Why should there
be lies against people and against the *wahi*?’”[^4]

As regarding the erroneous “traditions” upon which some people may
depend and which claim that the Qur’ān has been distorted and which
exists among the Shī’ahs in the books of *hadīth*, these charges are
totally rejected. They are indicted and rejected because their likes
exist in the books which the Sunnis consider as containing authentic
traditions.

Al-Bukhāri has traced a tradition to ‘Ā’isha saying, “The Messenger of
Allāh (ṣ) heard a man reciting a [Qur’ānic] chapter at night, so he said
to him, ‘May Allāh have mercy on him! He has reminded me of
such-and-such a verse in such-and-such a chapter...”[^5] Of course,
nobody can believe what this “tradition” means and which points to the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) NOT knowing the Qur’ān in full by heart, or to
his having forgotten some of its verses...! Following are proofs that
they found a portion of Surat al-Tawba **only** with Khuzaymah al-Ansāri
during the compilation of the Qur’ān according to what al-Bukhāri states
in his *Sahīh*:

Zayd ibn Thābit has said, “When we recorded the tablets, I missed a
verse from Surat al-Ahzāb which I used to hear the Messenger of Allāh
(ṣ) recite and which I found with none except Khuzaymah al-Ansāri whose
testimony the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) equalled to that of two believers:
‘... Men who proved true to their promise to Allah...’”[^6]

And in another narrative by Zayd ibn Thābit, the latter said, “... So I
traced the Qur’ān, collecting its text from sheets, shoulders and leaves
and also from men’s memory till I found from Sūrat al-Tawba a couple of
verses with Khuzaymah al-Ansāri which I found with nobody else.”[^7] So,
how can one compromise this narrative with the fact that the Qur’ān has
been transmitted consecutively?!

And among the numerous traditions recorded by al-Bukhāri and other Sunni
traditionists in their books of “*Sahīh*” (authentic) traditions and
“Musnads” (reliable sources) and which openly claim that the text of the
Holy Qur’ān is distorted is one narrated about caliph ‘Umar ibn
al-Khattāb, with the narrator relying on the authority of Abdullāh Ibn
Abbās as follows: “‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb went out. When I saw him coming,
I said to Sa’īd ibn Zayd ibn ‘Amr ibn Nafeel, ‘Tonight, he [‘Umar] will
say something which he never said since he became caliph.’ He did not
like what I said and responded by saying, ‘What could he tell you what
he never said before?’

‘Umar sat on the pulpit. Once the caller to the prayers finished calling
the *adhān*, ‘Umar stood up then sat on the pulpit. He praised Allāh as
He deserves then said, ‘Having said what I have said, I am going to make
a statement which I am destined to say. I do not know; perhaps I am
saying it before my demise. Anyone who understands it and who realizes
its significance should disseminate it wherever his destination may be.
And if one is afraid he will not realize it, I do not permit him to tell
a lie about me.

Allāh sent Muhammad (ṣ) with the truth. He revealed the Book to him.
Among what Allāh revealed was Ayat al-Rajm [the verse of stoning], so we
recited it, understood it and absorbed it. The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ)
stoned, and we stoned after him. I am afraid if a long period of time
passes by, someone may say, ‘By Allāh we do not find the verse of
stoning in the Book of Allāh.’ They will thus go astray by abandoning an
obligation mandated by Allāh. Stoning in the Book of Allāh is right
against married men or women once the evidence is established, or when
there is a pregnancy, or when one confesses it.”[^8]

The other narrative, which is also recorded by al-Bukhāri, explains that
‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb wished to add that verse which he, according to his
claim, was dropped by himself, but he was afraid of what people might
say: “‘Umar said, ‘Had it not been for the possibility that people may
say that ‘Umar increased the text of the Book of Allāh, I would have
written the verse of stoning with my own hand and thus back what
instruction the Prophet (ṣ) had had regarding stoning an adulterer in
the presence of four witnesses.’”[^9]

As for this alleged “verse,” it supposedly says the following: “As for
the mid-aged [sheikh] man or woman, if he or she commits adultery, you
should absolutely stone them.”[^10] Ibn Mājah, too, has narrated the
same in his *Sahīh*. Since we unequivocally believe that the Qur’ān in
our hands has never suffered any diminution or addition, caliph ‘Umar
must have been confused, and the source of this confusion may be the
existence of the stoning verse not in the Holy Qur’ān but in the Torah
of the People of the Book as this becomes evident from the narrative of
Ibn ‘Umar who says, “A Jew and a Jewess who had committed adultery were
both brought to the Prophet (ṣ).

He (ṣ) asked the Jews, ‘What do you do to them?’ They said, ‘We blacken
their faces and expose them to shame.’ The Prophet (ṣ) said, ‘Bring me
the Torah and recite it if you are telling the truth.’ They came with a
one-eyed man of their own choice whom they asked to recite. When the man
came to a certain place in the verse, he put his hand on it. The Prophet
(ṣ) told him to raise his hand. When he did, the stoning verse became
quite evident. The man said, ‘O Muhammad! They are to be stoned, but we
have been hiding it among ourselves.’ The Prophet (ṣ) ordered them
stoned.”[^11]

What strengthens the possibility that ‘Umar was confused between the
Wise Book of Allāh and the Torah of the People of the Book is what
al-Jazā’iri says in his book titled “This is my advice to every Shi’a
man”. He says the following: “... and how can such distorted and altered
books be recited while the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) rebuked ‘Umar ibn
al-Khattāb holding in his hand a sheet of the Torah, so he (ṣ) rebukes
him saying, ‘Have I not brought it [Islam] to you white and pure?!’? The
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) did not accept that ‘Umar should even look at one
page of the Torah.”[^12]

It is also narrated that caliph ‘Umar had also said, “We used to recite
the following in the Book of Allāh: ‘If you turn away from your parents,
it is apostasy if you turn away from your parents,” or “It is apostasy
in you if you turn away from your parents.”[^13]

It is not a secret that neither this verse nor its predecessor exists in
the Book of Allāh. As for Abdullāh ibn Mas’ūd, it is narrated about him
that he used to add both words “al-thakar” (the male) and “al-untha”
(the female) to this sacred verse:

***“By the night as it conceals (the light)” (Qur’ān, 92:1). ‘***

Alqamah has said, “... How does Abdullāh recite ‘By the night as it
conceals (the light)’? I recited to him the following: ‘By the night as
it conceals (the light), and by the daytime when it manifests itself,
and by the male and the female...’ He said, ‘By Allāh! [Thus did] the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) recite it to me; from his mouth to mine.”[^14]

Thus does al-Bukhāri, who records this incident, let us fall into a new
contradiction because he also narrates saying that the Messenger of
Allāh (ṣ) ordered the Muslims to learn how to recite the Qur’ān from
Abdullāh ibn Mas’ūd. For example, a narrative from Ibn ‘Umar says that
the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) used to say, “Learn the recitation of the
Qur’ān from four men: Abdullāh ibn Mas’ūd...,” thus starting by his
name, or he said, “Learn the Qur’ān from four men: Abdullāh ibn Mas’ūd,
Sālim slave of Abū Hudhayfah, Ubayy ibn Ka’b and Mu’ādh ibn Jabal.”[^15]

So, how can the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) order us to learn how to recite
the Qur’ān from those who do not memorize it very well?! We leave the
answer to this question to al-Bukhāri, of course, and to those who
follow in his footsteps and who believe everything in his *Sahīh*.

As for Muslim, the same is found in him, too. ‘Ā’isha is quoted as
having said, “From among what was revealed in the Qur’ān this: ‘ten
known sucklings.’ The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) passed away and they were
still recited as part of the Qur’ān.”[^16]

This claim of ‘Ā’isha contains a clear answer to those who advocate
narratives such as these have been fabricated; otherwise, what does she
mean when she claims that the recitation of such verses went on despite
the death of the Prophet (ṣ)?!

Abū al-Aswad quotes his father saying, “Abū Mūsa al-Ash’ari sent a
message to those who recited the Qur’ān in Basra, and they were three
hundred men. From among what he said to them was this: ‘We used to
recite a Chapter which we used to liken in its length and strength to
[Sūrat] Barā’a, but I memorized from it only this: ‘Had the son of Adam
had two valleys full of wealth, he would have desired a third, and
nothing fills the stomach of the son of Adam except dust’.”[^17]

In the book titled *Al-Itqān fi ‘Uloom al-Qur’ān* by al-Suyūti, it is
stated that some narratives indicate that the Qur’ān has only 112
*sūras* (Chapters), or they add two other chapters: those of Hafd and of
Khal’[^18] or other such narratives from which we believe we have cited
enough.

Having stated all the above, is it fit for a Shī’ah to say that the
Qur’ān of the Sunnis is incomplete, or it has an addition, due to the
narrative advocating the same in their books of *hadīth*? Certainly not.
The consensus of the Sunnis is to say that the text of the Qur’ān has
never been altered.

As for the issue of the existence of narratives saying that such a text
has been altered and which exist in books of “*Sahīh*” (authentic)
traditions, especially those recorded by al-Bukhāri and Muslim and which
the Sunnis have taken upon themselves to accept in their entirety in the
pretext that all what is narrated in them is regarded by them as
authentic, the interpretation of it is one of two possibilities without
the existence of a third: 1) Such narratives are “authentic” but they
contain confusion which took place to those who narrated them as is the
case with the stoning chapter, or 2) These narratives are not authentic
as is the case with the other narratives which we mentioned above. Thus,
there is no alternative to reconsidering the labeling of both books by
al-Bukhāri and Muslim as the two “*Sahīh*” (authentic) books.

How can we, then, explain such a rabid campaign undertaken by writers
such as Zahir, al-Khateeb and their likes who accuse the Shī’ahs of
distorting the text of the Qur’ān because of the existence of weak
traditions in their books of traditions which make such a claim and
which they themselves reject especially since their likes are many
traditions recorded by Sunni traditionists in their “*Sahīh*” books?!
One whose house is made of glass should not throw stones at others’
houses.

[^1]: Muhammad Ridha al-Muzaffar, \`Aqā\`id al-Imāmiyya, p. 41 (third
edition).

[^2]: I\`tiqādāt al-Sadūq.

[^3]: Al-Sunnah al-Muftarā \`Alayha, p. 60.

[^4]: Difā\` an al-\`Aqeeda wal Sharī\`ah dhidd Matā\`in
al-Mustashriqeen.

[^5]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 6, p. 508 in the book dealing with the
merits of the Qur\`ān in a chapter about forgetting the text of the
Qur\`ān.

[^6]: Ibid., Vol. 6, p. 291 in the book of tafsīr where “... so among
them were those who died..., etc.” is explained.

[^7]: Ibid., Vol. 6, p. 162 in the book of tafsīr in a chapter
discussing “... A Messenger has come to you from your own selves...”

[^8]: Ibid., Vol. 8, p. 539 in the book of fighters from among the
people of apostasy in a chapter about stoning a woman who became
pregnant out of wedlock.

[^9]: Ibid., Vol. 9, p. 212 in the book of Ahkām (religious injunctions)
in a chapter about testimony before a judge.

[^10]: Ibn Dāwūd, Sunan.

[^11]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 9, p. 476 in the book of Tawhīd in a
chapter about what can be interpreted of the Torah.

[^12]: Abū Bakr al-Jazā\`iri, This is my Advice to Every Shī\`ah man.

[^13]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 8, p. 540 in the book of fighters from
among the people of apostasy in a chapter about stoning a woman who
became pregnant through adultery.

[^14]: Ibid., Vol. 5, p. 71 in the book dealing with the virtues of the
sahābah in a chapter about the merits of Abdullāh ibn Mas\`ūd.

[^15]: Ibid., Vol. 5, p. 71 in the book dealing with the virtues of the
sahābah in a chapter about the merits of Abdullāh ibn Mas\`ūd.

[^16]: Muslim, Sahīh, Vol. 2, p. 1075 (edition of Dār Ihyā\` al-Turāth
al-\`Arabi) in the book of nursing babies in a chapter about prohibition
in five sucklings.

[^17]: Ibid., Vol. 2, p. 726 in the book of zakāt (edition of Dār Ihyā\`
al-Turāth al-\`Arabi) in a chapter titled “Had the son of Adam had two
valleys full of wealth, he would have desired a third”.

[^18]: al-Suyūti, Al-Itqān fi \`Uloom al-Qur\`ān, p. 65.


