Shī’ahs And The Purified Sunnah
===============================

Both Parties’ Stand Towards The Sunnah
--------------------------------------

One of the lies circulated against the Shī’ahs by some fools is that
Shī’ahs reject the Sunnah of the Chosen One, peace and blessings of
Allāh be upon him and his progeny, a nonsense beyond which there is no
other nonsense. Following we would like to transmit some views of Sunni
scholars about the stand of the Shī’ahs with regard to the Purified
Sunnah.

In his book titled *Al-Imām al-Sādiq (‘a)*, Shaykh Muhammad Abū Zuhra
says, “Consecutively reported Sunnah is to them an evidence in the
validity of which there is no contention, and consecutive reporting to
them obligates decisive knowledge... Denying the cherished Prophetic
Sunnah, which is consecutively reported from the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ),
is apostasy because it means denying the Message brought by Muhammad
(ṣ). As regarding denying the use of statements by the Imāms as
evidence, it is much less than that; it is regarded as straying from the
right path, not apostasy.”[^1]

Shaykh Muhammad al-Ghazāli, in his book titled *Difā’ an al-’Aqeeda wal
Sharī’ah dhidd Matā’in al-Mustashriqeen* (a defense of the doctrine and
the Sharī’ah against the charges of Orientalists), says the following:
“Among these liars are those who propagate saying that the Shī’ahs are
followers of Ali (‘a), that the Sunnis are the followers of Muhammad
(ṣ), that the Shī’ahs are of the view that Ali (‘a) was more worthy of
the [Prophetic] Message, or that it was erroneously diverted from him to
others, and all of this is ugly rubbish and shameful fabrication.”

Then he goes on to say, “Shī’ahs believe in Muhammad’s Message and
realize the honor of Ali (‘a) in his kinship to this Messenger and in
upholding his Sunnah. Like all other Muslims, they see no human being,
from the early generations or from the last, greater than the Truthful
One, the most Trusted one; so, how can such hallucination be attributed
to them?!”[^2]

There is no contention between the Sunnis and the Shī’ahs about the
status of the Purified Prophetic Sunnah and that it has to be acted
upon, but they have differed [from the Sunnis] about the method of how
to transmit such a Sunnah to generations which succeeded the Prophet’s
generation or how to verify it. Sunnis suffice themselves by
transmitting the *isnād* of the *hadīth* by quoting one trusted person
who cites any member of the *sahābah* in whose justice they believe, and
they believe in *all* of them.

To them, the traditions recorded in the *Sahīh* books of al-Bukhāri and
of Muslim are never to be doubted, so much so that these books have
become as though they were on par with the Holy Qur’ān in as far as
accuracy is concerned; otherwise, what is t he meaning of the vast
majority of Sunnis taking upon themselves to accept all what these
*Sahīh* books contain?!

In order to underscore this, let us quote the view of Shaykh Abū ‘Amr
ibn al-Salāh in the Introduction to al-Nawawi’s *Sharh* of Muslim’s
*Sahīh* as follows: “ALL what is decided by Muslim, may Allāh have mercy
on him, as being authentic in his book [Muslim’s *Sahīh*] is
*absolutely* authentic. The same applies to what al-Bukhāri decided in
his book as being authentic. This is so because the nation has received
such an acceptance, with the exception of those whose contention is
disregarded, through consensus.” He adds saying, “The view of an
infallible person cannot miss, and the nation in its consensus is [thus]
protected against falling into error.”[^3]

As for the Shī’ahs, they precondition, first and foremost, the rendering
of *isnād* of *hadīth* to any of the Imāms from among Ahlul Bayt (‘a),
basing their argument on the following statement of the Messenger of
Allāh (ṣ): “I have left among you that which, if you uphold it, you
shall never stay: the Book of Allāh and my *‘itrat*, my Ahlul Bayt.”[^4]
and also on this verse of the Almighty:

***“Allāh only wishes to remove all abomination from you, O members of
the family (Ahlul Bayt), and to make you pure and spotless” (Qur’ān,
33:33).***

As for the other conditions, the most important among them is to compare
the narrative with the text of the Book of Allāh (ṣ) then to look into
its context and *isnād* then compare it with others the decisive
*tawātur* (consecutive reporting) of which has already been fixed and,
finally, judging it through reason. Following any narrative which lacks
any of these conditions is to be seriously considered and contemplated.

The major *ahādīth* book with the Shī’ahs are four: *Al-Kāfi, Man lā
Yahduruhu al-faqīh, Al-Istibsār* and *Al-Tahdheeb*, and *all* the
narratives in these books are subject to investigation [rather than
taking them for granted as is the case with our Sunni brethren]. They
contain what is lean and what is fat, and Shī’ahs do not consider all
the narratives in these books as being accurate, for the Shī’ahs see no
book which can be compared with the Book of Allāh in as far as accuracy
is concerned as is the case with both Shaykhs, namely al-Bukhāri and
Muslim, with regard to their *Sahīh* books.

For example, in the book titled *Masādir al-Hadīth ‘inda al-Shī’a
al-Imāmiyya* (sources of *hadīth* according to Imāmite Shī’ahs) by the
critic Sayyid Muhammad Husayn al-Jalāli, who classifies the traditions
in *Al-Kāfi*, we read the following: “The number of *ahādīth* in it is
16,121 of which 9,485 are weak, 114 are good, 118 are confirmed, 302 are
strong and 5,702 are authentic.”

This clearly demonstrates how Shī’ah scholars themselves consider
thousands of *ahādīth* in *Al-Kāfi*; so, where is this “fact” which
comes out of the mouths of some liars such as Zahir and al-Khateeb who
claim that *Al-Kāfi* is regarded by the Shī’ahs just as al-Bukhāri’s
*Sahīh* is regarded by the Sunnis, then they claim that its title is
‘*Sahīh* al-Kāfi”?! This is an outrageous lie which they repeat in their
poisoned books with the objective to mislead the reader by labeling weak
traditions which they derived from *Al-Kāfi* or other Shī’ah books of
*hadīth* as “authentic” in order to use this as an argument against them
and to indict them...

Both Parties’ Stand Regarding The Prophet’s Infallibility
---------------------------------------------------------

While some people with vested interested in addition to some liars
circulate erroneous rumors by saying that the Shī’ahs prefer their Imāms
over the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ), as many Sunnis think, I have found,
from my research, that the Shī’ahs sanctify the Prophet (ṣ) to a degree
that is by far greater than that viewed by the Sunnis. Shī’ahs sanctify
the Sunnah of the Prophet (ṣ) and are of the view that anyone who denies
a ruling mandated by the Prophet (ṣ) is an apostate.

They see the Prophet (ṣ) as the very best of the first generations and
of the last. They simply regard upholding the Twelve Imāms from among
Ahlul Bayt (‘a) based on their being the most authentic to transmit the
Sunnah of the Prophet (ṣ). They reject any and all doubts and hearsay
about the Prophet’s infallibility. In their view, he is infallible with
regard to the matters relevant to the creed and to life, prior to his
Prophetic mission and thereafter.

As for the Sunnis, they, too, prefer the person of the Prophet (ṣ) over
all early generations and the last, but they see his infallibility
limited to theological matters only. These, in their view, are matters
related to conveying the Message and nothing more. As for anything less
than that, he is like all other human beings: He may be wrong, or he may
be right.

Before we rebut the latter view, we would like to show the reader
portraits of what the Sunnis believe with regard to the Prophet’s
infallibility so that we may clearly and truly see their stand in this
regard and from what they regard as the most accurate books next to the
Book of Allāh.

‘Ā’isha has said, “... till the truth took him by surprise at the Hira
cave. In it, the angel came to him and said, ‘Read!’ (Or ‘Recite!’). The
Prophet (ṣ) said to him, ‘I am not a reader.’ [The Prophet (ṣ) went on
to say] He took me and covered me till I was exhausted then released me.
Then he released me and thrice said, ‘Read!’”

‘Ā’isha goes on to say, “He returned shivering till he entered Khadīja’s
chamber and said, ‘Cover me.’ He was covered till fear abandoned him. He
then said, ‘O Khadīja! What is wrong with me?’ Khadīja took him and set
out to Waraqah ibn Nawfal ibn Asad ibn Abd al-Uzza ibn Qusayy, cousin of
Khadīja, [son of her uncle] her father’s brother, a man who embraced
Christianity during the *jāhiliyya*, and he used to write in Arabic.

He used to write the Bible in Arabic whatever Allāh wanted him to write,
and he was an old man who had lost his eye sight. Khadīja said to him,
‘O cousin! Listen to your nephew!’ Waraqah said, ‘O cousin! What do you
see?’ The Prophet (ṣ) informed him of what he saw. Waraqah, therefore,
said, ‘This is the same Code which was revealed to Moses! How I wish I
could be alive when your people get you out [of Mecca]!’ The Messenger
of Allāh (ṣ) said, ‘Shall they really get me out?’...”[^5]

Is it accepted by reason that the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) did not know
that what was revealed to him was the Prophetic mission and that Waraqah
ibn Nawfal, the Christian, was more knowledgeable than him and that he
was the one to tell him?!

‘Ā’isha goes on to finish her narrative and to state what is more
strange than this and from which the bodies shiver: “... Waraqah then
died and the revelation ceased to come, so much so that the Prophet (ṣ)
grieved very much. We came to know that his grief took control of him to
the extent that many times he used to go to high mountain summits in
order to throw himself down from there. Whenever he reached the summit
of a mountain in order to throw himself down from it, Gabriel came to
him and said, ‘O Muhammad! You truly are the Messenger of Allāh!’ He,
therefore, would enjoy some calm, then he would return. If the
revelation took too long to visit him, he would do the same. So, if he
then went to the summit of a mountain, Gabriel would come to him and say
the same to him.”[^6]

And can a Muslim believe that the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) did not know
the Qur’ān in its entirety? Look, then, to what al-Bukhāri states,
relying on the authority of ‘Ā’isha who said, “The Messenger of Allāh
(ṣ) heard a man reciting the Qur’ān at the mosque, so he said, ‘May
Allāh have mercy on him! He reminded me of such-and-such a verse which I
dropped from such-and-such a Sura!’”[^7]

As regarding their claim that it was acceptable to believe that the
Prophet (ṣ) used to forget, it is narrated on the authority of Jābir ibn
Abdullāh [al-Ansāri] that during the Battle of Khandaq (moat), ‘Umar ibn
al-Khattab went to him and said, “O Messenger of Allāh! I was about to
perform my prayers when the sun had almost set after a fasting person
would break his fast.”

The Prophet (ṣ) said, “By Allāh, you have not then performed it.” ‘Umar
goes on to say, “The Prophet (ṣ) went down to valleys in my company. He
made his ablution then performed the *Asr* prayers after the sun had
already set, then he prayed the *Maghrib* thereafter.”[^8]

Abū Hurayra is quoted as having said, “Prayers were called for, rows
were prepared standing, so the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) came out to us. As
soon as he stood up in his prayer area, he said he had *janāba*
(uncleanness due to seminal discharge), so he said to us, ‘Stay where
you are.’ He returned and made his *ghusul*. Then he came out and his
head was dripping. He made the *takbeer* and we prayed with him.”[^9]

Abū Hurayra is also quoted as having said, “... so the Prophet (ṣ) led
our noon prayers in two prostrations [apparently *qasr*, shortened],
then he went to a wooden board in the forefront of the mosque and put
his hand on it. Among the people were Abū Bakr and ‘Umar. They felt too
much respect for him to ask him about it. People went out quickly.

They said, ‘Were the prayers shortened?’ Among the people was a man whom
the Prophet (ṣ) used to call ‘the man with two hands’ and who said to
the Prophet (ṣ), ‘O Prophet of Allāh! Why did you shorten the prayers?!’
The Prophet (ṣ) said, ‘I did not forget, nor did I shorten them.’ They
said, ‘You did, indeed, forget, O Messenger of Allāh (ṣ)!’ He then said,
‘The man of the two hands has said the truth.’”[^10]

Imagine! They go as far as claiming that a Jew was able to expose the
Prophet (ṣ) to his magic, so the Prophet (ṣ) imagined doing something
which he did not do! And that he had to ask ‘Ā’isha whether the *wahi*
had descended upon him or not! Or he might forget whether he had an
intercourse with his wife or not!

‘Ā’isha has said, “The Prophet (ṣ) remained for a period of time
imagining that he had cohabited with his wife but he in reality had not.
One day he said to me, ‘O ‘Ā’isha! Allāh passed His verdict to me with
regard to something about which I sought His verdict. Two men came to
me. One of them sat near my foot while the other sat near my head. The
one near my foot said to the one near my head, ‘What is wrong with the
man?’ He said, ‘He is enchanted.’ ‘Who enchanted him?’, asked the other.

He said, ‘Labeed ibn A’sam.’”[^11] ‘Ā’isha has also been quoted as
having said, “The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) was enchanted, so much so that
he would imagine doing something which he never did till one day, while
he was with me, he kept praying to Allāh then said, ‘Have you felt that
Allāh has issued a verdict about something for which I sought His
verdict?’”[^12]

Shaykh Muhammad Abdoh rejected these narratives which claim that the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) had fallen under the effect of sorcery because
they contradict this verse:

***“The wicked ones say, ‘You follow no one other than a bewitched man’”
(Qur’ān, 28:8).***

As regarding the Prophet’s control of his carnal desires, al-Bukhāri has
stated in his *Sahīh* a narrative through Abū Hishām saying, “When the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) was sick, he kept going in a circle around his
women and saying, ‘Where am I supposed to be tomorrow? Where am I
supposed to be tomorrow?’ out of his concern for ‘Ā’isha. ‘Ā’isha said,
‘When it was my own turn [to cohabit with the Prophet (ṣ)], he calmed
down.’”[^13]

‘Ā’isha has also said, “Whenever the Prophet (ṣ) was about to make a
trip, he would cast lots about his women. Anyone chosen by the lot he
used to choose to go out with. And he used to divide for each woman her
day and night, but Sawda daughter of Zam’ah granted her day and night to
‘Ā’isha wife of the Prophet (ṣ).”

Anas ibn Mālik said, “The Prophet (ṣ) used to spend one hour making a
round of his wives in the night and the day, and they were eleven.” Anas
was asked, “Was he able to manage all of that?!” Anas said, “We used to
talk and say that he (ṣ) was granted the stamina of thirty men!”[^14]

Sunnis claim that the following sacred verses were revealed to rebuke
the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) for having frowned at Abdullāh ibn Maktoom,
who was blind, and that the reason behind his turning away from the man,
as the Sunnis narrate, was his being busy talking to ‘Utbah ibn Rabī’ah,
Abū Jahl ibn Hishām, al-Abbās ibn Abd al-Muttalib, Ubayy and Umayyah ibn
Khalaf inviting them to believe in Allāh and hoping they would embrace
Islam.

Ibn Maktoom had asked the Prophet (ṣ) then to recite something from the
Holy Qur’ān and to teach him from what Allāh had taught him till hatred
surfaced on the face of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) because his speech
was interrupted and he said to himself, “These prominent persons would
say that he [the Prophet (ṣ)] is followed only by the slaves and the
blind,” so he turned away from him and paid his full attention to the
folks to whom he was talking.

These verses are:

***“He frowned and turned away, because the blind man came to him,
(interrupting). But what could tell you that he might grow (in spiritual
understanding)? Or that he might receive admonishment, and the teaching
would benefit him?” (Qur’ān, 80:1-4).***

The Shī’ahs reject this story entirely saying that these verses were
revealed about a man from Banū Umayyah, not the Messenger of Allah, who
had turned away from that same blind man. *‘Allāma* Muhammad Husayn
Tabatabai, in his exegesis titled *Al-Mizan*, has said the following:
“These verses are not at all clearly indicative that they were addressed
to the Prophet (ṣ).

Rather, it is a mere narrative not directly telling who it implicates.
Rather, they contain an indication that someone else [other than the
Prophet (ṣ)] is meant because frowning in the face of others is never a
habit of the Prophet (ṣ) even with his own enemies who differed with
him, let alone the believers who seek more guidance. Moreover, the
individual implicated in them is described as paying attention to the
rich and turning away from the poor, and this does not fit the Prophet’s
gracious manners.

Instead, Allāh has described his manners as being great, saying, even
before the revelation of this chapter [Chapter 80 quoted above], ‘You
surely are endowed with great manners;’ so, how can anyone believe that
Allāh grants him recognition for his great manners at the start of his
Prophetic mission then He turns to rebuke him for what he did and speak
ill of him such as describing him as courting the rich even when they
are unbelievers and turning away from the poor even when they are
believers and are seeking guidance.”[^15]

Based on the above-quoted narratives and their likes, the Sunnis derived
their belief that the infallibility of the Prophet (ṣ) included *only*
matters relevant to the religion and the message. But Allāh ordered us
to emulate His Messenger absolutely and without any term or condition:

***“Nor does he say (anything) of (his own) desire. It is no less than
inspiration sent down to him” (Qur’ān, 53:3-4).***

Add to this the following verse:

***“Take what the Prophet assigns to you, and abstain from what he
withholds from you. And fear Allāh, for Allāh is strict in punishment”
(Qur’ān, 59:7).***

These verses prove that his infallibility is not restricted but
absolute. Had it been permissible for the Prophet (ṣ) to err, Allāh
would then have ordered us to follow error. This is something from
saying it we seek Allāh’s protection.

The infiltration of narratives casting doubts about the infallibility of
the Prophet (ṣ), besides their being the work of forgers, so that they
may be used to cast doubt about the Islamic creed, may have other
reasons as to why they were fabricated, so that they may support the
stand of some *sahābah*, the same *sahābah* who claimed that the Prophet
(ṣ) was “hallucinating” during his last sickness when he asked them to
bring him some writing material so he would dictate to them the writing
of something after the writing of which they would never stray.

So, it is not odd after that to find some narratives describing one of
the *sahābah* as being right while in its regard the Prophet (ṣ) was
wrong, as those who promote such narratives claim. One of them is what
is attributed to him regarding the revelation of the verse about the
veil after ‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb had pointed out to the Messenger of
Allāh (ṣ) the importance of his women being veiled! Anas has said,
“‘Umar said, ‘I said: O Messenger of Allāh! The good and the bad persons
come to see you.

Perhaps you ought to order the mothers of the faithful to veil
themselves.’” According to another narrative, ‘Umar said to the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ), “Veil your women.” She [‘Ā’isha] said, “He did
not; therefore, Allāh revealed the verse of veiling.”[^16]

Also among what the Sunnis attribute to him (ṣ) regarding performing the
funeral prayers for the hypocrites, they say it was revealed in support
of a stand by ‘Umar after the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) had insisted on
performing it on [Abdullāh] the son of Ubayy, the hypocrite.

It is narrated that Abdullāh ibn ‘Umar said, “When Abdullāh ibn Ubayy
died, his son went to the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) and said, ‘O Messenger
of Allāh (ṣ)! Give me your shirt so I may shroud him in it, and do
perform the funeral prayers for him and seek forgiveness for him.’ He
(ṣ) gave him his shirt and said to him, ‘Once you are through with him,
call the *adhān*.’ When he finished calling the *adhān*, he (ṣ) came to
perform the funeral prayers for him, whereupon ‘Umar pulled him (aside)
and said, ‘Has not Allāh prohibited you from performing funeral prayers
for the hypocrites?’

He said:

***‘Whether you ask for their forgiveness or not, (their sin is
unforgivable:) If you ask seventy times for their forgiveness, Allāh
will not forgive them because they have rejected Allāh and*** ***His
Prophet, and Allāh does not guide those who are perversely rebellious’
(Qur’ān, 9:80),***

so this verse was revealed: ‘

***Nor should you ever pray for any of them who dies, nor stand at his
grave, for they rejected Allāh and His Prophet and died in a state of
perverse rebellion’ (Qur’ān, 9:84),***

so he (ṣ) abandoned the idea of praying for them.”[^17]

In another narrative from ‘Umar himself, he said, “... so I was very
surprised at my own daring with the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ).”[^18]

The truth in that incident is that the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) was given
the option to pray for the hypocrites and to seek forgiveness for them
by the token of the verse saying,

***“Seek forgiveness for them or do not seek it; even if you seek
forgiveness for them seventy times, Allāh will not forgive them”
(Qur’ān, 9:80).***

The Prophet (ṣ) opted to pray for that particular hypocrite due to the
great benefit, tot he anticipated interest and to win the hearts of the
man’s own people, the Khazraj, from among whom one thousand men embraced
Islam. His prayers (ṣ) for that hypocrite took place before the
prohibition had descended.

The verse saying, “Seek forgiveness for them or do not seek it..., etc.”
does not convey the prohibition which ‘Umar understood and because of
which he objected to the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) and whom he saw as
“wrong”. The revelation of the verse prohibiting praying for the
hypocrites does not at all prove that the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) was
wrong in praying for Abdullāh ibn Ubayy, Allāh forbid; so, it would have
been wrong had he done so after its revelation and not before.

This incident does not serve a purpose except to demonstrate how wrong
‘Umar was and how strongly he objected to the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ).
‘Umar himself admits the same; he is quoted as having said, “I slipped
in Islam a slip worse than which I never slipped when the Messenger of
Allāh (ṣ) wanted to pray..., etc.”[^19]

Similar to it is the incident of accepting blood money from the captives
in the aftermath of the Battle of Badr. This verse:

***“It is not fitting for a Prophet that he should have prisoners of war
until he has thoroughly subdued the land. You look on the temporal goods
of this world, but Allāh looks to the hereafter, and Allāh is Exalted in
might, Wise. Had it not been for a previous ordinance from Allāh, a
severe penalty would have reached you for the (ransom) that you took”
(Qur’ān, 8:67)***

was revealed, according to the view of the Sunnis, in order to rebuke
the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) for having accepted ransom from the prisoners
of the Badr war instead of killing them at the time when ‘Umar ibn
al-Khattāb wanted to kill them all, so this verse was revealed
supporting ‘Umar’s opinion. They narrate what supports their opinion,
statements which they themselves have said then attributed to the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) regarding the meaning of the previous verse which
contains a threat of a severe punishment. But what was that threat
really for?!

The Sunnis narrated saying that the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) used to weep
with Abū Bakr who said, “We almost were subjected to a great penalty on
account of the disagreement of the son of al-Khattāb, and had a penalty
descended, only the son of al-Khattāb would have slipped from it.”[^20]
The truth about this incident is as follows:

The past verse was revealed before the Battle of Badr rebuking the
*sahābah* who preferred the trade caravan and what Abū Sufyān’s trade
caravan was carrying over fighting when they were consulted by the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) who wanted to see how ready they were and how
willing to fight the polytheists.

The prohibition in the verse is not absolute regarding the Prophet (ṣ)
taking war prisoners. Rather, it prohibits taking war prisoners without
[first] fighting the polytheists, as was the desire of some *sahābah*
who were consulted by the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) to either take the
trade caravan from them or to fight them. How can it be reasonable to
believe that this verse, which threatens those who do not wish to fight,
was revealed to rebuke the Prophet (ṣ) who had already killed the
polytheists?! Seventy war heroes from Quraysh were killed in that
battle.

Abu Hurayra And The Abundance Of His Ahādīth
--------------------------------------------

Due to the large number of *ahādīth* narrated by Abū Hurayra, I decided
to shed some light on his personality. Traditionists have unanimously
agreed that Abū Hurayra narrated more traditions about the Messenger of
Allāh than anyone else although he did not keep the Prophet (ṣ) company
except for one year and nine months or, according to some narratives,
three years. The *Sahīh* books of the Sunnis have included 5,374
traditions of which al-Bukhāri narrated 446.

As for Abū Hurayra himself, he has said, “No companion of the Prophet
(ṣ) narrated more traditions than I have except Abdullāh ibn ‘Umar, for
he can write and read [whereas I cannot].”[^21] But all what Ibn ‘Umar
transmitted are 722 traditions from which al-Bukhāri quotes only seven
and Muslim only twenty...

As for the reason why Abū Hurayra kept the Prophet (ṣ) company so much,
he himself answers this question when he says, “They say that Abū
Hurayra narrates too many traditions, and Allāh is the One Who promises;
and they say, ‘Why do the Muhājirūn and the Ansār not narrate as he
narrates?’

My brothers from among the Muhājirūn kept busy making transactions at
the market, and my brothers from among the Ansār kept busy by their
money being invested, and I was a poor man who kept company with the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) in order to fill his belly. So I was present when
they were absent, and I remembered when they forgot.”[^22]

He also said, “People say, ‘Abū Hurayra has narrated too many
[traditions].’ I used to keep the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) company in
order to satisfy my stomach, so that I do not have to eat what is
prohibitive nor wear silk nor be served by this man or by that woman.
And I used to tie a stone to my stomach on account of acute hunger,
although I would recite a verse with me so that he might feed me.

The most kind man to the destitute was Ja’far ibn Abū Tālib. He used to
take us to feed us whatever he had in his own house, so much so that he
used to bring us a container which had nothing it, so we would tear it
and lick what is in it.”[^23]

Abū Hurayra expressed his appreciation of the food charity of Ja’far ibn
Abū Tālib by saying the following about him, “Nobody who ever put on
sandals, or ride animals, or tread the dust after the Messenger of Allāh
(ṣ) was better than Ja’far ibn Abū Talib.”[^24]

So, what criterion did Abū Hurayra apply in favoring Ja’far ibn Abū
Tālib over all other *sahābah*?!

In his *Sahīh*, Muslim has narrated saying that ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab
beat Abū Hurayra when he heard him quoting the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) as
having said, “Whoever says, ‘La ilaha illa Allāh’ [there is God except
Allāh] enters Paradise.”[^25]

Ibn Abd al-Birr has quoted Abū Hurayra himself saying, “I have brought
you traditions which, had I narrated them during the time of ‘Umar ibn
al-Khattāb, Umar would have beaten me with the club.”[^26]

The traditionist-faqīh Rasheed Rida has said, “Had ‘Umar’s life-span
extended till the death of Abū Hurayra, such numerous *ahādīth* would
not have reached us.” Mustafa Sādiq al-Rāfi’i, therefore, says, “He,
meaning Abū Hurayra, was the first traditionist in Islam to be charged
[with fabricating *hadīth*].”

When the Battle of Siffīn took place, Abū Hurayra sided with Mu’āwiyah
and was rewarded with plenty of money for doing such a “good job” in
narrating *hadīth* and for supporting the Umayyads. Marwān ibn al-Hakam,
for example, used to appoint him as his own deputy in his job as the
*wāli* [governor] of the city. His conditions, hence, improved a great
deal.

Ayyūb ibn Muhammad is quoted as having said, “We were once with Abū
Hurayra, and he was wearing two beautiful linen garments. He blew his
nose, so he said, ‘How can this be?! Abū Hurayra blows his nose while
wearing linen?! I remember being the very last one in the distance
between the pulpit of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) and the chamber of
‘Ā’isha, losing my consciousness. One would come and put his foot on my
neck, thinking I am mad. I was not mad; I was only hungry.”[^27]

What is linked to his support for the Umayyads is his deliberately
keeping silent about some traditions of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ)
because narrating them would have jeopardized his own life [not just his
pocket]. Abū Hurayra himself has said, “I learned from the Messenger of
Allāh (ṣ) two pouches [of *ahādīth*]. As for one of them, I disseminated
it. As for the other, had I disseminated it, this throat would have been
cut off.”[^28]

Where does this statement stand in comparison to this following
statement by Abū Hurayra himself: “People say that Abū Hurayra has
narrated too many traditions. Had it not been for two verses in the Book
of Allāh, I would not have narrated a single *hadīth*:

***‘Those who conceal the clear (Signs) and the guidance We have sent
down after We have made it clear for the people in the Book!the curse of
Allāh, and the curse of those entitled to curse, shall be upon them,
except those who repent and make amends and openly declare (the truth):
I turn to them; for I am oft-Returning, Most Merciful’ (Qur’ān,
2:159-160).”***[^29]

From all these irrefutable proofs, the truth becomes quite clear about
Abū Hurayra and his “integrity” in narrating *hadīth* and which makes
him similar to the “sultans’ preachers” in our own time. And it becomes
quite clear why the Shī’ahs turn away from his traditions: It is their
answer to the Sunnis who exaggerate in accepting Abū Hurayra’s
traditions, charging anyone who is critical of him.

In the book titled *Ikhtisār ‘Ulūm al-Hadīth* [summarizing the sciences
of *hadīth*], Ibn Hanbal, Abū Bakr al-Hameedi and Abū Bakr al-Sayrafi
are all quoted as having said, “We do not accept the narration of one
who tells lies about the traditions of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) even
if he repents thereafter.”[^30] Al-Sam’āni has said, “One who tells a
lie in one single narrative, all his previous narratives must be
dropped.”[^31]

Following we would like to display some of the “traditions” narrated by
Abū Hurayra which al-Bukhāri has recorded in his *Sahīh*:

Let us start with Abū Hurayra claiming that Moses, peace be upon him,
gouged the eye of the angel of death!!! Abū Hurayra has said, “The angel
of death was sent to Moses, peace be on him. When he said to him [to
accompany him], he pushed him back, so he [the angel] returned to his
Lord and said, ‘You sent me to a servant who does not want to die.’

Allāh answered him by saying, ‘Go back to him and tell him to put his
hand on the back of a bull, for then he will be granted for each hair
one more year to live.’ He said, ‘Lord! What after that?’ Allāh said,
‘Death.’ He, therefore, asked Allāh to bring him close to the holy land
the distance of a stone’s throw.”[^32]

Abū Hurayra has said, “... It will be said to hell: ‘Are you now full?’
It will say, ‘Is there any more?’ It will then be the time when the
Lord, Praised and Exalted is He, would put his foot on it, and it would
say, ‘Now, only now, am I full.’”[^33]

Abū Hurayra has said, “The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) said, ‘Our Lord,
Praised and Exalted is He, descends every night to the lower heavens
during the last third of the night and says, ‘Who is there to plead to
me, so I shall grant him? Who is there to seek My forgiveness, so I
shall forgive him?’”[^34]

The latest narrative contradicts what the Sunnis believe of Allāh (ṣ)
firmly established on the ‘Arsh. His descending to the lower heavens of
the night, as Abū Hurayra claims, implies His staying there for the 24
hours of the night and the day on account of the presence of another
time of the night in another area of the earth, in various places, since
the earth is like a ball! Had Abū Hurayra known that the earth looks
like a ball, would he have narrated “traditions” like these?!

Abū Hurayra has also said, “The Prophet (ṣ) said, ‘The Children of
Israel used to bathe in the nude, so each one of them would look at the
other, but Moses used to bathe by himself, so they said, ‘By Allāh!
Nothing prohibits Moses from bathing with us except that he has no
sexual organs.’ Moses went once to bathe. He put his garment on a rock.
The rock rolled down, carrying his garment with it. Moses chased the
rock saying, ‘Bring my garment back, O rock! Bring my garment back, O
rock!’ till the Children of Israel saw Moses and said, ‘By Allāh! There
is no harm in [the body of] Moses!’ He took his garment and started
beating the rock [to discipline it!!!].’” Abū Hurayra went on to say,
“By Allāh! He asked six or seven other [rocks] to beat that rock with
him.”[^35]

Abū Hurayra has also said, “The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) said, ‘When the
call for the prayers is made, Satan would then run away. He would keep
farting so that the *adhān* may not be heard. When the call terminates,
he returns till the prayer is held; it is then that he will run away
again. Once it is over, he returns and so on. One would keep telling
himself, ‘I remember such-and-such! I remember such-and-such [things or
people, etc.]!’ He would keep telling himself like that till he does not
know how he prayed.”[^36]

In fact, the past “traditions” exist in the books of the Israelites
which Abū Hurayra used to quote quite often. This was due to keeping
company so much with Ka’b al-Ahbar, the Jew who pretended to have
embraced Islam.

About entering Paradise, Abū Hurayra has narrates saying, “I heard the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) say, ‘A group from among my nation will enter
Paradise who are seventy thousand in number; their faces will shine like
the moon.’ ‘Akkāshah ibn Muhsin al-Asadi stood up and said, ‘O Messenger
of Allāh! Do pray for me so that Allāh may let me be one of them!’ He
(ṣ) said, ‘O Lord! Do let him be among them!’

Then a man from among the Ansār said, ‘O Messenger of Allāh! Do pray for
me so that Allāh may let me be one of them!’ The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ)
said, ‘‘Akkāshah has already beaten you to it!’”[^37]

Abū Hurayra also says, “While we were in the company of the Prophet (ṣ),
when I was asleep, I saw myself [in a vision] in Paradise. I found a
woman making her ablution beside a mansion. I inquired, ‘To whom does
this mansion belong?’ They said, ‘To ‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb.’ I remembered
then how jealous he is, so I fled away. ‘Umar wept and said, ‘I am
jealous only for your own sake, O Messenger of Allāh!’”[^38]

We would like to conclude Abū Hurayra’s “traditions” by citing some
*fatwas* narrated about him and attributed to the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ)
whom he quotes as having said, “If anyone looks inside your house
without your permission, and if you threw a rock at him and gouged his
eye, you will not then be blamed.”[^39]

As for other “fatwas” from Abū Hurayra, one says that the Messenger of
Allāh (ṣ) has said, “None of you should walk wearing only one single
sandal. Let him wear them both or take them off both.”[^40]

A Halt With Al-Bukhāri In His Sahīh
-----------------------------------

It has become necessary to cast a look, though swift, at al-Bukhāri’s
*Sahīh* as the most accurate of all the books of *hadīth* according to
the Sunnis who, on one hand, believe in the authenticity of all what is
narrated in it. On the other hand, it contains many narratives by Abū
Hurayra and such a huge quantity of the narratives which cast doubt
about the infallibility of the Prophet (ṣ) in addition to other such
narratives.

Al-Bukhāri records*ahādīth* which, according to him, are authentic from
among 600,000 (six hundred thousand) traditions, as narrated about him.
He himself has said, “I have not included in this book except what is
authentic, and what I have not included of such authentic *ahādīth* is
even more numerous.”

The first objection which we have against al-Bukhāri, the mentor, is his
reliance on the “justice” of a series of traditionists as the *only*
condition for fixing the authenticity of the narrated *hadīth* and
without considering its context, what meanings it contains, etc. This
explains the presence of instability, error and contradiction in many
narratives which he has recorded.

Even if the narrator is just, this does not stop him from forgetting a
portion of one *hadīth* which he had heard in addition to the
possibility of his narrating the *hadīth* according to its meaning, not
in the wording which he had heard. This causes the *hadīth* to lose some
of its original wording which may have another meaning to which the
narrator did not pay attention especially since the series of the
narrators is so lengthy and may sometimes include seven or eight
persons.

If we add the difficulty of verifying the “justice” of traditionists,
especially the hypocrites from among them whose inner secrets are known
only to the Lord of all, the greatest fault with al-Bukhāri’s procedure
in recording traditions becomes quite obvious. Underscoring this point,
Ahmad Amin has said, “Some traditions whose traditions he recorded are
not trustworthy. *Huffāz* (those who know the Qur’ān by heart) have
deemed about eight [out of ten] of those quoted by al-Bukhāri as
weak.”[^41]

Following are some of the traditions which al-Bukhāri labels as
“authentic” (*Sahīh*) and, as time passed by, the Sunnis adhered to
their contents:

Abū Sa’īd al-Khudri is quoted as having said that the Messenger of Allāh
(ṣ), with regard to Judgement Day, said the following, “... so they
shall keep falling (into hell) till only those who used to worship
Allāh, be they righteous or sinners, remain, and it will be said to the
latter, ‘What keeps you while all other people have gone?’ They will
say, ‘We parted with him, and we this Day need such parting the most,
and we heard a caller saying that all people should join those whom they
used to worship; we, therefore, are waiting for our Lord.’

The Mighty One will come to them not in the form in which they saw Him
the first time, and He will say, ‘I am your Lord.’ They will say, ‘You
are our Lord,’ and only the prophets will speak to Him. One will ask
them, ‘Is there between yourselves and Him any sign whereby you
*identify* Him?’ They will say, ‘It is the leg,’ so He will unveil His
leg, and every believer will prostrate to Him...”[^42]

Jarīr ibn Abdullāh is quoted as having said, “One night, we were sitting
with the Prophet (ṣ). He looked at the moon when it was the fourteenth
of the month and said, ‘You shall see your Lord just as you see this
[moon], and you shall not be blamed for seeing Him.’”[^43]

Suffices to rebut these past two “traditions” what al-Bukhāri himself
records when he relies on the *isnād* of Masruq who says, “I asked
‘Ā’isha, ‘Mother [of the faithful]! Did Muhammad (ṣ) ever see his Lord?’
She said, ‘My hair stood up on account of what you have said. Where do
you stand with regard to three things which, if anyone mentions them to
you, he lies? Whoever told you that Muhammad (ṣ) saw his Lord lies. Then
she recited the following verse:

***‘No vision can grasp Him, but His grasp encompasses all vision: He is
above all comprehension, yet He is acquainted with all things’ (Qur’ān,
6:103),’***

***‘It is not fitting for a man that Allāh should speak to him except by
inspiration, or from behind a veil or by sending a messenger to reveal,
with God’s permission, whatever Allāh wills, for He is Most High, Most
Wise’ (Qur’ān, 42:51).”***[^44]

*‘Allāma* al-’Askari says, “The verse saying,

***‘Some faces that Day will beam (in brightness and beauty), looking to
their Lord’ (Qur’ān, 75:22)***

means they look in anticipation for the Command of their Lord [to be
lodged in Paradise], that is, they are expecting it. It is like the
context of the following verse about what the sons of Jacob who said to
their father:

***‘Ask the town where we have been’ (Qur’ān, 12:82),***

that is, ‘Ask the people of the town.’ Thus, interpreting the verses in
the light of their outward meaning leads to Allāh, the most Praised, the
most Exalted One, has a body.”[^45]

Among the other Israelite concepts found in al-Bukhāri’s book is one
narrated about Abdullāh saying, “A rabbi went to the Messenger of Allāh
(ṣ) and said, ‘O Muhammad! We find [in our books] how Allāh will place
the heavens on a finger, the trees on a finger, the water and the earth
on a finger and all other creation on a finger, then He will say, ‘I am
the King!’ The Prophet (ṣ) laughed till his molar teeth became visible
on account of testifying to the truth of what that rabbi had said. Then
the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) recited this verse:

***‘They did not estimate Allāh as He deserves’ (Qur’ān, 6:91).”***[^46]

[Abdullāh] Ibn ‘Umar is quoted as having said, “The Messenger of Allāh
(ṣ) said, ‘If the sun’s arch comes out, abandon saying the prayers till
the sun comes out [completely]. And when the sun’s arch sets, abandon
the prayers till it sets, and do not time your prayers with the rising
of the sun or with its setting, for it rises between both horns of the
devil.’”[^47]

I do not know how anyone can believe such superstitions!

Here is another from Abū Dharr al-Ghifāri who is supposed to have said,
“The Prophet (ṣ), when the sun set, said to Abū Dharr, ‘Do you know
where it went?’ I [Abū Dharr] said, ‘Allāh and His Messenger know best.’
He (ṣ) said, ‘It truly goes till it prostrates under the ‘Arsh. It will
seek permission, and it will be granted permission, and it almost
prostrates under the ‘Arsh, so it seeks permission, and it is granted
permission.

And it almost prostrates, but it is not accepted from it. It seeks
permission, and permission is not granted to it. It will be said to it,
‘Return from where you have come,’ so it rises from its setting place.
This is a reference to this verse of the Almighty:

***‘And the sun runs its course for a period determined for it: That is
the decree of the One Exalted in might, the all-Knowing One’ (Qur’ān,
36:38).’”***

‘Umar ibn al-Khattab is quoted as having said, “Have you not come to
know that the deceased person is tormented by the living weeping over
him?” despite this verse of the Almighty:

***“No bearer of the burden (of sins) bears the burden of someone else”
(Qur’ān, 17:15).***

Abdullāh is quoted as having said, “The name of a man was pronounced in
the presence of the Prophet (ṣ). It was said that he kept sleeping till
the morning and did not wake up for the prayers. The Prophet (ṣ) said,
‘Satan urinated in his ears.’”[^48]

Jābir ibn Abdullāh (al-Ansāri) is quoted as having supposedly said, “Put
lids over your pots, cover your drinks, close your doors and keep your
children at home during the night, for the jinns spread and snatch. Put
out the lamps when you go to bed, for the oil lamp’s tape may burn and
may cause the house to burn.”[^49]

We find this much of such narratives sufficient, and others are quite
numerous, causing a large question mark to be placed before al-Bukhāri
and his *Sahīh*. The first that is based on our proving the error of the
common claim that all what is recorded in this *Sahīh* is accurate is
that any tradition in it deserves to be used as evidence simply because
al-Bukhāri granted it the adjective “authentic.”

We, therefore, have to cast a second look at the beliefs which were
derived based on some of this book’s traditions such as the possibility
of seeing Allāh Almighty, His placing His foot in Hell, the
infallibility of the Prophet (ṣ) being incomplete, the Prophet (ṣ) not
memorizing the entire text of the Qur’ān, Moses gouging the eye of the
Angel of Death and many, many such stuff which has occupied a place of
prominence and in which [some] people believe despite the doubts and
superstitions which it carries and which can be used to level charges
against the Islamic faith itself. The same applies to other books of
*hadīth* as well.

As a result, we are obligated to refer to our Islamic history and cast
another look at a great deal of what al-Bukhāri and other traditionists
have narrated about the status of a *sahābi*, be he this person or that,
especially with the presence of the disputes among these *sahābah* and
which stirred a dissension the results of which are apparent in our own
time: the presence of different sects which divided and weakened the
Muslims.

[^1]: Shaykh Muhammad Abū Zuhra, Al-Imām al-Sādiq (\`a).

[^2]: Shaykh Muhammad al-Ghazāli, Difā\` an al-\`Aqeeda wal Sharī\`ah
dhidd Matā\`in al-Mustashriqeen.

[^3]: Muslim\`s Sahīh as explained by al-Nawawi, Vol. 1, p. 14 (Dār
al-Sha\`ab edition).

[^4]: Al-Tirmidhi, Sahīh, Vol. 13, p. 201 in the book dealing with the
merits of the Family of the Prophet (ṣ) (Dār al-Kitāb al-\`Arabi).

[^5]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 9, p. 92 in the book of interpretation in
a chapter about the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) being the first to start it.

[^6]: Ibid., Vol. 9, p. 932

[^7]: Ibid., Vol. 9, p. 93.

[^8]: Ibid., Vol. 1, p. 349 in the book of athān in a chapter about the
Prophet (ṣ) saying, “We have not prayed” to someone.

[^9]: Ibid., Vol. 1, p. 168 in the book of ghusul in a chapter about
when it is said at the mosque that one has janāba.

[^10]: Ibid., Vol. 8, p. 48 in the book of manners in a chapter of what
people may say.

[^11]: Ibid., Vol. 8, p. 57 in the book of manners in a chapter about
Allāh enjoins justice and kindness.

[^12]: Ibid., Vol. 7, p. 444 in the book of medicine in a chapter about
magic.

[^13]: Ibid., Vol. 5, p. 77 in the book about the virtues of the sahābah
in a chapter about the virtues of \`\`isha.

[^14]: Ibid., Vol. 1, p. 165 in the book of ghusul in a chapter about
one cohabiting then doing it again and about one who cohabits with his
women in one ghusul.

[^15]: \`Allāma Sayyid Muhammad Husayn al-Tabatabai, Tafsīr al-Mizan,
Vol. 20, p. 203 (2nd edition), 1974 A.D.

[^16]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 6, p. 296 in the book of exegesis; Vol.
8, p. 170 in the book of seeking permission to enter.

[^17]: Ibid., Vol. 7, p. 462 in the book of outfits in a chapter about
wearing a garment.

[^18]: Ibid., Vol. 2, p. 252, in the book of coffins.

[^19]: Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-\`Ummāl, hadīth No. 4404.

[^20]: Ibid.

[^21]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 1, p. 86 in the book of knowledge.

[^22]: Ibid., Vol. 3, p. 313 in the book of farming in a chapter about
the horse.

[^23]: Ibid., Vol. 5, p. 47 in the book of the virtues of the sahābah in
a chapter about the merits of Ja\`fer ibn Abū Tālib.

[^24]: Al-Tirmidhi, Sahīh, Vol. 13, p. 189 (Dār al-Kitāb al-\`Arabi
edition), Beirut, Lebanon. The compiler follows this statement by saying
that its isnād is authentic.

[^25]: Muslim, Sahīh, Vol. 1, p. 201 in a chapter about one who says
“There is God except Allāh” out of firm belief enters Paradise.

[^26]: Shaykh Muhammad al-Ghazāli, Fiqh al-Seera, p. 41 (sixth edition).

[^27]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 9, p. 317 in the book of upholding the
Book and the Sunnah in a chapter about what the Prophet (ṣ) stated
according to the agreement of people of knowledge.

[^28]: Ibid., Vol. 1, p. 89 in the book of knowledge in a chapter about
memorizing knowledge.

[^29]: Ibid., Vol. 1, p. 88.

[^30]: Ikhtisār \`Ulūm al-Hadīth, p. 111.

[^31]: Al-Nawawi, Al-Taqreeb, p. 14.

[^32]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 2, p. 236 in the book of coffins.

[^33]: Ibid., Vol. 6, p. 353 in the book of exegesis in a chapter about
the verse “Is there any more?”

[^34]: Ibid., Vol. 2, p. 136 in the book of tahajjud.

[^35]: Ibid., Vol. 1, p. 169 in the book of ghusul in a chapter about
one who bathes isolated in the nude.

[^36]: Ibid., Vol. 1, p. 336 in the book of athān in a chapter about the
rewards of calling the athān.

[^37]: Ibid., Vol. 7, p. 473 in the book of outfits in a chapter about
the outer garments, mantles and towels.

[^38]: Ibid., Vol. 4, p. 306 in the book of the beginning of creation in
a chapter about the characteristics of Paradise.

[^39]: Ibid., Vol. 9, p. 18 in the book of blood monies in a chapter
about one who takes his own right or sought qisās without having to
refer to the sultan.

[^40]: Ibid., Vol. 7, p. 496 in the book of outfits in a chapter about
one who walks wearing one single sandal.

[^41]: Ahmad Amin, Duha al-Islam, Vol. 2, pp. 117- 118.

[^42]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 9, p. 396 in the book of tawhīd in a
chapter about “Faces that Day shall be fresh”.

[^43]: Ibid., Vol. 6, p. 355 in the book of tafsīr in a chapter about
the verse “... So celebrate your Lord\`s praises” (Qur\`ān, 110:30).

[^44]: Ibid., Vol. 6, p. 359 in the book of tafsīr in a chapter about
Surat al-Najm.

[^45]: Al-\`Askari, Ma\`ālim al-Madrasatayn, Vol. 1, p. 31 (2nd
edition).

[^46]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 6, p. 317 in the book of tafsīr in a
chapter about “They did not estimate Allāh as He deserves.”

[^47]: Ibid., Vol. 4, p. 319 in the book about the beginning of creation
(genesis) in a chapter about the characteristic of Iblis and his hosts.

[^48]: Ibid., Vol. 2, p. 135 in the book of tahajjud.

[^49]: Ibid., vo. 4, p. 336 in the book of the beginning of creation
(genesis) in a chapter about “If flies fall into the drink of one of
you, let him take it out with a piece of bread.”


