Mut’a: Temporary Marriage
=========================

It is a woman marrying a man according to an agreed upon dower and for a
pre-determined period of time stated in a marriage contract which
incorporates all the conditions of a marriage regarded by the Sharī’ah
as sound.

Its format is that a woman says the following to the man after they both
agree and accept the dower and the period of time: “I married you to
myself on such-and-such a dower and for the known period of time” where
this period is named exactly. The man’s answer will be: “I accepted”.

Representation in this contract is accepted just as it is in any other
contract. According to the terms of the contract, the woman becomes the
wife of the man, and the man becomes her husband till the end of the
period specified in the contract. They may renew it to a different
period of time or even forever if they wish.

The wife has to observe the *‘idda* (waiting period) after the period
terminates. The duration of the *‘idda* will be two months if she still
goes through the menstrual cycle; otherwise, it is forty-five days. The
child, male or female, born out of a *mut’a* marriage belongs to his/her
father.[^1]

This type of marriage is used to scandalize the Shī’ah because the
latter believe in its legality, but the questions here are:

 Where did the Shī’ahs come up with this sort of marriage?

 Is this sort of legality subject to what a *mujtahid* deems as
permissible or prohibitive?

 And what are the proofs for its legality from the Glorious Book and
the Purified Sunnah?

In order to answer all these questions, we say that all Muslims, in
their various sects, are unanimous in their view that this sort of
marriage was legislated in the dawn of Islam. Al-Bukhāri, quoting
[Abdullāh] Ibn Abbās, cites the latter saying, “We used to participate
in military campaigns with the Prophet (ṣ), and we did not have our
women with us, so we said to him, ‘Could we have eunuchs [for sex]?’

But he prohibited us from doing that and later permitted any of us to
marry a woman by giving her as simple [a dower] as a garment. Then he
recited the following verse: ‘

***O you who believe! Do not make unlawful the good things which Allāh
has made lawful for you...’ (Qur’ān, 5:90).”***[^2]

The verse saying

***“... seeing that you derive benefit [mut’a, enjoyment] from them,
give them their prescribed dowers” (Qur’ān, 4:24)***

had already been revealed about this type of marriage. Most Sunni
scholars of exegesis have explained “enjoyment” in this verse as the
*mut’a* marriage. But Ibn Abbās, Ubayy ibn Ka’b and Sa’īd ibn Jubayr
read this verse as though it says: “From whoever among them you derive a
pleasure for a pre-determined period, you must give them their
dowers.”[^3]

Explaining this verse in his *Tafsīr*, Ibn Kathīr said the following:
“It is far-fetched that these should believe in the distortion of the
Qur’ān; therefore, it must be intended for interpretation rather than
recitation...”[^4]

But Islamic sects differed about the continuity of permitting this sort
of marriage, and the problem became: Was the *mut’a* marriage prohibited
or did it remain as is? The following *hadīth* proves beyond any doubt
that the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) passed away without having prohibited
the *mut’a* marriage:

‘Imrān is quoted as having said, “The verse of *mut’a* was revealed in
the Book of Allāh (ṣ), so we acted upon it in the company of the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ), and no verse was ever revealed prohibiting it,
nor did he (ṣ) ban it till his death. A man [apparently referring to
‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb] said according to his own personal view whatever
he wanted to say.”[^5]

It is stated in *Sharh al-Bāri ‘ala Sahīh al-Bukhāri* that the man
referred to in the *hadīth* cited above is caliph ‘Umar ibn
al-Khattāb.[^6] This supports what Muslim narrates in his *Sahīh*
relying on the authority of Abū Nadra who has said, “I was with Jābir
ibn Abdullāh [al-Ansāri] when someone came to him and said, ‘[Abdullāh]
Ibn Abbās and [Abdullāh] ibn al-Zubayr differed with each other about
both types of *mut’a*.’ Jābir said, ‘We did them both in the company of
the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ), then ‘Umar prohibited us from doing them;
so, we did not return to doing them.”[^7]

Also in Muslim’s *Sahīh*, with *isnād* traced back to ‘Atā’ who has
said, “Jābir ibn Abdullāh came to perform the *‘umra*. We, therefore,
went to his house. People asked him about things, then they mentioned
*mut’a*. He said, ‘Yes, we did perform the *mut’a* during the time of
the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) and during that of Abū Bakr and of
Umar.’”[^8]

Muslim, relying on the *isnād* of Jābir ibn Abdullāh, also narrated in
his *Sahīh* that the latter had said, “We used to contract *mut’a* for a
handful of dates and flour for a few days during the time of the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) and that of Abū Bakr till ‘Umar banned it with
regard to ‘Amr ibn Hareeth..”[^9]

The story of ‘Amr ibn Hareeth is that a poor woman knocked at the man’s
door once pleading to him to give her something to satisfy her hunger,
but the man refused to give her anything unless she let him have her way
with her, claiming that it was the *mut’a* marriage. The woman accepted
this condition against her will. Caliph ‘Umar came to know about it, so
he was very angry. This prompted him to ban it.

Moreover, he decreed to stone anyone who practiced this type of marriage
as is clear from a narrative recorded by Muslim in his *Sahīh* the
*isnād* of which is traced to Abi Nadra. The latter said, “Ibn Abbās
used to enjoin the *mut’a*, and Ibn al-Zubayr used to prohibit it, so I
mentioned this to Jābir who said, ‘We used to practice *mut’a* when we
were in the company of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ).

When ‘Umar came [to power], he said, ‘Allāh makes lawful for His
Messenger whatever He wills; so, complete the *hajj* and the *‘umra* and
stay away from marrying these women. If a man is brought to me who had
married a woman off to a man, I will stone him.’”[^10]

And in al-Tirmidhi’s *Sahīh*, while quoting Abdullāh ibn ‘Umar who was
asked by a Syrian about the *mut’a*. He said, ‘It is lawful.’ The man
said, ‘Your father [‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb] banned it.’ [Abdullāh] Ibn
‘Umar said, ‘Do you see that my father banned it although the Messenger
of Allāh (ṣ) had permitted it, should you abandon the Sunnah [of the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ)] and follow what my father says?!’”[^11]

The nation’s scholar, Abdullāh Ibn Abbās , was famous with regard to his
view that the verse relevant to *mut’a* was never abrogated.
Al-Zamakhshari says the same in his *tafsīr* titled *Al-Kāshif* where he
cites Abn Abbās saying that the verse of the *mut’a* is among the fixed
ones. In al-Bukhāri’s *Sahīh*, too, there is a testimony to this fact.
Abū Jamrah says, “I heard Ibn Abbās being asked about the *mut’a* of
women; he permitted it.

Mawla said to him, ‘Such is done during a harsh circumstance and when
there is a shortage of women,’ or something like that, whereupon Ibn
Abbās said, ‘Yes.’”[^12] Both al-Tabarāni and al-Tha’labi, each in his
own *tafsīr* book, rely on the authority of Ali (‘a) saying, “Had ‘Umar
not banned the *mut’a*, nobody would have committed adultery except a
wretch,”[^13] that is, only few would have committed it.

Despite the clarity of all these proofs that are as clear as the midday
sun regarding the continuity of the *mut’a* marriage being *halāl*, most
Sunnis nowadays see the opposite, claiming that the verse relevant to
this type of marriage was abrogated. They also differed regarding what
[or *who*] abrogated it. Some of them say it was abrogated by a Qur’ānic
verse, while others say that the revocation came from narratives in the
Sunnah. We rebut both views with the above-cited traditions the
authenticity of which is already fixed and which prove that the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) died without prohibiting the *mut’a*.

As regarding those who say that it was abrogated by this verse:

***“... who guard their private parts, except with those joined to them
in the marriage bond” (Qur’ān, 23:5-6),***

this verse is Mecci (revealed in Mecca) while the *mut’a* verse is
Medenite (revealed in Medīna) [i.e. revealed after the Hijra].

The ruling for the legislation of the *mut’a* marriage is Medenite, and
what precedes cannot abrogate what follows. As regarding those who say
the abrogation came from the Sunnah which is narrated about the
Messenger of Allāh (ṣ), the “traditions” which they claim to be
abrogating contradict each other. Some of them say it was abrogated in
Khayber, another in Awtas, a third when Mecca was conquered, a forth in
the Tabūk campaign, a fifth in the *‘umra* of *qadā’* and a sixth in
*Hijjatul-Wadā’* (farewell pilgrimage)...!

The inconsistency of these narratives and their contradiction is a clear
proof of their inaccuracy. Add to this the fact that such narratives are
no more than transmissions each one of which was related by one single
person and do not qualify to abrogate a ruling fixed in a Qur’ānic verse
and the legality of which is proven according to the consensus of the
Muslims because abrogation cannot take place through one single person’s
narrative, and a Qur’ānic verse cannot be abrogated except by another
verse of the Qur’ān by virtue of the verse saying

***“We neither abrogate any of Our revelations nor cause them to be
forgotten without substituting [them with] something better or similar”
(Qur’ān, 2:106).***

Besides the existence of all these clear texts which prove the legality
of the *mut’a* marriage and that the Prophet (ṣ) never banned it but
stayed till caliph ‘Umar banned it during his caliphate, we cannot find
a solution for this complex except that caliph ‘Umar followed his own
*ijtihād* in order to achieve a [social] benefit which he, according to
his own insight, saw the Muslims of his time and days required him to
prohibit the *mut’a* a civil prohibition, in order to serve a temporal
interest, not a religious prohibition, since caliph ‘Umar is greater and
is Islamically above prohibiting what Allāh has permitted or
incorporating in the religion what has nothing to do with the religion.

He knew that what Muhammad (ṣ) deemed as *halāl* remains permissible
till the Day of Judgment, and what Muhammad (ṣ) deemed as *harām*
remains prohibitive till the Day of Judgment. It has, therefore, to be a
civil prohibition, not a religious one. His strict stand vis-a-vis the
*mut’a* marriage is not the first of its kind, for he is known to be
tough and harsh in all his affairs and applies his personal *ijtihād*
seeking the higher benefit, in his view, for Islam and the upholding of
the Sharī’ah.[^14]

One example of ‘Umar applying his own *ijtihād* in some ruling and his
strictness in their regard is when he ordered the Muslims to perform the
*nafl* prayers during the month of Ramadan (what is known as “salāt
al-tarāweeh”) in a congregational manner after it had been performed
during the time of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) and that of Abū Bakr
individually. Relying on the authority of Abū Hurayra, al-Bukhāri states
the following: “The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) said, ‘One who stands in
prayers during the month of Ramadan out of a firm belief and a sincere
desire for rewards, his past sins shall be forgiven.’

Ibn Shihāb said, ‘The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) passed away and people were
thus doing [praying during the month of Ramadan the *nafl* prayers
singly], and it remained so during the caliphate of Abū Bakr and the
dawn of the caliphate of ‘Umar, may Allāh be pleased with them both. I
went out with ‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb, may Allāh be pleased with him, in a
night during the month of Ramadan to the Mosque and saw the people
scattered, each praying on his own, each man praying by himself. A man
would pray on his own, while others see a man pray so they pray like
him.

‘Umar said, ‘I am of the view that if I gather these to pray behind one
*qāri*, it would be better.’ He gathered them all to pray behind Ubayy
ibn Ka’b. I went out with him in another night and I saw the people
following the prayer of their *qāri*. ‘Umar said, ‘How good this *bid’a*
(invention in the creed) is! And the one after which they sleep is
better than the one after which they stand,’ meaning the one performed
at the end of the night is better, and people used to stand for the
prayers at the beginning of the night.”[^15]

Even with regard to this same *nafl* prayer ritual, he [‘Umar] followed
his personal *ijtihād*, increasing the number of its prostrations to
twenty. ‘Ā’isha has said, “The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) never increased
the number of prostrations over eleven neither during the month of
Ramadan nor in any other month.”[^16]

But some of those who were contemporary to caliph ‘Umar, in addition to
some naive traditionists after him, when the latter were unmindful of
the reason why the caliph banned the *mut’a* marriage, found it quite
serious that he should ban what Allāh had permitted, so they were forced
to find a justification for it. They could not find anything other than
the claim that the Prophet (ṣ) abrogated it after permitting it, thus
falling into confusion, and their statements contradicted each other so
much.

Look into the following narrative so you may see the extent of such
confusion and contradiction about which we are talking. More calamitous
is that those who fabricated the following narrative attributed their
fabrication to Ali, peace be upon him:

Al-Bukhāri, in his *Sahīh*, has stated the following: “Someone said the
following to Ali, may Allāh be pleased with him, Ibn Abbās finds no
fault with the *mut’a* of women.’ Ali (‘a) said, ‘The Messenger of Allāh
(ṣ) banned it in the Battle of Khayber and banned eating the meat of
domiciled donkeys.’ Some people said, ‘If one applies trickery till he
has *mut’a*, his marriage is invalid.’ Some other people said, ‘The
marriage is permissible, but the condition is nil.’”[^17]

Had these folks understood the reason why the caliph [‘Umar] had banned
it, they would not have had to resort to such an effort and such a
confusion. *Mut’a* has been looked into above from both its theological
and historical aspect.

As regarding looking into it from the ethical and social standpoint, its
legislation came as a mercy to people and to provide an ease to many,
especially to those who travel seeking knowledge, or trade, or *jihād*,
or guard a border..., situations in which a permanent marriage is not
possible because of its consequences and requirements which do not agree
with the conditions of travelers especially while they are young and the
desire in them is fiery.

They face one of two options: They may either remain patient and declare
a *jihād* against their own self, something which brings about a great
deal of hardship which may lead to malignant ailments and lethal
psychological ills and other harms with which people are familiar. Or
they may fall into adultery which has filled the world with corruption
and harm.

These reasons are the same that prompted one of the Gulf preachers named
Shaykh Ahmad al-Qattan to issue a *fatwa* to Arab students in the
Philippines to practice temporary marriage under a different name which
he called “marriage with the intention to divorce.” The condition in
this marriage is that the husband intends to divorce his wife without
anyone knowing about this intention, that is, that his marriage is in
his mind temporary, while according to the knowledge and intention of
the wife, it is permanent. The husband divorces his wife at the end of
the period which he had in mind.

Although those who invented this sort of marriage admit that it contains
lying to the wife and cheating her, and although there is no evidence
for it in the Qur’ān or in the Prophetic Sunnah, they justify it in
their own legislation by saying that its harm, at any rate, remains much
less than the harms of adultery!

Our Shaykh named above issued such a *fatwa* when he was asked about the
*mut’a* marriage and about Ibn Abbās legalizing it. He answered by
saying that this kind of marriage is prohibitive and that Ibn Abbās was
wrong in his verdict. He added commenting thus: “Had we followed the
scholars’ slips, we would have turned apostates!”

Thus became the *bid’a* of a “marriage with the intention to divorce”,
according to the view of al-Qattan, a substitute for the *mut’a*
marriage which was brought in the Book of Allāh and in the Sunnah:

***“Will you exchange what is better for what is worse?!” (Qur’ān,
2:61);***

so, there is no power nor might except in Allāh.

Mut’a Of The Hajj
-----------------

As for the *mut’a* of the *hajj*, it was practiced by the Messenger of
Allāh (ṣ) who enjoined it in accordance with the verse saying:

***“If anyone wishes to continue the ‘Umra on to the Hajj, he must make
an offering, such as he can afford; he should fast three days during the
Hajj and seven days on his return, making ten days in all. This is for
those whose home is not in (the precincts of) the Sacred Mosque”
(Qur’ān, 2:196).***

It is described as “enjoyment during the time of Hajj” due to the
pleasure of permitting what the *ihrām* prohibits during the period from
both *ihrāms* (the *ihrām* for the ‘Umra and the *ihrām* for the
Hajj)[^18], and this, too, was detested by caliph ‘Umar and which he
banned despite the fact that the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) died without
having banned it. Al-Bukhāri, relying on the authority of Sa’īd ibn
al-Musayyab, has stated the following: “Ali (‘a) and ‘Uthmān, may Allāh
be pleased with them both, differed with regard to their views about the
*mut’a*. Ali (‘a) said, ‘You only want to prohibit something which the
Prophet (ṣ) had personally done.’ When Ali (‘a) saw that, he permitted
both.”[^19]

And look into the following *hadīth* which al-Bukhāri records in his
*Sahīh* and which clearly shows that there were those who followed their
own *ijtihād* with regard to clear statements made by the Prophet (ṣ):

Al-Hakam has said, “I saw both ‘Uthmān and Ali, may Allāh be pleased
with them both. ‘Uthmān used to ban the *mut’a* and ban one from
combining both. Ali (‘a) permitted both saying, ‘*Labbayk* for an
*‘umra* and *hajj*!’ He said, ‘I shall never abandon the Sunnah of the
Prophet (ṣ) simply because someone said something.’”[^20]

The “someone” to whom Ali (‘a) referred in his statement above is ‘Umar
ibn al-Khattāb as we clarified in previous places. As for the excuse of
‘Uthmān with regard to his view, when allegiance was secured for him as
the caliph, Abd al-Rahmān ibn ‘Awf, as ordered by caliph ‘Umar before
the latter’s death, preconditioned on him to act upon the Book of Allāh
(ṣ) and the Sunnah of His Prophet (ṣ) and the way of both *sheikhs* [Abū
Bakr and ‘Umar].

Banning both types of *mut’a* was considered as part of the way of both
*sheikhs* and to which ‘Uthmān could not apply his own *ijtihād*;
otherwise, he would not have become caliph if he refused to accept that
condition. It is consecutively reported about caliph ‘Umar that he has
said, “Two types of *mut’a* which used to be in effect during the time
of the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) and which I now ban,”[^21] meaning the
*mut’a* of women and of *hajj*.

This statement by caliph ‘Umar shows that dealing with their own rulings
came only from him, not from anyone else. He admits that both types of
*mut’a* were in existence during the time of the Prophet (ṣ), and he
does not indicate at all that the Prophet (ṣ) had banned them; rather,
he here is admitting banning them himself saying, “... and which I now
ban.”

May Allāh have mercy on one who said the following about the previous
statement by ‘Umar: “We accepted his testimony [that the Prophet (ṣ)
never banned these *mut’as*] and did not accept his prohibition
thereof.”

The fact is that anyone who reviews our Islamic history subjectively and
away from fanaticism will find many other rulings (besides those
relevant to both *mut’as* and to the *taraweeh*) which came to exist out
of the *ijtihād* of caliph ‘Umar and despite the existence of fixed
statements by the Prophet (ṣ) which oppose them. But the Sunnis accepted
these *ijtihād* rulings across the centuries thinking they came from the
Prophet (ṣ)...!!!

[^1]: Imām Sharaf ad-Dīn, Al-Fusūl al-Muhimma.

[^2]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 6, p. 110 in the book of exegesis in a
chapter about the verse saying, “O you who believe! Do not make unlawful
the good things which Allāh has made lawful for you” (Qur\`ān, 5:90).

[^3]: Ibn Kathīr, Tafsīr; Muslim, Sahīh (as explained by al-Nawawi),
Vol. 3, p. 552 (Dār al-Sha\`ab edition).

[^4]: Ibn Kathīr, Tafsīr..

[^5]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 2, p. 375 in the book of hajj.

[^6]: Sharh al-Bāri \`ala Sahīh al-Bukhāri, vol 4, p. 177; Sharh
al-Nawawi \`ala Sahīh al-Bukhāri, Vol. 3, p. 364 (Dār al-Sha\`ab
edition).

[^7]: Muslim, Sahīh, Vol. 3, p. 556 in the book of nikāh in a chapter
about mut\`a (Dār al-Sha\`ab edition) as explained by al-Nawawi.

[^8]: Ibid., Vol. 3, p. 555 in the book of nikāh in a chapter about
mut\`a (Dār al-Sha\`ab edition) as explained by al-Nawawi.

[^9]: Ibid., Vol. 3, p. 556 in the book of nikāh in a chapter about
mut\`a (Dār al-Sha\`ab edition) as explained by al-Nawawi.

[^10]: Ibid., Vol. 3, p. 331 in the book of hajj in a chapter about the
scholars\` views regarding the legitimacy of one who performs the mut\`a
while performing the \`umra (Dār al-Sha\`ab edition).

[^11]: Al-Tirmidhi, Sahīh.

[^12]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 7, p. 36 in the book of nikāh.

[^13]: Al-Tabarāni, Tafsīr. Al-Tha\`labi, Tafsīr.

[^14]: Excerpted and edited from the book titled Asl al-Shī\`a wa
Usooliha [the origin and principles of Shī\`ah] by \`allāma Muhammad l
Kāshifal-Ghitā\`.

[^15]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 3, p. 126 in the book of the taraweeh
prayer in a chapter about the merit of one who stands for prayers during
the month of Ramadan.

[^16]: Ibid., Vol. 2, p. 137 in the book of tahajjud.

[^17]: Ibid., Vol. 9, p. 76 in the book of ikrāh (doing something forced
by extreme necessity) in a chapter abut the legality of a marriage.

[^18]: Imām Sharafud-Dīn, Al-Fusūl al-Muhimma.

[^19]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 2, p. 374 in the book of hajj.

[^20]: Ibid., Vol. 2, p. 371 in the book of hajj.

[^21]: Al-Rāzi, Al-Tafsīr al-Kabīr, Vol. 5, p. 153 (Dār Ihyā\` al-Turāth
al-\`Arabi). Al-Tabarāni.


