The Awaited Mahdi And Dissensions
=================================

All Islamic groups agree on a man who appears at the end of time to fill
the world with justice and equity and establish the government of
righteousness over all parts of the earth as a testimony to this verse:

***“Before this We wrote in the Psalms, after the message (had been
given to Moses): My servants, the righteous, shall inherit the earth”
(Qur’ān, 21:105),***

and also this verse:

***“And We wished to be gracious to those who were being oppressed in
the land, to make them leaders (in faith) and to make them*** ***the***
***heirs” (Qur’ān, 28:5),***

and also this verse:

***“They would fain extinguish Allāh’s light with their mouths, but
Allāh will not allow but that His light should be perfected, even though
the unbelievers may detest (it). It is He who has sent His Prophet with
guidance and the religion of truth to proclaim it over all religions,
even though the pagans may detest (it)” (Qur’ān, 9:32-33).***

The Chosen One (ṣ) clarified that this awaited man is from among his own
family; he (ṣ) said, “The world will not come to an end before the Arabs
are ruled by a man from among my own family whose name is similar to
mine..., etc.”[^1]

Abū Sa’īd al-Khudri is quoted as having said that the Messenger of Allāh
(ṣ) said, “The Hour shall not come till the earth is filled with
oppression, suppression and animosity, then will come out of my family
one who will fill it with equity and justice after being filled with
oppression and transgression.”[^2]

Abū Hurayra is quoted as having cited the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) as
saying, “If only one day remained of the life in this world, Allāh, the
most Exalted One, the most Great, would have prolonged it till a man
from among my Ahlul Bayt (‘a) rules the Daylam Mountain and
Constantinople.”[^3]

Umm Salamah is quoted as having cited the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) saying,
“Al-Mahdi is from among my offspring, from the offspring of Fātima
(‘a).” The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) said that Jesus, peace be upon him,
would appear at the end of time and would pray behind al-Mahdi. Abū
Hurayra quotes the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) as saying, “How will you be if
the son of Maryam (Mary) descends among you and your own Imām is your
king?!”[^4]

Al-Hāfidh, in *Sharh Sahīh al-Bukhāri*, has said, “Narratives are
consecutively reported that al-Mahdi is from this nation, and that Jesus
son of Mary will descend and pray behind him.”[^5] The Fiqh Assembly of
the Muslim World League (Rabitat al-Aalam al-Islami) issued the
following *fatwa* (verdict) dated May 31, 1976 about the Awaited Mahdi:
“Al-Mahdi, peace be upon him, is Muhammad ibn Abdullāh al-Hasani
al-Alawi al-Fatimi al-Mahdi, the Awaited One. The time of his appearance
is at the end of time, and it [appearance] is one of the signs of the
Great Hour.

He shall come out from the west, and he will receive the oath of
allegiance in Hijaz, in Venerable Mecca, between the Rukn and Maqam [of
Ibrahim], between the Honored Ka’ba and the fixed Black Stone. He will
appear when there is a great deal of corruption, when disbelief spreads
and when people oppress, and he will fill the earth with justice and
equity just as it was filled with injustice and oppression.

He shall rule the entire world and everyone will be his subject, once
through conviction and once through war. He shall rule the earth for
seven years, and Jesus, peace be upon him, will descend after him and
kill the Dajjāl [anti-Christ] or descends with him and helps him kill
him at the Ludd Gate on the land of Palestine. And he is the last of the
twelve righteous caliphs about whom the Prophet (ṣ) spoke as recorded in
the *Sahīh* books... The belief in the appearance of al-Mahdi is
obligatory, and it is one of the tenets of the followers of Sunnah and
Jamā’ah and is not denied except by one who is ignorant of the Sunnah
and one who brings an innovation into the creed.”[^6]

Hence, Sunnis agree with the Shī’ahs that Imām al-Mahdi (‘atfs) is the
last of the Twelve Caliphs about whom the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) gave
the glad tidings, and both parties agree on most other points relevant
to the Awaited Imām. As regarding their differences in his regard, these
are:

**First:** Most Sunnis believe Imām al-Mahdi (‘atfs) will be born at the
end of time, while the Shī’ahs believe he was born in 255 A.H. (869
A.D.) to his father Imām al-Hasan al-Askari (‘a), the twelfth among the
Imāms from among Ahlul Bayt (‘a), but Allah Almighty veiled him from the
eyes for a wisdom which He decreed, and he remains alive and will come
out at the end of the time.

**Second:** Sunnis, as in the above-quoted *fatwa*, believe al-Mahdi
(‘atfs) is a descendant of al-Hasan (‘a) and the name of his father is
Abdullāh based on a narrative recorded by them: “... His name shall be
similar to mine, and the name of his father similar to my father’s,”
whereas Shī’ahs believe al-Mahdi (‘atfs) descends from Imām al-Husayn
(‘a) and was born to his father al-Hasan al-Askari. (‘a).

The latest narrative they report as follows: “... His name shall be
similar to mine, and his father’s name similar to my son’s”, a reference
to the Prophet’s grandson al-Hasan (‘a). Some Sunni writers tried to
criticize and charge the Shī’ahs for their belief in the birth of the
Awaited Imām and in his holding the reigns of Imāmate at the age of
five.

This criticism is mostly rendered to fanaticism due to their own
conviction. Anything contrary to their conviction or to what they have
been accustomed to or have inherited, they immediately pass their
judgment on it as “invalid” without looking into the arguments of
others. Our response to this is:

**First:** There are many Sunni scholars who believe al-Mahdi (‘atfs) is
Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Askari (‘a), and that he is still alive [and in
occultation] till Allāh permits him to come out. They, thus, are in
agreement with what the Imāmite Twelver Shī’ahs say. Among these
scholars are:

1. Muhyi ad-Dīn ibn al-’Arabi in *Futūhāt al-Makkiyya*.

2. Sibt ibn al-Jawzi in his book *Tadhkirat al-Khawāss*.

3. ‘Abd al-Wahhāb al-Sha’rāni in his book *Aqā’id al-Akābir*.

4. Ibn al-Khashshāb in his book *Tawarīkh Mawālīd al-’Aimma w
Wafiyyātihim*.

5. Muhammad al-Bukhāri al-Hanafi in his book *Fasl al-Khitāb*.

6. Ahmad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Balādhuri in his book *Al-Hadīth al-Mutasalsil*.

7. Ibn al-Sabbāgh al-Māliki in his book *Al-Fusūl al-Muhimma*.

8. The man of knowledge Abd al-Rahmān in his book *Mir’āt al-Asrār*.

9. Kamāl ad-Dīn ibn Talhah in his book *Matālib al-Su’ūl fī Manāqib
al-Rasūl*.

10. Al-Qandūzi al-Hanafi in his book *Yanābī’ al-Mawadda*.

And there are others, too.[^7]

**Second:** There is no evidence from the Sharī’ah proving the opposite.
The occultation of the Awaited Imām has many similar miracles about
which the Holy Qur’ān informs us. Noah, peace be upon him, remained in
his people for 950 years calling them to the way of Allāh:

***“... and he stayed among them a thousand years less fifty” (Qur’ān,
29:14).***

He, of course, lived longer than that. The Fellows of the Cave remained
asleep for 309 years. Allāh Almighty raised Jesus, peace be on him, to
Him, saved him from being killed and will send him back to this world at
the end of time. Al-Khidir, too, peace be upon him, remains alive veiled
from our eyes.

As regrading the tender age of al-Mahdi (‘atfs) when he received the
reigns of Imāmate following the death of his father, al-Hasan al-Askari
(‘a), the eleventh in the series of the Imāms from among Ahlul Bayt
(‘a), there are similar and even greater miracles than that. Allāh made
Jesus son of Mary, peace be upon him, a prophet even as he was a
suckling infant in the cradle:

***“But she pointed to the babe. They said, ‘How can we talk to one who
is a child in the cradle?!’ He said, ‘I am, indeed, a servant of Allāh:
He has given me Revelation and made me a prophet...’” (Qur’ān,
19:29-30).***

***And Allāh granted authority to Yahya (John the Baptist) while still a
child: “‘O Yahya! Take hold of the Book firmly.’ And We granted him
wisdom even as a youth” (Qur’ān, 19:12).***

If anyone says that these miracles were for the prophets, we say that
there is no evidence from the Sharī’ah pointing to miracles coming to a
halt after the demise of the greatest Prophet (ṣ). Miracles are not only
for prophets. The fellows of the cave were not prophets.

Even the master of devils, Iblis, Allāh extended his life-span till the
Hour. On the other hand, those who object to the belief in the
occultation of the Awaited Imām, their objection is rendered to their
ignorance of his status and the truth about him. Al-Mahdi (‘atfs) will
be the Imām of Jesus, peace be upon him, whom Allāh made a prophet even
while a suckling babe in the cradle.

Thus, had the Sunnis come to know and realize that Allāh Almighty is the
One Who chose the Twelve Imāms from among the Ahlul Bayt (‘a) to be the
successors of the Prophet (ṣ) and the custodians of Muhammad’s Message,
their astonishment about the care with which Allāh surrounded the seal
of these Imāms–till He brings him back and completes His victory for the
clear righteousness and make his creed dominate all other creeds–will
surely disappear and will have no excuse.

Most Sunnis are not surprised about what they have accepted through
their own avenues, or from anything with which their sect agrees;
rather, they accept it and take it for granted whether it be about these
miracles mentioned in the Holy Qur’ān and about which nobody of course
can raise any doubt, but this consideration includes what they have
taken from the narratives in the *Sahīh* books of both al-Bukhāri and
Muslim.

As they narrate, for example, Allāh descends to the lower earth at the
end of the night; He uncovers His leg; He puts His foot in Hell on the
day of Judgment (we seek refuge with Allāh against such beliefs), or the
possibility of the Prophet (ṣ) forgetting or falling under the influence
of wizardry or his forgetting the text of the Qur’ān, or Moses, peace be
upon him, gouging the eyes of the Angel of Death, or the *imān* of Abū
Bakr weighting greater than that of the entire nation..., or the vision
of ‘Umar piercing through thousands of miles in what is known as the
incident of Sariya which is famous among the Sunnis, or their statement
that “Had there been a prophet after me, he would have been ‘Umar,” or
their saying that the angels are shy of ‘Uthmān..., in addition to many,
many such tales which most of them accept as they are and despite the
existence of many faults in them. As regarding what others believe, they
reject it altogether, denying it without even looking into it or
researching it.

I am sure had the belief in the occultation of the Awaited Imām been
incorporated in their doctrine, the Sunnis would not have surrounded it
with any doubt, nor would they have questioned it! In this regard, I
recall many interesting incidents which I encountered as I talked with
some brothers. One of them, while denying the legitimacy of the *mut’a*
marriage, which the Shī’ahs believe as legitimate, he did not know that
Islam did not ban slavery, so he was attacking it because it [slavery]
did not agree with his mentality.

And when I explained to him that all the Sunnis believe in its being
*harām*, he immediately expressed his agreement with them. As for the
*mut’a* marriage, and although he never saw anything supporting banning
it in al-Bukhāri’s *Sahīh*, he insisted he was not convinced of it for
no reason except that all the Sunnis believe it is *harām*!

What is more funny than this, I used to tell others during my defense of
the guidance which I received and the following of the Straight Path of
Ahlul Bayt (‘a) that the Shī’ahs believe the Prophet (ṣ) forgot some
verses of the Qur’ān or that a Jew was able to bewitch him or the story
of the encounter between Moses and the angel of death, etc., they
strongly rejected all of that and ridiculed such beliefs!

And When I explained to them that these are the same beliefs because of
which the Shī’ahs criticize the Sunnis and which are fixed in the most
“authentic” Sunni books of *hadīth*, such as al-Bukhāri’s *Sahīh*, for
example, some of them used to turn to defend them and to find a
justification for them, insisting on upholding them, and this is nothing
but what is called a blind sectarian fanaticism.

Nothing will avail in confronting it when one comes face-to-face with
the truth because closing the eye about them does not mean their
non-existence. The similitude of such people is, as you know, that of
the ostrich.

Contrary to what some people imagine, the Awaited Imām (‘atfs), despite
the belief of all Islamic sects of his appearance at the end of time,
they will differ about him when he does appear, and this will be the
subject of a great test for all the Muslims, even for all those who
follow heavenly creeds, for the Jews and the Christians, too, believe in
the coming of a Promised Savior.

Narratives have told the Muslims that they will be tested with regard to
the Dajjāl who will fight al-Mahdi (‘atfs), so much so that many of them
will fight on the side of this Dajjāl whom some narratives describe as
the one-eyed Dajjāl.

The truth, as I see it, is further than what some Sunnis believe, that
is, that on the forehead of this Dajjāl, the word “Kāfir” [unbeliever]
will be written. In such a case, it is highly unlikely that any Muslim
will be tested in his regard so long as he can read this word which
tells the truth about him. As for the claim of some of them that only a
believer will be able to read that word on the Dajjāl’s forehead, this,
too, is rejected because the result of the test will then have been
determined even before seeing that Dajjāl.

There is no sense in such a case in the dissension to which the
narratives have referred. The same applies to their claim that he will
be one-eyed. For this reason, I used to wonder in the past about: How
can the Muslims not swear the oath of allegiance to al-Mahdi (‘atfs)
when he appears, or how can they even fight him despite their waiting
for his appearance and their conviction that Allāh will grant him
victory??!!

But I, after conducting my research in the issue of the difference
between the Sunnis and the Shī’ahs, came to know that the strong tie
this man enjoys according to the beliefs of the Shī’ahs, especially
their belief that he is their Twelve Imām. This dissension became more
clear than before. When the Awaited Imām appears according to the
descriptions of the Shī’ahs, they will swear the oath of allegiance to
him at the same time when the fanatics from among the Sunnis will
immediately say that this Mahdi (‘atfs) is Shi’i and not the one for
whom we have been waiting who undoubtedly should be Sunni!  
 We can feel the effects of this same dissension in our contemporary
life through the criticism and the charges launched by Sunni fanatics
against the Islamic revolution in Iran and against the man who exploded
it. In most cases, they winked at him for no reason whatsoever except
his being a Shī’ah!

They did so without their knowledge of those behind this dissension,
those who fuel it from among our own people whom the enemies of this
nation have employed for this contemptible purpose. This is so despite
the fact that the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) had already given us glad
tidings about such a blessed renaissance and those behind it in one
*hadīth* recorded by al-Bukhāri in his *Sahīh* where he relies on the
authority of Abū Hurayra who has said, “We were sitting with the Prophet
(ṣ) when the Jum’a [Friday] Sūra [Qur’ānic Chapter] was revealed:

***‘... As well as (to confer all these benefits upon) others who have
not already joined them’ (Qur’ān, 62:3).***

I said, ‘Who are these people, O Messenger of Allāh?’ He did not answer
till we asked him about them three times, and Salmān al-Fārisi was
present among us. The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) put his hand on Salmān then
said, ‘Had [the means to acquire] *imān* (conviction) been in Venus, it
would have been acquired by men [or a man] from among these
[Persians].’”[^8]

Allāh Almighty has also referred in His Exalted Book to these folks when
he said,

***“Behold! You are those invited to spend in Allāh’s way, but some
among you are stingy. Yet*** ***any who are stingy are so at the expense
of their own souls. But Allāh is free of all needs, and*** ***it is you
who are needy. If you turn back (from the path), He will substitute
another people in*** ***your place; then they will not be like you!”
(Qur’ān, 47:38).***

Abū Hurayra has said that when the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) recited this
verse, he was asked, “O Messenger of Allāh! Who are these people who, if
we run away [from our religious obligations], they will replace us and
will not be like us?” He (ṣ) patted Salmān’s thigh then said, “This man
and his people. Had the creed been in Venus, men from among the Persians
would have acquired it.”[^9]

The Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) also drew attention to the group of people
that will take upon itself to create dissension among the Muslims in our
time. Ibn ‘Umar has said, “The Prophet (ṣ) once said, ‘O Allāh! Bless
our Syria! O Allāh! Bless our Yemen!” They asked him, “What about our
Najd?!” He (ṣ) said, ‘O Allāh! Bless our Syria! O Allāh! Bless our
Yemen!’ They again asked him, ‘O Messenger of Allāh (ṣ)! What about our
Najd?’ I believe his third statement included the following: ‘It is
there that shall be earthquakes and dissensions, and it is from there
that the horn of Satan shall come out.’” [^10]

I could not interpret the dissension referred to in this *hadīth* except
with Wahhabism whose inventor, Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab, was born in
one of the villages of Najd called ‘Uyayna. This group of people hid
under the cover of Tawhīd which they used as a forefront to hide the
vile objectives behind charging other sects, especially the one that
follow Ahlul Bayt (‘a), with apostasy and *shirk*.

For example, they regard pleading to Allāh through the medium of the
prophets and righteous servants of His as a great innovation despite the
presence of what contradicts this belief in al-Bukhāri’s *Sahīh* and in
what caliph ‘Umar had done.

Anas has said, “‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb, may Allāh be pleased with him,
used to seek help from al-Abbās ibn Abd al-Muttalib in praying for rain.
He said, ‘Lord! We used to plead to You in the name of our Prophet, so
you would grant us water, and we now plead to You in the name of the
uncle of our Prophet , so do let rain water descend upon us.’ And they
would thus get rain water.”[^11]

As for the reason why Wahhabism has so much concentrated on this issue,
it is because the followers of Ahlul Bayt (‘a) were known more than
others to uphold and to respect the sanctity of the person of the
glorious Prophet (ṣ) and the infallible Imāms after him because they
realize their great status with Allāh Almighty. They are the ones
without whom mankind would not have been guided to the Straight Path of
Allāh, and mankind would have kept their ignorance and misguidance.

Suffices for an answer to Wahhabism and to its inventor what is recorded
by al-Bukhāri in his *Sahīh* that the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) has said,
“Some people will come out from the east and recite the Qur’ān; it will
not go beyond their throats. They abandon the creed as swiftly as an
arrow abandons its bow, then they shall not return to it till the arrow
returns to its bow.” He was asked, “What is their mark?” He said, “Their
mark is *tahleeq* (shaving),” or he said “al-tasbeed” (shaving the
head)[^12].

The meaning of “tasbeed” is the same as has been quoted in this sacred
*hadīth*: “Ibn Abbās came and his head was *musbad*,” that is,
shaven[^13]. This has become the “trade mark” of the Wahhabis as is
known from their history.

Al-Mahdi (‘atfs) will come to support the downtrodden on earth against
all arrogant powers; so, what do you expect from his enemies? Will they
not try to use the hypocrites from among the Muslims, the sultans’
preachers and the imāms of misguidance to fight this new comer? Can you
not see how in our own days, how the ruler of Iraq, who earned a
reputation for his sins and apostasy, was able to deceive millions of
Muslims who went out shouting his name when he pretended to have *imān*
and to rely on Allāh and announce *jihād* against the unbelievers and
the polytheist people till many naive people thought this Dajjāl became
the Muslims’ Imām in truth?!

This suffices to point to what the conditions of the Muslims can be once
they are exposed to greater and harder events. The Chosen One (ṣ)
explained what the Muslims should do in order to guarantee their
salvation from drowning in the swamp of these dissensions after his
departure from this world: by upholding His Book and [at the same time]
by following the Pure ‘Itra from among his Ahlul Bayt (‘a) as we
explained in the first Chapter.

Hudhayfah ibn al-Yamān has said, “People used to ask the Messenger of
Allāh (ṣ) about goodness, and I used to ask him above evil, fearing it
might involve me. I said, ‘O Messenger of Allāh! We used to be in
*jāhiliyya* and in evil, then Allāh brought us all this goodness. Will
there be evil after this goodness?’ He (ṣ) said, ‘Yes.’ I said, ‘And
will there be after that evil goodness?’

He (ṣ) said, ‘Yes, and it will have smudge in it.’ I asked him (ṣ),
‘What is its smudge?’ He (ṣ) said, ‘People guide others without
themselves being rightly guided. What you will know about them you will
detest.’ I said, ‘Will there be after such goodness evil?’ He (ṣ) said,
‘Yes, callers at the gates of hell; whoever responds to their call to it
they hurl him into it.’ I said, ‘O Messenger of Allāh! Describe them for
us.’

He (ṣ) said, “They are from our own folks and they speak our [Arabic]
tongue.’ I said, ‘What do you order me to do should I live to see that?’
He (ṣ) said, ‘Uphold the Muslim masses and their *imām*.’ I said, ‘What
if they have neither masses nor an *imām*?’ He (ṣ) said, ‘Then stay
aloof from all these groups even if you have to bite on a tree’s root
till death comes to your rescue and you are in such a condition.’”[^14]

This *hadīth* clearly explains to us the obligation of upholding the
Muslim masses and their *imām*, and that when there is confusion about
the issue, and when one cannot know the truth, the Prophetic instruction
directs us to remain silent. This *hadīth* also makes it clear that the
callers stand at the gates of hell; whoever responds to their call, they
hurl him into it, that they are not from among the non-Arabs but from
among the Arabs, something which stresses what the previous *ahādīth*
have stated regarding the innovating group of people.

The fact is that this dissension in which we pass nowadays and against
falling into its nets did the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) warn us, we are
obligated to take extreme caution by selecting the path which safely
helps us reach the Sunnah of the Chosen One (ṣ), especially when there
are so many paths the number of which reaches seventy-three–according to
some narratives–and each one of these paths (sects) claims it is on the
right track. But the Messenger of Allāh (ṣ) explained to us that only
one of them will receive salvation; others will not.

Allāh has promised to support the saved group. Says the Prophet (ṣ), “A
group from among my nation shall remain on the path of righteousness;
they are not harmed by those who differ from them, till Allāh’s command
comes.” A Muslim nowadays has become perplexed, feeling strange about
all what takes place around him of this great fuss, of the grand
dissension, seeing himself required to take a second look at his Islamic
creed and likewise at many significant events in our Islamic history,
something which is considered as a testimony to what the Messenger of
Allāh (ṣ) has already said: “Islam started foreign and shall return
foreign just as it started...”

Undoubtedly, anyone who takes a discerning look at our Islamic history
and at our status quo, contemplating upon what Ahlul Bayt (‘a) had to
endure, especially the Imāms from among them, at the calamities, trials
and tribulations, at the persecution to which they were exposed, and if
he thinks about the reason why the truth has become lost among the
Sunnis..., he will realize the meaning of Islam returning foreign.

It seems such a return has already taken place especially during the
last few years. A part of the darkness which the oppressors spread on
following this path, across centuries, and in testimony to what the
Chosen One, the Guide (ṣ), has already articulated thus: “We are members
of a Household for whom Allāh has chosen the Hereafter over the world.

My Ahlul Bayt (‘a) shall face after me discrimination, hardship and
exile in the land till some people rise from there–and he pointed with
his hand towards the east–people who carry black flags; they will ask
for what is right, but they will not be given it, so they will fight and
achieve victory; they will be given whatever they want, and they will
not accept it till they pass it on to a man from among my Ahlul Bayt
(‘a) who will fill it with justice just as it was filled with
oppression. Anyone who lives to see that taking place, he must go to
them even if he has to crawl on ice.”[^15]

Lord! Do hasten his honorable ease and make us among those who march
behind his flag. And the last of our supplication is: Praise be to
Allāh, Lord of the Worlds, and greetings and salutations upon our
master, Muhammad, and his good and pure Progeny.

[^1]: Al-Tirmidhi, Sahīh, Vol. 9, p. 74. Abū Dāwūd, Vol. 2, p. 7. Ahmad,
Musnad, Vol. 1, p. 376.

[^2]: Mustadrak al-Sahīhayn, Vol. 4, p. 557. Ahmad, Musnad, Vol. 3, p.
36.

[^3]: Ibn Mājah, Sahīh, in a chapter about ijtihād.

[^4]: Muslim, Sahīh, Vol. 1, p. 373 in a chapter about Jesus son of Mary
descending (Dār al-Sha\`ab edition).

[^5]: Fath al-Bāri, Vol. 5, p. 362.

[^6]: Mu\`āmarat al-Mut ājirīn bid-Dīn [plot of those who trade in
religion], p. 29.

[^7]: I took these references from the book titled Li Akoona Ma\`a
al-Sādiqīn (So I May be with the Truthful) by \`allāma Dr. Muhammad
al-Samāwi al-Tījāni, p. 196.

[^8]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 6, p. 390 in the book of tafsīr in a
chapter about “... As well as (to confer all these benefits upon) others
who have not already joined them”.

[^9]: Refer to the books of Tafsīr by Ibn Kathīr, al-Qurtubi, al-Tabari
and Al-Durr al-Manthūr.

[^10]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 9, p. 166 in the book of dissensions in a
chapter about a dissension from the east.

[^11]: Ibid., Vol. 2, p. 66 in the book of praying for rain.

[^12]: Ibid., Vol. 9, p. 489 in the book of tawhīd in a chapter about
the recitation by a sinner and a hypocrite.

[^13]: Shaykh Imām Muhammad ibn Abū Bakr al-Rāzi, Mukhtār al-Sihāh, p.
282 (published by Dār al-Turāth al-\`Arabi for publication and
distribution).

[^14]: Al-Bukhāri, Sahīh, Vol. 9, p. 159 in the book of dissensions in a
chapter about “What if there is no Jamā\`a?”

[^15]: Ibn Mājah, Sunan, Vol. 2, ahādīth No. 4082 and 4087. Al-Tabari,
Tārīkh.


