Punishment in Barzakh for Non-Fulfillment of the Rights of Others
=================================================================

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***

It is mentioned in the book of Misbahul Harmain that in the last days of
his life, a respected personality named Shaykh Abdul Tahir Khorasani
travelled to Mecca and made a vow that as long as he was alive he would
remain there only and serve the holy house. During those days a person
had a bag full of gems, jewels and money and he was looking for a
reliable person who may hold it as a trust.

People suggested the name of Shaykh Abdul Tahir Khorasani and said that
he was one of the most reliable and honest personality in Mecca. Thus he
placed his trust with the Shaykh. After a period of time the Shaykh
passed away. When the person who had kept his bag as trust returned, he
was informed that the Shaykh was dead. When he approached the successors
of the Shaykh, they expressed ignorance about the matter. That man was
devastated and he was reduced to penury due to this.

However he was aware of the fact that the souls of believers arrive in
Wadius Salaam and that they are free and communicate with each other. So
he prayed to the Almighty Allah to enable him to see the deceased so
that he can ask him about his money.

After a long time, when he did not get any reply from the valley he
inquired from some scholar why it was so; that he was supplicating so
much but not getting any reply from the Shaykh. They told him that it
was possible that he might be in the place fixed for wrong doers. That
is he might be Wadi Barhut, which is in Yemen.

Wadi Barhut is a dangerous valley having horrible wells and pits etc. It
is often mentioned that extremely terrifying voices are heard in that
place, in other words just as Wadius Salaam in the neighborhood of
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) was a place of peace and safety for noble souls,
in the same way, Wadi Barhut was a place of stay for wicked souls.[^1]

In any case, that person set out for Wadi Barhut and became engrossed in
prayer, fasting and supplications till one day he saw Shaykh Abdul

Tahir. He asked: Are you, Abdul Tahir? Yes, replied the Shaykh. But are
you not the one who served the holy shrine in Mecca? Yes, said the
Shaykh. That person asked about his bag and why the Shaykh was in such a
bad condition. The Shaykh said: Your trust is buried in such and such
corner of the house. You did not come to collect it for such a long
time, so I could not return it to you before my death. Now you may go
there and direct my survivors to restore your trust.

Sin, which Makes One Eligible for Chastisement in Barzakh
---------------------------------------------------------

But as for your question at my bad condition; you should know that it is
due to three sins: One is rights of others, which are like a rock
attached to the wing of a bird that does not allow it to fly away.

Such is the seriousness of this matter that even though a person might
have performed the Ziyarat of Kerbala, Mashad or served at holy Kaaba,
he cannot get the neighborhood of Ahle Bayt (a.s.) if he has not
observed this properly. No matter where the body of that person might be
buried: in Mecca. Medina or Wadius Salaam, but it would not be allowed
to proceed to the high heavens if it has not fulfilled the rights of
others.

The following are those three rights.

Three Rights
------------

The first sin, about which I was reminded is that I had cut off
relations from my relatives in Khorasan and gone and settled down in
Mecca. It is prohibited to severe relations. You paid no attention to
the community and tribe. There are so many people who do not pay for the
obligatory expenses of their children and parents and they do not care
even if they are involved in some difficulty. They settle down in some
other town and do not pay any heed to their condition and well-being.

And the second sin was that I had given a dinar to an undeserving
person. The statement of the book is as follows: Perhaps one dinar was
not given to a deserving person, instead it was given to an undeserving
person and it is unlawful to deprive a deserving fellow.

Insulting a Scholar and Severe Chastisement
-------------------------------------------

The third sin was that a scholar of religion resided in our
neighborhood, and we caused insult to him. The scholar is having a right
upon us and we learn about our religion from him. The scholar is having
rights upon the society.

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: One who has insulted a scholar;
it is as if he has insulted me. If one is not attentive and has caused
insult to a scholar or had been rude to him; it is as if he has denied
the rights of the scholar and he would be answerable for that.

O God, what we shall do if You were to deal with justice with us? O God,
we are fearful of Your justice.

O God, deal with us with mercy and grace; we are not having the capacity
to bear Your justice.

Asking the Forgiveness of Neighbors at the Time of Death
--------------------------------------------------------

It is recommended for one who feels that his death is near, to seek the
forgiveness of his neighbors, friends and companion travelers. He should
not say that in this way he has done a favor. Many a times one acts
against the rights of neighborhood; for example one might have spoken to
a neighbor in a raised voice or caused pain to him; but now one does not
remembers it.

Do not trespass on the rights of those who cultivate your company and
understand the importance of travelling companion through this
traditional report.

Imam Ali (a.s.) and the Jew Travel Companion
--------------------------------------------

It is narrated that Imam Ali (a.s.) was returning to Kufa from a
journey; when a person accompanied him on the way and during that
journey the Imam (a.s.) asked him about his name, address and faith etc.
He said: I am a resident of such and such locality near Kufa and I
follow the Jewish religion. Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: I also reside
in Kufa and I am a Muslim. Both were traveling together.

The Jew started talking and after traveling for some time they reached a
junction from where one road led to Kufa and another to the locality of
that Jew. On reaching there Amirul Momineen (a.s.), instead of
proceeding to Kufa continued walking with the Jew. Suddenly the Jew
noticed this and asked: You are not going to Kufa? Imam Ali (a.s.)
replied: Why not? The Jew said:

The road to Kufa is different; did you miss it? Why? The Imam asked, I
had noticed this at that same place, but since you were my companion on
a journey, I wanted to fulfill the rights of traveling companions. So I
walked a few steps with you to bid farewell to you. The Jew was
astounded and he asked: Is it your personal belief or your religious
duty? Is this kind of fulfillment of human rights related to your
religion? He replied: Yes, it is the command of my religion and school.

The Jew fell into contemplation: What religion is so concerned about
human rights? The following day that Jew came to Kufa and saw in a
nearby Masjid that his travel companion was surrounded by a huge crowd
and every person was extending respect and honor to him. The Jew asked
someone who that man was. He was told that he was the Caliph of Muslims
and Amirul Momineen (a.s.).

The Jew began to think: Is this person really the leader of Muslims who
was the previous day behaving with me with such humility and sincerity?
All of a sudden that Jew fell at the feet of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and
embraced Islam and became one of the special Shia followers of the Imam.

Siraat Bridge and Hell
----------------------

If a person does not properly fulfill the right of others and dies in
this condition, he would be involved in severe chastisement on Judgment
Day and on Siraat Bridge. Some points are mentioned from the
introduction for explanation of about the Siraat Bridge. The literal
meaning of Siraat is way and in terminology whatever has been mentioned
in the holy Shariat and what the Muslims are obligated to have faith in
and also that which is included in the fundamentals of religion[^2] , it
is a bridge over Hell.

Siraat is a Bridge over Hell
----------------------------

It is narrated from the seal of the prophets that he said: When Judgment
Day would be established, they would haul Hell into the field of
gathering[^3]. It would have a thousand reins and each rein would be
held by a hundred thousand powerful angels. When they would be hauling
it, a call would be raised from Hell, which would pull the surrounding
creatures to itself.

All would be calling out: O Allah come to help us! Except for the seal
of the prophets; he would be saying: O Allah, help my Ummah. Like an
affectionate father, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) would be
concerned about the salvation of his Ummah. Thus it is mentioned in
traditional reports that when the Hell would be brought, they would make
a bridge above it so that people may cross it to enter Paradise. And
hell is made to appear on that day. On that day shall man be mindful,
and what shall being mindful (then) avail him?

On the Siraat Bridge for Three Thousand Years
---------------------------------------------

Siraat is the way to Paradise; but it is a strange way. It is narrated
from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) that the length of Siraat is
equal to travel of three thousand years, in which there is an elevation
of a thousand years and then a thousand years of decline and then a
thousand years of travel through rocky terrain and through scorpions and
wild animals. It is not an easy matter to cross the Siraat. Every person
would pass over the Siraat Bridge according to his faith and the quantum
of his good deeds.

Light of Belief and Deeds and the Siraat Bridge
-----------------------------------------------

There is no particular light on the Siraat Bridge; on the contrary there
is darkness on it. Sun and moon are of no use over there. There is no
light, except the effulgence of elegance of His Eminence Muhammad
Mustafa (s.a.w.s.). On Judgment Day, the effulgence of Muhammad and Aale
Muhammad (a.s.) and the effulgence of their Wilayat would be of use to
man. Recitation of Quran and remembrance of the Almighty Allah,
effulgence of sincerity of intention would illuminate the surroundings
from all directions.[^4]

Finally, how much effulgence one has obtained in this world and the
illumination of a person would be to the extent an eye can see. Another
light would be to a length of one Farsakh and the third would be such
that he would be able to see before his feet. It is narrated that the
light of someone would be so less that he would be able to illuminate
only his toe and he would stumble all the time.

How to Traverse the Long Dark Path without Any Light?
-----------------------------------------------------

The effulgence of Wudhu and Ghusl is worship. It would shine from all
the physical parts of the body subject to the condition that darkness of
sin should not have covered the shining effulgence. This long way is
equal to travel of three thousand years. How can it be traversed without
the effulgence of good deeds? As much effulgence we can take with us to
the grave would be less.

Siraat Bridge is Perceptive
---------------------------

All the things of the Hereafter possess perception and feelings. They
are completely different from the material world. So much so that even
the earth is having the perception of Judgment Day. The Siraat Bridge is
also having perception, feelings and understanding. One who steps on the
Siraat Bridge; if he is a believer, his feet would be pure, clean and
broad.

And the Siraat Bridge would be pleased with his passing over it. And if
the infidel or a sinner would pass over it, the Siraat Bridge would
start trembling and the Holy Quran has declared that the whole Hereafter
is alive.[^5] Life has enveloped the whole of the after world. Thus the
Siraat Bridge recognizes individuals.

When it notices an obedient servant passing over it, it becomes leveled
and smooth for him and when it sees a disobedient man walking on it, it
begins to tremble under his feet to such an extent that it becomes
thinner than a strand of hair, sharper than sword and darker than night.
There are many passes of Siraat, from which three are mentioned here,
which are related to worship acts under discussion.

A Terrible, but True Dream
--------------------------

Haji Noori (r.a.) has narrated from a respected Shaykh in Mustadrakul
Wasail that he said: There was a Masjid in our locality. Its caretaker
was a person named Muhammad bin Abi Uzniya and that Shaykh was also
among the managers, founders and teacher of that Masjid and every day he
came to it on the appointed time and delivered discourses. One day they
continued to wait for a long time, but that Shaykh did not arrive.

Some people were sent to look for him and seek information why he had
failed to show up. They reported that the Shaykh had taken ill. All the
people waiting for him in the Masjid arose and set out to visit him.
When they came to his house, they found the Shaykh in bed, and he had a
towel around his head and was groaning in pain; saying again and again:
I got burnt! I got burnt!

When they asked what was wrong, he said: Except for the thigh, my whole
body is burning from head to toe. They asked how this was so. He
replied: I was asleep last night, when I dreamt that Qiyamat has been
established. They have brought Hell near and a bridge was placed over it
for people to cross.

I also was among those who were passing over it. In the beginning, I was
all right, but as I moved forward, it was becoming difficult for me. The
space below my feet was becoming narrower. I began to stumble. The way
narrowed down further.

There was only fire below my steps and it was beating me like melted
butter. One of my feet was collapsing. I shifted my weight on the other
leg and at last regained balance. But the flames were pulling me down. I
could see nothing. I was thrashing my limbs here and there, but it was
of no use and no one harkened to my entreaties. Suddenly a thought came
to me that was Imam Ali (a.s.) not a helper? Thus, love for Ali (a.s.)
impelled me to call out O Ali!

As soon as I uttered this statement I perceived the effulgence of Imam
Ali (a.s.) at my head. When I raised my head, I saw that Imam Ali (a.s.)
was standing near the Siraat Bridge and saying: Give me your hand. I
stretched out my hand and when Imam Ali (a.s.) extended his hand the
fire moved completely aside. His graceful hand saved me and brought me
up. Then he passed his affectionate hand over my thigh; after that I
awoke from that terrifying nightmare.

My whole body had burned down except that spot where Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) passed his hand. The Shaykh removed the towel from his body and
except for some portions of his thigh, his whole body was covered with
boils. The Shaykh received treatment for three months and only then he
was cured. After that whenever he was asked in a gathering and he
narrated the incident, he used to get fever due to fear.

Who can Remain Steadfast on the Straight Path all the Life?
-----------------------------------------------------------

There is a traditional report in the third volume of Biharul Anwar that
no one from the past and the future persons can pass over the Siraat
Bridge without hardships and difficulties, except for the Seal of the
Prophets and his Purified Ahle Bayt (a.s.).

His Eminence has himself said: O Ali, no one can pass over the Siraat
Bridge without problems, but I, you and your descendants: they are
fourteen purified lights, who can traverse the Siraat Bridge without any
problem; but the remaining creatures would not pass over the Siraat
Bridge without stumbling. Who is steadfast on the Straight Path all the
life? Who is it that passes a whole day without any mistake? Who is it
that does not deviate from the true path even for a moment?

Explanation of Thinner than a Strand of Hair and Sharper than a Sword
---------------------------------------------------------------------

There are so many days, which pass in disobedience from morning to night
and they do not pass in obedience of the Almighty Allah. On the
contrary, all the day is spent in following the carnal desires. So much
do we deviate from our destination that we do not even notice it. It is
a fact that the identification of path of true religion is very
intricate and it is thinner than a strand of hair and acting on
religious law is more difficult than a sharp sword.

Everyone would be Caused Distress by Hell
-----------------------------------------

In the end, everyone would have to pass through Hell and everyone would
be distressed by it. At the time of crossing the Siraat Bridge every
person would be terrified of Hell and would be surrounded by flames,
burning of the heart and crying; and a flame would arise from Hell,
which would surround all the people and shake up the prophets as well.
We don’t know what has befallen us! All would be hiding their heads
between their knees [^6]All would be saying: O Allah, help us! In any
case, salvation is only for those who are pious.[^7] In other words., if
someone thinks that he can escape the Siraat Bridge; he should know that
it is impossible, because the Siraat Bridge is path to Paradise and
there is Hell below it.

Reality of the Hereafter Cannot be Imagined
-------------------------------------------

The condition of the afterworld can never be imagined or understood by
the people of this world. It is an impossible thing. As long as man is
alive, he cannot truly understand the reality of Paradise and Hell. The
commonality of words leads one to form a vague idea, but the reality is
much beyond that. For example, if we say: The fire of Hell; due to use
of common words, we at once form an imagination of a fire produced by
coal. Or when we say: Snakes and scorpions of Hell: at once we get an
imagination of worldly snakes and scorpions, because our perception can
form only this imagination.

[^1]: Maad, Ayatullah Dastghaib

[^2]: Surah Mominoon 23:74

[^3]: Surah Fajr 89:23

[^4]: Surah Hadid 57:12

[^5]: Surah Ankabut 29:64

[^6]: Surah Jathiya 45:25

[^7]: Surah Maryam 19:72


