Barzakh
=======

Thus human life from the time of death till Judgment Day is:

***“…and before them is a barrier until the day they are raised.”***
(Surah Mominoon 23:100)

Man should be certain that there is no solution without death. Human
death is separation between soul and body and it is complete separation
of body from soul. After the separation of soul from the body, the human
body will mix up in dust and become dust. After separation from the
material body, this soul is joined to a subtle body, which is known as
facsimile and which is not visible because of its being of extremely
thin matter.

And it should be believed that after death there would be interrogation
about deeds. We should keep their replies ready. Certainty of this
matter is also necessary that there is reward and punishment in Barzakh
as well.

That is man would be recompensed according to his character and deeds
till Judgment Day would be established and he gets permanent reward or
punishment. Many believers possessing inappropriate character will have
their accounts completed in this world of Barzakh.

In such a way that on Judgment Day they would not have to face any
difficulty. Detailed circumstances of Barzakh are mentioned in the Book
of Resurrection by the same author, which might be referred to. It is
necessary to have faith in these issues, and one should be so certain of
these fundamentals that his heart should absolutely aware of them and at
the time of interrogation, he should not be bewildered.

Also for fulfillment of every obligatory and recommended act, one should
not sit idle even for a moment, because time is less and result is near.

Because the distance between man and the consequences of his deeds is
nothing, except death and that also continues to warn man every moment.

Certainty on Qiyamat: that is when all the past and future people would
be raised and gathered in one place. That day: when the light of the sun
and moon would be no more and the day when mountains would break up and
become like soft particles; when the heavens and the earth would be
transformed; the day when people of a particular group would be holding
the scroll of their deeds in their right hands.

Another group would be in extreme distress and grief and would be
holding the scroll of their deeds in their left hands. That is the day,
which the Almighty Allah has referred to as ‘the great day’. In such a
way that elders of faith are shocked by its remembrance and they weep
and wail in its terror.

Indeed if every awakened heart reads the descriptions of that day in
Quran and ponders over it, he would be deprived of his comfort and peace
and would become disinterested in the world and its pleasures and seek
the refuge of the Almighty Allah for that day.

It is not necessary to have information about the time of Qiyamat. In
the same way, it is neither necessary to have detailed knowledge about
the circumstances of that day neither is it of any use. On the contrary,
it is inappropriate to ask questions about it.

It is so, because this knowledge is restricted to Almighty Allah.
Although it is necessary to have knowledge and faith on some stages,
which are clarified in the Holy Quran: like Balance of deeds, Siraat
Bridge, Accounting of deeds, Intercession, Paradise and Hell, which
would be explained in the coming pages.[^1]

Barzakh
-------

According to dictionary, it means a veil or an obstruction between two
things and which does not allow the two of them to join. For example
there are two seas: salty and sweet, but the Almighty Allah has made
such a barrier between them that none of them can destroy the other.
This is known as Barzakh. Although according to terminology, Barzakh is
a barrier, which Allah, the Mighty and the High has placed between the
world and the hereafter in such a way that both should retain their
characteristics.

This world is between the worldly affairs and those of the hereafter. In
Barzakh, there is no headache and toothache etc. All are restricted to
this material world. However they are abstract things. But they also do
not resemble the circumstances of the hereafter. That is chastisement is
not absolute for the disobedient and pleasures are also not absolute for
the righteous.

Imam (a.s.) was asked: What is the duration of Barzakh? He replied: From
the time of death till they would be raised up from the graves. It is
mentioned in the Holy Quran that:

***“…and before them is a barrier until the day they are raised.”***
(Surah Mominoon 23:100)

Facsimile world and the facsimile body
--------------------------------------

Barzakh is also known as the ‘facsimile world’, because it is like this
world from the aspect of form and appearance, but it is different in
material and characteristics, but after a period of time, they will
enter another world in such way that this world would be like the womb
for them. Your body in Barzakh is also the facsimile body.

That is in form it is exactly like this body, but it is not body or
matter. On the contrary, the body is subtle and thinner than air.
Nothing would obstruct it. A wall cannot obstruct its view.

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) says: This facsimile body seems to be the same
worldly body. If you see your parents in the dream, you will see them in
the same worldly body, but their material body is in the grave. This
form and body is facsimile body.

The body of Barzakh possesses eyes exactly like our eyes. But those eyes
do not experience any pain. They continue to see till the establishment
of Judgment Day and they see perfectly.

They do not weaken like these eyes, which make them needful of glasses.

Intellectuals and scholars compare it to be an image seen in the mirror,
but subject to the condition that two characteristics are found in it.
One is that it stands independently, without the support of the mirror.

Secondly, it has perception and feelings as well. The facsimile body
exists independently and also possesses perception. Its examples are
dreams, which traverse long distances in the blink of the eye. A person
reached to Holy Mecca or Mashad Muqaddas in a moment.

The foods and drinks of that world, beautiful forms and faces and
pleasing songs are such that no one from this world is capable to
produce them. All these are present and the souls of the facsimile body
take advantage from them and gain nourishment from them;[^2] although
foods and drinks of this world and other things are subtle and they are
not related to matter.

On the basis of this, as mentioned in traditional reports, it is
possible that a thing would transform into different kinds according to
the desire of the believer. For example a fig may turn into an apple.

It is narrated from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that he said: I saw my
uncle,

His Eminence, Hamza after martyrdom. A tray of pomegranates of Paradise
was placed before him and he was eating from it. Suddenly they
transformed into grapes and then the grapes turned into fresh dates.
That is one thing changes into different things as it is not matter, it
is subtle substance.

The literal meaning of ‘Barzakh’ is a veil or a barrier that stands
between two things and which does not allow the two to meet. For
example, that part or region of the ocean in which waves of both: sweet
and salty waters bounce and yet God has provided between them an
invisible barrier whereby one cannot overcome another.

**“He has made the two seas to flow freely (so that) they meet together:
Between them is a barrier, which they cannot pass.”** (Surah Rahman
55:19-20)

It is called Barzakh, but technically Barzakh is a realm kept by the
Lord of the Universe between this world of ours and the forthcoming
Hereafter in such a way that both might maintain their individual
limits. Barzakh is a state between these worldly and otherworldly
affairs.

Halfway between Reward and Punishment
-------------------------------------

After entering the world of Barzakh, one does not experience physical
pains like headache, toothache and such other troubles. Such suffering
forms a part of the essentials of the material world. But there, in
Barzakh, it is the realm of abstracts or of incorporeal beings. Of
course, it can also not be called the Hereafter, which may mean that
there will be only darkness for the sinners and only light for the
obedient ones.

Some people asked Imam (a.s.) about the duration of Barzakh. He replied,
“It is from the moment of death up to the time when all will rise from
their graves regaining life.[^3]

The Holy Quran says:

***“… and before them is a barrier until the day they are raised.”***
(Surah Mominoon 23:100)

Facsimile World and the Facsimile Body
--------------------------------------

Barzakh is called Facsimile World also, because it is just like this
world; but is so in shape and form yet different and distinct from the
viewpoint of its substance and specialty. After our death, we enter a
realm, which, in comparison, is like this world vis-à-vis a mother’s
womb.

Similarly, our bodies also will be facsimile bodies in Barzakh. This is
to say that they will appear quite like our worldly material bodies but,
factually, they will not be this body (containing skin and flesh). It
will be an elegant, fine and exquisite body. It will be finer than air.
There will be no barriers for it, which our bodies face in this material
world. It (the Barzakh body) can see anything and everything from
everywhere every time. There will be no difference for observation
whether something is on this side of a wall or on the other.

Imam Ja’far (a.s.) says, “If you see that facsimile body you will say:
Lo, it is the same worldly body.”[^4]

For example, if you happen to see your father in your dream, you will
observe him only in his worldly material body whereas his body (and
matter) is in the grave and this form, which you see in the dream, is
his facsimile form. The Barzakh body also has eyes, but there is no fat
or liquid in them.

Those eyes do not suffer any pain till the Day of Resurrection. Those
eyes can see things and can see well, but they never become weak nor do
they require spectacles. Here is an example for more explanation:

Picture in the Mirror, with Two Stipulations
--------------------------------------------

Scholars and experts of scholastic theology have compared the Barzakh
body with what one sees in a mirror. Of course there are two
differences. First, the said picture is actual (not a mere reflection)
and second, it achieves senses. The facsimile body is real and it also
senses and understands things.

An incomparable example is dream. Therein we travel immeasurable
distances in a split second. In no time we reach Holy Mecca, Holy Mashad
and all other places. We also see and hear people over there and also
talk there. But all these things are not performed by physical organs.

Not only this, better, higher and finer things like various kinds of
tasty food, good-looking faces and pleasing fragrance as well as
melodious songs etc. are instantly available to the facsimile body,
things which are unimaginable here. All these things are found in
Barzakh and the souls can benefit from all these things in their
facsimile bodies.

***“And reckon not those who are killed in Allah’s way as dead; nay,
they are alive (and) are provided sustenance from their Lord…”*** (Surah
Aale Imran 3:169)

All Food Articles and Fruits Combined in Only One Thing
-------------------------------------------------------

Since the foods, drinks, fruits and all such things in Barzakh are fine
and have nothing to do with matter; it is quite possible for them, as
mentioned in narrations, to combine in one thing according to the
desires and wish of the faithful. For example, there is date fruit, but
you wish to eat (taste) an apple. The former instantly turns into the
latter or in any other form of your liking. All of it depends on your
wish.

It is mentioned in a report that the Holy Prophet once said, “I saw my
respectable uncle Hamza after his martyrdom. A plateful of heavenly
pomegranate was in front of him. He was eating from that plate. All of a
sudden, I saw that the pomegranate at once changed into date fruit.”
(Summary of the rest of the narration is that the Holy Prophet said, “I
asked my honorable uncle what kinds of deeds are most beneficial there
(in the Hereafter)?”

He replied, “Three things count here the most, Giving water to the
thirsty, reciting Salawat for the Prophet and his Progeny and love for
Ali Ibn Abi Talib.” In short, the things of that realm are subtle (fine)
and are not made up of matter; one thing turns into another and into
many other forms and shapes instantly at the will of the faithful.

The Degree of Effects
---------------------

Compared with this world, one of the specialties of the realm of Barzakh
is effectiveness. In the science of medicine, there is a theory, the
description whereof is of no use for the common masses. So we will
proceed after only hinting towards it. It is that there are two things,
one that affects something and the other that is affected. According to
the aforesaid theory, the more these two things are subtle, the more
profound will be the effect.

Fruits, sweets and the pleasure, which we derive in this world, are like
a drop in the ocean in comparison with those in the realm of Barzakh.
The tastefulness there is immeasurably more than it is here. If only a
part of the face of a heavenly Hourie is unveiled, it will dazzle the
eyes of the whole world. If the entire beauty of that fairy opens, it
will outshine the sun. Indeed, absolute beauty is available only there.

God says:

***“Surely We have made whatever is on the earth an embellishment for
it, so that We may try them (as to) which of them is best in works.”***
(Surah Kahf 18:7)

Meaning: We have made whatever is in the world an adornment, but it is a
beauty, which is a test or trial. The intention is to differentiate
between child and a major person whereby it may be known as to who
becomes mad after this toy (this material world) and who does not pay
any attention to this plaything. The real pleasure lies in the real
beauty and in trying to attain it.

A Man in the Grave Who Hosted Others
------------------------------------

The power of effect is so much in the realm of Barzakh that it cannot
even be imagined in this world. Sometimes we come across events, which
can guide the people living in this world. One such effective event has
been quoted by the late Naraqi in his book Khazain: During my youth, I
was busy, along with my father and other relatives, in visiting people
on the occasion of Navroz holiday.

It was Tuesday and we had gone to a friend’s house situated near a
graveyard in Isfahan. We were told that he (my friend) was not present
in his house. As we were somewhat tired we turned towards the graveyard
with a view to take some rest and also to visit the graves of the
faithful. There we sat down at a spot.

One of our companions, pointing his finger towards a nearby grave, said
jokingly, “O resident of the grave! These are holidays. Will you not
host us?” We heard a voice from that grave, “On next Tuesday you will be
my guests here.”

All of us became spellbound and also frightened thinking that perhaps,
all of us would be dead by next Tuesday. So we engaged in performing as
many good deeds as possible and also began to write our wills. Then
arrived the following Tuesday and yet all of us were safe and alive. We
gathered at a place and after consultations decided to go to that grave
and see what happens. Perhaps that voice might not have meant our death,
but had some other aim behind it.

So when we approached that grave, someone from us said, “O occupier of
this grave! Fulfil your promise.” Suddenly we heard a voice from that
grave, “Welcome!”[^5] At once, we saw that it is a very big green
garden. Pure water streams are flowing in it. Trees therein are full of
various kinds of fruits available in every season.

Colourful birds of innumerable kinds are busy singing melodious sweet
songs. In the midst of that garden, there stood a spacious grand
mansion, which was fully decorated. All of its windows opened towards
the garden. When we entered that building we saw a very handsome man
sitting there. When he saw us, he stood up in respect. Then he put
before us various kinds of foods, drinks and sweets the like of which we
had never seen before, nor even imagined. We fully enjoyed this feast.

More significant was his statement, “We had never seen so much tasteful
things before and that our desire was never satiated even after taking
it and that the more we ate the desire increased. Then many other kinds
of eatables were also brought and we went on enjoying them. Thereafter
when we got up, the gentleman accompanied us until we got out of that
garden.”

Reward of Fair dealing and Offering Prayers in Time
---------------------------------------------------

Before leaving, my father asked that gentleman, “Who are you? For what
did the Almighty God grant you so much honor and position that you are
able to host even the whole world if you so desire? What is this place
of residence?”

The gentleman replied, “I belong to your native place and was selling
meat in such and such street.” People asked, “How did you get this high
position and lofty rank?” He said, “It is all due to only two things.
During my entire lifetime, I never gave less to buyers and I also never
failed to offer prayer at the earliest hour.

If I heard the call for prayer (Adhan) while weighting meat, I used to
leave my shop at once and rush to the Mosque. So the Lord of the worlds
granted me this place after my death. Last week you had asked me to host
you. At that time I did not have permission to accede to your wish. I
have obtained it this week.”

Thereafter, one of us asked him about the duration of his age. He told
the questioner, “You will live for ninety years”, and that man is still
alive. Then he told me, “You will live for so many years”, according to
which there are yet ten to fifteen years to go. All of us bade him
goodbye. He saw us off. As we turned around we found ourselves sitting
by his grave as before.”

Lasting Pleasure in the Realm of Barzakh
----------------------------------------

Another specialty of the realm of Barzakh is its eternity or everlasting
nature. Here (in this material world) nothing is everlasting. Beauty
fades out soon. Food remains tasty only upto the time it is in the
mouth, that is, only for a few moments. Same is the case with marriage
and marital joy.

These foods and fruits are also not long lasting. After sometime they
rot and become useless distasteful and foul. Nothing here is
everlasting. But nothing gets deteriorated or corrupted in the realm of
Barzakh, because that world (in the Hereafter) does not depend on
matter. Everything is everlasting there. As a testimony to what I have
mentioned here, I would like to mention a case involving the great
scholar and religious jurisprudent Allamah Shaykh Mahdi Naraqi.

By the way, let me also say that presenting some truths while narrating
an event in a nice way makes it easily comprehensible. That is why
actual events and true happenings are also presented during the
discussion of religious beliefs and doctrines.

A Cloak Full of Rice in the Valley of Peace
-------------------------------------------

Shaykh Mahmud Iraqi, at the end of his book Darus Salam, quotes the late
Naraqi (r.a.). He said, “When I was a caretaker of the Holy Najaf, there
fell a severe famine. One day, I came out of my house. My children were
hungry and crying for food. I went to the Valley of Peace with a view to
seek the removal of our sorrow and gloom through a visit to the dead
among the faithful.

There I saw that some people brought a dead body and also told me, “You
may also accompany us. We have come here for making this body join with
pious souls of this Holy place.”

Then they took that corpse to a wide big garden and placed it in one of
the palaces situated in that garden. All means of comfort were available
in those palaces. When I saw all this, I also followed them and entered
that palace along with them. There I saw a young man dressed in
resplendent clothes sitting on a golden throne.

When he saw me, he called me by my name and made me sit by his side very
respectfully. Then he told me, “You do not recognize me. I am the same
body, which has been just brought here. My name is so and so. I was a
resident of such and such city.

The group, which you saw in my funeral procession, was that of the
angels who brought me from my city up to this garden. This is one of the
heavenly gardens.” Hearing these things my gloom disappeared and I
desired to see that garden thoroughly. When I got out of that palace, I
saw a number of such palaces. When I looked into them I found my parents
and many other near and near ones. They made me their guest. I
thoroughly enjoyed the eatables served by them.

In the midst of these comfortable and luxurious moments, I suddenly
remembered my family members and imagined how hungry they were. This
thought made me gloomy once again. My father asked, “What happened to
you all of a sudden?” I replied, “My family members are restless due to
hunger.”

My father said, “Here is a heap of rice, take it.” I took off my cloak
and filled it with that heavenly rice. My father told me to take it for
my family. When I lifted up the cloak, I found myself in the Valley of
Peace. My cloak was, of course, full of that rice. I took it to my
house. My wife asked, “From where have you brought this?” I replied,
“What have you to do with it?”

Briefly speaking, we ate that rice for quite a long time, but it never
depleted. At last my wife forced me to tell her the true story.
Thereafter when we went to take out that rice we found nothing.”

A similar event is recorded in Darus Salam. Interested readers may refer
to it.

Animals Hear the Voice of the Dead
----------------------------------

The aim of this discussion is to throw light on the perpetuity of the
other world (Barzakh), be it regarding bounties or about their
tastefulness or joy. On the other hand, the calamities of that world are
also very hard and everlasting. May God protect us! If a man gets
entangled in torture in Barzakh and if we hear his terrible shrieks, all
the terrible things of our world will appear nothing to us compared to
it.

It is mentioned in Biharul Anwar, Vol. 3, that the Holy Prophet said, “I
was grazing sheep before I was made His messenger by Almighty God.
During those days, I used to observe (as you might have also) that goats
and sheep were becoming still all of a sudden as if shocked deeply by
something. You might have also observed that sometimes poultry birds
like hen jump off and stop picking their food even when no danger (like
animal) is seen anywhere near them.

After I started getting revelations, I asked for the reason of such
unusual happenings and Jibraeel told me that in the realm of Barzakh,
sinners get divine punishments. Their cries are heard by all, except men
and jinns. Such voices shock animals and they stop feeding.”

Cries Raised by a Hashimi Murderer in his Dream
-----------------------------------------------

It is mentioned in Darus Salam of Allamah Noori that, as per a narration
in the book of Sawabul Aamaal of Shaykh Sadooq (r.a.), an exceptionally
handsome and good-looking youth, who was a solider in the army of Umar
bin Saad in Kerbala, was also the killer of one of the brothers of Imam
Husain (a.s.).

The narrator says, “I could see that the face of that fellow had become
very black after the event of Kerbala. He had also become very thin and
extremely weak. I inquired about his conditions from his neighbours.
They said that ever since he returned from Kerbala, every night, he
shrieks and cries loudly in his dreams awaking us also. I went to him
and asked about the matter.

He replied, ‘At night time the Hashimi youth who was killed by me, comes
in front of me and pushes me towards fire. It makes me cry loudly and I
cannot sleep.’”

Advice of a Perfumer and Demand by a Jew of His Trust
-----------------------------------------------------

There are many events in this world to prove the existence of Barzakh.
Their description will become unduly lengthy, so we suffice with only
one such happening. The famous pious scholar, Syed Hashimi Bahraini
(r.a.) is quoted in Darus Salam[^6]that: There was a perfumer in Najaf
Ashraf who gave advice (admonition) to people at his shop daily after
mid-day prayer.

Many people used to gather in his shop. A prince from India had become a
resident of Najaf Ashraf. Once he had to undertake a journey. So he went
to the said perfumer and gave him, as his trust, a bag containing
precious stones and pearls etc. Then he went on his journey. Upon his
return, when he came to the perfumer to take back his trust, the latter
denied saying: I do not know about any such trust.

The prince became very uneasy and finally went to the Holy tomb of Ali
(a.s.) and said, “O Ali! I left my comfortable residence just to live
near your Holy Shrine for some time. I had left my precious property as
a trust with such and such perfumer in Najaf. Now he is denying of any
such trust. I have no wealth except that, nor have I any proof of
depositing my property with that perfumer. Now there is none, except you
who can help me with justice.”

During that night, he saw Ali (a.s.) in his dream saying, “Next morning,
when the gate of the city opens, you go out and demand your trust from
the very first person you see. He will make your trust return to you.”
Accordingly that man went out of the city gate and saw a weak and aged
pious man carrying firewood on his shoulders. He wanted to sell it for
fulfilling the needs of his family.

The Indian felt ashamed of asking anything from such a poor gentleman.
So he did not say anything and returned to the Holy Shrine of Amirul
Momineen (a.s.). The following night also he saw the same dream and got
the same order from Ali (a.s.). The next morning also he saw the same
poor old man and did not tell him anything. During the third night too,
he saw Ali (a.s.) in his dream and heard the same words. The following
morning, he told the wood seller his need explaining to him what had
happen. After thinking for a while, the old man said, “Come to the
perfumer’s shop tomorrow after Zuhr prayer. I will arrange for the
return of your trust.”

Next day when people gathered at the perfumer’s shop, the old man said
to the perfumer, “Today let me share in the duty of giving advice to
people.” That man agreed. The pious man began his talk, “O dear
listeners! I am so and so and son of so and so. I am very fearful in the
matter of observing rights of others. By the grace of God, I have no
greed for money at all. I am a contented man and have taken to a corner
for worship.

Yet, I have come into a difficult situation. I want to make you aware of
it. I advise you all also to fear God’s anger and the fire of Hell. Once
I had to take a loan due to urgent need. I took a loan of ten Qiran[^7]
from a Jew and gave him a word that I would return it within twenty days
paying him half Qiran daily. I did accordingly for five days. But
thereafter I could not find that Jew.

On making inquiries, I was told that he had left for Baghdad. After a
few days, I saw in my dream that it is Resurrection and I and many other
people have been made to stand in a counter for giving replies in the
Divine Court. By the Grace of God, I got relief soon and then, joining
the successful people, went towards Paradise.

When I reached the Siraat Bridge I heard the roar of Hell. Then I saw
that the creditor Jew leapt like a flame of fire from Hell, came across
my path and said, “Pay me back my five Qiran and proceed further only
after doing so.” I implored him humbly and earnestly saying, “I was in
search of you for paying up the debt, but you could not be found.” But
he said, “I will not allow you to go further unless you pay up my
money.”

I said, “I have nothing here just now.” He said, “Okay then allow me
just to put my finger on your body.” I agreed. When he touched my chest
with his finger, it burnt my body so severely that I woke up crying
loudly. I saw that my chest had a burn and it is still painful. I
undertook many treatments, but to no avail.”

Then he showed his chest to the gathering at the perfumer’s shop. Seeing
it, people began to weep fearing their own Hereafter. The perfumer also
became very fearful of God’s anger. He took that Indian to his house,
returned his trust to him and begged for his pardon.

Can Such Things be Denied Absolutely
------------------------------------

Reason says that if we come across a thing, which is difficult to
comprehend, it should not be instantly and out rightly rejected or
denied. Logic says that it can be possible. For example, if an
astronomer says that there are some satellites around Mars and that they
too revolve around Mars just as the moon revolves round the earth.

Should this claim be rejected at once? No. It may be true. The great
scientist Ibn Sina says, “If you hear news or event, you should imagine
it as possible until its impossibility is not established
logically.”[^8]

Suppose you hear that a baby is born with two heads. As this is not
logically impossible, say that it may be so.

Three Kinds of News
-------------------

First: News for the inadmissibility of which there is no logical proof
should not be rejected or denied.

Second: News, which has some proofs thinking over which intellect may
decide that it should be accepted.

Third: If the one who brought news has, with him, some testimony from
the Lord of the universe, which is called a miracle. In this case,
intellect decides that it should not be rejected in comparison to the
second stage it should be definitely accepted and one must remain
satisfied.

There is no Logical Argument against Resurrection
-------------------------------------------------

Just think over it. Is there any argument of any of the kinds mentioned
above to reject the news of life after death? Can anyone argue and give
any logical proof to show that there cannot be any questioning after
death and that the grave cannot squeeze or there is no realm of Barzakh
or the other world called Qiyamat or Resurrection or Maad?

O you owners of intelligence! Just decide whether there is any
difference in the news given by an astronomer that Mars and Jupiter have
four thousand stars or planets and the news given by the Prophet of God
(s.a.w.s.) that there are ninety-nine pythons in the grave to punish the
unbeliever of God?

Is there any difference so far as the giving of news is concerned?
Perhaps somebody may say that the claim of the astronomer is based on
perception or that it is after seeing. Then we will say that,
doubtlessly, the messenger has also said everything after observing and
feeling. During the night of Meraj (ascension), he had seen and felt all
things with his physical organs.

Rather, his holy soul covers the knowledge of all worlds and realms. The
sight or faculty of seeing can make a mistake, but the sight of the soul
of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) can never err. There can be a defect in the
eyesight of an astrologer or an astronomer, but there is no question of
any error in the feeling, observation and intelligence of the Messenger
of God.

Before Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) declared his Prophethood, the people of Mecca
used to call him, ‘As Sadiq Al Amin’ meaning: The most truthful and
trustworthy person. There was not even a single person, who had ever
found any untruth in what he had said or done nor had anyone found any
dishonesty in his dealing, behavior or attitude towards all.

So, apart from his witness and testimony, the permanent proof of
Muhammad’s Messengership and the everlasting miracle, Quran also tells
us about Resurrection, punishment in grave and rising bare-bodied on the
Day of Judgement, is it reasonable not to believe it?

Burial of Fatima Bint Asad, Mother of Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
------------------------------------------------------------

When Fatima Bint Asad, mother of Ali (a.s.) breathed her last, Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) went weeping to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and said,
“My respected mother has expired.” The Holy Prophet said, “It is my
mother who has expired.” There was a wonderful affection in the relation
between the Holy Prophet and Fatima Bint Asad.

The latter had looked after the former just like a caring and loving
mother for quite a long time. At the time of her burial, the Holy
Prophet took off his shirt and told people to dress the late Fatima in
it. People did so.

Then first the Holy Prophet himself lay in that grave for a few moments
and prayed for her forgiveness. After the grave was filled up, he stood
near it and, after a while, said loudly, “Your son, your son, but not
Ja’far and Aqeel.” People asked about the reason of doing so.

The Holy Prophet replied, “Once I was talking about the rising of the
bare-bodied dead on the Day of Resurrection. Fatima Bint Asad came to me
weeping and said, ‘I wish that you might cloth me in your shirt after I
die.’

She was very fearful also about the squeeze of the grave. So, before she
was buried, I myself slept in her grave for some time and prayed, ‘O
God! Protect her from the squeeze of the grave.’

But the reason of my uttering the words ‘Your son..’ was that, when the
angels asked her about God, she replied, ‘Allah’, when they asked about
the Prophet, she replied, ‘Muhammad’ but as for Imam, she could not give
any reply (because this event was much prior to Ghadeer Khum when Ali
(a.s.) was announced as the Chief of the believers). So I advised Fatima
to say, ‘Your son (Ali) not Ja’far or Aqeel.’”

Fatima Bint Asad was much Fearful about the Events after Death
--------------------------------------------------------------

Despite the fact that Fatima bint Asad was very great pious and graceful
lady, who had the honor of being the mother of Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
and who had been the guest of God for three days in the House of God
(Kaaba) (on the occasion of Ali’s birth) and who was the second woman to
put faith in the Messengership of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) and who was a very
great and humble worshipper of only one God was so much afraid of the
events to take place after her death and the Holy Prophet did to her as
mentioned above. Then who and what are we in comparison?

Let us all seriously think and worry about our own future.

Well, let us go back to the main issue. The truthful announcer of
everything, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) says that there will be
questioning and squeeze of the grave and rising bare-bodied on the Day
of Judgement.

Effectiveness of Soul in Physical Body
--------------------------------------

Though it will be the soul, which will be rewarded or punished, it is
also possible that the body may also feel it. Sometimes it does so
happen that, owing to the soundness of the soul, the body also does not
disintegrate in the grave. It remains fresh even for a thousand years.
There are many testimonies to this fact.

For instance, the body of Ibn Babawayh (r.a.), around one hundred fifty
years after his death in the time of Fateh Ali Shah, was found fresh.
Not only this but, more astonishingly, even his shroud was not worn out
nor the color of henna on his nail faded after such a long time!

The Body of Shaykh Sadooq Found Fresh
-------------------------------------

It is written in Rauzatul Jannat that a hole had developed in the grave
of Shaykh Sadooq (r.a.) due to heavy rain around the year 1238 H.E.
People thought of filling it up. So they entered the tomb and found that
his body was safe and sound though his physique was rather bulky.

The color of henna was also traceable on his nails. This news spread in
Tehran. When Fateh Ali Shah heard it, he, along with some government
officials as well as religious scholars, went to the tomb to enquire.
They all saw what they had heard. The king ordered to close the hole and
to rebuild the tomb over the grave with decorations.

The Fresh Body of Hurr and the Handkerchief on his Head
-------------------------------------------------------

Similar is the event of Hurr Ibn Yazid Riyahi. Muhaddith Jazaeri has
mentioned it in Anwarun Nomaniya like this: Shah Ismail Safavi went to
visit Kerbala and when he came to know that some people have no good
opinion about Hurr, he ordered the excavation of his grave. So when the
grave was opened people saw that the martyr’s body was exactly in the
same condition as it was on the day of his martyrdom in Kerbala.

There had been no change at all in it. So much so that even his
handkerchief also was intact on his head. Since it was historically
known to all that the chief of all martyrs, Imam Husain (a.s.) himself
had tied his own handkerchief on the wounded head of Hurr Shah Ismail
ordered that the kerchief may be untied so that he may take it to put it
in his own shroud as a good luck sign.

As soon as the kerchief was removed, people saw blood gushing out of his
wound. So it was replaced immediately and the blood stopped flowing.
Thus people knew that Hurr’s condition was good (that God was pleased
with him and had given him a good reward due to his assistance to Imam
Husain (a.s.) in Kerbala). The king built a grand tomb over his grave
and appointed a caretaker over it.

A Suckling Babe in the Grave of Abu Ja’far Kulaini (r.a.)
---------------------------------------------------------

The tomb of Shaykh Kulaini (r.a.), author of Kafi, is situated near the
bridge in Baghdad. A fellow from the oppressor rulers thought of
destroying the Holy shrine of Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) so that people may
stop visiting Kazmain. His minister was a Shia (in heart). He became
restless to find out a way to stop that fellow from his evil intention
was unable to say anything openly, because any doubt of his being a Shia
was enough to put his life in danger.

Anyway, they proceeded to Kazmain with the aforesaid evil intention. As
soon as they approached the Baghdad Bridge, the minister said, “Here is
the grave of a big Shia scholar, who was one of the delegates of Imam
Kazim (a.s.), and people say that his body is still fresh and that it
will always remain fresh and safe.

If the king agrees this may be checked. If it is found that what people
say is correct, then it would not be wise to touch the tomb of Imam
Kazim (a.s.).” The ruler agreed and, as per the king’s command, the
grave of Kulaini (r.a.) was opened.

They saw that his body was quite fresh and not only that; more
surprising was the existence of the fresh and safe body of a little
child by Kulaini’s side. It could not be known whether the child was
related to Kulaini (r.a.) or not. What is worth noting is what a soul
can do. If any other person also comes close to a pious soul it is also
affected thereby.

No doubt the Holy Progeny of the Messenger are the fountainhead of good
and so their corpses are also alive and people can see occasional
miracles from their graves.

Contrary to it, if somebody is a person of Hell, the chastisement to his
or her soul also affects the body. Accordingly, when Bani Abbas
overpowered Bani Umayyah and destroyed them totally and even dug out
their graves, it was observed that nothing, except some traces could be
seen in the grave of the accursed Yazid.

Fire of Barzakh Leaps out of a Grave
------------------------------------

Quoting narrations of some reliable and trustworthy people, the late
Shaykh Mahmud Iraqi has mentioned in Darus Salam that once we went to
the graveyard of Imamzada Hasan (Tehran). Sun had not yet set. One of
our companions sat down on the stone of a grave. Suddenly he shouted,
“Please lift me up.” When we lifted him, we saw that the stone was
almost red hot.

Just think. How great is the chastisement meted out to the soul that
even the gravestone becomes so hot? He says, “I recognized the owner of
that grave, but I would not disclose his name so that he may not be
defamed among people.”

Also it is said about another man who was buried in Qom that flames of
fire leaping out of his grave had burnt down carpets over there.

Fire Hotter than the Fire of this World
---------------------------------------

Shaykh Shustari (r.a.) mentioned in his admonitions that the Lord of the
worlds has said: ‘Hot fire’. Is there, then, any cold fire also? Yes. If
it is possible to make comparison, the fire in our world is cold
compared to the fire of Barzakh. Nature speaks of two types of fires in
this world itself, which if compared can tell us which one is really
hot.

Lightning is the Biggest Fire in the World
------------------------------------------

Shaykh Shustari (r.a.) says that if a comparison is made between the
fire of wood and charcoal and lightning in the sky it will be known that
lightning is a thin (fine) fire, created by the bouncing and hissing of
clouds. It is so hot that it burns out everything it touches and then
slips away instantly. It neither returns nor stays anywhere. Nothing can
cool it. If it falls on a tree, it turns it into coal at once.

If it falls on an ocean it burns it up to its bottom and fries even the
fish in the bottom of the sea. Only lightning is the real fire. The
embers in a hearth also is fire, but that fire can be put off by pouring
a little water or some dust on it. Its heat and burning has some
limitations.

Now you will have understood that the fire of Barzakh cannot be compared
with the fire of this world, not even with lightning. If someone’s
facsimile body and soul are under torture in Barzakh, it is possible
(though not always necessarily) that his or her material body may also
get affected.

What is contrary to it is also observed. Pleasing and sweet fragrance
spread in the absence of any scent, or flowers or burning of aloes wood
from the graves of some dear servants of God have also been witnessed.

Those Who do not Experience Fear
--------------------------------

In the news and traditions of Holy Imams, there are tidings showing that
some good servants of God are protected by God from the fear and
punishment in the grave during the period of Barzakh. Some of them are
those to whom reminder (Talqeen) was recited. Here we mean the third
Talqeen, which is recited after the burial.

Yahya Bin Abdullah says, “I heard from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that: What
prevents you from reciting the words, which protects your dead from
seeing Munkar and Nakeer in their graves? I asked: Master! What should
we do? He said: When the dead has been buried, its legal heir should sit
near the grave and taking his mouth nearer to the head of the dead,
recite loudly:

O so and so son of so and so. Are you on the same covenant on which you
were when you parted from us? That covenant is the testimony of the fact
that there is no God but Allah, Who is only One and Who has no partner.
And the testimony of the fact that undoubtedly Muhammad, may the Peace
of Allah be on him and his progeny, is the slave and prophet of Allah
and is the lord of all the prophets and is the last of them.

And that Ali is the chief of the believers and the leader of all the
successors. And indeed whatever is brought by Muhammad is truth and the
death is truth and the rising is truth and Allah would raise those who
are in the graves.

Then he said: Munkar and Nakeer tell one another to return, as the proof
has been taught to this dead.''[^9]

The first Talqeen should be recited at the last moments and the second
at the time of lowering the body in the grave.

It is likely that someone may say: What can a dead person understand?
But, as we have described earlier, the soul (spirit) of the dead remains
near its body and hears better than we can. Some may also ask: How can
an admonition (Talqeen) recited in the Arabic language be understood by
a non-Arab body?

The reply is that, when one goes away from this material world of water
and earth all languages are equally comprehensible for him or her.
Linguistic limitations belong only to the material world.

Death at a Time of the Descent of Mercy
---------------------------------------

Another group of people who are protected from the squeeze of the grave,
fear and Barzakh torture are those who die between time of Zuhr on
Thursday and Friday, as these are the hours when divine mercy rains
allowing such persons its full benefit. God covers them in His kindness.
This is also a kind of divine kindness that God showers on His servants.

Two Green Branches and Testimony of Forty Persons
-------------------------------------------------

The burying of two green branches of date tree, palm or pomegranate
(Jareedatain) along with the dead body is one of the things about which
it is promised that these things come in the way of the chastisement in
grave. Of course date branches are the best and they must be green.

Another protecting thing is the testimony of fourteen or more persons
about the true belief of the dead and their prayer for the forgiveness
of the dead. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) is quoted in Anwarun Nomaniya that he
said, “If forty persons gather near a dead person and say: O God! We
know nothing, except good deeds done by this person. God responds: I
have accepted your testimony and have forgiven all his sins not known to
you.”

Prophet Dawood did not Offer Burial Prayer for a Worshipper
-----------------------------------------------------------

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) is also reported to have said that there was a
worshipper among Bani Israel about whom God revealed to Dawood (a.s.)
that he (said worshipper) was a hypocrite. When he died, Dawood (a.s.)
did not offer prayer on his body. Others went and forty persons prayed
for the salvation of the dead, saying: O Lord! We know nothing about
this man, except that he was doing good deeds and You know better.

So kindly forgive him. When that body was given a wash another group of
forty persons arrived and also uttered the same words, as they did not
know about the hidden matters of that deceased. Then it was asked
through revelation to Dawood (a.s.), “Why did you not pray for him?”

Dawood (a.s.) replied, “O Lord! I did not pray, as You informed me that
he was a hypocrite.” A voice came from heaven, “Though it is true, a
group of people has testified that he was a good man, so I also
confirmed it, accepted their testimony and forgave him.” It also is a
very great kindness of the Almighty that He pardons His servants and
does not punish them even though they were not eligible for such
salvation.

Testimony of Believers by Dust of Kerbala on the Shroud of Allamah Majlisi (r.a.)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It was because of this that pious people, especially earlier religious
scholars used to keep their shrouds ready beforehand and to request
their friends and the faithful people to write their testimonies on it.
Muhaddith Jazaeri (r.a.) writes that his teacher Allamah Majlisi (r.a.)
used to request his believing friends to write their testimonies with
the earth of Kerbala on his shroud and they used to comply by writing:
Doubtlessly he was a faithful person, and put their seals under it.

Among all such things done for protection from the chastisement in grave
effectively is to place the Holy earth of the grave of Imam Husain
(a.s.) in one’s grave and also to anoint the forehead and both palms of
the dead with it.

The Good Deeds which Reach the Dead after Death
-----------------------------------------------

Among the beneficences of good deeds, which benefit one in the grave,
are the good deeds, which are being performed in this world by proxy or
the reward of such good deeds, which is being given to the dead as a
gift.

The foremost among them is repayment of his debts and performance of
missed prayers and fasts. Similar to it is performance of Hajj, which
the dead could not or did not undertake, and also to give charity in the
way of God and to pray and seek pardon for the dead.

There are many narrations by Ahle Bayt on this subject. (Interested
persons may refer to Wasailush Shia, Kitabut Taharat, Abwaab-e-Ehtezaar,
Baab 27, and Abwaab-e-Qazaae Salaat Baab 12 wherein there are 26
traditions. They may also study Baab-e-Hajj-va-Waqf in the same book).

The summary of these narrations is that if someone performs good deeds
like Prayers, Fast, Hajj and alms-giving etc for a deceased person, the
Lord of the Universe makes its reward reach the dead and also grants a
manifold reward to the performer of such good deeds.

Numerous Gifts as Reward of Charity on behalf of the Dead
---------------------------------------------------------

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) says, “It also happens that a body is under
squeeze in grave and then he is given ease and comfort. Angels tell him
or her that this is the result of such and such good deed sent to you by
your such and such well-wisher in the world. Such rewards are very big
in proportion to the good deeds performed for them.”

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has been quoted in Wasailush Shia that Almighty God
commands seventy thousand angels to proceed to the grave of that
fortunate person. Every angel has, in his hand, a plate full of heavenly
bounties of Paradise. They tell the dead, “Be you in peace and safety, O
servant of God! O friend of God! This gift has been sent to you by such
and such friend.”

Then his grave lit up brightly and God the merciful grants him a
thousand cities, a thousand Houries and a thousand precious robes and
fulfils one thousand of his wishes.

Request of the Dead to the Living
---------------------------------

It is mentioned in Maniul Akhbar that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said,
“Go on sending gifts to your dead.” The companions asked, “O Messenger
of God! What can be a gift for the dead?” The Prophet said,
“Supplications and alms.”

Then he added, “Every Friday eve, the spirits of the dead come to the
nearest sky and, standing in front of their homes, cry out weeping
sorrowfully, ‘O my family members! O my children! O my parents and O my
near and dear ones! Be kind to us. God will be kind to you. We have to
account here for what wealth and property we had in the world and by
which others benefit there. Please do us some favor, be it through a
dirham or bread or a cloth. God will adorn you with heavenly dress…’”

Barzakh is Veiled in this World
-------------------------------

Some may think as to where such a vast world of Barzakh is situated? Our
intellect is unable to comprehend it. We will only say that the realm of
Barzakh is in a veil and hence invisible to the physical eye. There are
many narrations to make us understand this matter.

For example: This world of ours, along with its vast lands and skies, if
compared with the realm of Barzakh, is like a tiny spot in an endlessly
big forest. So long as a man lives in this world, he is like a silk worm
or like an unborn child in womb. When he dies, he becomes free. Of
course, he remains in this very world and does not go away and out of
it, but now he has no limitations like time and space, because these
things are limited only to this material world.

The Realm of Barzakh Encircles this World
-----------------------------------------

If it is said to a baby in the womb that there is a very vast world
beyond your present station, which is nothing in comparison with that
one, he would be unable to comprehend it. Similarly, we, who are able
now to see only through the physical eyes, cannot comprehend the other
world, which is hidden from our eyes.

Almighty God says in the Holy Quran:

***“So no soul knows what is hidden for them of that which will refresh
the eyes; a reward for what they did.”*** (Surah Sajdah 32:17)

That is, nobody knows what things have been provided for him or her that
can cool their eyes. This is the reward of the good deeds done by them
in the world. We only know that as the Trust Informer (Prophet) has
informed us of it and we testify to it. The realm of Barzakh has
encircled and covered our present physical and material world just as
this world has covered the world in womb. No other example is more
explanatory.

Souls are Friendly with One Another and Please One Another
----------------------------------------------------------

Asbagh bin Nubatah says, “I saw my master, Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
standing at the gate of Kufa looking towards the desert. It appeared
that he was busy talking with someone, but there was no one. I also
stood up. After a long time, I felt tired. So I sat down and got up
again after a while.

But Ali (a.s.) was still busy talking. I went a step forward and asked,
‘O Amirul Momineen! Who is it you are talking to?’ He said, ‘This talk
of mine was to please the spirits of the faithful.’ I asked, ‘Which
faithful? No one from those who have passed away is present here.’ He
said, ‘Yes, they are present here.’ I again asked, ‘Are they present
here physically or in spirit?’

He replied, ‘Their spirits. Had you been able to do so, you could have
seen how they gather at a place, talk mutually and please one another
remembering the gifts and bounties of God.’”

The Valley of Peace is the Station of the Spirits of the Faithful
-----------------------------------------------------------------

It is mentioned in other traditions that any faithful person who passes
away either from the east or the west of this world finds that his
spirit or soul which remains in his facsimile body has its place in the
Valley of Peace in the neighborhood of Amirul Momineen (a.s.).

In other words, Najaf Ashraf is an expression of the higher world.
Likewise, for unbelievers their abode is Wadi Barhut situated in Yemen
in a fearful and barren land where even birds do not venture. This is a
place for the appearance of mean souls.

Nearness to Amirul Momineen Ali (a.s.) Attainable through Knowledge and Virtues
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Whatever you have heard about importance of nearness to Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) is about spiritual neighbourhood, whatever one’s physical
distance from Najaf Ashraf. In fact nearness to Ali (a.s.) is attainable
through knowledge and actions. When a man commits a sin, he becomes
distant from Ali (a.s.) in proportion to the seriousness of his sin.

Very nice if the soul is with Ali (a.s.) and body also gets buried near
him in Najaf Ashraf. It is indeed a very big fortune. But if, God
forbid, one is physically buried in Najaf Ashraf, but his soul is under
torture in Wadi Barhut, it is a terribly bad luck. So all of us should
try our best to make our spiritual relation with Ali (a.s.) more and
more strong and close.

Doubtlessly, physical burial in Najaf Ashraf also is not without
benefits and has perfect effectiveness, because being buried there, is
in a way, a means to nearness to the Amirul Momineen (a.s.).

A Dead Body brought from Yemen to Najaf Ashraf
----------------------------------------------

It is mentioned in Madinatul Majiz that, one day, Ali (a.s.) was sitting
with his companions at the back of the gate of Jufa. Looking up, he
said, “Do you also see what I am seeing?” People said, “No, O Amirul
Momineen!” He said, “I can see two persons who are bringing a dead body
on a camel to bury it here. It will take three more days for them to
reach here.” On the third day thereafter Ali (a.s.) went again with the
companions to see who comes.

First people could see that a camel was coming towards them with a body
on its back. A man was holding the rein of that camel. Another man was
walking behind. When they came nearer, Amirul Momineen (a.s.) asked,
“Whose body is it? Who are you and from where do you come?”

They replied, “We are from Yemen and this is the body of our father who
had willed that his body should be carried to Iraq to be buried in Najaf
Ashraf.” Ali (a.s.) asked, “Did you ask him the reason for it?” They
replied, “Yes, our father was saying that a man will be buried there who
will be able, if he likes, to intercede for the entire gathering on the
Day of Resurrection.” Ali (a.s.) said, “By God. I am indeed that man.”

One Who gave Shelter to Locusts Around His Tent
-----------------------------------------------

In connection with benefits for those who are buried near Ali’s (a.s.)
tomb Muhaddith Qummi (r.a.) has given a very appropriate example in
Mafatihul Jinaan. There is an Arabic proverb meaning: Such and such
person is superior than the one who gives shelter to locusts. The story
is as follows: A man named Madlaj bin Suwaid, who belonged to the tribe
of Tai was, one day, sitting in his tent. He saw that a group belonging
to the Tai tribe was approaching his tent holding huge bags and many
utensils. He asked their condition.

They said: Many locusts have descended around your tent. We want to
catch them. Hearing this, Madlaj got up, took a spear in his hand and
ascending his horse declared, “By God, I will kill anyone who even
touches these locusts. These grasshoppers are my neighbors and they have
come in my shelter.

How can you catch them? It will never be allowed.” Then he defended his
locusts till the sun rose and it became hot and the locusts flew away.
Then he said, “Lo. Now the locusts have left my neighbourhood. Now it is
your look out to deal with them.”

In short, it is obvious that if someone comes in the neighbourhood of
Ali (a.s.), thereby taking his shelter will surely benefit by his
support.

Close Relation between the Soul and the Grave
---------------------------------------------

Muhaddith Jazaeri (r.a.) mentions at the end of Anwarun Nomaniya: If you
ask when souls live in facsimile bodies in the Valley of Peace, why we
have been asked to visit graves (for reciting Fatiha and prayers)? And
how do the souls understand that a visitor has arrived when they are not
present in the graves?

The reply is that it has been narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that
though the souls live in the Valley of Peace, their relations with
graves remain intact and they know about the visitors and recognize
them. The Holy Imam has said that souls are like sun. The sun remains in
the sky, but its rays cover the whole earth.

Likewise, the souls’ covering or encirclement is concerned with
knowledge and comprehension.

Reflection of Sunrays in a Mirror
---------------------------------

Just as the appearance and reflection is relatively much more at a
mirror, the attention of souls and their covering is more at their
graves. It is so because the soul had lived in those bodies for several
years and gained much favours due to them. That is why they will focus
their attention there.

This also provides an answer to the one who asks as to why we should go
to the grave when the Imam is present at every place and thus, there is
no difference in one place and the other. Doubtlessly, the graves of
Holy Imams and religious leaders are the centers of the attention of
Holy souls and the places where divine favors keep raining. Angels come
and go there.

So, if anybody wants to get full benefit from those Holy personalities,
he should never give up visiting the Holy shrines and must try their
best to go there.

Why no Reward or Punishment is Given to this Earthly Body?
----------------------------------------------------------

Some people raise here a weak doubt and say: The soul after one’s death
gets connected with a fine body called facsimile body, which is just
like this earthen body, as described earlier, and also sees (tastes)
reward or torture with the same facsimile body. Now here arises a
question:

When man had worshipped God in this earthen body, how reward is given to
the other body? Or man had committed sins in the material body, which
has been disintegrated now after death, how is it that the punishment is
meted out to the other body? There can be several answers to this
question.

Every Soul has Two Kinds of Bodies
----------------------------------

As Allamah Majlisi (r.a.) has written, the facsimile body is not any
outward thing, which may be brought near the grave after one’s death and
then, for example, it may be said to it: O soul! Now live in this body.

Rather, a facsimile body is a fine body, which lives even now in this
world with man’s earthly body. Every soul has two bodies: A fine
(subtle) body and a thick (dense) body. Man has prayed and sinned in
both these bodies. This matter must be well understood. So we are giving
the example of a dream.

During a dream, these two bodies get separated. What a man sees in his
dream is the behavior or deed of this facsimile body, which walks, talks
etc. Within twinkling of eye man reaches Kerbala, Holy Mashad, tours
from east to west.

This shows that the facsimile body remains with man always. But after
death, it separates from the material body. This statement of Majlisi
(r.a.) is a very studied one. There also are many more testimonies.

The Soul is either Punished or Rewarded
---------------------------------------

Another answer is that after death, human soul turns into the same
earthen form of body. It does not get connected with any outside body.
Rather the soul takes up the form of material body. Now, you may call it
a facsimile body, Barzakh body or spirit.

But, as it is fine, elemental or material eyes cannot see it. Summarily
speaking, it was only the spirit, which had committed sins in the world
and hence it is only the spirit that is being punished after death.

Now, it may be chastised either by getting it connected with the
facsimile body or it may be getting punishment absolutely by itself,
constantly. Of course, on the Day of Judgement, all will rise and gather
only in this worldly and material body.

[^1]: Qalbe Saleem, Pg. 247

[^2]: Aale Imran 3:179

[^3]: Biharul Anwar

[^4]: Biharul Anwar

[^5]: Here it should be understood sometimes, Lord Almighty removes that
veil in front of eyes which prevents us from observing the things
belonging to the realm of Barzakh so that people may take lessons of
admonition.

[^6]: Vol. 1, P. 247

[^7]: Unit of Currency

[^8]: Tafsir Burhan

[^9]: Wasailush Shia, Book of Cleanliness, chapter 35. There are many
narrations on this matter in Wasailush Shia, Book of Purification,
Chapter 13. One by Imam Baqir (a.s.) is as follows: The Imam (a.s.)
says: The body is not punished, until the said branches remain green and
God willing, it will not be punished even after the branches dry up.


