Sthe Indispensable People the Indispensable People
==================================================

( 39 )

3.When we review in retrospect the important events involving the
history of a nation we find that those events and their early evolutions
were not dependent on most of the individuals and small groups who lived
in those particular times. The presence or the absence of this soldier
or that farmer or worker or merchant or politician did not affect those
events.

Every individual except a very few was dispensable or it was possible
to replace any of them with another person who could have performed a
similar role.

There are of course some small groups and some individuals who perform
important roles which other people cannot or do not want to perform.
These small groups and a few individuals would be indispensable and the
big events therefore would be connected strongly to these groups and
individuals.

The presence of any of the small-role performers (and these are the
overwhelming majority in every nation) in relation to the important
event ought to be called incidental and dispensable. We say that the
presence of such people or small group is incidental and dispensable in
relation to an important event because that event could have been
realized with or without such persons or group for everyone of them is
easily replaceable.

As we look retrospectively at the onset of the faith of Islam and its
gradual spread during the time of the Holy Prophet we find that Islam
was strongly connected with the presence of a small number of
individuals and groups.

It is needless to speak about the connection of the faith of Islam with
the presence of the Messenger for he is the one who received the
revelation carried the message and faced what no other person faced. He
is the only man whose qualities qualified him to receive the
revelation.

As the faith of Islam was dependent on the person of the Holy Messenger
in its commencement and continuity during the period of the Prophethood
we find that the continuity of Islam during that period was connected
strongly and positively with three small groups who protected the life
of the Messenger and offered great sacrifices in his defense.

**The Hashimites**

The first of these small groups was the clan of Hashim.

This clan had offered what no other Meccan clan offered during the
years the Holy Prophet spent between the beginning of his Prophethood
and the beginning of his Hijra.

This group was privileged with the honor of defending the Holy Prophet
during those years. No other Meccan clan shared this honor. The rest of
the clans had chosen to take a hostile attitude towards the prophet his
message and his clan. That hostile attitude threatened the Messenger and
the members of his clan constantly with serious dangers.

Thus it would be justifiable to say that the presence of the rest of
the Meccan clans in relation to the development of the message during
that period was not only incidental but also a negative force for those
clans did not offer as groups any assistance to the Messenger; in fact
they impeded progress.

Some men and women related to these Meccan clans had believed in the
Messenger and offered some sacrifices for him and his message but they
did that as individuals.

The groups to which those persons belonged had taken hostile attitudes
towards the Messenger and persecuted those individuals because they
deviated from their hostile line.

Had Omayad Makhzoom Zuhra Jumah and the rest

of the Meccan clans been absent the Holy Prophet and his message could
have been freed from many dangers. The Imam Ali in one of his messages
directed to Muaweyah mentioned the following:

"Our people (the Meccan clans) wanted to kill our Prophet and
annihilate our clan. They plotted and committed atrocities against us.
They prevented us from the water and clothed us with fear. They forced
us to live at a rugged mountain and started the fire of war against us
and the Almighty decided for us to defend His religion and fight for His
sacred cause. Our believer was seeking the Divine reward and our
unbeliever was trying to protect his honor. The rest of the Qureshite
Muslims were free of what was surrounding us either through an alliance
which protected them or through a relationship to a clan which was ready
to defend them. Thus they were in a security against murder.

"Whenever the war became bloody and the companions were unwilling to
fight the Messenger put the members of his House in the front protecting
his companions through them from the heat of the swords and spears."( 1
)

**The Ousites and the Khazrajites**

The other two small groups with whom the continuity of the faith of
Islam was positively connected at another stage of the development of
the Islamic movement were the two tribes of Al-Khzraj and Al-Ous. The
two tribes were privileged from among the non-Meccan Arab tribes by
honor of their defense of the Holy Messenger and his message after the
Hijrah. Had other tribes wanted to share with the two tribes this honor
they could have acquired it; unfortunately they chose to oppose the
Messenger instead of assisting him.

Thus the continuity of the faith of Islam was connected to these three
small groups. The presence of the rest of the tribes and clans was
dispensable and less than incidental

( 1 ) Al-Shareef Al-Radhi Mohammad Ibn Al-Hussein Nahjule- Balaghah
collection of words of the Imam Ali Part 3 pp. 8-9.

in relation to the faith of Islam in that period. For the presence of
those clans and tribes had a negative effect and was fraught with
dangers which threatened the life of the Messenger and his message.

**ABU TALIB**

As we find these three small groups connected strongly with the message
of Islam the history of this faith presents to us two men whose
existence was indispensable and necessary during the period of
Prophethood.

One of these two men was Abu Talib uncle of the Messenger his guardian
during the days of his childhood and his main defender after the
commencement of his Prophethood. The protection by this hero of his
nephew and his defense against the threats of the Qureshites (the
non-Hashimite Meccan clans) was a main factor in the continuity of life
of the Messenger and his message. The Meccan clans were burning with
hatred towards the Messenger and anxious to shed his blood. What
prevented them from that was the presence of Abu Talib the chief of
Mecca who led the Hashimites and made out of them and himself an
unpeakable fortress around the Messenger.

The readers of the Islamic history know how the Qureshite clans
delivered to Abu Talib an ultimatum to stop his nephew from defaming
their fathers and belittling their gods and ridiculing their minds;
otherwise they would confront him and Mohammad on a battlefield until
one of the two parties perished. Abu Talib did not have any doubt that
his acceptance of the Qureshite challenge meant his death and the
annihilation of his clan; yet he did not pressure his nephew to stop his
campaign. He only informed him of the Qureshite ultimatum and then he
told him kindly:

"Save me and yourself my nephew and burden me not with what I cannot
bear.".

When the Messenger rejected their ultimatum declaring to his uncle that
he would not exchange his message with the possession of the whole
universe Abu

Talib immediately reversed his attitude and decided to go along with
the Messenger to the end. He called him after he turned his back: "Come
back my nephew.".

When the Messenger came back the great uncle said to him: "My nephew go
on. Say whatever you like I shall never let you down at any time." ( 2
)

**Abu Talib fulfilled this huge promise with distinction**

When a Meccan threw some dirt on the Messenger while he was prostrating
Abu Talib went on pandishing his sword and holding the hand of his
nephew until he came to the sacred Mosque. A group of the enemies were
sitting there and when some of them tried to stand for Abu Talib he said
to them: "By the One in Whom Mohammad believes if anyone from you stands
up I will hit him with my sword."

Then he went on putting dirt on their faces and beards. ( 3)

The Qureshite clans formed a strong alliance against Abu Talib and his
clan and resorted to the weapon of starvation instead of confrontation.
They knew that the Hashimites would fight if fought; and that they could
not be annihilated without costing their adversaries great losses.

Thus the Meccan clans imposed an economical and social embargo against
the Hashimites. This continued for three years during which time the
Hashimites were forced to live at a rugged mountain called "Shi-ab Abu
Talib." The Hashimites during that period were forced sometimes to eat
leaves of trees to alleviate the pains of hunger.

During that period the main concern of the old hero was to protect the
life of the Messenger. Abu Talib during those years often made some
members of his own family (especially his son Ali) lie at the bed of the
Holy Prophet protecting him by his dearest son from danger of
assassination.

( 2 ) Ibn Husham Biography of the Prophet Part 1 p. 266.
( 3 ) Khalid Mohammad Khalid Fee Rihab Ali.

**ISLAM OF ABU TALIB**

A number of historians and hadith-recorders reported that Abu Talib
died while he was a pagan. Some of them reported that the verse "It is
not permissible to the Prophet and the believers to ask God to forgive
the pagans even if they were akin to them after it became clear to them
that those pagans are from the people of Hell " was revealed in relation
to Abu Talib for the Prophet wanted to ask God to forgive him and the
Almighty prohibited him from doing that .

Such statements were fapicated as a part of the smear campaign which
the Omayads and their allies waged against Imam Ali. They tried by
fapicating these hadiths to prove to the masses of the people that Abu
Sufyan father of Muaweyah was better than Abu Talib father of Ali
claiming that Abu Sufyan died while he was a Muslim and Abu Talib died
while he was a pagan .

The recorders of the hadiths and the historians took these hadiths
without paying attention to the evidence of their forgery. They did not
try to examine these hadiths yet the date of the revelation of the above
mentioned verse testifies that it was not revealed about a matter
pertaining to Abu Talib .

The verse is a part of the chapter of Bara-ah (number 9). This chapter
is totally Medinite with the exception of the last two verses (129 and
130). The verse which is the subject of our discussion is the 114th. The
chapter of Bara-ah was revealed during the ninth year after the Hijrah.
The Prophet ordered Abu Bakr to announce the first part of it during the
days of pilgrimage of that year when he sent him as an "Amir Al-Hajj"
(commander of the pilgrimage). Then he sent Ali to take that part from
him and announce it because God commanded him that no one should deliver
the revelation other than himself or a man from the members of his
House. The chapter speaks of events that took place during the campaign
of Tabouk which was during "Rajab" of the ninth year.

Since this chapter contains the above mentioned verse

the verse could not mean Abu Talib. because he died in Mecca at least
two years before the Hijrah .

Asking God to forgive a deceased usually takes place at the time of a
funeral prayer. The wording of the verse indicates that for it says: "It
is not permissible to the Prophet and the believers to ask God to
forgive the pagans." This indicates that the Prophet was with other
believers (in a congregational prayer) when he asked forgiveness for the
pagans.

As a matter of tact the funeral prayer was not instituted before the
Hijrah. The first prayer offered by the Messenger for a deceased was his
prayer for Al-Bura Ibn Maarour from Medina.

It is likely that the verse was revealed after the Prophet offered a
funeral prayer for one of the hypocrites who used to pretend Islam and
conceal paganism. It is very likely that the verse was revealed when the
Holy Prophet offered a funeral prayer for Abdullah Ibn Abu Salool who
died during the ninth year and who was well noted in his hypocrisy his
hatred to the Messenger and his adversity to the faith of Islam. About
him and his followers the chapter of Al-Munafiqoon ( the Hypocrites )
was revealed before that time. Had the historians and hadith-recorders
(who inadvertently mentioned the fapicated hadiths about Abu Talib's
paganism) thought with some depth and logic they would not have
committed this terrible historical error.

To say that Abu Talib was a pagan is to say that he was a believer in
the divinity of idols. But this belief cannot co-exist with his belief
in the truthfulness of Mohammad who denounced idols and considered their
deification and worship a defiance to the Creator.

For Abu Talib to believe in the divinity of idols he either had to
believe that Mohammad was deliberately misinforming people about God or
that he was hallucinating. If Abu Talib were pagan and in spite of that
he offered so much sacrifice for the sake of Mohammad he must have been
insane or an unusual fool. Had he believed that his nephew was
unbalanced or a conscious misinformant about God Abu Talib should have
confined Mohammad and

become his strong opponent rather than his formidable protector for the
mission of Mohammad was expected to ping destruction and death to Abu
Talib and his clan.

Abu Talib tied his fate to the fate of his nephew. He was unconcerned
with what might happen to him and to his clan. He witnessed the dangers
surrounding him and his clan and the difficulties that were accumulating
around him because of his protection of his nephew. In spite of all what
happened to him and to the members of his clan history does not record
any harsh word on the part of Abu Talib to his nephew. On the contrary
he offered himself and the members of his clan as a redemption to his
nephew.

He treated him better than any compassionate father treated his most
beloved son. He told him: "Nephew continue your mission and say whatever
you desire to say. By God I shall never leave you to any danger." Abu
Talib was a man of great faith and strong belief in the truthfulness of
Mohammad. He lived with that mission about eleven years and the
difficulties for Mohammad and for him increased in size by the passage
of time. He was a man of unusual faith in the truthfulness of Islam.
History witnessed distinguished companions running away when the danger
grew. But Abu Talib did not run away nor did he lose his determination.
He continued his sacrifice for the Prophet for the duration of his
life.

This should give credence to what Al-Tabersi recorded through his
channel to the Imam Jaafar Al-Ssadiq:

"While the Imam Ali was sitting at the 'Ruhbah' in Kufa " surrounded by
a group a man stood up and said: "Commander of the Believers you are in
this great position at which God has placed you while your father is
suffering in hell." The Imam replied saying: "Be silent. May God
disfigure your mouth. By the One Who sent Mohammad with the truth if my
father intercedes for every sinner on the face of the earth God would
accept his intercession." ( 4 )

He concealed his faith and God rewarded him twice.

( 4 ) Al-Tabersi Al-Ihtijaj Part 1 p. 341.

He concealed his faith only to protect Mohammad. Had he revealed his
belief in Islam the relation between him and the rest of the Qureshites
would have been severed. He wanted to maintain the dialogue between him
and the Qureshites and not let it be discontinued for this could have
led to an armed conflict in a decisive battle which might have led to
the destruction of his clan. By this the Hashimite wall around Mohammad
would fall and the Meccan pagans could reach him.

In spite of concealing his faith Abu Talib on more than one occasion
made his belief in Islam clearly known.

While on his deathbed he said to the Hashimites: "I command you to be
good to Mohammad. He is the most trustworthy of Quraish and the
ever-truthful of the Arabs. He pought a message which is accepted by the
heart and denied by the tongue for fear of hostility

By God whoever walks in the path of Mohammad shall be on the right road
and whoever follows his guidance shall have the happy future. Had there
been a balance in my years I would have shielded him against dangers and
defended him against adversaries .

"And you the Hashimites respond to Mohammad's invitation and believe
him. You will succeed and be well-guided. Assist Mohammad; certainly he
is the guide to the straight path." ( 5)

We All Are Indebted to Him

All Muslims are indebted to Abu Talib for the continuity of the Islamic
Message is a result of the continuation of the life of the Messenger
until God completed His message to mankind. The protection of Abu Talib
to the Messenger was the main physical deterrent to the Qureshites.

I once made this statement in an Islamic seminar and the following
question was raised: If God is the One Who wanted the message of Islam
to continue and to spread

( 5 ) Khalid Mohammad Khalid Fee Rihab Ali.

was not He able to preserve it and spread it without Abu Talib and his
protection to the Messenger? In my reply I stated the following: Muslims
believe that God was able to preserve the life of the Messenger and He
was able to make all the children of Adam Muslims and believers in God
His oneness and in the Day of Judgement. He could have made them
obedient to all Heavenly laws. He was able to make all the Qureshite
clans obedient to Mohammad. He was able also to make all people obedient
to His command without creating Mohammad .

Yet in spite of our belief in all this we know that God did not do
that. He did not make all people believers. He did not interfere
directly to change their thinking and their belief. He rather left for
them their freedom to choose. This means that God did not want to run
the events of the world miraculously and through Divine intervention. He
rather wanted to run the affairs of the world in accordance with the
natural means and courses. Therefore He sent revelations down to a human
being named Mohammad and spread Islam through that person.

The Almighty did not choose to force the Qureshites to believe or
disbelieve. The majority of the Qureshites chose to oppose Mohammad and
Abu Talib chose to believe in his message and to defend him by all of
what he had of men and means. This protection of Abu Talib to the
Messenger was an important factor in preserving the life of the
Messenger and the continuation of his mission until Abu Talib departed
from this world.

To attribute paganism to a man such as Abu Talib who was so benevolent
to all Muslims by guarding the life of the Messenger for about eleven
years is one of the worst forms of ungratefulness. It is a reward of
great favor by the worst insult.

Abu Talib was the first of two great men with whom the continuity of
the faith of Islam was strongly connected and their presence in relation
to the continuity of the faith of Islam was not incidental.

**IMAM ALI**

The other man with whom the continuity of the faith of Islam during the
days of the Messenger was strongly connected is the son of Abu Talib Ali
who carried the same mission after his father's death but on a larger
scale.

Numerous companions made great efforts for the sake of Islam and
rendered to the Prophet of Islam assistance worthy of appreciation. It
is sufficient to mention the three Caliphs: Abu Bakr Omar and Othman
along with the numerous Meccan companions such as Al-Zubeir Talhah
Abdul-Rahman Ibn Ouf Abu Obeidah Ibn Al-Jarrah Saad Ibn Abu Waqass
Al-Miqdad Ibn Al-Aswad Abdullah Ibn Mas-ood and Ammar Ibn Yasir. Add to
these people from the Medinites men such as Abu Dujana Qais Ibn Saad his
father Saad Ibn Abadah Saad Ibn Maath and others from other communities
such as Abu Tharr Salman Al-Farisi and hundreds of companions other than
these. All these men endeavored in the way of God by sacrificing some of
their wealth or their life or both.

If we review the period of the Prophethood and the roles which these
righteous companions performed we find them indispensable as a group.
Yet each one of them as an individual was replaceable by another
companion to perform a role similar to his.

It was possible to replace Abu Bakr by Omar to perform a role in a
manner similar to his. It was possible to replace Abu Bakr Omar and
Othman by Abu Obeidah Ibn Al-Jarrah Talhah and Al-Zubeir. It was
possible to replace Saad Ibn Abadah by Saad Ibn Maath or by his son Qais
Ibn Saad Ibn Abadah or to replace Abu Tharr by Salman or Ammar Ibn
Yassir or Al-Miqdad Ibn Al-Aswad. The roles of these companions were
close or similar. Had Omar been the companion of the Messenger in the
Cave at the night of the Hijrah instead of Abu Bakr Islam would not have
lost by the exchange. But Ali's role in guarding the life of the
Messenger could not have been performed but by Ali. It was easy for Ali
to perform the role of any other companion during the time of the
Messen-

ger but it was not easy for any other companion to perform Ali's
role.

It was easy for Ali to be the companion of the Messenger in the Cave of
Thour at the night of the Hijrah. But it was not easy for Abu Bakr or
any other companion to lie on the bed of the Messenger redeeming the
Messenger by his life resigning to receive the Qureshite attack which
was expected to come from ten warriors supported by the rest of the
Meccan pagans.

It was not possible for any of the companions of the Messenger to
perform the role of Ali at Badr where he destroyed nearly 50 percent of
the Qureshites who perished at that battle. Thus he tipped the scale
through his personal efforts in favor of the small Islamic army when the
faith of Islam was at stake.

It was not possible for any companion to perform Ali's role at Ohod
when the companions ran away climbing the mountain not turning their
faces to the Messenger while the Messenger was calling upon them to come
to him. The Messenger was singled out to face thousands of pagans. No
one remained with him except Ali to confront the regiments which were
seeking the life of the Messenger.

Ali faced them one after another and forced many of them to retreat
until a few of the companions came back to defend their Prophet. Had Ali
run away as the others did and the pagans reached the Messenger the
direction of the history could have been changed if the Almighty did not
protect Islam and His Messenger by a very unusual miracle .

These are only a few of many events which prove clearly that Ali's
endeavor was a very substantial factor in pinging about the victory of
the Faith of Islam and the defeat of its enemies. This proves that Ali
was the protective shield of the Messenger against the numerous dangers
which surrounded his precious life. This means that Ali had two
important exclusive honors:

1. The continuity of Islam which was dependent on the life of the
Messenger and his triumph during that period was strongly connected with
Ali's presence and endeavor .

2. The strong connection between the birth of the

Islamic State and his presence. It was impossible for the Muslim State
to be established if the enemies of Islam were to be victorious and able
to destroy the new power.

Since the endeavors of Ali had a clear effect in tipping the scale in
favor of the new power at the decisive battles between the Messenger and
his enemies it would be very true to consider the endeavor of Ali one of
the most important factors in the birth of the Islamic State.

How true the word of Omar was when he said to a man accusing Ali with
conceit: "By God the pillar of Islam could not have been established
without the sword of Ali."

**UNIQUE BRAVERY SUPPORTED WITH UNIQUE SINCERITY**

Ali's unusual pavery and physical strength alone could not make out of
him a protective shield for the Messenger nor could they tie the
continuity of Islam and the birth of the Islamic State to his existence.
What made him so transcendent was his unusual sincerity to the Heavenly
principles and his deep insight by which he discovered the unknown
truths and through which his pavery and physical strength were directed
to the service of the truth .

History witnessed many men equipped with physical strength and pavery.
But the lack of knowledge of the truth or the absence of sincerity
toward the truth made them spend what they were given of power in
supporting falsehood and combating the truth; or made them
self-worshippers spending all their energy for obtaining a false glory
or cheap material.

Unlike these Ali was an example of a different type of men whose
knowledge made them directly witness the truth and enjoy sacrifices
which other people found unbearable. He accompanied this world bodily
while his soul was connected to the higher world. He and the ones whom
he exemplified are the ones whom God had chosen to be the rulers on this
earth!.

**His Birth and Childhood**

The strong tie between Ali's endeavor and the birth of

the Islamic State was not a product of chance. It was rather the
product of spiritual evolution started at an early stage of his life.
Ali was being prepared for the unique honor since the days of his
childhood. He had the exclusive honor of having the strong ties to the
great Messenger who took him to himself during the days of his childhood
as a member of his own family. He directed the child's clear mind and
illuminated nature towards the truth. He saturated him from the strength
of his faith knowledge wisdom and purity.

At the hands of that teacher Ali grew and his qualities developed. He
became a mirror reflecting the lights of the Prophet.

"Abu Talib's wife Fatima the daughter of Asad (the lady whom the
Messenger used to consider his second mother) gave birth to Ali at the
Kaaba. Thus he was the first human to be born inside the Ancient and
Sacred House of God. His birth was thirty years after the birth of the
Prophet and twenty three years before the Hijrah. His mother named him
Haidrah (lion) or Asad. His father named him Ali (high). The two names
were appropriate for he was destined to be the lion of God and His
Messenger as he was the highest person after the Messenger who
"pothered" him among all Muslims.

"The capability of Abu Talib as a provider was below the need of his
family especially with famine by which the Meccans were plagued at that
period. The Prophet suggested to his uncle Al-Abbas that both of them
try to lighten the burden of Abu Talib by taking some of his children.
Abu Talib honored their request. Abbas took Jaafar and the Prophet took
Ali and kept him with him until the day of the commencement of his
Prophethood." ( 6 )

The Messenger and Al-Abbas were well-to-do and they were able to offer
Abu Talib what he needed of food during that hard period and leave Ali
and Jaafar with their

( 6 ) Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak Part 3 pp. 5-6 and so in Ibn Husham
Biography of the Prophet Part 1 p.246.

parents. But the Messenger chose that he and his uncle take the two
children to them.

It seems that the Messenger seized upon the opportunity of the famine.
He took Ali to him trying to provide him through his uppinging with his
spiritual food along with his bodily food preparing him to the great
future which was awaiting him .

It appears that he was willing to do so even if Quraish did not have
the famine. Ali was the most valuable companion of the Messenger .

The Messenger himself informed us that his relationship to Ali was not
incidental. He told him: "Ali people are from various trees but you and
I are from one tree." ( 7 )

Of course the Messenger did not mean by this statement that Ali was his
relative and first cousin and that their grandfather was Abdul Mutalib
because that is not important information. These facts are common place
to people. Furthermore Al-Abbas and Al-Hamzah were children of Abdul
Mutalib and Jaafar and Aqeel were pothers of Ali. Their relationship to
the Prophet is like that of Ali to him exactly.

What the Messenger meant is that Ali's soul resembles the soul of the
Holy Prophet and that he was strongly connected to him as an extension
of his personality. Thus he was from the Messenger of God as he spoke of
himself: "And I am from the Messenger of God as one of two trees
originated from one root and as the lower arm extending from the upper
one." ( 8)

It seems that the Messenger took Ali to himself while Ali was still a
small child for Ali himself stated the following: "And you have known my
place from the Messenger of God with the close relationship and the
special position. He seated me on his lap while I was a small child
empacing me making me join him in his bed

( 7 ) Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak Part 2 p. 241.
( 8 ) Nahjul-Balaghah Part 3 p. 73.

touching his holy body and smelling the sweetness of his fragrance. He
used to chew the food and put it in my mouth." ( 9)

The Prophet lived before the days of Prophethood as a world by himself.
He lived in a society in which ignorance and idol-worshiping were
prevalent sanctifying superstition and legalizing the unethical conduct.
Yet he was able to think of what the minds of the people of his society
were unable to discern. The purity of his nature enabled him to see and
hear what people could not see or hear. He lived in the midst of his
society as an island of knowledge wisdom and civilization surrounded by
an ocean of barbarism and ignorance.

Ali was destined to be a part of that independent world and to live in
the atmosphere of that island without being affected by the surrounding
society. He grew up as a light derived from the light of Mohammad. His
illuminated nature and keen mind enabled him to follow the steps of the
Prophet living up to his principles and ideals. The Imam spoke of his
growth under the direction of the Prophet Mohammad and the influence of
his attachment to him in forming his high characters:

"And he (the Messenger of God) never found an untruth in my words or
any wrong in my deeds. God had attached to him (Mohammad) from the time
of his weaning the greatest of His angels to walk him through the path
of virtue and to teach him the highest ethics of the world . . . and I
was following him as a baby following his mother. He used to raise for
me every day a banner of his ethics and command me to follow it.

"He used to seclude himself every year in Hira and I was with him while
no one else could see him. And during the early period of Islam there
was only one house sheltering the Messenger of God Khadijah and myself
as their third seeing the light of revelation and smelling the fragrance
of the prophethood." ( 10)

( 9 ) Nahjul-Balaghah Part 2 p. 157.
( 10 ) Nahjul-Balaghah Part 2 p. 15.

By that time Ali arrived in his spiritual ascendance to a degree by
which he became able to hear and see what the Messenger was hearing and
seeing at the days of the commencement of his Prophethood. He (Ali) said
that at an occasion which took place during the first few days from the
commencement of his Prophethood the Prophet told him: ". . . Certainly
you hear what I hear and you see what I see but you are not a Prophet.
You are a minister and you are on a good path." As Ali had covered so
much distance in his spiritual development before passing ten years of
age it was only natural for him to add to his special position with the
Prophet the other exclusive honor of being the first of the believers in
the Prophethood of Mohammad and the fastest in response to his call.

