The Redeemer
============

( 73 )

6.The rapid increase of the number of Muslims in Medina heartened the
Medinites and encouraged them to invite the Prophet to move to their
city pledging to defend him with all their power. Upon this pledge the
Holy Prophet accepted their invitation. The Meccan pagans knew about
what took place. They conferred secretly and reached the conclusion that
the death of Mohammad was the only means to stop the spread of Islam.
From each clan in Mecca a strong and courageous man was selected to
attack Mohammad at an appointed night. Thus all the Meccan clans would
be participants in his murder.

The Almighty revealed to His Messenger the news of the conspiracy and
ordered him to depart from Mecca at the appointed night. His departure
while under their surveillance was expected to put him face to face with
danger .

Like other Meccan houses the house of the Prophet was not sight proof.
An outsider could see its inside. The bed of Mohammad therefore should
not be unoccupied; otherwise the enemies would discover his departure
and block the roads and search the houses to find him. But whoever
occupied Mohammad's bed at that night should be ready to die for the
attack was surely coming .

The Messenger revealed to Ali the news of the conspiracy and asked him
to lie on his bed. As expected Ali neither declined the dangerous
invitation nor did he think of his own fate. He only thought of one
important thing:

The fate of the Prophet. "Messenger of God " he asked:

"Will you be safe?" When the Prophet replied in the affir-

mative Ali went down to the earth prostrating thanking God for the
safety of His Messenger.

The Holy Prophet commissioned Ali with another mission: He asked him to
deliver to the Meccans in the following days their trusts which were in
the possession of the Prophet. The Messenger was the trustee of the
Meccans friends arid enemies alike. He was to them the Trustworthy.

No one should deliver those trusts on behalf of the Prophet other than
his trustee and representative Ali.

The recorders of the hadith reported that the Messenger commissioned
Ali with a third mission that night. Al-Hakim reported that Ali said
that the Messenger accompanied him to the Kaaba (on the night of the
Hijrah) to try to destroy Quraish's biggest idol. The Messenger mounted
the shoulders of Ali in order to reach the roof of the Kaaba but he
found some weakness in Ali. He went down and told Ali to mount his
shoulders and he did. And the Messenger rose up. Ali felt that if he
wanted to reach Heaven he could. Ali went up to the roof of the Kaaba.

He shook the largest idol which was made of copper being bound to the
roof. When he took hold of the idol the Prophet told him to throw it
down. He did and the idol was poken. ( 1 )

It seemed that this mission was completed before the conspirators
surrounded the house of the Prophet and that the Prophet and Ali came
back to the house after fulfilling this mission; then the Prophet left
when the enemies were surrounding his house. Ali remained to fulfill the
other two great missions: Occupying the bed of the Messenger and
delivering to the Meccans their trusts.

Ibn Al-Atheer in his history (Al-Kamil) reported that Gapiel came to
the Prophet and told him not to lie on his bed that night and that the
Prophet ordered Ali to lie on his bed. He also commissioned him to
deliver what was in his possession of the trusts to the Meccans and
informed him that the enemies would not harm him.

The Prophet took a handful of soil and threw it on the

( 1 ) Al-Hakim Al-Mustadrak Part 3 p. 5.

heads of the enemies who were surrounding his house and left unnoticed
reciting the chapter of Yasine. Seeing the bed of the Prophet occupied
the enemies believed that Mohammad was sleeping on his bed. They waited
until morning and when Ali rose from the bed they recognized him. "Where
is Mohammad?" they asked. "I do not know "

Ali replied. "You ordered him to leave and he left." They beat Ali up
pought him to the Mosque detained him for one hour then freed him. (
2)

It is also reported that when the dawn drew nigh they dashed into the
house and were surprised to find that the occupier of the bed was Ali
rather than Mohammad. Ali stood up and they asked him: "Where is
Mohammad?"

He denied any knowledge about his whereabouts. Violence erupted and Ali
pressed the hand of their leader making the sword of the man fall from
his hand. Seizing upon the sword he was able to drive them out.

The chiefs of Mecca realized that their conspiracy was abortive. The
Meccans in groups went in every direction trying to find Mohammad. One
group led by a tracker took the right direction until they approached
the Cave of Thour. Hearing the rumble of their feet Abu Bakr who was
hiding with the prophet was extremely frightened and sweating. As they
came to the mouth of the Cave Abu Bakr whispered in the ear of the
Prophet: "If one of them looks under his feet he will see us." The
Prophet calmly replied: "Be not afraid God is with us."

The Almighty protected His Prophet from his enemies and the historical
Hijrah by which the faith of Islam and the Muslims were transferred from
a state of weakness to a state of dignity and strength. commenced.

**THE MAGNITUDE OF THE MISSION**

Let us try to evaluate Ali's sacrifice and the magnitude of his
mission. When the Prophet accepted the invitation of the Muslims of
Medina the Muslims in Mecca numbered

( 2 ) Ibn Al-Atheer in his history Al-Kamil Part 2 p.72.

about 150. The Prophet permitted or rather urged these Muslims to
migrate to Medina. He did that in spite of his awareness of the new
danger which resulted from his covenant with the Medinites. He knew that
the Meccans would not let him depart from their city safely. He could
have kept a number of prominent Muslims around him to shield him against
the imminent danger. He could also commission any one of them to occupy
his bed at such a time. But he did not do that; instead he urged them to
leave Mecca ahead of him and kept Ali for the hard task. He chose Ali
because he knew that an occupant of his bed that night must have the
following qualities:

1. His love to God His Messenger and His religion should be stronger
than his love to himself.
2. He must be endowed with a courageous spirit that would enable him to
face death for the Divine cause with satisfaction.
3. He should have an indomitable spirit with which he would not be
frightened by his aloneness while facing the violent wrath of the Meccan
community because he foiled their plot against the Prophet. In addition
to this he had to be patient enough to withhold all information about
the Prophet regardless of what he might face of torture.

It was extremely difficult if not impossible to find a person other
than Ali ready to perform such a role and do it so calmly without
fear.

Here we may understand the meaning of the ministry and assistance which
Ali promised the Prophet ten years before the time of this event.

Significance of the Delivery of the Trusts It is worthy to note that
the Prophet commissioned Ali with the delivery of the trusts to the
Meccans. This clearly put in action what he promised Ali of
executorship. The Messenger could have commissioned someone other than
Ali to deliver the trusts. Ali's survival was highly in doubt because of
his dangerous mission. The rest of the Muslims were in no danger; thus
the Prophet would be expected to commission Abu Bakr or another
companion with the

delivery of the trusts rather than Ali. Yet he chose Ali in spite of
the dangers with which he was surrounded.

**A Miraculous Prophecy**

Choosing Ali to deliver the trusts proves that Ali was the only person
representing the Prophet. Deputizing Ali by itself was a unique
prophecy. God revealed to Mohammad that Ali would pass the crisis safely
and that he would be in a position to deliver the trusts. Had the
Prophet not been certain that Ali would survive the crisis he would have
commissioned someone other than Ali with the trusts. Their delivery was
a duty whose imperativeness compelled the Prophet to choose the surest
way in delivering them. Thus it was the duty of the Messenger to choose
for such a mission a person who was expected to survive rather than a
person who was expected to die .

**Value Undiminished**

The reader may think that Ali was certain of his survival and his
certainty came from information of the Holy Prophet and from his being
commissioned by him to deliver the trusts for this indicates that the
Prophet was sure of Ali's survival. If this were the case the event
would lose its importance for the occupant of the bed of the Prophet
would not be harmed regardless of the magnitude of the danger.

The fact is that the Messenger of God commissioned Ali with the
delivery of the trusts after he accepted the mission of redemption
without hesitation or concern with what would happen to him during that
night. It was equal to Ali to stay alive or to die as long as the
Prophet was safe. Ali was the one who used to seek martyrdom as an
ultimate goal. He believed that martyrdom is the great gain and the
highest form of victory. We know the truth of this when we read what is
recorded in Nahjul-Balaghah where he speaks about the revelation of the
following verse: "Do men think that they will be left alone saying: 'We
believe ' without being tested?".

The Imam tells us that when this verse was revealed he reminded the
Prophet of a statement he made when the Imam was saddened because he did
not obtain martyrdom which many other Muslims obtained at the Battle of
Ohod.

The Prophet told him at that time: "Be cheerful martyrdom is coming to
you." The Prophet confirmed his previous statement saying: "That will be
so. How will your patience be at that time?" The Imam retorted:
"Messenger of God this will not be a place of patience. It will be a
place of cheerfulness and thanks." ( 3)

The Almighty informed the Messenger when he was migrating to Medina
that he would come back to Mecca: "Certainly the one who commanded you
to deliver the message of the Holy Qur'an will ping you back. . . ."

This revelation was a promise from God to His Prophet to make him
survive all difficulties until he returns him to Mecca regardless of any
battles he attends. Thus the Prophet had attended numerous battles while
he was certain of his safety. This did not diminish the value of his
endeavor for he was determined to do that even if he were not promised
with a Divine protection.

This is true also concerning Ali. His belief in his survival until he
delivered the trusts does not diminish the magni tude of his sacrifice
because he was ready to make that sacrifice and to redeem the Prophet
whether he was informed of his survival or his martyrdom The history of
Ali after the Hijrah substantiates this conclusion. The Prophet did not
inform Ali that he would survive the battle of Ohod but that did not
prevent him from staying with the Messenger protecting him by himself
and combating the regiments one after another and forcing them to
retreat after all companions ran away .

The Almighty protected His Messenger from the Qureshite conspirators
and enabled him to arrive in Medina safely where he found strength and
support. But Quraish was not expected to adopt a peaceful attitude or to
sleep while Mohammad was alive. To them his very existence

( 3 ) Nahjul Balaghah Part 2 p.5.

was a tremendous danger threatening their religion and influence. They
expected his power to grow by the passage of time and that he would come
back accompanying an army that Quraish could not face .

Certainly the survival of the Messenger made the Qureshites more eager
and determined to kill him and more violent in combating him. They were
expected to wage a long war against him and his followers. They were
ready to use whatever they had of power and influence to fight him and
to stir up the pagans and non-pagan tribes against him. They wanted to
succeed in accomplishing by confrontation what they could not accomplish
through attempts of assassination .

Ali's redemption of the Holy Prophet at the night of the Hijrah was a
fulfillment of the pledge which he made at the conference of the House
where he promised the Holy Prophet to be his minister. The events which
followed the Hijrah demanded from Ali assistance to the Prophet much
more and greater in size and magnitude year after year until the victory
of the Heavenly message was realized.

The Faith of Islam could not have continued and spread unless the
followers of Islam were liberated from fear and enabled to enjoy
religious freedom. This could not be realized unless a powerful state
based on the principles of the new faith is established. Such a state
could not be established unless the evil forces which were threatening
the faith are defeated .

We shall see in the following pages that Ali was that unique minister
who was great enough to assist the Prophet to achieve these goals .

Thus Ali earned the two honors of being the Redeemer of the Final of
the Prophets and the honor of being the executor of the Prophet (in
action) whom he deputized to deliver to the Meccans what was in his
possession of their trusts. Both honors were unique .

When his two missions were so successfully fulfilled Ali set out
towards Medina. As he arrived to Qoba he found the Holy Prophet waiting
for him to enter with him the city which was destined to be the capital
of Islam.

