The Science of
نحو
==================

Definition, Purpose and Subject Matter
--------------------------------------

**نحو is the science of classical Arabic which deals with how to
identify the grammatical positioning of the three parts of speech;**
إسم, فعل and حرف by recognizing the changes which occur at their end.
In addition to this, it discusses how to connect the parts of speech
with one another and make meaningful sentences.

The purpose of**نحو is to guard one from making errors when articulating
and understanding the language of the Arabs.  From the various sciences
associated with the Arabic language,** **نحو is by far the most
important.**

All discussions in**نحو are centered upon words, phrases, and
sentences. **

Mapping the Arabic Language
---------------------------

The most basic utterance which comes out of the human beings mouth is
termed ‘**لفظ ’.  If it has no established meaning, it is known as ‘**
**مُهمَل ’ (meaningless), whereas if it does convey established meaning,
it is called ‘** **مَوضوع ’ (meaningful). ** **مَوضوع could be either
one word, termed** **مُفرَد (single) also known as ‘** كلمة’ (word) or a
group of words;**مُرَكَّب (compound).  The group of words can be linked
together so as to result in a complete sentence;** **مركَّب
مفيد/جملة/كلام** (beneficial combination/sentence), or it may constitute
a phrase; **مركَّب غير مفيد (non-beneficial combination).**

<p dir="rtl">
كلمة:
-----
</p>

The Arabic ‘word’ ( كلمة) is divided into three types; إسم, فعل and
حرف.  Stated otherwise, every word in the Arabic dictionary falls into
one of these three categories.  Unlike English which has eight parts of
speech, in Arabic there are only three.  This inconsistency will become
clear only after precise definitions are given to the three types:

1. إسم: is the ‘ كلمة’ that gives a full independent meaning in itself
and is not linked to time, e.g.**رجل (man),** **بيت (house).  The
category is broader than ‘noun’ in that it also includes three others
from the eight English parts of speech, namely pronouns, adjectives and
adverbs.**

2. فعل: is the ‘ كلمة’ that gives a full independent meaning in itself
and is also linked to time, e.g.**كَتَبَ (wrote),** **يَنصُرُ (helps).
This is exactly the same as the ‘verb’ in English.**

3. حرف: is the ‘ كلمة’ which has no independent meaning of its own i.e.
can only be understood after coupling either a noun or a verb to it,
e.g.**في (in),** **على (on),** **و (and).  This category includes
prepositions, conjunctions, and articles.**

The Sentence (جملة/مركّب مفيد )
-------------------------------

A sentence is a group of words that conveys to the point of satisfaction
either information or desire e.g.**الرَّجُلُ طَويلٌ (The man is tall),**
**خُذْ** **الكِتابَ (Take the book),** **رَبّي إرزُقْنِي (My lord!  Give
me sustenance).  It is primarily of two types:**

1. **جُملةٌ خَبَرِيّةٌ : is the** **جُمله wherein the possibility of
truth and falsehood exists: e.g.** **البِنتُ عاقِلَةٌ (The girl is
intelligent),** **المُعَلِّمُ حاضِرٌ (The teacher is present).**

2.**جُملةٌ إنشاﺋِﻴَّﺔٌ : is the** **جُمله whose meaning does not support
the possibility of truth and falsehood e.g.** **هل عِندَكَ قَلَمٌ (Do
you have a pen?),** **إشرَب الماء (Drink the water!).**

A sentence, essentially, is the conveyance in words of a specific
linkage made between two ‘ideas’; one primary, the other descriptive
within the mind of the speaker.  Now if the two ideas also exist in the
outside world and what the speaker is saying corresponds to the outer
reality, it is termed true.  If it does not correspond it is called
false.  For instance the sentence**زَيدٌ ناﺋِﻢٌ (** **زَيدٌ is sleeping)
in which the idea of sleeping has been linked affirmatively to** **زَيدٌ
can be verified by judging it with the reality.  When looking towards
what exists in the world, if we see** **زَيدٌ is actually sleeping, it
would mean the affirmation is correct, and hence the statement is true.
Otherwise, it would be false.  In a** **جُملةٌ إنشاﺋِﻴَّﺔ no such
external reality exists.  It is the words of the speaker which for the
first time are bringing the two ideas together. ** **إنشاء literally
means to originate.  Now we see clearly why sentences such as questions
and commands do not support truth and falsehood; confirmation and
non-confirmation to external reality can not occur due to there being no
such reality.**

Keeping in mind the above explanation, EVERY possible sentence can be
easily classified into either**خَبَرِيّةٌ or** **إنشاﺋِﻴَّﺔ , including
sentences about which we know with absolute certitude that they are
true, such as ‘Allah created the heavens’, or likewise with certitude we
know their falsehood, such as ‘The sky is below us’.  Both these and
similar statements are without doubt** **خَبَرِيّةٌ sentences, for they
have external realities to which they either confirm or not confirm.  It
is the existence of this reality (or non-existence) which determines
whether the sentence will be classified** **خَبَرِيّةٌ or**
**إنشاﺋِﻴَّﺔ**

<p dir="rtl">
### إسمِيّه/فعلِيَّه :
</p>

###

We said every sentence is essentially made up of two parts; a primary
one and a descriptive one.  First they link together in the mind of the
speaker.  Then they are conveyed through the medium of words.  This
linkage which results in a sentence is termed ‘**إسناد ’.  The primary
part or subject of the sentence is called ‘** **مُسنَد إليهِ ’ and the
descriptive part or predicate is known as ‘** **مُسنَد ’.  To
illustrate, consider a boy (** **وَلَدٌ ) and the idea of laziness (**
**كَسلٌ ).  There are several ways these two ideas can be linked
together.  Some will result in sentences while others will form only
phrases:**

1.**الوَلَدُ الكَسلانُ , the lazy boy: a descriptive phrase**

2.**كَسَلُ الوَلَدِ , the boy’s laziness: a possessive phrase**

3.**الوَلَدُ كَسلانُ , The boy is lazy: a full sentence (** **إسناد-
جملة إسميّة ).**

4.**كَسِِلَ الوَلَدُ , The boy became lazy: also a full sentence (**
**إسناد- جملة فعليّة ).**

In the third example “**الوَلَدُ كَسلانُ ” the** إسم ‘**الوَلَدُ ’ which
appears first is the** **مُسنَد إليهِ i.e. the primary part of the
sentence.  The** إسم (in this case adjective)**كَسلانُ is the predicate
and it appears second.**

In the fourth example “**كَسِِلَ الوَلَدُ ” again it’s the** إسم
:** الوَلَدُ which is being talked ‘about’, so it is the** **مُسنَد إليه
.  Only here it does not appear first, but second.  The** فعل
(verb)**كَسِِلَ , appearing first, is the descriptive part and therefore
the** **مُسنَد**

We see there is no consistent order in which they must appear.  Subject
and predicate do not mean first and second.  They mean primary and
descriptive.  When the sentence comprises of just two words, as in both
the above examples, identifying the two is still relatively easy.
However, like in all languages, sentences in Arabic are not restricted
to just two words.  They can be very long.  Having sentences which are
between ten and say twenty words long is quite normal in Arabic.  It is
in such complex sentences that the process of identifying the subject,
(made up of multiple phrases) from the predicate (also compound) becomes
somewhat difficult.  A great portion of**نحو is devoted to parsing and
analyzing sentences in order to determine the subject from the
predicate, for even the basic translation of a sentence depends entirely
on it.  It is for this reason great scholars like Ibn Khaldun say “**
**أهَمُّها النَّحوُ إذ لَولاه أصلُ التَفاهُم ”.  (The most important of
the sciences associated with the Arabic language is** **نحو , for
without it no communication can exist). ** **لُغَه which is knowledge of
vocabulary, according to him is the least important aspect of Arabic.**

To make recognition of the**مُسنَد إليه and** **مُسنَد** ** somewhat
easier the scholars of** **نحو further classify the sentence into two
categories based on the first word in the sentence:**

1.**جمله أسميّه : the sentence which begins with an** إسم e.g.**الوَلَدُ
قاﺋِﻢٌ (The boy is standing).  The two parts are known as** **مُبتَدا
and** **خَبَر (subject and predicate).**

2.**جمله فعليّه : the sentence which begins with a** فعل e.g.**ذَهَبَ
حامِدٌ (Hamid went).  The two parts are known as** فعل and**فاعل (verb
and subject).**

### The Two Parts of the إسميّه Sentence:

###

The**مُسنَد إليهِ , when it appears in an** إسميَّه structure, is
called**مُبتَدا .  With rare exception, it will be first in the
sentence.  The** **مُسنَد in this type of sentence is called** **خَبَر**

### The Two Parts of the فعليّه Sentence:

###

The**مُسنَد إليه , when it appears in the** **فعليَّه sentence, it is
called** **فاعل or subject of the verb preceding it.  Unlike in English,
the verb ALWAYS precedes the subject in Arabic.  Therefore, in this type
of sentence the** **مُسنَد إليه i.e. the** **فاعل will always come after
the descriptive part or predicate.  The predicate (** **مُسنَد ) is
known simply as** فعل.  These ideas are summarized below in Table 1-A.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="33%" />
<col width="33%" />
<col width="33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"></td>
<td align="left"><p>جُملَة إسمِية</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>جُملَة فِعلِية</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><p>مُسنَد إليه</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>مبتدا</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>فعل</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><p>مُسنَد</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>خبر</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>فاعل</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

**Table Error! No text of specified style in document. - A -**إسناد****

Grammatical States
==================

Introduction
------------

Human beings experience emotional states based on interaction with one
another.  People make us happy, angry, and sad etc.  These states are
then reflected on our faces by our facial expressions i.e. smiles,
frowns etc.  Arabic words behave in a similar fashion.  They enter
grammatical states because of interaction with surrounding words.  These
‘grammatical states’ are then reflected on the last letter of the word.
Unlike human emotions, grammatical states in Arabic are just four:

**رفع** - the nominative case.

**نصب** - the accusative case.

**جر** - the genitive case.

**جزم** - the jussive case.

We see this in the English language to a very restricted degree in
pronouns.  Take for example the three variations of the third person
masculine pronoun; he, him and his or for the feminine; she, her and
her, for the second person masculine; you, you and your and for the
first person; I, me and my.

The reason why the same meaning is being conveyed using three different
words is to reflect grammatical state.  When the pronoun is intended to
be subject of the verb, ‘he’ or ‘she’ is used.  Likewise for object, one
must use ‘him’ or ‘her’.  In the English language this discussion is
restricted to pronouns.  For nouns, regardless of how the noun is used,
there will be no difference in the way the noun is pronounced.  In
Arabic this process is extended to ALL nouns.

Reflection of Grammatical States - إعراب
----------------------------------------

The name given to this process is**إعراب** .  Therefore,**إعراب** is the
process by which grammatical states are reflected on the last letter of
words by change in vowelling or lettering, either explicitly or assumed.

The need for this occurs because in Arabic, we have no other way of
determining whether a given noun is being made the subject of the verb
or the object, or whether it is in the possessive case.  There is no
rule in Arabic which states the subject HAS to come before the object.
A verb followed by two nouns can have any of the following three
possibilities:

The first is subject and second is object.

Vice versa.

The two nouns together form a possessive phrase

For instance, if the verb**ضَرَبَ** (hit) is followed by the two
nouns**وَلَد** (boy) and**زَيْد** (a person’s name), the sentence can
have three possible meanings:

A boy hit Zaid.

Zaid hit a boy.

Zaid’s boy hit…  (Someone else)!

It is apparent from the above that some sort of system of reflection is
needed to determine the intended structure while excluding the other
two.  In Arabic this is done by giving the last letter a distinct
vowelling or lettering.[^1]

Before moving further it is important to know which of the three parts
of speech experience these states and reflection process, and which do
not.  This is important because every word will have some sort of ending
including state-less words.  There is a sub-set of words that do not
enter grammatical states and hence there endings have no grammatical
significance.  One may liken them to a ‘stoic’ person who remains
emotionless.  When confronted with this state-less type of word, one
should be fully aware of its state-less nature and not assume
grammatical meaning from the ending.

Statelessness -  مبني vs. معرب
------------------------------

Now, returning back to our discussion, we said it is important to
understand from the outset which of the parts of speech experience
‘**إعراب** ’ (i.e. are**معرب** ) and which don’t (i.e. are**مبني** ), so
that false grammatical assumptions may be effectively avoided.  (Refer
to the previous section.)

Recall that the purpose of**إعراب** was to determine between various
grammatical usages, such as subject, object, and possessive case, by way
of last letter reflection.  A simple pondering on the three definitions
given above will reveal that only إسمs have the capacity of ever
becoming subject, object, or being used in the possessive case.  To
illustrate further, let’s try making a**فعل** (i.e. verb) the subject of
another verb and see how it sounds, while contrasting it to when a noun
is made subject.  Went was quick!  Going was quick; meaning the act of
going was quick.  Primarily, the reason why ‘went’ did not make sense
and ‘going’ did is because ‘went’ has a tense in it, preventing it from
becoming subject, whereas going is an act with no tense.  In any case,
from the above explanation and example it becomes clear that verbs can
not be made subject, object etc., and the same goes for particles. *So
when these two categories will never become subjects, objects etc., they
have no need for reflection.  They should be state-less (* ***مبني*** *)
in their entirety.*   Therefore, the logical division should have been
as follows:

**أسماء** : all**معرب** .

**أفعال** : all**مبني** .

**حروف** : all**مبني** .

Had the division been like this, things would have been easy and the
discussion would have ended.  Unfortunately, the existing reality is a
bit different from this.  The reality is as follows:

**حروف** : All**مبني** .  (the way they’re supposed to be)

**أفعال** : 80%**مبني** (the way they’re supposed to be), 20%**معرب** .
This 20% needs to be accounted for.

**أسماء** : 80%**معرب** (the way they’re supposed to be), 20%**مبني** .
This 20% also needs to be explained.

It is this very explanation which will be the focus of the rest of this
discussion,** إن شاء الله** **.**

The scholars of**صرف** (Arabic Morphology) have classified the**فعل**
into 4 types, namely:

**ماضي** , the past tense verb e.g.**كَتَبَ** (wrote).  This category
is**مبني** in its entirety i.e. No governing agent will ever enter upon
a past-tense conjugation and alter its ending.

**مضارع** , the present and future tense verb e.g.**يَنصُرُ** (helps, or
will help)…or one may refer to the first as ‘perfect’ i.e. occurred and
the second as ‘imperfect’, meaning ongoing, either presently in the
process of occurring or will begin at a future time.

**أمر** , imperative or command verb e.g.**إشرِبْ** (Drink!)

**نهي** , negative command or prohibition e.g.**لا تَشرِبْ** (Don’t
drink)

To more easily explain the 20% of verbs that do enter grammatical states
and therefore are**معرب** , we need to modify this classification
slightly.  This will be done by examining the last two verbs in a
somewhat detailed manner in the next chapter.
