Process of Reflection - إعراب أسماء و أفعال
===========================================

Recall from the discussion of the 4 types of**فعل** in the previous
section, that the**ماضي** (the past tense verb) is**مبني** in its
entirety i.e. no governing agent will ever enter upon it and alter its
ending.  Skipping**مضارع** and leaving it for last, let’s take a look at
the remaining two verbs:**أمر** and**نهي** .

The 20% of Verbs that are معرب
------------------------------

Recall that**أمر** , which is the command verb, like all verbs, will
have an active as well as a passive.  Each table will have 14
conjugations.  (Refer to the**صرف** book)  However, when contemplating
the reality of Amr, we see something unique not found in the other types
of verbs, namely, the fact that literally speaking commands have to be
directed to someone being addressed.  By literal definition,**أمر** must
be second person and in the active voice, such as Sit!  Drink!  Read!
Etc...  Does that mean you can’t use an**أمر** verb in the passive voice
or in other than the second person?  Well you can, but it won’t be a
literal**أمر** , it would be a figurative way of speaking.  Take for
instance second person passive with the verb ‘to help’ i.e. You must get
helped, or third person active, He must help, or third person passive,
He must get helped.  Now contrast these three with just Help!  You will
see a sharp difference in literal and figurative application of the term
‘command’ upon the various conjugations of the**أمر** tables.  For this
reason, the scholars of Sarf tend to break down the table of 14 into two
smaller tables, the first being just the middle six conjugations of the
second person, and the other being the remaining 8, a combination of the
third person 6 plus numbers 13 and 14.  When they did this, to keep
things level, they also broke down the passive table into two similar
tables, although the above reasoning does not apply to the passive
table.  Now, instead of two big tables of 14 and 14, we have four small
tables:

**أمر حاضر معروف** ** ** (second person active command) e.g.**إضرِب** ,
Hit!

**أمر حاضر مجهول** (second person passive command) e.g**.** **لِتُضرَب**
, You must get hit.

**أمر غاﺋﺐ و متكلّم** (third & first person active command)
e.g.**لِيَضرِب** , He must hit

**أمر غاﺋﺐ و متكلّم مجهول** (third & first person passive command)
e.g.**لَِيُضرَب** , He must get hit.

Keeping in mind the whole above discussion, now look at the four small
gardaans of the**نهي** verb which is the negative command:

**نهي حاضر معروف** (second person active prohibition) e.g.**لا تَضرِب**
, Don’t hit!

**نهي حاضر مجهول** (second person passive prohibition) e.g.**لا تُضرَب**
, You must not get hit.

**نهي غاﺋﺐ و متكلّم** ** ** (third & first person active prohibition)
e.g.**لا يَضرِب** , He must not hit.

**نهي غاﺋﺐ و متكلّم مجهول** (third & first person passive prohibition)
e.g.**لا يُضرَب** , He must not get hit.

Note the structure of the eight examples:

**إضرِب** was the first, then we had three that began with ‘**لِ** ’,
followed by four that began with ‘**لا** ’.

Significant?  From a pure**صرف** perspective, not really, because verb
conjugation, more than anything else, has to do with the designated
letters at the end of the verbs which make the conjugations slightly
different in how they look and sound, and that’s why we memorize them,
with particular attention given to those slight differences.

However, from a**نحو** point of view, the difference between**إضرِب**
and the rest is very profound.  (If you understand this, you’ve
understood a lot, insha Allah.)

What the scholars of**نحو** did, is they looked at the above 8 examples,
noting that all end with a ْ   ‘**سكون** ’.  Then they saw, seven of
them have particles i.e. governing agents in front of them, either
‘**لِ** ’or ‘**لا** ’.  From this, they deduced that the sukoon at the
end of all except**إضرِب** is a reflection of grammatical state.
Therefore, these gardaans are not separate verbs, but rather THE
SAME**مضارع** (present-tense verb) in the state of ‘**جزم** ’.  In other
words**لِتُضرَب** ,**لِيَضرِب** ,**لِيُضرَب** and the four**نهي** tables
are nothing more than**يَضرِبُ** ,**يُضرَبُ** ,**تَضرِبُ**
and**تُضرَبُ** with either ‘**لِ** ’or ‘**لا** ’ in front of them, both
of which are ‘**جزم** ’ giving particles.

As for ‘**إضرِب** ’ i.e. the second person, active command, they said
this is different for two reasons:

It does not begin with a recognized prefix of the present-tense
verb,**ي** ,**ت** ,**ء** , or**ن** .  Therefore, it cannot be
incorporated into the**مضارع** category, as we did to the others.

Furthermore, it does not have a governing agent before it which could
explain away the sukoon at the end of it, meaning no grammatical
reflection can be attributed to this last letter sukoon.

For these two reasons, the scholars of**نحو** have classified the**فعل**
somewhat different than the scholars of**صرف** .  This happens by taking
seven of the above eight tables and incorporating them into**مضارع** and
keeping**أمر حاضر معروف** as the third distinct type of**فعل** .  The
breakdown is as follows:

**ماضي** , the past-tense verb.**مبني** in its entirety, as mentioned
previously.

**مضارع** , the present and future-tense verb.  Predominantly**معرب** ,
as will be seen shortly.

**أمر حاضر معروف** , the second person, active-command verb,
also**مبني** in its entirety.

The present-tense verb (**مضارع** ), like all verbs, also has 14
conjugations.  From the 14, two conjugations, namely the two feminine
plurals (number 6 and 12) are**مبني** i.e. will never change despite the
governing agent entering upon them.  The final ‘ن’ at the end of these
two conjugations is actually the pronoun, and from it we get the plural
feminine meaning.

As for the other 12 conjugations of the present-tense verb, they are
all**معرب** PROVIDED THAT THEY ARE FREE OF THE ‘**ن** ’ OF EMPHASIS.
These 12 conjugations can be split into two groups:

Those that end in a**ُ**   in the state of**رفع** .  This would include
5 conjugations; numbers 1, 4, 7 and the last two, 13 and 14.

Those that end with a**ُ**   in the state of**رفع** , the remaining
seven conjugations i.e. the four duals, plus numbers 3, 9 and 10.

Types of ن
----------

Before we proceed, it is important to note that in total there are three
different types of ‘**ن** ’!

The first is the ‘**ن** ’ of feminine plurality. This is actually a
pronoun (and not a reflection of**رفع** ).  It comes at the end of
conjugation numbers 6 and 12 and will never drop.

The second is what they call, the ‘ن إعرابي’.  The function of this
‘**ن** ’ is to reflect that the**مضارع** verb is in its default state
of**رفع** .  The presence of this ‘**ن** ’ at the end of the seven
conjugations mentioned above will indicate**رفع** .  The pronoun is the
letter before the ‘**ن** ’ i.e. an ‘**ا** ’ for the four duals, a ‘**و**
’ for the two masculine plurals, and ‘**ي** ’ for number ten, the second
person singular feminine.  In**نصب** and**جزم** , this ‘**ن** ’ will
drop.

The third and final ‘**ن** ’ is what we referred to as the ‘**ن** ’ of
emphasis.  This is a special ‘**ن** ’ which is a particle and is
attached to the end of the**مضارع** .  It comes in both a**ساكن** form
as well as a**مشدد** form.  Its meaning function is twofold.  Firstly it
eliminates the present tense and makes the verb specific to the future.
Secondly it adds emphasis to the future tense meaning (verily or
surely).  All conjugations of the present-tense verb become**مبني** as a
result of it.

Now we can clearly see the 20% of verbs which are**معرب** and
distinguish them from the 80% that are**مبني** :

**ماضي** -**مبني** in its entirety.

**أمر حاضر معروف** -**مبني** also.

**مضارع** with the ‘**ن** ’ of feminine plurality (6 and 12)-**مبني**

**مضارع** with the ‘**ن** ’ of emphasis (all 14 conjugations)-**مبني**

**مضارع** empty of  the above mentioned both ‘**ن** ’ -**معرب**

Note that from a total five only one is**معرب** and four are**مبني** .
Four from five is 80% and one from five is 20%.

Essential Note on بناء
----------------------

Thus far we have covered five types of**مبني** words.

All**حروف** .

<p dir="rtl">
**ماضي** .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
**أمر حاضر معروف** .
</p>

**مضارع** with the ‘nun’ of feminine plurality.

**مضارع** with the ‘nun’ of emphasis.

Depending on the reason of ‘**بناء** ’ (statelessness),**مبني** words
are of two types:

**مبني الأصل** - words that are truly**مبني**   i.e. They never enter
grammatical states and therefore have no need for the process of
reflection called**أعراب** .  The first three from the above five
are**مبني الأصل** .

**مبني مشابه** - words that are**مبني**   due to a secondary reason such
as resemblance to the first category, meaning they do enter grammatical
states and hence need the reflection that**أعراب** provides. However,
owing to some external reason, their last letters remain constant
despite the many governing agents that enter upon them. **مضارع** with
the ‘**ن** ’ of feminine plurality is**مبني**   because the final
‘‘**ن** ’ at the end of these two conjugations RESEMBLES the ‘**ن** ’
of**فَعَلنَ** i.e. conjugation number 6 of the past-tense table, whereas
the emphatic tables are**مبني**   in their entirety due to the ‘**ن** ’
of emphasis being a particle and particles do not give way to last
letter change.

The 20% of أسماء that are مبن<p dir="rtl">
ي
</p>
------------------------------

From the perspective of**أعراب** and**بناء** , the ‘**إسم** ’ is
classified into two categories:

**أسم مُتَمَكِّن** :**أسماء** that do not resemble**مبني الأصل** and are
therefore**معرب** . This category comprises of the vast majority
of**أسماء** (about 80%), divided into 16 types to be discussed at a
later time.  Grammatical state in them will be reflected on the last
letter as mentioned previously.  This reflection can be via ‘**حركات** ’
i.e. short vowels;**ضمّة** ,**فتحة** and**كسرة** , and also by means of
letters such as long vowels (**ا** , و and ى).  It may be explicit or
assumed.  For the most part, there will be a full separate reflection
for each grammatical state.  Occasionally, there will be just two
reflections for all three of the states**أسماء** enter.  From this we
see that**رفع** does not necessarily mean**ضمّة** , nor does**نصب**
or**جر** mean**فتحة** and**كسرة** . **رفع** ,**نصب** and**جر** are the
states and**ضمّة** ,**فتحة** and**كسرة** are just one method of their
reflection.  There may be others.  In human beings happiness is usually
reflected by smiles, but it doesn’t have to be like that.  Sometimes
it’s through tears.  In animals happiness is reflected by tail-wagging
for instance ….  In total for**معرب** **أسماء** (the 16 types of**أسم
مُتَمَكِّن** ), there are nine methods of reflection.  These will be
covered in detail once we are done explaining the**مبني** nouns, insha
Allah.

**أسم غير مُتَمَكِّن** :**أسماء** that do resemble**مبني الأصل** and are
therefore**مبني** . **مبني** nouns are 8 types.  Under each are just a
few**أسماء** .  Together they account for less then 20% of**أسماء** .

The eight categories are listed below.

**ضما** ﺋﺮ or**مضمرات**    : Personal Pronouns.

**الأسماء الموصولة** **     ** : Relative Pronouns.

**الأسماء الإشارة** **         ** : Demonstrative Pronouns.

**أسماء الأفعاال** **          ** : Nouns in the meaning of verbs!

**أسماء الضُروف** **         ** :**أسماء** ** ** which indicate on time
or place (type of Adverb).

**أسماء الأصوات** **        ** : Words which are used to refer to sounds
or noises.

**مركَّب بناء** **    ** : A small group of words which were originally
phrases, namely the numbers from eleven to nineteen.

**كِنايات**          : Words that refer to vagueness in speech or number
etc. (Like ‘so many’ in English.)

### Personal Pronouns - ضماﺋﺮ

###

Pronouns in Arabic are much more than what we have in English.  To fully
understand all the groupings of Arabic Pronouns, contrasting them with
their English counter-parts will be helpful.  In English, primarily we
have three groups of pronouns: nominative, accusative and genitive.
They are listed below:

Nominative: he, she, they, you, I and we

Accusative: him, her, them, you, me and us

Genitive: his, her, their, your, my and our

Note that in the plural third person (they), gender is irrelevant,
meaning the same pronoun is used for feminine and masculine, while in
the second person both gender AND plurality are not considered.
Likewise, the singular feminine third person (her) is used twice in
accusative as well as genitive.  So basically the total number of
pronouns in English is only 18 and after dropping the ones which are
used twice 16.

In Arabic, the total number is very high at 84: six groupings, each of
which has a full 14 pronouns.  To understand the significance of the
number 14 here, recall what we mentioned when explaining the conjugation
tables.  Six groupings is because in addition to the three groupings
mentioned above Arabic also has governing agents.  If a pronoun is said
to be in**رفع** due to being subject for instance, there must be
something to cause the**رفع** preceding the pronoun, which in this case
would be the verb.  Thus the verb in**نحو** is called the ‘**عامل** ’
(governing agent).  This will happen in all three of the states**أسماء**
enter into;**رفع** ,**نصب** and**جر** .  Now the pronoun may be attached
(**مُتَّصل** ) to the agent and both written as ONE WORD, or the agent
could be a separate word and the pronoun written by itself (**مُنفَصل**
).  In each case the pronoun will look different.  For**جر** there is
no**مُنفَصل** , because the agents of**جر** are just two, namely
prepositions and**مضاف** , which puts the**مضاف إليه** in the state
of**جر** .  Both agents REQUIRE that the pronoun after them be
attached.  This leaves us with a total of five groups.  Then because
the**مجرور** one can have only two agents, it is mentioned twice, thus
making the number of groupings six (with 14 under each):

**مرفوع متّصل**   : Nominative pronoun attached to its agent e.g.
the**ت** ُ in**ضَرَبتُ** (I hit).

**مرفوع منفصل**             : Nominative pronoun separate from its
agent.**هُو** َ which means ‘he’.

**منصوب متّصل**            : Accusative pronoun attached to its agent
e.g. the**ﻪُ** in**رَأيتُهُ** (I saw ‘him’)

**منصوب منفصل**          : Accusative pronoun separate from its agent
e.g.**إيّاكَ** (you alone).

**مجرور متّصل** with**حرف جر**    : Genitive pronoun attached to
preposition e.g. the**ﻪُ** in**لَهُ** (for him).

**مجرور متّصل** with**مضاف**       : Genitive pronoun attached
to**مضاف** e.g. the**هُ** in**دارُهُ** (his house).

All of these 84 pronouns are**مبني** due to their dependency upon
nouns.  In order to be used in speech, third person pronouns need to be
preceded by nouns and so forth.  Dependency is a characteristic of
particles: one of the three**مبني الأصل** .

The following is a full table of all the**ضَماﺋﺮ** discussed in this
section:

<p dir="rtl">
**مجرور متّصِل**
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
**منصوب**
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
**مرفوع**
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
**صيغة**
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
بِمضاف
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
بِحرف جر
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
منفصل
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
متّصِل
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
مُنفَصِل
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
متّصِل
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
مضارع
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ماض<p dir="rtl">
ي
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
دارُ<p dir="rtl">
هُ
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لَ<p dir="rtl">
هُ
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إيّا<p dir="rtl">
هُ
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
هُ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
هُوَ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
يَضرِبُ (هو )
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ضَرَبَ (هو )
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
واحد مذكر غاﺋﺐ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
دارُ<p dir="rtl">
هُما
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لَ<p dir="rtl">
هُما
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إيّا<p dir="rtl">
هُما
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
هُما
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
هُما
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
يَضرِبا نِ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ضَرَبا
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تثنية مذكر غاﺋﺐ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
دارُ<p dir="rtl">
هُم
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لَ<p dir="rtl">
هُم
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إيّا<p dir="rtl">
هُم
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
هُم
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
هُم
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
يَضرِبُو نَ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ضَرَبُو ا
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
جمع مذكر غاﺋﺐ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
دارُ<p dir="rtl">
ها
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لَ<p dir="rtl">
ها
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إيّا<p dir="rtl">
ها
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ها
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
هِيَ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تَضرِبُ (هي )
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ضَرَبَتْ (هي )
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
واحد مؤنث غاﺋﺐ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
دارُ<p dir="rtl">
هُما
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لَ<p dir="rtl">
هُما
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إيّا<p dir="rtl">
هُما
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
هُما
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
هُما
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تَضرِبا نِ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ضَرَبَتا
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تثنية مؤنث غاﺋﺐ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
دارُ<p dir="rtl">
هُنَّ
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لَ<p dir="rtl">
هُنَّ
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إيّا<p dir="rtl">
هُنَّ
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
هُنَّ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
هُنَّ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
يَضرِبنَ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ضَرَبْنَ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
جمع مؤنث غاﺋﺐ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
دارُ<p dir="rtl">
كَ
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لَ<p dir="rtl">
كَ
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إيّا<p dir="rtl">
كَ
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
كَ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أنتَ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تَضرِبُ (هو )
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ضَرَبْتَ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
واحد مذكر حاضر
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
دارُ<p dir="rtl">
كُما
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لَ<p dir="rtl">
كُما
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إيّا<p dir="rtl">
كُما
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
كُما
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أنتُما
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تَضرِبا نِ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ضَرَبْتُما
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تثنية مذكر حاضر
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
دارُ<p dir="rtl">
كُم
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لَ<p dir="rtl">
كُم
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إيّا<p dir="rtl">
كُم
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
كُم
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أنتُم
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تَضرِبُو نَ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ضَرَبْتُمْ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
جمع مذكر حاضر
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
دارُ<p dir="rtl">
كِ
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لَ<p dir="rtl">
كِ
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إيّا<p dir="rtl">
كِ
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
كِ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أنتِ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تَضرِﺑِﻴ ﻦَ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ضَرَبْتِ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
واحد مؤنث حاضر
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
دارُ<p dir="rtl">
كُما
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لَ<p dir="rtl">
كُما
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إيّا<p dir="rtl">
كُما
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
كُما
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أنتُما
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تَضرِبا نِ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ضَرَبْتُما
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تثنية مؤنث حاضر
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
دارُ<p dir="rtl">
كُنَّ
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لَ<p dir="rtl">
كُنَّ
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إيّا<p dir="rtl">
كُنَّ
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
كُنَّ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أنتُنَّ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تَضرِبنَ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ضَرَبْتُنَّ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
جمع مؤنث حاضر
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
دارِيَ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لِ<p dir="rtl">
ي
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إيّايَ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ي
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أ<p dir="rtl">
نا
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أضرِبُ (أنا )
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ضَرَبْتُ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
واحد متكلم
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
دارُ<p dir="rtl">
نا
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لَ<p dir="rtl">
نا
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إيّا<p dir="rtl">
نا
</p>
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
نا
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
نَحنُ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
نَضرِبُ (نحن )
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ضَرَبْنَا
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
جمع متكلم
</p>

Table Error! No text of specified style in document. -B - Personal
Pronouns

### Relative Pronouns - الأسماء الموصولة

###

In order to fully understand what relative pronouns are, one needs to be
informed about the**موصوف- صفة** phrase which in Arabic grammar is the
noun-adjective phrase, an expression of usually two**أسماء** in which
the second**إسم** describes the first.

e.g. **رَجُلٌ** **كَرِيمٌ** (a noble man), or

**الرَّجُلُ** **الكَرِيمُ** (the noble man)

From the aspects in which the**موصوف** and**صفة** have to correspond, is
being**معرفه** or**نكره** (definite or indefinite).  In most cases both
words are**أسماء** and correspondence is fairly simple.  Adding ‘ال’ to
both words will make it ‘the noble man’ whereas keeping both words empty
will leave it ‘a noble man’.  However, occasionally the need arises to
describe a noun using a whole sentence.  Take for instance the phrase ‘a
man who I met yesterday’.  ‘I met yesterday’ is a full sentence.  It was
used in the above example to describe the indefinite noun ‘a man’.

The scholars of**نحو** have attached a value to the informative sentence
(**جملة** **خبرية** ) and have told us it’s ‘**نكره** ’.  Therefore, if
the above example were to be rendered into Arabic it would read as
follows:**رَجُلٌ** **لَقِيتُهُ** **أمسِ** .  No extra word is needed
between the noun being described i.e. the**موصوف** ‘**رَجُلٌ** ’ and the
sentence**لَقِيتُهُ** **أمسِ** , for they are both**نكره** and
correspondence is complete.  On the other hand, were the**موصوف** to
be**معرفه** , we would have had a problem of matching the two.  To
convey the meaning ‘the man who I met yesterday’, merely adding an ‘ال’
to the**موصوف** would not suffice.  We would be left with a**معرف**
**موصوف** (**الرَّجُلُ** ) and a**نكره صفة** (the**جملة** **خبرية** ).
The only way this meaning could be validly conveyed is if somehow that
value attached to the**جملة** **خبرية** could be transformed into
a**معرفه** value.  This is where the**مَوصول** comes into play….

**الأسماء الموصولة** or Relative Pronouns are like which, what, that, or
who in English, not the question which, what etc. but the pronouns
‘which’ come between nouns and the sentences ‘that’ describe them.  Read
that again!  “pronouns ‘which’ come between nouns” and “the sentences
‘that’ describe them”.  In English these pronouns MUST be brought in
every such structure.  In Arabic they are brought ONLY when the**موصوف**
is**معرفه** .  If it is**نكره** , there will be no need for a**مَوصول**
, in which case the grammatical structure itself will join the sentence
to the noun being described.

This is the primary purpose why we have these words in the language.  If
the noun being described is of a very general meaning such as man,
woman, thing etc, often the noun is not mentioned.  The**مَوصول** itself
will convey the entire meaning, such as in the following sentence:

**جاء الّذي علَّمَكَ في المسجدِ** (The person who taught you in the
masjid came).

In this sentence the**مَوصول** ‘**الّذي** ’ not only means ‘who’ but
actually ‘the person who’.

The sentence which follows the**مَوصول** i.e. the describing**جملة**
**خبرية** is called**صِله** . Together with the**مَوصول** , both parts
become**صفة** for the preceding noun, or if the noun is of a general
nature and implicit as mentioned above, the**مَوصول** and**صِله**
together will directly become part of the greater sentence.  Within
the**صِله** there MUST be a third person pronoun referring back to
the**مَوصول** .  This pronoun will always correspond to the**مَوصول** in
gender and plurality.  In the above example the implicit pronoun**هو**
hidden in the verb**عَلَّم** َ is referring to**الّذي** the**مَوصول** .

Besides**الّذي** and its dual, plural, and feminine variations, the
following relative pronouns are in use:

**مَنْ** - the person who…

**ما** - the thing that….  Both**مَنْ** and**ما** have no duals our
plurals.  The same word is essentially used for all gender and
plurality.  ‘**مَنْ** ’ is for human beings while ‘**ما** ’ is for
non-humans.

**أيٌّ** **,** **أيَّةٌ** -which….  Both**موصولان** will always
be**مضاف** to the**أسماء** after them.  The second word of the
possessive phrase may be singular or plural e.g. **أيُّ** **كِتابٍ**
(which book) and,    **أيُّ** **الكُتُبِ** (which of the books).  Both
meanings are almost identical.  Just two ways of saying the same
thing. **أيٌّ** and**أيَّةٌ** are both**معرب** and there grammatical
state will be subject to the governing agent before them similar to
normal إسمs.

The ‘**ال** ’ which is attached to the active and passive participles
(**إسم** **فاعل** and**إسم** **مفعول** ) is also considered to
be**مَوصول** and in the meaning of**الّذي** .  Hence,**الضارِبُ** would
mean**الّذي ضَرَبَ** (one who hits).  Likewise,**المَضروبُ** is akin
to**الّذي ضُرِبَ** (one who is hit).  In other words the ‘**ال** ’ at
the beginning of both literally means ‘one who’.

**ذُو** in the dialect of the clan of**بَن طَي** - also in the meaning
of**الّذي** according to this particular tribe of Arabs e.g.**جاﺋﲎ ذُو
ضَرَبَكَ** (the man who hit you came to me).

Except for**أيٌّ** ,**أيَّةٌ** , and the duals of**الّذي** and**الّتي**
, all**مَوصول** are**مبني** due to there dependency upon the**صله** .
You will never encounter a**مَوصول** except with its**صله** .  As
mentioned repeatedly, dependency is a characteristic of**حرف** **:** one
from the**مبني الأصل** .

### Demonstrative Pronouns -   الأسماء الإشارة

###

Descriptive Pronouns (this/that) are devices used to refer or point
towards nouns.  While the pronoun in Arabic is called**إسم إشاره** , the
noun is known as**مُشارٌ إليه** .  In the phrase**ذٰلِكَ الكِتابُ**
(that book),**ذٰلِكَ** is the**إسم إشاره** and**الكِتابُ** is
the**مُشارٌ إليه** .  The pronoun coupled with the noun will always be a
phrase.  However, there are instances when the noun being referred to is
of a very general nature such as thing, man, or woman, in which case the
pronoun itself will convey both meanings i.e.**هٰذا** can mean ‘this
thing’ or ‘this person’ as apposed to just ‘this’.  When this happens
the following word will be the remaining part of the sentence (the
predicate).  In order to determine whether the following word is
connected to**هٰذا** and forming the second part of the descriptive
phrase or whether**هٰذا** is independent of a separate ‘**مُشارٌ إليه**
and conveying the entire meaning itself as mentioned above, one will
need to look at the next word.  If it begins with an ‘**ال** ’, the two
words will become a descriptive phrase (this book), otherwise a full
sentence.  When the**مُشارٌ إليه** can not take ‘**ال** ’ do to
being**مضاف** and a descriptive phrase is intended, such as ‘this book
of his’, in order to avoid confusion with the**إسميّه** sentence,
the**إسم إشاره** will be brought after the possessive phrase.  Consider
the following three ways of using this device:

1.**هٰذا الكِتابُ** : this book

2. **هٰذا كِتابٌ** : This is a book.

3.**كِتابُهُ** **هٰذا** : this book of his

### Verbal Nouns - أسماء الأفعال

###

These are a group of words in the language which are very few in
number.  They have the meanings of verbs, meaning that their meanings
are linked to time.  They have tenses.  However, besides the tense, they
have no other characteristic of verbs such as conjugation tables and
suffixes.  They do not fall under any recognized pattern of verb.  They
come in two types; a group that has a past tense meaning e.g.**هَيهاتَ**
(became distant), and a group consisting of words that have command-verb
meanings e.g.**رُوَيدَ** (give respite), the first being identical
to**بَعُدَ** (a past-tense verb), and the second to ‘**أمهِل** ’ (a
second person active command verb).

Although these words do have the meanings of**أفعال** due to the absence
of all other characteristics of recognized verbs, they were not
categorized as such.  The other two parts of speech also do not apply,
but because there number is so less in the Arabic language, the scholars
of grammar did not see it appropriate to give them a separate category
and call them the fourth part of speech.  Instead they said these
are**مبني** **أسماء** which contain the meaning of verbs, treating this
tense as a ‘resemblance’ to verb, hence their**مبني** nature.  Recall
both ماضي and**أمر حاضر** are**مبني الأصل** .

### Adverbs of Time or Place - أسماء الضروف

###

### Words Denoting Sounds or Noises - أسماء الأصوات

###

These are essentially sounds rendered into words e.g.**أُح أُح** , a
coughing sound.  They are all**مبني** due to sounds not having true
grammatical positioning, in terms of being subject, object etc.

### Numbers 11-19 - مركّب بناء

###

### Words denoting vagueness - كنايات

###
