Appendix A - Expressiveness of the Arabic Language
==================================================

Ibn Khalidun, may Allah elevate his rank, wrote in his
magnificent**مُقَدِّمَه** regarding the Arabic language and its
superiority over all other languages.  He said,**رَحِمُهُ الله** , it is
because in Arabic even “non-words” i.e. vowel sounds and patterns carry
meaning.  In other languages, to convey these ‘non-word’ meanings whole
words need to be used.  He said that is why we see massive difference in
length when some Arabic passage is translated into a non-Arabic
language.  The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said,

“Speech has been made comprehensive for me”.

Basically we have three distinct sources for meanings, only one of which
is because of the words themselves:

A meaning originating from the base letters of a word i.e. wherever and
in whichever pattern those letters are found, the base letter meaning
will be present e.g. the base letters ‘kaf, taa, and baa’ express the
meaning of writing.  Wherever these letters are found, the ‘base letter
meaning’ of writing will be there.  In Arabic almost all combinations of
three consonants have meaning.  It is the job of the dictionary to give
us this base letter meaning.

A meaning coming from the pattern.  The letters themselves are all
consonants.  Consonants alone can not be pronounced.  For instance, try
pronouncing the letter ‘b’ without adding a vowel to it!  The moment a
sound comes out, one realizes it’s either ‘ba’, ‘be’ or the like which
has been pronounced, not just the letter ‘b’ by itself.  The reality is
all consonants need to be coupled with vowels in order to become
syllables and thus pronounceable.  This is the nature of human
utterance.  By definition, a syllable is the sound produced by coupling
a consonant with a vowel.  This is nothing more than a manifestation of
human limitations.  In other languages, this ‘vowelling’ which arose out
of pure necessity is mostly random and carries little significance.
However, in Arabic it is this very vowelling which Ibn Khaldun is
calling our second meaning, namely the ‘pattern meaning’.  ‘**ك** ’,
‘**ت** , and ‘**ب** ’ we said expresses the meaning of ‘to write’.  In
Arabic there are literally dozens, if not hundreds of ways to vowel
those three letters, some of which include the addition of ‘non-base’
letters.  All of these patterns carry distinct meaning.  Now, depending
on the particular pattern, the base-letter meaning of writing will be
expressed in a unique way.  For instance,**كَتَبَ** (he
wrote),**كُتِبَ** (it was written),**يَكتُبُ** (he writes, is writing or
will write),**كاتِب** (writer),**مَكتَب** (desk i.e. place of
writing),**أُكتُب** (write!) and many, many others.  Also recall that we
said the subjects of all of these verbs i.e. the pronouns are not
separate words but letters.  The recognition of these patterns and
designated letters which come at the end of the verbs to reflect the
pronouns is the subject matter of**صرف** (Arabic Morphology).

As for the third and final meaning, which is also a ‘non-word’ meaning,
we refer back to the first section of this discussion i.e. introducing
grammatical states.  Recall that grammatical structure in Arabic is
reflected by change in the last letter.  It is from the ending of a
given word that we determine whether that word is being used in the
sentence as a subject of the verb, an object, or whether the word is in
the possessive case.  It is**نحو** which deals with all the
technicalities of grammatical meaning.

In summary, we may say the most basic meaning originates from the given
three base letters of a word.  These three letters then need to be
arranged with vowels in order to be pronounced.  In most languages this
vowelling carries little if any meaning.  In Arabic whole distinct
meanings such as tenses and the gender, plurality and person of pronouns
is conveyed via these vowels and letters.  When the individual words are
constructed, they need to be used in sentences, because people do not
speak in words.  They speak in sentences.  Sentence structure is
reflected again, not by separate words (like in other languages), but by
vowels or letters!  This is our third meaning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] See Appendix A for a discussion of how meanings are conveyed in the
Arabic language, with reference to Ibn Khaldun and the Prophet (pbuh).
