[Main Section]
==============

Some writers, we find, on glancing over their works, place this
prophet - called Zoraster sometimes, and more lately Zarathushtra (and I
must ask the pardon of my Parsî brethren, as I may be committing the
most flagrant mispronunciations, for I am absolutely ignorant of the
Avestaic language) - as late as B.C. 610. That would make him about
contemporary with the Buddha and with Plato - a position resting on
Muhammadan authority, and, if ever seriously entertained by European
Orientalists, now at least entirely renounced. Dr. L. H. Mills - looked
upon as one of the greatest European authorities, who made the standard
translation of the Gãthãs and published with it the various other
authoritative translations - in dealing with this question of antiquity
relies on the evidence of language, a point on which I shall have
something to say a little later. He says that the Gãthãs are written in
a tongue which is evidently related to the Vaidik Sanskrit, the Gãthãs
being "long after the oldest Riks". [ *Zendavesta,* Introduction p 37.
Sacred Books of the East, xxxi]. Now the *Rig Veda* is put by him at the
preposterously late date of only 4,000 years before Christ; and basing
himself on that date he puts the Gãthãs at B.C. 1000, and possibly as
far back as 1500 B.C. So that we have got from 610 B.C. to 1000 B.C. or
even 1500 B.C. as our first backward step. But Dr. Mills says that they
may be much older - as, in truth, they are. In his later work, writing
in 1890, he says: "I have ceased to resist the conviction that the
latter limit [B.C. 1500] may be put further back.

If they antedate the worship of Mithra . there is no telling how old
they may be. The decision of criticism is to refrain from conjectures
too closely limiting their age." [*A Study of the Five Zarathushrian (
Zorastrian) Gãthãs,* with Pahlavi translation. Narosangh’s Sanskrit Text
and the Persian text translated, and a commentary. Introduction, pp xix,
xx].

Then we come to the view taken by the German savant, Dr. Haug, and we
find that he contends for a greater antiquity, basing himself on the
destruction of the library of Persepolis by Alexander, in 329 B.C. He
argues that, in order that such a vast library, such a mass of
literature, should have been gathered together, you must assume a
greater antiquity, to give the mere time necessary for the writing and
the gathering of the books. The writing was completed, he thinks, about
400 B.C. It is not possible, he says, at the very latest, to put the
time of Zoroaster after 1000 B.C., and he regards 2800 B.C. as a more
likely date, while he may be very much older. [*Essays on the Parsis,*
by Martin Haug, Ph.D, Trüb’s Oriental Series, p 136]. Dr. Haug further
remarks: "Under no circumstances can we assign him a later date than
B.C. 1000, and one may even find reasons for placing his era much
earlier and making him a contemporary of Moses. Pliny, who compares both
Moses and Zoroaster, whom he calls inventors of two different kinds of
magic rites, goes much farther and states that Zoroaster lived several
thousand years before Moses". [ *Ibid.* p 299].

So we are gradually getting backwards, from 610 B.C. to 1500 B. C. from
1500 B.C. to 2800 B.C and possibly very much earlier may be the first
proclamation of the famous truths by the Prophet. Greek testimony,
however, which is available - and it is valuable as being much more
ancient than the views of our modern Orientalists - throws the date,
once more,. very much further back. Aristotle, for instance, places the
date of the Prophet at 9600 B.C., putting it 6,000 years before the time
of Plato, and we may say generally that this is the view which is taken
by the Greek historians. Somewhere about 9,000 years before the
Christian era would be the date assigned by them to the teachings of the
Prophet. [*Essays on the Parsis,* by Martin Haug, Ph.D, Trüb’s Oriental
Series, p 298]. The discoveries now being made by European
Archaeologists are very much helping the contention which pushes the
beginnings of the religion further and further back; for inasmuch as we
have to connect this Zarathushtrian tradition with the tradition of
Chaldea, with the tradition of Nineveh, and of Babylonia, the late
researches in those districts throw some light upon the question. You
may remember that only a month or two ago in *Lucifer* , in a comment on
an article by H. P. Blavatsky, I mentioned some of the very latest
discoveries which are being made in the country over which this religion
once ruled unchallenged. We find there the history of that land,
preserved in cuneiform writing, traced back to at least 7,000 years
before Christ, and probably, the discoverer says, to 8000 B.C. This
cuneiform writing is now under process of translation, and it is
possible that when that translation is published, evidence, which even
European science will accept, may be available, corroborative of the
antiquity of the religion of Zoroaster.

Occultism, in any case, throws the beginnings of His teachings far far
back, age after age behind all these dates. Occultists have two kinds of
records on which they rely. First, the great Brotherhood has preserved
the ancient writings - the writings themselves, taken away at the time
when they were written; these writings are stored in underground
temples, underground libraries, where no enemy can find them and where
no injury can touch them. There, millennium after millennium, the
knowledge of the world is gathered in its written form, and there are
people to-day, men and women to-day, who have been permitted to set eyes
on many of these ancient writings - writings, the very knowledge of
which has passed from the world of profane history, writings in the
ancient sacerdotal language, different from anything which the most
ancient of the races now knows. That is not the only record on which the
Occultist depends: he depends also on those imperishable records
written, as we sometimes say, in the Ãkãsha itself ; meaning by that
that there is a subtle medium which, to use a physical analogy, records
like a sensitive plate every event that happens, even in its minutest
details - the photograph, as it were, of the evolution of man, correct
down to the very tiniest incident, and which at any time may be referred
to, at any moment may be read, by those who train themselves for the
study, who are willing to undergo the discipline necessary for such a
research. Thus the record can be verified by each successive inquirer;
we have the testimony of expert after expert who studies these most
ancient records, and who sees not mere written characters but the events
of the past, moving in living accuracy before him, moving as they
occurred, instinct with life. The events of the history behind us thus
live in the past of time.

According to those records, this religion which in modern days is called
Zoroastrianism, the religion of the Parsîs, is, as I said, the second of
the religions of the Ãryan stock. The Iranians - coming forth from the
same cradle-land as the first family, but spreading westwards over that
vast extent of territory which includes not only modern Persia but the
realm of ancient Persia - were led in their first migration thither by
their great Prophet Zoroaster, who held to them the same position that
Manu held to the whole original Ãryan race. He belonged to the same
mighty Brotherhood, and was a high Initiate of the same great Lodge,
taught by the same Teachers, the Sons of the Fire. Many of you will have
read in those most ancient records from the Book of Dzyan, given in the
*Secret* *Doctrine,* [ *Op.cit.* by H P. Blavatsky, i, Stanza iv, I]. of
the Sons of the Fire, who were the Instructors of all the great
Initiates, called in Their turn, the Lords of the Flame. He came as a
teacher at the beginning of this Iranian sub-race, to give them the
ancient truths in a form fitted for a civilization that was to grow up
amongst them; in a form fitted for the type of mind which was to develop
amongst them, suited to train, to evolve, to develop them, just as other
faiths were given to other peoples with the same object and on similar
lines. From that mighty Teacher - whose date runs backward to a time at
which every Orientalist would laugh in scorn - from Him came down a line
of prophets that superintended the earlier development of the Iranian
people. And here let me remind you that, when we are speaking of such a
line of prophets, it by no means follows that each prophet is a separate
individual, for the same soul often re-incarnates time after time in the
same office, as you know well enough from your own ancient records. Such
men as, say, Veda Vyãsa, had not one birth only upon earth but many
births, for those men are always living in touch with earth, They are
always superintending the spiritual evolution of mankind, and They come
forth from time to time, from age to age, manifesting in a body of the
time at which They appear, the same great Teacher, the same liberated
Soul, the same mighty Instructor, over and over again taking the same
name, as though to suggest the spiritual identity to the deaf ears of
men. And tracing down this line of prophets, or this Prophet, we begin
to see where the Greek tradition comes in, and we understand that the
Zoroaster spoken of by Aristotle 9,600 years before what we call the
time of Christ (dated of course by him from Plato, not from Christ) was
seventh of this name from the original Zoroaster, and not the first
Zoroaster as the Greeks supposed, and as I imagine too often many of the
modern Parsîs are willing to believe. He then was seventh in the line of
teachers who came to revive and reinforce the teaching when it was
sinking downward and was menaced with overthrow. Still later than that
there was another Zoroaster, about the year 4000 before Christ, who
again revived

the ancient teaching, again repeated the essential truths, giving them
forth again with divine authority, and by means of that sacred fire
which is the symbol of Deity, and which is in truth the voice of Deity.
As we study this succession of prophets we see that from this ancient
religion came what is called the " great science," the " Magic " of the
Chaldees. We understand that the Magi of antiquity were teachers and
priests of this same ancient faith, and - if, for a moment, I may
startle the modern mind - that when more than 20,000 years ago the
Chaldean sage stood on the roof of his observatory and marked and
recorded the passage of the stars, that man was one of the comparatively
modern descendants of the long line of the Magi, one of the
comparatively modern representatives of the ancient lore of the
Zoroastrian faith.

Let us, then, go backward and look at the teaching in the light of its
earlier form, even although we have only its later recensions so far as
scholarship is concerned ; and we shall find that even in its later
recensions the ancient truths are recognizable though hidden; and that
though many of these truths have been distorted in the modern form, have
been materialized, have been degraded, still the occultist may recognize
them; still he may point them out to those who follow this ancient
religion, and may pray the modern Parsîs, in the name of their ancient
Prophet, the divine Initiate who founded their faith, to rise above
modern materialism, to rise above the too petty limits of modern
Orientalism, and to claim their rightful dignity as one of the most
ancient of the world's religions. Let them link themselves to the
immemorial occult tradition, and not degrade themselves by accepting
every passing suggestion of European scholarship.

Let it be remembered, as we shall find proved by language presently,
that these ancient Iranians were Ãryan and not Semitic. That is one of
the points on which dispute has arisen, and in a moment I will show you
how the language bears out the occult contention. We admit, of course,
in much later days a Semitic intermixture. But the Iranians came from
the Ãryan stock, and are really a sister race of the Ãryans south of the
Himalayas.

The first Zoroaster, in teaching again the essential principles which
are the foundation of every faith, and in each faith are apt to be
overlaid by later accretions, blended philosophy and religion in a
remarkable way. Coming to found a civilization which had its own
peculiar features, which was essentially agricultural in its character,
which was permeated through and through with the idea of the practical
side of life, which was intended to train men practically in a noble
faith and sublime morality, He did not give a metaphysical philosophy
and an exoteric religion, linking the two together. But He interblended
the two, so that it is well-nigh impossible to give an account of each
separately. A better idea of the whole is obtained by following His
method, and by studying the philosophy and the religion as a single
system. Having foresight of the special civilization that was to grow
up, He gave an immense amount of astronomical science interwoven with
the philosophy and the religious teaching, and He gave that astronomical
science - so necessary for people engaged in agriculture - in its occult
form, and not in its poor dwarfed modern presentation. To Him the stars
were not mere masses of matter, revolving by blind unconscious laws
around dead unconscious suns. To Him the planets around the sun, and the
mighty stars in the highest heavens, were but the bodies of spiritual
Intelligences, whose will was their guiding law and whose knowledge
ensured the stability of the universe. He taught astronomy not as of
dead matter and soulless energy, but as of living Intelligences, moving
in changeless order, because guided by perfect wisdom and unswerving
will. He taught astronomy as the living occult science of spiritual
wisdom, expressed in the material universe, the lowest form of its
expression. Out of the teaching of religious philosophy and of science
there grew up the ethic which down to the present day is the glory of
the Zoroastrian creed. A perfect practical purity is the key-note of
that morality, purity in every action of the personal life, purity in
every relation to external nature, honouring external elements as the
manifestations of the divine purity, guarding, as it were, their
spotless cleanliness as a homage to the Life wherefrom the whole
proceeds. We shall find as we go on that these are the salient points of
His teachings, but ere I take them up one by one I must glance at this
question of the language, for we need to understand that question to
some extent if we are to trace the teachings through the different books
that at present are in our hands.

I have said that the language in its oldest form, the language of the
*Avesta* , justifies the occult statement of the antiquity of the
Zoroastrian faith; for by the testimony - and I am quite willing to take
it when it supports the occult view - by the testimony of European
Orientalists, this Avestaic language, even as it is to-day in the latest
recensions, is an Âryan dialect and is allied to the Sanskrit of the
Vedas. There is not time, and it would be a little outside the subject,
to say anything of the changes which you will know occurred in the
development of Sanskrit in this country, the changes which are
noticeable between the Sanskrit of the Vedas and the classical Sanskrit
of later days; but the*Avesta* is allied to the early, to the Vaidik
Sanskrit [Essays on the Parsîs, p 70], and that Sanskrit, as our German
doctor tells us, is an elder sister of the Avestaic language. [Ibid p
40]. Not only is this similarity clearly and distinctly marked in the
words that are used, but the similarity goes far beyond the words
themselves. These ancient Gãthãs, or hymns, are written in metres that
are closely allied to the metres of the *Sãma Veda* Their rhythm, their
feet, the evident method of their chanting, is a very close ally of the
rhythm, of the feet, of the chanting, which still exist amongst the
Hindus. So that we find on looking at them that this mark of antiquity
is upon them, and as we throw back, despite the Orientalists, the
antiquity of the Vedas, the antiquity of Hinduism, we carry back also
with us the antiquity of the Zoroastrian faith, linking the two together
in our defence as they were linked together in their earlier days in the
far past of the two great peoples. So again, if I may for a moment take
the occult record, the chants are the same. Those wonderful chants of
the ancient world, which have their results in the invisible, those
chants that control the lower intelligences and that rise up to the
higher in the language of colour and of music - these Gãthãs were
chanted in that same archaic svara, and though lost by the priests of
modern Zoroastrianism, the echoes are still recoverable from the Âkãshic
records. Turning now - for the survey is necessarily hasty - from the
language of the *Avesta* to that much contested word "Zend," which some
say is a language while others say it is a commentary - how far does
European scholarship throw light upon the question? They say, some of
them - and here I fear modern Parsîs tend to agree with them - that Zend
is nothing more than a modern Pahlavi translation and commentary on the
ancient writings. The word is certainly constantly applied simply to
that translation, made under the Sasanian dynasty in comparatively
modern times. But I am glad to see that some European scholarship
rejects that contention, and declares that the Zend is the original
commentary written in the language of the *Avesta* , and is therefore
thrown back again to the ancient times, to the times of the language
allied to the Sanskrit of the Vedas, Dr. Haug says that from the " use
of the denomination Avesta and Zend by the Pahlavi translators, we are
fully entitled to conclude that the Zend they mentioned was a commentary
on the Avesta already existing before they undertook their translation;
and as they considered it sacred, this Zend was probably in the same
language as the original Avesta . Originally it (Zend) meant the
commentaries made by the successors of Zarathushtra upon the sacred
writings of the prophet and his immediate disciples. These commentaries
must have been written in nearly the same language as the original text,
and as that language gradually became unintelligible to all but the
priests, the commentaries were regarded as part of the text, and a new
explanation, or Zend, was required. This new Zend was furnished by the
most learned priests of the Sasanian period, in the shape of a
translation into Pahlavi, the vernacular language of Persia in those
days; and in later times the term Zend has been confined to this
translation". [Essays on the Parsîs, pp 120, 122]. The contention that
Zend was a commentary is to a large extent shown to be true, if once
more we turn to the occult testimony instead of to the testimony of
modern scholarship. For we find, and here we may take the evidence of H.
P. Blavatsky - who was writing of that which was within her own
knowledge from her own study under the Teacher, under her Guru - that
this commentary, the original Zend of the Iranians, was a commentary
written in a language derived from that ancient sacerdotal language to
which I alluded in the beginning of this lecture. For there is a
language known to all occultists, not a language of letters, as letters
are understood in our modern tongues, but a language of signs, of
symbols, of colours, of sounds, which rings out in music as well as
shines in colour, and which takes its own forms, which every Initiate
can recognize and translate into the lower languages of the intellectual
world. It has sometimes been called the Zenzar. It has sometimes been
called the Deva-Bhãshã. H. P. Blavatsky says of Zend:

"It means, as in one sense correctly stated, ' a commentary or
explanation' ; but it also means that which the Orientalists do not seem
to have any idea about,*viz* ., the ‘rendering of the esoteric
sentences,' the veil used to conceal the correct meaning of the
Zend-d-zar texts, the sacerdotal language in use among the Initiates of
archaic India. Found now in several undecipherable inscriptions, it is
still used and studied to this day in the secret communities of the
eastern adepts, and called by them - according to the locality -
*Zend-zar* and *Brahma* or *Deva Bhãshã* . The Zend text is simply a
secret *code* of certain words and expressions agreed upon by the
original compilers, and the key to which is but with the Initiates". [
*The Theosophist* , IV article on Zoroastrianism, commencing on p 224].
Many names have been given to the language; names matter not, for they
vary with every tongue; but the essential thing is that such a language
exists, that it is known to-day as it was known a million years ago,
that people learn it now as they learnt it then, that occult instruction
is given in that language, and not in the clumsy sounds articulated by a
physical tongue, and that from that language truths are translated into
the most ancient intellectual tongues derived from it. The Vaidik
Sanskrit is the most ancient intellectual echo of that archaic language,
and the Zend of the Iranian has the same root, comes from the same
fount. Later on, when we come to the Pahlavi translations we find there
that we are within what is generally called historic time. " Pahlavi" is
now used only to denote " the written language of Persia during the
Sasanian dynasty, and to the literature of that period and a short time
after", [*Essays on the Parsis,* p 81. The Sasanian dynasty flourished
from A.D. 226 to A.D. 653, when it was swept away by the Muhammadans]
but in earlier times it was used generally for ancient Persian. Here we
have Semitic words, traces of the Semitic influence, and it is contended
that these run backwards to some 600 years before the time of Christ. [
*Ibid* p 81]. That matters not, for 600 years before the time of Christ
is a modern time for an occultist. He is dealing with millennia and not
with centuries, and this sign of Semitic influence in the later time has
absolutely no influence on his judgment as to the origin of the ancient
faith. We must pass from this question of language, which might well be
worked out at greater length and which leads to many other matters of
interest, to one other disputed point of importance, too much
overlooked. The Chaldean tradition, as it is preserved through the
Grecian nation, is of vital interest, although it be at present ignored,
as I understand, by the modern Zoroastrianism. This Chaldean tradition
which comes through Greece, may roughly be said to have arisen as
follows. In the time of Alexander it is admitted that there was a vast
library at Persepolis, but as you know he burned it either in
drunkenness or in revenge. Hence he is constantly called " the accursed
Alexander" in all the later writings belonging to the faith of
Zoroaster. Now, there is evidence that at the time of the burning there
were two complete sets of the whole Zoroastrian literature. One of these
sets was in the library and was burnt by this " accursed Alexander". The
other set was taken possession of by the Greek conquerors, and by them
was translated into Greek. Little of this survives, but fragments of it
remain in the*Nabathoean Agriculture* , in the quotations made from it
by Neo-Platonic writers, who speak of the*Oracles of Zoroaster* and of
the teachings of that Prophet. These traces of the ancient teaching,
preserved in the literature of the Greeks, strengthen and corroborate
the acknowledged Zoroastrian tradition. Why then should not this
assistance be accepted in the struggle to substantiate the antiquity of
the religion ? Why should not modern Pãrsîs take the evidence which
comes down to them through this other line, since the two lines are
found to blend into one? These fragments preserved by Greek authors,
borne witness to in the literature of the Greek nation, these fragments
still breathe the ancient spirit, and corroborate the teachings which
Zoroaster in the past has given.

Let us now turn to the literature itself, and consider our documents.
First comes the*Yasna* , of which the most ancient part consists of the
Gãthãs, the archaic hymns, the teachings which came from the mouth of
the great Prophet Himself. They are now five only in number, and, as
accepted in the present day, are mere fragments, but they are dignified,
sublime and grand, bearing testimony to the nobility of the ancient
teaching. These form the first part of the *Yasna* ', the second part
consists of prayers and ceremonies - prayers addressed to the supreme
Deity, prayers equally addressed to the mighty Ones who stand below Him,
forming the spiritual hierarchy. For ancient Zoroastrianism knew nothing
of that modern materialism which tries to place God at one pole of the
universe and man and his world at the other, with a mighty gap of bare
and empty space between them. In Zoroastrianism, as in every other
ancient faith, there was no gap in the universe, no empty space, no
place where there were not living Intelligences, no place where
spiritual beings were not working; from man near the base of the ladder
to the supreme God at its head, there were ranged Intelligences growing
higher and higher, diviner and diviner, and all these were objects of
adoration - a fact to which the whole literature of Zoroastrianism bears
testimony. After the *Yasna* , with its two parts, we have the
*Visparad* , a collection of invocations, of preparatory invocations to
be used before other prayers and sacrifices. These two, the *Yasna* and
the *Visparad* , may be regarded as holding the position in
Zoroastrianism that is held by the Vedas in Hinduism, Below these there
comes what was once a vast mass of literature of which only, alas! the
names for the most part survive. There is one book complete, and some
few fragments of the remainder, out of a list of twenty-one great
treatises, of which the contents, roughly outlined, are also on record -
the 21 Nasks, they are called. These deal with sciences of every kind,
with medicine, with astronomy, with agriculture, with botany, with
philosophy, with the whole range in fact of sciences and laws; they hold
the position held by the Vedãnga in Hinduism. I lay stress on these
analogies, because they so much strengthen our position as to the
antiquity and the dignity of this ancient faith. Of these only one book
survives in its entirety, the*Vendidad* , the book of laws affecting the
preservation of purity alike in external nature and in man. Next we have
the *Khordah* *Avesta* or little *Avesta* , consisting of Yashts
(invocations) and of prayers, for the use of the laity rather than of
the priests, many of them the prayers used daily by the modern Parsîs.
It is a mixed collection - some of the fragments very ancient, some of
comparatively recent date. After the burning of the library of
Persepolis came a period of five hundred and fifty years of anarchy and
tumult, and it was only at the close of this period that, under the
Sasanian monarchs, the surviving fragments of Zoroastrian literature
were gathered together. Little marvel that but fragments remained,
fragments of a once glorious whole, like pieces of mosaic rent from
their bed where they formed part of a great and intelligible picture.
Only those who can recover the picture can see where each fragment
fitted in, and can thus judge of the original beauty of the whole.

I have explained rather at length - considering the time at my
disposal - though very briefly in reality, these preliminary details,
because to most people they are almost unknown, and yet, unless they are
known, it is impossible to appreciate the weight of evidence by which
the antiquity of the philosophy and the religion themselves are
sustained. And we may also say that it is necessary to see where the
gaps in the evidence occur, to appreciate how much has been lost, how
fragmentary are the Scriptures remaining in our hands, and how imperfect
must therefore be any statement of the philosophy and the religion drawn
from them alone. Enough, however, remains, to substantiate the
proposition that Zoroastrianism is at one with occult teaching on all
important points, save one. In the Scriptures, as accepted by orthodox
Parsîs reincarnation is not found; it is taught in the fragments
preserved by the Greeks, and in the*Desatir* , a book containing much
occult truth, but none of these are regarded as authoritative.

Let us now turn to the philosophy and the religion themselves, and as
there has been, most unfortunately, a materialistic reaction, under
European influence, it is necessary to quote verse by verse from the
received Scriptures in order to establish the ancient occult teachings.

At the head of the manifested universe stands Ahurã-Mazdão, sometimes
translated as the living Wisdom, sometimes as the Lord of Wisdom,
sometimes as the Wise Lord. The cuneiform inscriptions have Aûramazdã,
the Sasanian Aûharmazda, and the modern Persian is Hôrmazd or Ormazd. [
*Essays on the Parsis,* p 302].

He is the Supreme, He the Universal, the All-pervasive, the Source and
the Fountain of Life; He, in the Zoroastrian religion, holds the same
position as the manifested Brahman of the Upanisads, who came forth at
the beginning, the One, the source of life to man. He is described over
and over again in the different Scriptures, not so fully in the Gãthãs -
though there also in part - as in some of the prayers and invocations.
Let us take two specimens to show what is the description given of this
mighty Being, in order that you may realize how sublime is the
conception, how lofty this idea of the primeval God. In the*Ormazd
Yasht* , He proclaims His own qualities, something the same way as Srî
Krishna does in the 10th Discourse in the *Bhagavad Gîtã* He proclaims
His names, the names which describe His attributes. He says: " I am the
Protector, I am the Creator, I am the Nourisher, I am the Knowing, I am
the Holiest Heavenly One. My name is the Healing . My name is God, My
name is Great, Wise One; My name is the Pure I am called the Majestic .
the Far-seeing I am called the Watcher . The Augmenter," and so on
through a list of seventy-two names. [ *Ormazd Yashr,* Trans from Prof
Spiegel by A H. Bleek]. Let us listen to the description of Him in the
words of the great Prophet Himself: " He, (Ahura-Mazda) first created,
through His inborn lustre, the multitude of celestial bodies, and
through His intellect the good creatures, governed by the inborn good
mind. Thou, Ahura-Mazda, the Spirit who art everlasting, makest them
(the good creatures) grow. When my eyes behold Thee, the Essence of
Truth, the Creator of life, who manifests His life in His works then I
know Thee to be the primeval Spirit, Thou, Mazda, so high in mind as to
create the world, and the father of the good mind". *[Gãthã Ahunavaitî,*
Trans by Dr Haug] Ahura-Mazdão is revealed as threefold, and we read in
the *Khordah Avesta* : "Praise to Thee, Ahura-Mazda, three-fold before
other creatures". [ *Op cit,* vii *Qarsêt Nyâyis* , I Spiegel]. Notice
this " three-fold " for it is of vital importance. It joins this
Zoroastrian conception of the First Being to the threefold or triple
Brahman who is so familiar to us in the Upanishads, and it also explains
His emanating two principles which exist in Him, and a third completing
the Trinity, two principles which too often have been placed as opposing
principles, making the Zoroastrian teaching essentially dualistic
instead of essentially monistic as it is. But before taking up that
point we must recognize that according to the ancient teaching there was
behind and beyond Ahura-Mazdão the One, the Unknowable, that Boundless
Time who by Orientalists in Europe is denied, knowing not the occult
teachings. They argue that the idea of Boundless Time, as the source of
Ahura-Mazdão is founded on a grammatical blunder, instead of its being,
as it is, an attempt to convey the occult truth of the One Existence,
unknowable to human faculties. But although they contest it, they admit
the antiquity of the teaching; they must admit that the testimony of
ancient days is at one with the occult teaching. If we take the Greek
evidence, it speaks with no uncertain voice as to what was taught,
Plutarch says: "Cromas-des [Ahura-Mazdão] sprang out of the purest
light", [ *Essays on the Parsis,* p 9] Damascius writes: "The Magi and
the whole Aryan nation consider, as Eudemos writes, some Space, and
others Time, as the universal cause, out of which the good god as well
as the evil spirit were separated, or, as others assert, light and
darkness, before these *two* *spirits arose* ". [ *Ibid,* p 12].
Theodoros speaks of " the nefarious doctrine of the Persians, which
Zoroastrades introduced, *viz* that about ZOROUAN, whom he makes the
ruler of the whole universe, and calls him Destiny; and who when
offering sacrifice in order to generate Hormisdas, produced both
Hormisdas and Satan". [ *Essays on the Parsis,* p 12]. Very interesting
is this blundering account of a controversialist, especially his
reference to the occult teaching of the primeval Sacrifice. This again
comes out in a " Refutation of Heresies " in the fifth century A. D. by
Ezvik. “Before anything, heaven or earth, or creature of any kind
whatever therein, was existing, Zeruan existed. . He offered sacrifices
for a thousand years in the hope of obtaining a son, ORMIZ by name, who
was to create heaven, earth, and everything therein". [ *Ibid* p 13].
Dr. Haug, who clings to the grammatical blunder theory, nevertheless
acknowledges: "That this doctrine of *Zarvan Akarana* was commonly
believed in Persia, during the times of the Sasanians, may be distinctly
seen from the reports quoted above (pp. 12-14)”. [ *Op cit* pp 309-310].
Apart from all occult testimony that is enough to establish that
Zarathushtra taught the ancient doctrine of the One Existence,
unmanifested, from which the manifested came forth. And when we further
read of a primeval sacrifice, performed by God Himself, from which
Ahura-Mazdão was produced, we know by the hint, so dark to the many but
so clear to the few, that the primary Sacrifice, the limitation by which
manifestation was rendered possible, was also taught by Zarathushtra, as
it is known to every student of occultism, and is hinted at over and
over again in the Scriptures of the world. H. P. Blavatsky says
“Ahura-Mazda (Asura-Mazda) himself issued from Zero-ana Akerna ‘
Boundless (circle of) Time,' or the unknown cause. The glory of the
latter is too exalted, its light too resplendent for either human
intellect or mortal eye to grasp and see. Its primal emanation is
eternal light, which, from having been previously concealed in Darkness,
was called to manifest itself, and thus was formed Ormazd, the ' King of
Life.' He is the ' first-born ' in Boundless Time, but like his own
antetype (pre-existing spiritual idea), has lived within Darkness from
all eternity". [Article on Zoroastrianism, *The Theosophist,* IV, p
224].

To the occultist, knowing that Zarathushtra was a member of the
Brotherhood, there can of course be no doubt as to His teaching on this
fundamental truth; but for others the external testimony ought to be
sufficient, and the fact that the opposing view is merely the idea of
Europeans, ignorant of the ancient lore.

Let us now return to the threefold Ahura-Mazdão, and His unfolding in
order that creation might be; we learn that from Him duality proceeded,
Spentõ-Mainyush and Angrô-Mainyush, two principles that had their root
in Him, but that were unfolded in order that a manifested universe might
be brought into existence. The words "good" and "evil" are used to
describe these two principles, but they are not the best words of
description; the key is given in the most ancient Gãthãs. Good and evil
may be said to only come into existence when man in his evolution
develops the power of knowledge and of choice; the original duality is
not of good and evil, but is of spirit and matter, of reality and
non-reality, of light and darkness, of construction and destruction, the
two poles, between which the universe is woven and without which no
universe can be. The second phrase, "reality and non-reality," is used
by Zarathushtra Himself in the proclamation of this fundamental truth,
for we read in the*Gãthã Ahunavaiti* , that the Prophet declared,
standing by the sacred Fire - we will in a few moments see the
significance of a declaration made standing by the Fire - "In the
beginning there was a pair of twins, two spirits, each of a peculiar
activity"; He goes onto say: "And these two spirits united created the
first (the material things); one the reality, the other the
non-reality". [ *Essays on the Parsis. Yas.* xxx 3, 4, Trans by Dr
Haug]. There is that primary duality, Sat and Asat, exactly the occult
teaching, that from the One the duality unfolds, in order that the many
may proceed. The One created the reality and the other the unreality.
The Prophet goes on to say that the one or the other of these must be
followed; of these two " spirits" you must choose one, just as in all
ancient teachings it is said that we may choose either spirit or matter;
call them, if you will, good and evil, but good and evil are not the
fundamental names, it is the spiritual or the material between which the
choice of man is made. Various names are given to these two showing how
they were understood in the ancient days. In *Gãthã Ushatavaitl* (Yasna
xlv) it is said: "All ye who have come from near and far, should now
listen and hearken to what I shall proclaim. Now the wise have
manifested this universe as a duality.

I will proclaim the two primeval spirits of the world, of whom the
increaser thus spoke to the destroyer". [*Op cit,* 1, 2]. There, are two
names again that give us the clue to the secret, the " increaser" and
the destroyer," the one from whom the life is ever pouring forth, and
the other the material side which belongs to form, and which is ever
breaking up in order that life may go on into higher expression. As
though to impress this on the people, it is said that the so-called evil
spirit is the death by which the body of men is struck away; the
destruction of form means the passing on of life into higher
conditions - not the work of any evil power, but the liberation of the
soul, and therefore a part of the divine manifestation of the universe.
They are also spoken of as " the two masters", as " the two creators,"
and we find it declared that the mighty Intelligence Srosh worshipped
these "two creators who create all things". [ *Op cit, Yasna,* Ivii, 2]
Surely this great One would not worship evil, though He might reverence
the duality in the divine nature. As though to set the question at rest,
They are spoken of as " my two spirits" by Ahura-Mazdão Himself. [ *Op.
cit Yasna,* xix, 9]. Dr. Haug fully grasps this idea and remarks: "They
are the two moving causes in the universe, united from the beginning,
and therefore called ' twins ' ( *Yêmã* , Sans. *Yamari* ). They are
present everywhere; in Ahura-Mazda as well as in man. . We never find
Angro-Mainyush mentioned as a constant opponent of Ahura-Mazda in the
Gãthãs, as is the case in later writings. . Such is the original
Zoroastrian notion of the two creative spirits, who form only two parts
of the Divine Being." [ Op. cit., pp. 303-305]

A little more difficult, perhaps, to trace, more covered over by a
change that came in later times, there is a third person in this
primeval Trinity: Ahura-Mazdão, who is the first and from whom all
proceeds; the second with the duality which is ever the mark of the
second Person in the manifested Trinity; the third, the Wisdom, the
primeval Wisdom, or Mind, by which the world was made. This is Armaiti,
of whom it is written: "To succour this life (to increase it) Armaiti
came with wealth, the good and true mind; She, the everlasting one,
created the material world". [Op. cit., Gãthã Ahunavaiti, 7 ]. In later
days Armaiti became identified with Her creation, and was worshipped as
the Goddess of the earth, but of yore She completed the Trinity.

Next in order come the hierarchies of the heavenly Intelligences, led by
the seven great Spirits, the Ameshaspentas, the seven presiding Gods;
sometimes Ahura-Mazdão is placed at Their head as one of Them; sometimes
They form the lower septenary and above Them is the higher Triad - a
conception familiar to every Theosophist, who knows that the universe is
a decade represented by the lower seven and the higher Three, as in the
Sephiroth of the Jewish Kabalah. The seven Ameshaspentas, if
Ahura-Mazdao be omitted, are: Vohüman, the Good Mind; Asha Vahishta, the
Best Holiness; Kshatraver, Power; Spendarmad, Love; Haurvatãt, Health;
Ameretãd, Immortality; and Fire, " the most helpful of the
Ameshaspentas". [*Yasna* i, 6. Trans by Spiegel, P 26]. To These prayers
are continually addressed, hymns are continually chanted to Them, the
whole liturgy is permeated by Their worship; and yet some oriental
scholars - followed in this by only a small minority, I am glad to say,
of modern Parsîs - have materialized Them into mere attributes of God,
instead of the living Intelligences by whom as it is said in the Gãthãs,
the worlds were made and are sustained.

Dr. Mills degrades Them into mere attributes, and in his translation
always thus treats Them, though occasionally forced into very untenable
positions by this modern shrinking from the recognition of invisible
Intelligences everywhere. Let us see if They can be taken as mere
attributes:

"Yet the most bounteous Mazda Ahura, and Piety with Him,

And Asha the settlements furthering, Thou Good Mind and Thou the
Dominion,

Hear ye me, all! and have mercy". [Gãthã ii,(*Yas* xxxiii) Trans by Dr
Mills p 127].

The " qualities," here spelt with capitals, are some of the
Ameshaspentas, Spendarmad, Vohûman and Kshatraver, and the plural "ye,"
as well as the phrase, " hear ye me,*all* !"is a curious way of
addressing a God and His qualities.

" Doctrines, Ahura, and actions, tell me which are the best ones, Mazda,

And the debtor's prayer of the praisers; tell me this with the Truth and
the Good Mind,

And by Sovereign Power and grace bring on this world's perfection."

The Pahlavi has: "Do Thou, therefore, O Aûhar-mazd, declare to me that
which is the best word and deed, and do ye give that which is Thy debt,
O Vohûman, and Thine, 0 Ashavahisht, for this praise, for through your
sovereignty, O Aûharmazd, the completion of Progress is made manifestly
real in the world .at will". [*Op cit,* pp 152, 153].

"Thus I conceived Thee, bounteous, Ahura-Mazda,

When with the Good Mind's help, obedience neared me,

And asked of me: "Who art thou? Whence thy coming?" [*Ibid,* p 165]

- a curious proceeding for a quality.

"These your favours first ask I thou, Ahura! Asha! and grant too thine,
Aramaiti!" [*Ibid,* p 343].

Many more passages might be cited from the Gãthãs, did space permit.
Then take this from the*Yasna Haptanhaiti* , admittedly one of the
oldest parts of the *Yasna* , after the Gãthãs: We worship Ahura-Mazda
the righteous, master of righteousness. We worship the Ameshaspentas
(the archangels), the possessors of good, the givers of good. We-worship
the whole creation of the righteous spirit". [ *Essays on the Parsis,*
page 171]. The *Visparad* begins: "I invoke and proclaim to: the Lords
of the Heavenly, the Lords of the Earthly" [ *Op cit* , Trans by Prof
Spiegel, p 5].

and so on through a long list of Gods. Again: " We make them known: To
Ahura-Mazdã, to the holy Sraôsha, to Rashnu the most righteous, to
Mithra with large pastures. To the Ameshaspentas, to the Fravarshis of
the pure, to the souls of the pure, to the Fire, the son of Ahura-Mazda,
and to the great Lord."\* [*Op cit,* xii, 18, 19, p 18]. The*Yasna*
bears its testimony: " I invoke and proclaim to: The creator
Ahura-Mazda, the Brilliant, Majestic, Greatest, Best, most Beautiful,
the Strongest, most Intellectual, of the best body, the Highest through
holiness; who is very wise, who rejoices afar, who created us, who
formed us, who keeps us, the Holiest among the heavenly. I invoke and
proclaim to: Vohûmano, Ashavahista, Kshathra-Vairya, Spenta-ãrmaiti,
Haurvat and Ameritãt; the body of the cow, the soul of the cow, the fire
(the son) of Ahura-Mazda, the most helpful of the Ameshaspentas."
[*Yasna,* i 1-6, Trans by Prof Spiegel, p 26].

But the*Yasnas* are full of worship, worship of the highest Gods, of
Mithra, [ *Mihir Yasht, Essays on the Parsis,* p 202] of the Goddess of
the waters, [ *Abãn Yasht, Ibid.* p 197] of Srosh [ *Yasna,* Ivii,
*Ibid,* p 189] - one of the mightiest of the great Intelligences - of
the sun, moon, and stars. [ *Yasna,* iv 39 Trans by Spiegel, p 42]. In
fact, the whole fabric of Zoroastrianism must be destroyed, if the
worship of the Gods is to be wrenched out of it in deference to European
materialism. In it, as in Hinduism, the Gods are everywhere, and as the
worshipper ascends, he worships loftier and loftier Intelligences, till
he reaches Ahua-Mazdão, of whose will they are the agents, by whose life
they are sustained.

We now come to the Fire, the supreme symbol of God, the symbol of divine
life, that which is called the Son of Ahura-Mazdão, the sacred symbol
most reverenced by the Zoroastrians of to-day. As we might expect, we
find prayer after prayer addressed to the Fire, worship addressed to the
Fire in the plainest, the clearest and the most explicit terms, the Fire
which is declared to be the most helpful of all the spiritual
Intelligences, the Fire which is the most friendly, coming down from
Ahura-Mazdão and acquainted with all heavenly secrets. "Happy is the man
to whom thou comest mightily, Fire, son of Ahura-Mazda. More friendly
than the most friendly, more worthy of adoration than the most worthy of
honour. Mayest thou come helpfully to us at the greatest business. Fire,
thou art acquainted with Ahura-Mazda, acquainted with the heavenly. Thou
art the holiest of the same (the fire) that bears the name Vãzista. O
Fire, son of Ahura-Mazda, we draw near to thee". [ *Yasna,* xxxvi, ii
4-10. Trans by Prof Spiegel, p 96].

What is the Fire ? Ever, in every religion, has fire been the symbol of
the supreme God; Brahman is fire; Ahura-Mazdão is fire; the Jews worship
their God as a pillar of fire, and the Christians proclaim, " Our God is
a consuming fire." Everywhere fire has been and is the supreme emblem;
for He who is glory is revealed as fire; it blazes out from That which
"is dark by excess of light," and the whole universe is but the

outcome of the living flame. Oh! if I could show you Zarathushtra, the
mighty One, as He first spake to the people, and taught them the truths
that the Fire had revealed to Him, the Sons of the Fire who sent Him to
the earth to teach those truths to the people. Picture Him standing by
the altar, speaking of what the Fire revealed to Him. Remember what is
said in one of those "Oracles" which reproduce the early traditions:
"When thou beholdest a sacred Fire, formless, flashing dazzlingly
throughout the world, Hear thou the voice of the Fire."As Zarathushtra
spake, there was at first no fire at the altar at His side; there was
sandalwood in fragrant heaps, there were perfumes, but no fire. As the
Prophet stood there He held a Rod - of which every occultist knows, a
Rod, a copy of which was used in the Mysteries - filled with the living
fire of the upper spheres, and with the twining fire-serpents round it.
As he raised that Rod, pointing it to heaven, through infinite space,
through the vault of the blue sky, the heavens burst into fire, and
lambent flames played on every side; cleaving the air, some of these
flames darted downwards and fired the altar at His side, and the living
fire wreathing round Him made Him a mass of flame, as He spake " the
Words of the Fire", and proclaimed the everlasting truths. That was how
Zarathushtra taught in the ancient days. And He gave the hymns of fire,
that could call it down from above - the compelling mantras, the words
of power - and century after century, millennium after millennium, the
fire that blazed on the Zoroastrian altar in the fire-temple was no mere
mingling of material flames. Ever from above, from the heavens; the
sacred fire was called down from the fiery Âkãsha; at the word of the
priest, that fell upon the altar, and there blazed as the living symbol
of God. When the lower priesthood had to act, when the higher one was
not available for the service, then they were given the rod of fire in
which the electric fire was ever flashing, the living flame, and as they
touched the altar-fuel with that rod, the heavenly fire blazed out.

Even now, see how the tradition has come down, in the very ceremonies by
which the fire is lighted on the new altar. To-day there is still a
faint echo of the ancient truth, although the power has departed and no
Parsî Dastur can summon fire from on high. Fire is gathered from all the
different sources in the town wherein the sacred flame is to be lighted,
but the fire is not used as it is gathered from the earthly fuel; for
the officiator places above the gathered fire an iron tray heaped with
sandalwood, and holding it high above so that material contact shall not
be, the fire below lights the fuel, and a second fire leaps up; nine
times over that ceremony is repeated, until the very essence of fire, as
it were, is gathered - pure for the pure, and worthy to be the symbol of
the divine. Further, they seek to have the electric fire, the fire of
lightning, flashing down from heaven, and as they are now unable to call
it down for themselves, sometimes even for years they have to wait
before the last fire is gathered, sometimes for years to be patient ere
that fire may be mingled with the others, that burn upon the sacred
altar. Before that sacred Fire every Zoroastrian bows, and in the
Zoroastrian home, when sunset falls, a fragment fire is carried through
every room in the gathering dusk, emblem of the purifying, the
protecting power of the Supreme.

We must now hastily glance at the way in which man is regarded, that we
may understand his place in the hierarchy of Intelligences. In him are
the two principles - spirit and matter - as in all else, and he can side
with the one or the other. All the ethic is based on the idea that he
shall throw himself on the side of the pure, battle for the pure,
maintain the pure. It may be that the later view of Angrô-Mainyush as
the enemy was an attempt to stir man into active conflict against evil,
to make him feel he was fighting the battle of the "good spirit "
against the " evil spirit ". To be in everything actively on the side of
purity is a personal duty. The Zoroastrian must keep the earth pure,
must till it as a religious duty; he must perform all the functions of
agriculture as a service to the Gods, for the earth is the pure creature
of Ahura-Mazdão, to be guarded from all pollution. The air must be kept
pure. The water must be kept pure; if anything unclean, like a corpse,
falls into the water, the good Zoroastrian must remove it, that the pure
element may not be fouled. Hence also the objection to burning a dead
body, as polluting the fire by the touch of the unclean. Therefore is
the body reverently carried to the Towers of Silence, and in that
guarded place, open but to the heavens, it is laid, that the vultures
may swiftly devour it, and no pure element may thereby be soiled.

Passing from that purity of external nature, with which a Parsî must not
only passively but also actively associate himself, we come to that
famous axiom of their religion: "Pure thoughts, pure words, pure deeds."
That is the constantly reiterated rule of the Zoroastrian life - and we
notice that the three are placed in the occult order - repeated in his
daily prayers, insisted on at every turn. The first words of the
*Khordah Avesta* form the Ashem-Vohû, the most sacred formula ever
repeated: " Purity is the best good. Happiness, happiness is to him -
namely, to the best pure in purity." [ *Op* *cit* Translated by
Professor Spiegel, p 3]. When Ahura-Mazdão is answering Zarathushtra as
to the recital of the Ashem-Vohû, He declares that the recital of the
Ashem-Vohû that is worth all the good things created by Himself is "
when one forsakes evil thoughts and evil words and evil deeds". [
*Hodokht Nask, Essays on the Parsis* , p 29]

Between the ages of seven and fifteen, the child must be initiated, and
then is put on him (or her) for the first time the kusti, or sacred
thread, and the sûdrã, or white linen shirt, both emblems of purity. The
kusti is made of seventy-two threads of lambs wool, and is wound thrice
round the waist, signifying the good thoughts, words and deeds incumbent
on the wearer; it is knotted twice in front and twice behind.
Truthfulness, chastity, obedience to parents, hospitality, industry,
honesty, kindness to useful animals, are virtues on which special stress
is laid, and charity is made an essential part of religion. It is to be
wise charity, and bestowed on the deserving; especially are
recommended - helping the poor, helping those to marry who cannot afford
to do so, helping to educate the children of those unable to perform
this duty for themselves. Ervad Sheriarji Dadabhai Barucha says: "Just
as certain virtues are said to be the peculiar attributes of the four
classes of the people, and highly becoming to them, so certain vices are
specially to be shunned by them. For the priestly class, hypocrisy,
covetousness, negligence, slothfulness, attention to trifles and
unbelief in religion are peculiarly unbecoming. The warrior must be
above oppression, violence, breach of promise, encouragement of evil,
ostentation, arrogance and insolence. The husbandman must fly from
ignorance, envy, ill-will and malice; and the artisan must avoid
incredulity, ingratitude, rudeness and slander (Mainyo-i Khart, lix)".
[*Zoroastrian Religion and Customs,* p 31] It is interesting to notice
that when Ahura-Mazdão proclaimed " the righteous (Ahuna-Vairya) both
spiritual and earthly," the Ahuna-Vairya had three lines - the four
classes, the five chiefs, and a conclusion. The classes were the
fourfold order of priests, warriors, agriculturists and artisans,
[*Yama, xix 17, Essays on the Parsis,* p 188]] another mark of the close
kinship of the Iranians with the first Âryan sub-race.

Other of these marks are interesting: the sacrifice of the Homa,
worshipped as fervently and extolled as highly in the*Homa Yasht* [
*Essays on the Parsîs,* pp 176-185] as in the *Sama Veda* ; the names of
the priests - the ãtharva (atharvan), the Zaota (Hotã), and the identity
by function of the Rathwi with the Adhvarya; milk, ghee, holy water,
sacred twigs, are all used in certain ceremonies; Parsîs, like Hindus,
have their prayers for the dead, at stated intervals. In truth, the two
faiths are sister faiths, only invasion, oppression and exile have
shattered the younger faith to such an extent that much of its ancient
birthright has been lost.


