[End]
=====

The seven principles of the human constitution are clearly mentioned
in*Yasna* , LIV, I: "Bodies together with bones, vital power and form,
strength and consciousness, soul and Fravarshi". [*Op cit,* Translated
by Prof Spiegel, p 120]. The first three are dense and etheric bodies
with Prãna; strength is Kãma, consciousness is Manas, Urvan, translated
soul, is Buddhi, and Fravarshi is Âtma. "Every being of the good
creation, whether living or deceased or still born, has its own
Fravarshi," says Dr. Haug. [*Essays on the Parsis,* p 206]. But this
hardly gives the full idea of the word, as it is expounded in
the*Fravardin* *Yasht* , in which Ahura-Mazdão declares that everything
good is maintained by their splendour and glory. They are called the
strong guardian-angels of the righteous," and evidently represent the
Âtmã, and in many cases the Âtmã when Manas and Buddhi have been merged
in it.

After death, the soul passes into the intermediate world, " the
time-worn paths which are for the wicked and which are for the
righteous," [*Vendidad,* Fargard, xix, 29,*Essays on the Parsis,* p 225]
spoken of by Ahura-Mazdão as " the frightful, deadly, destructive path
which is the separation of the body and soul, [*Hadokht Nask,* Yt xxii,
17 Ibid p 222] Kãmaloka. The soul of the righteous meets a beautiful
maiden, the embodiment of his good thoughts, goods words and good deeds;
he crosses the "bridge of judge " safely, and reaches heaven. But the
soul of the wicked meets a hideous hag, the embodiment of his evil
thoughts, evil words and evil deeds, and he fails to cross the bridge
and falls into fire.

Again much is left untold, much is too briefly, too baldly, described;
yet enough has been said to justify the occultist when he bears witness
to this ancient religion, the second of the Fifth Race religions, that
it springs from the primeval source, that its Prophet was one of the
Divine Initiates, that it comes down from the past, millennium after
millennium, and is but poorly represented by the comparatively
materialized Zoroastrianism of to-day. The study of its Scriptures might
revive it; the old knowledge might again be breathed into it; these
concessions to European criticism and European materialism might be
repudiated by every Zoroastrian as no part of his ancient, of his
glorious faith. O my Parsî brothers! your Prophet is not dead. He is not
perished: He is watching over the religion that He founded: ever seeking
to raise it from its present degradation, to give it back its lost
knowledge, its lost powers. What nobler work for the Zoroastrian of
to-day than to permeate his brethren with the ancient fire, to relight
its blaze on the spiritual altar of their hearts ? What nobler work than
to study his own Scriptures, and to go forth and teach the ancient
learning with the authority and power that can only be wielded by a man
of the same faith with those he addresses. The Fire is not dead; it is
only smoldering on its ancient altars; white-hot are the ashes, ready to
reburst into flames. And I dream of a day when the breath of the great
Prophet Zarathushtra shall sweep again through His temples,fanning the
ashes on the altars of those ancient fanes, and every altar shall flash
into fire, and again from heaven the answering flames shall fall, making
the Iranian religion once more what it ought to be, a beacon light for
the souls of men, one of the greatest religions of the world.


