Islamic Culture?
================

Culture has been defined as “the totality of socially transmitted
behaviour patterns, arts, beliefs, institutions, and all other products
of human work and thought characteristic of a community or a population.
It is the set of shared beliefs, attitudes, values, and behavioral
patterns of a group or organization.” (Readers Digest Universal
Dictionary)

Religion on the other hand is “the expression of man's belief in and
reverence for God or gods who created the Universe and govern it.”

It is as naive to think that any religion encompasses the totality of
culture as it is to think that any culture is solely the product of a
religion.

Islam like many other religions claims to be universal accommodating
within its fold the cultures of all its adherents provided that the
bounds of the religious laws are not transgressed.

Islam has broad parameters of rules and regulations and within these
parameters an African can remain as much a Muslim as a Pakistani or a
Bangladeshi or an English-man or Scots-man or an American or Chinese or
any individual from any country anywhere in the world.

Nevertheless there is a difference of opinion on whether Islam has its
own distinct culture. Scholars are divided on whether there is a central
cultural theme in Islam.

Some vehemently argue that there is such a central theme.

Others maintain that because of the universality of Islam it is wrong to
insist upon a common cultural theme.

This latter school of thought argue that culture is an historical
heritage of a nation, people or society in the fields of art,
architecture, dress, cuisine, language, literature and other cultural
norms and pursuits. Islam, on the other hand, consists of beliefs, acts
of worship, a code of conduct and jurisprudence. So long as the culture
of a society lies within the parameters of Islamic beliefs, acts of
worship, code of conduct and the shariah, that culture would be
acceptable in Islam. Many an artist, architect, poet, author and chef
has, upon acceptance of Islam, adjusted himself/herself so as conform to
the Islamic requirements.


