Development of Jurisprudence and Theology
=========================================

A. The Shi’a School
-------------------

During their life time the Imams remained the chief exponents of the
shariah, the Islamic law. Many of the Imams, when the political
atmosphere permitted, held theological classes and also taught other
sciences.

Since the major occultation of the twelfth Imam the Shi’as have, as
commanded not only by him but also most of the preceding Imaams, sought
guidance from mujtahids and followed the institution of taqleed.

Taqleed literally means to follow or to imitate someone. In Islamic
jurisprudence it means to follow a Mujtahid in matters pertaining to
law.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا قَبْلَكَ إِلَّا رِجَالًا نُوحِي إِلَيْهِمْ ۖ
فَاسْأَلُوا أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*** And we did not send before you any but men to whom we sent
revelation, so ask the followers of the reminder if you do not (21:7)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا مَا أُنْزِلَتْ سُورَةٌ فَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ يَقُولُ أَيُّكُمْ
زَادَتْهُ هَٰذِهِ إِيمَانًا ۚ فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا فَزَادَتْهُمْ
إِيمَانًا وَهُمْ يَسْتَبْشِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whenever a chapter is revealed, there are some of them who say:
Which of you has it strengthened in faith? Then as for those who
believe, it strengthens them in faith and they rejoice.(9:124)***

Taqleed applies only to matters of shariah. There is no taqleed in
matters of beliefs (the articles of faith). A Muslim must seek to attain
conviction of their truth through reflection and rational examination.

A Mujtahid must be a person learned in all the Islamic sciences. At any
given time there would normally be a number of persons qualified as
Mujtahids and it is not uncommon to have two members of the same family
in taqleed of two different mujtahids.

Any muslim can address any question of law to any mujtahid, whether or
not he is in the taqleed of that mujtahid and the mujtahid would issue a
fatwaa giving his opinion on that subject. This would invariably be by
way of a statement of the law which in the opinion of the mujtahid is
the correct legal position. The fatwaa would be binding on all the
persons in the taqleed of that mujtahid.

A mujtahid is so called because he does ijtehaad which term means to
strive for deriving the laws of the shariah from its sources which are:

1. The Qur’an

2. The Sunnah which mean the traditions and the practice of the Prophet
and the Imams.

3. Reasoning (Aql);

4. Consensus of the Mujtahids (Ijmaa).

B. The Sunni School
-------------------

The ruling khalifah invariably assumed the mantle of the chief exponent
of the shariah.

For nearly a hundred years following the death of the Prophet the State
retained absolute control over authentication, collection and
publication of the sayings (ahadees) of the Prophet. A few unscrupulous
khalifahs did not hesitate to use this power to legitimize their
misdeeds by arranging to have apocryphal ahadees produced.

After the Banu Abbas came into power in 132 A.H. (750 A.D.), the
formation of the Sunni community was formalised.Although there are many
sects and sub-sects in the sunni school of thought, the four main sects
are-

1 The Hanafis, founded by Imaam Abu Hanifa an-Nu'maan ibn Thabit (died
150 A.H./769 A.D.). He is a scholar greatly respected not only by his
followers but also the other sunnis.

2. The Malikis, founded by Imaam Abu Abdullah Malik ibn Anas (died 179
A.H./797 A.D).

3. The Shafeis, founded by Imaam Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn Idris al-
Shafei (died 204 A.H/819 A.D.)

4. The Hanbalis, founded by Imaam Ahmed ibn Muhammad ibn Hanbal (died
241 A.H./855 A.D.)

Although there are many irreconcilable differences in the four Sunni
schools, in the main, however, they agree on the fundamental bases of
their doctrines and laws. Each claims to have derived them from the
following four sources:

1. The Qur’an

2. The Sunnah of the Holy Prophet and at times the Sunnah of the first
four khalifahs

3. The Ijmaa (consensus among the companions of the Prophet or of the
religious leaders or among the followers)

4. The Qiyas (deduction of legal prescriptions from the Qur’an and the
sunnah through rational analogy).

The extent of the acceptance of the theological and legal doctrines of
any of the above four sunni schools depended largely on the inclination
of the ruler of the time. For example, although Abu Hanifa himself did
not gain great popularity with the khalifah, his successor Abu Yusuf
became a powerful figure in the court and held office of the Chief
Kadhi.

The khalifah, however, always continued to remain the final arbiter in
the exposition of the law and the jurists were relegated to an advisory
role.

Since the abolition of the institution of khilafah following the fall of
the Ottoman Empire the sunni schools have not developed as fast as they
need to so as to keep pace with the social, economic, political and
scientific development. Some Sunni sects have recognized the need for
Ijtehaad, a few appear to concentrate on Ijmaa as the main instrument
for reform.

In addition to their differences in jurisprudence, the Sunnis and the
Shi’as hold divergent theological views on various aspects of the
articles of beliefs e.g. human freedom of action and the Justice of God
(both discussed above), whether God has a corporeal form. Some sunni
sects believe in anthropomorphism.

The Shi’as and the Sunnis, however, agree on the following fundamental
beliefs:

1. That Allah is One and has no partners;

2. That Muhammad is the last Prophet of God;

3. That there will be Resurrection and Judgement.


