Women in Islam
==============

Islam does not accept that the first woman was created of any inferior
composition

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ اتَّقُوا رَبَّكُمُ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ مِنْ
نَفْسٍ وَاحِدَةٍ وَخَلَقَ مِنْهَا زَوْجَهَا وَبَثَّ مِنْهُمَا رِجَالًا
كَثِيرًا وَنِسَاءً ۚ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ الَّذِي تَسَاءَلُونَ بِهِ
وَالْأَرْحَامَ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ عَلَيْكُمْ رَقِيبًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O people! be careful of (your duty to) your Lord, Who created you
from a single being and created its mate of the same (kind) and spread
from these two, many men and women; and be careful of (your duty to)
Allah, by Whom you demand one of another (your rights), and (to) the
ties of relationship; surely Allah ever watches over you. (4:1)***

Or that it was Eve who fell to the promptings of Satan in disobeying
God. Both were equally to blame.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَوَسْوَسَ لَهُمَا الشَّيْطَانُ لِيُبْدِيَ لَهُمَا مَا وُورِيَ
عَنْهُمَا مِنْ سَوْآتِهِمَا وَقَالَ مَا نَهَاكُمَا رَبُّكُمَا عَنْ
هَٰذِهِ الشَّجَرَةِ إِلَّا أَنْ تَكُونَا مَلَكَيْنِ أَوْ تَكُونَا مِنَ
الْخَالِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But the Shaitan made an evil suggestion to them that he might make
manifest to them what had been hidden from them of their evil
inclinations, and he said: Your Lord has not forbidden you this tree
except that you may not both become two angels or that you may (not)
become of the immortals. (7:20)***

> (7:21) وَقَاسَمَهُمَا إِنِّي لَكُمَا لَمِنَ النَّاصِحِينَ

*** And he swore to them both: Most surely I am a sincere adviser to
you. (7:21)***

Women play an important role and are equal partners of men.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُحِلَّ لَكُمْ لَيْلَةَ الصِّيَامِ الرَّفَثُ إِلَىٰ نِسَائِكُمْ ۚ
هُنَّ لِبَاسٌ لَكُمْ وَأَنْتُمْ لِبَاسٌ لَهُنَّ ۗ عَلِمَ اللَّهُ
أَنَّكُمْ كُنْتُمْ تَخْتَانُونَ أَنْفُسَكُمْ فَتَابَ عَلَيْكُمْ
وَعَفَا عَنْكُمْ ۖ فَالْآنَ بَاشِرُوهُنَّ وَابْتَغُوا مَا كَتَبَ
اللَّهُ لَكُمْ ۚ وَكُلُوا وَاشْرَبُوا حَتَّىٰ يَتَبَيَّنَ لَكُمُ
الْخَيْطُ الْأَبْيَضُ مِنَ الْخَيْطِ الْأَسْوَدِ مِنَ الْفَجْرِ ۖ
ثُمَّ أَتِمُّوا الصِّيَامَ إِلَى اللَّيْلِ ۚ وَلَا تُبَاشِرُوهُنَّ
وَأَنْتُمْ عَاكِفُونَ فِي الْمَسَاجِدِ ۗ تِلْكَ حُدُودُ اللَّهِ فَلَا
تَقْرَبُوهَا ۗ كَذَٰلِكَ يُبَيِّنُ اللَّهُ آيَاتِهِ لِلنَّاسِ
لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***It is made lawful to you to go into your wives on the night of the
fast; they are an apparel for you*** ***and you are an apparel for them;
Allah knew that you acted unfaithfully to yourselves, so He has turned
to you (mercifully) and removed from you (this burden); so now be in
contact with them and seek what Allah has ordained for you, and eat and
drink until the whiteness of the day becomes distinct from the blackness
of the night at dawn, then complete the fast till night, and have not
contact with them while you keep to the mosques; these are the limits of
Allah, so do not go near them. Thus does Allah make clear His
communications for men that they may guard (against evil). (2:187)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ اتَّقُوا رَبَّكُمُ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ مِنْ
نَفْسٍ وَاحِدَةٍ وَخَلَقَ مِنْهَا زَوْجَهَا وَبَثَّ مِنْهُمَا رِجَالًا
كَثِيرًا وَنِسَاءً ۚ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ الَّذِي تَسَاءَلُونَ بِهِ
وَالْأَرْحَامَ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ عَلَيْكُمْ رَقِيبًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*** O people! be careful of (your duty to) your Lord, Who created you
from a single being and created its mate of the same (kind) and spread
from these two, many men and women; and be careful of (your duty to)
Allah, by Whom you demand one of another (your rights), and (to) the
ties of relationship; surely Allah ever watches over you. (4:1)***

As a daughter, she is to be shown greater affection than a son. The
Prophet commands that a daughter must receive twice as much love and
affection as a son.

As a wife, the woman has no obligation to provide for her husband or the
children out her income or wealth. The husband has this responsibility.
What a woman earns, or receives by way of inheritance or gift, is her
own property over which she has sole control.

It is injustice for the husband to require the wife to do the house-hold
chores. It is for the parties to agree on the division of labor.

The wife, however, is under a duty to obey the lawful and just commands
of her husband.

As a mother the woman occupies a unique position. She is placed upon an
almost divine pedestal. She must be obeyed (save where obedience would
lead to injustice), revered and her feelings never hurt. The Prophet has
said that while both parents must be obeyed and respected, the father's
place is three rungs below that of the mother.

The woman is the pivot of the family, and Islam holds the family as
being the most important unit of the society. From the moment of
conception to birth and up to the attainment of puberty, it is the
mother who shapes the mind, the thinking and the behavior of that future
member of the society.

The Prophet repeatedly emphasized the importance of the upbringing of
children and the role of the mother. He is reported to have said: “It is
better to bring up your children so that they have good manners and
morals than to spend your wealth for the pleasure of Allah.”

There are also several traditions of the Prophet and the Imams about the
treatment and conduct of pregnant mothers.

Dress
-----

The Qur’an commands both men and women to \`lower their gaze and be
modest'.

The women have been further commanded \`not to display their ornaments
except what appears thereof and to wear their head-coverings over their
bosom and not to display their ornaments except to their husband (and
other members of their family within the prohibited degree of marriage
e.g. a son, father, brother, uncles excluding uncles by marriage etc.)'.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ يَغُضُّوا مِنْ أَبْصَارِهِمْ وَيَحْفَظُوا
فُرُوجَهُمْ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ أَزْكَىٰ لَهُمْ ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ خَبِيرٌ بِمَا
يَصْنَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*** Say to the believing men that they cast down their looks and guard
their private parts; that is purer for them; surely Allah is Aware of
what they do. (24:30)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُلْ لِلْمُؤْمِنَاتِ يَغْضُضْنَ مِنْ أَبْصَارِهِنَّ وَيَحْفَظْنَ
فُرُوجَهُنَّ وَلَا يُبْدِينَ زِينَتَهُنَّ إِلَّا مَا ظَهَرَ مِنْهَا ۖ
وَلْيَضْرِبْنَ بِخُمُرِهِنَّ عَلَىٰ جُيُوبِهِنَّ ۖ وَلَا يُبْدِينَ
زِينَتَهُنَّ إِلَّا لِبُعُولَتِهِنَّ أَوْ آبَائِهِنَّ أَوْ آبَاءِ
بُعُولَتِهِنَّ أَوْ أَبْنَائِهِنَّ أَوْ أَبْنَاءِ بُعُولَتِهِنَّ أَوْ
إِخْوَانِهِنَّ أَوْ بَنِي إِخْوَانِهِنَّ أَوْ بَنِي أَخَوَاتِهِنَّ
أَوْ نِسَائِهِنَّ أَوْ مَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُهُنَّ أَوِ التَّابِعِينَ
غَيْرِ أُولِي الْإِرْبَةِ مِنَ الرِّجَالِ أَوِ الطِّفْلِ الَّذِينَ
لَمْ يَظْهَرُوا عَلَىٰ عَوْرَاتِ النِّسَاءِ ۖ وَلَا يَضْرِبْنَ
بِأَرْجُلِهِنَّ لِيُعْلَمَ مَا يُخْفِينَ مِنْ زِينَتِهِنَّ ۚ وَتُوبُوا
إِلَى اللَّهِ جَمِيعًا أَيُّهَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And say to the believing women that they cast down their looks and
guard their private parts and do not display their ornaments except what
appears thereof, and let them wear their head-coverings over their
bosoms, and not display their ornaments except to their husbands or
their fathers, or the fathers of their husbands, or their sons, or the
sons of their husbands, or their brothers, or their brothers' sons, or
their sisters' sons, or their women, or those whom their right hands
possess, or the male servants not having need (of women), or the
children who have not attained knowledge of what is hidden of women; and
let them not strike their feet so that what they hide of their ornaments
may be known; and turn to Allah all of you, O believers! so that you may
be successful. (24:31)***

Again in 33:59 God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ قُلْ لِأَزْوَاجِكَ وَبَنَاتِكَ وَنِسَاءِ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ يُدْنِينَ عَلَيْهِنَّ مِنْ جَلَابِيبِهِنَّ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ
أَدْنَىٰ أَنْ يُعْرَفْنَ فَلَا يُؤْذَيْنَ ۗ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ غَفُورًا
رَحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O Prophet! say to your wives and your daughters and the women of the
believers that they let down upon them their over-garments; this will be
more proper, that they may be known, and thus they will not be given
trouble; and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.(33:59)***

The above verses have been interpreted by some jurists as requiring a
veiled face and body and others as requiring a scarf over the head to
conceal the hair (an essential ornament) and the rest of the body,
except the face, the hands and the feet, to be covered by a loose
fitting outer garment. In different cultures different forms of women\`s
dress, or veil or “purdah” have evolved.

The Qur’anic object clearly appears to be protection of women from
molestation and disrespect, and not their treatment as inferior beings.


