Political Science
=================

Sovereignty belongs to God. The ruler, whether a king or an elected or
nominated representative, can only rule as His vicegerent and in
accordance with His laws.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ اسْتَجَابُوا لِرَبِّهِمْ وَأَقَامُوا الصَّلَاةَ
وَأَمْرُهُمْ شُورَىٰ بَيْنَهُمْ وَمِمَّا رَزَقْنَاهُمْ يُنْفِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And those who respond to their Lord and keep up prayer, and their
rule is to take counsel among themselves, and who spend out of what We
have given them. (42:38)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ إِنْ مَكَّنَّاهُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ أَقَامُوا الصَّلَاةَ
وَآتَوُا الزَّكَاةَ وَأَمَرُوا بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَنَهَوْا عَنِ
الْمُنْكَرِ ۗ وَلِلَّهِ عَاقِبَةُ الْأُمُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those who, should We establish them in the land, will keep up prayer
and pay the poor-rate and enjoin good and forbid evil; and Allah's is
the end of affairs. (22:41)***

When Imaam ‘Ali (as) was finally elected the khalifah he endeavored to
establish an Islamic government but alas he was not permitted to rule
for long.

However, during the five years of ‘Ali's reign he wrote several letters
to his Governors and Commanders restating the principles of governance
in Islam. These letters and instructions have been compiled into a book
called \`Nahjul Balagah', English translations of which are available.

The most famous of these documents is ‘Ali's letter to his Governor in
Egypt, Maalik Ashtar, which deals with a variety of subjects including
administration, judiciary, treatment of non-muslims, the army and the
conduct of a ruler or his representative. In the preamble of the letter
‘Ali says:

“This is what Allah's servant ‘Ali (as) has ordered Malik ibn al-Harith
al-Ashtar when he appointed him Governor of Egypt, for the collection of
its (Egypt's) revenues, fighting against its enemies, seeking the good
of its people and making its cities prosperous.”


