Chapter 1a - the Station of the Grave and the Beginning of Barzakh Westward Travel
==================================================================================

In the name of Allah, the Benevolent and Ever Merciful

All Praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of the Universe. The Master of
this world and of the Day of Judgement. Peace and blessings be on the
Prophet of Islam and on his Progeny who warned us that Love of this
world is a dangerous affliction and that it is the root cause of all
diseases afflicting the human race. All other diseases are really
branches stemming from this main root. And the cure of this affliction
is to keep reminding oneself constantly of Death.

I begin now, by saying that in 1307 H I had written my memories about
my schooling and had called it Travel Eastwards and now in 1312 when am
writing about the Barzakh, I intend to call ii Westward travel and I
hope that it will serve as a souvenir from me and will prove a source of
guidance and advice for the general public.

The fact is that our present material and elemental body by virtue of
its very nature, is in a dark and impenetrable veil, not allowing man to
see into any other world. Death, in fact, is the name of emerging from
this curtain and once this curtain is removed, man is able to see that
which was hidden to his eyes before, and he becomes aware of facts which
he was unaware of, until then.

'Certainly, you were heedless of this (day), now we have removed your
veil from you, so now your sight is sharp'. (Soora Qaf Verse 22)

That is to say, in this world you were ignorant of facts. Now after
death we have removed from your eyes the material curtain so that you
may clearly see the Hereafter.

Hence, I died. Then I saw myself standing, relieved of my illness,
feeling fit and healthy, but around my corpse my relatives were busy
mourning. I was saddened by their crying and told them that I was cured
and not dead but nobody heard me.

It was as if they neither saw nor heard me. I realised that these
people had now become distant from me and so I turned my complete
attention towards my corpse. I became especially attentive towards the
face and the side which was uncovered. Afterwards, my body was bathed
and shrouded. Then, when the people had taken care of their other
pending work, they took my body towards the graveyard. I was also
present in the funeral procession. In this I saw many wild beasts and
animals, which frightened me but the other people present were neither
afraid nor even troubled, as if those beasts were their tame and beloved
pets. In this way, we reached the graveyard. I stood in the grave, and
saw how my body was lowered into it, head first. The moment the body was
laid inside, the grave became full of animals emerging from
everywhere.

My fear knew no bounds especially when the animals started attacking my
body. But the man who was lowering my body was not in the least fearful,
it was as it he did not even see them.

The man laid the body in the grave and then came out. But my primary
interest was in my body so I stayed inside the grave. I tried to shy
away the animals but they were too many for me to handle and they
overcame me. One reason was, that I was so overcome with fear that my
very existence was trembling. I called out to the people standing above
my grave for help but nobody came forward to help. On the contrary they
remained busy in their work, as it they lust could not see the commotion
that was going on inside the grave. Suddenly certain people entered the
grave from somewhere and came to my help, as the animals ran away when
they saw these people. So I thanked them and asked them who they were
that they had helped me in such a difficult time. They smiled and
replied that they were my good deeds that I had done and that the beasts
had been my evil deeds. They asked me if I had not heard the verse
"Verily the good deeds clear away the bad deed’s. Then these people
disappeared.

As soon as the commotion was over. I regained my senses. I saw that the
men outside had closed the grave and had left me atone in the dark and
narrow place. I could see the people going back to their houses, even my
close friends, relatives and family members had deserted me and left me
alone. These were the very people for whose comfort and welt being I had
provided and worked for day and night. Their desertion and
unfaithfulness on the one hand and my dark and narrow prison on the
other, extremely saddened me and I was close to bursting with sorrow.

I had never before felt such fear and bewilderment and I sat down
dejected at the head of the corpse, losing all hopes of receiving any
help from anybody except God. I was wondering what would happen next
when suddenly the grave started trembling and dust came tailing down off
its walls and roof. It was especially violent near the foot of the grave
as if some huge beast was trying to split open the grave to enter.
Finally the grave did split and two huge men with fearful faces entered
(The punishment in the grave, the questioning of Munkir & Nakeer and the
presence of snakes and scorpions in the grave is mentioned in numerous
traditions. The details can be had from the books on Beliefs. e.g.
Sheikh Sudooq and Allama Majlsi may be referred to).

The two men were strong and hefty like giants. Smoke and fire bellowed
from their mouths and nostrils. In their hands were iron rods so red not
that it seemed as if flames were leaping up from them. Suddenly they
thundered in voices so sharp that the heavens and earth trembled. "Who
is your Lord?"

I was so afraid that I could not control my senses. I lost the power to
speak and my courage gave way. I thought that my dead body would not be
able to answer their questions and I became certain that they would give
the body a good beating with their iron rods and the grave would be
engulfed with tire. I saw that as it were their fear had made me lose
control over my senses, if fire engulfed the grave it would become much
worse. So I decided to answer their questions myself. I beseeched God
for help: O Helper of the Helpless and Rescuer of the Troubled and
Afflicted. come to my help." In my heart I also seeked the intercession
of Imam Ali because I knew him well and I was aware of his strength, and
of his position in the eyes of God and that he could come to one's help
at any place and at all times. I believed him to be the dispenser of
difficulties. My heart had been full of love for him throughout my life
and even in death. I knew that this intercessor was God's blessing and
that in the most difficult of times when man is near to losing his
senses this gift of God comes to his rescue.

The Qur’an says, "And you see men in stupor, and they are not in
stupor, but God's chastisement is severe" (Soora Hashr verse 2). But
even in such times, the Imam comes to help. Hence as soon as I seeked
his intercession. Inspite of the gravity of the situation, strength
returned to me and I felt capable of answering. (According to traditions
the light of the Friendship of the Imams will help their friends in the
difficult moments after death, as love strengthens heart and resolve).

But my lengthy silence had angered them all the more. Their flaming
eyes and faces became harsher. They raised their arms as if about to
strike me with their iron rods and in voices sharper than before they
repeated, 'Who is your Lord?"

But I was no longer afraid and so I replied softly that Allah, the One,
Only and Unique was my Lord, 'He is Allah; there is no God but he, the
knower of the unseen and the seen. He is the Beneficent and Ever
Merciful. He is Allah, there is no God but He, the King, the Holy. the
Peace loving, the Bestower of conviction, the Guardian, the
Ever-prevalent, the supreme, the great absolute. For too exalted is
Allah from what they associate (with him). (Soora Hashr verse 22,23)

I remembered this particular verse because I had been in the habit of
reciting it daily after my morning prayers. (This presence of mind and
the ready and appropriate reply befits the author who led a life of
piousness, benevolence, lofty morals, in service of humanity and in
quest of knowledge about God. Those who lead such lives will enjoy
similar conditions. But the ignorant, worldly, cruel and evil will be in
difficulties. Therefore man should pay heed, repent and start doing good
from now).

I felt it necessary to recite it in front of them in order to convince
them of my position and qualities. so that they may not think that the
human race was bereft of lofty qualities. They had objected to the
creation of Adam the very first day, saying that he would prove to be
nought but a source of mischief and bloodshed on earth. However, I saw
that as soon as I recited these verses. their anger seemed to melt away.
Their faces softened somewhat and one of them told the other that it
seemed as H I belonged to the group of scholars of Islam and therefore
they should continue with their questioning in a gentler manner.

But the other one replied that God had appointed them to question me
and so they should continue in the sane manner regardless of who I was,
because their attitude towards me should depend only upon my being able
to answer correctly all the questions and it was not yet known whether I
would be able to do so. After conversing thus ,they resumed their
questioning, Who is your Prophet?"

But now I felt sufficiently courageous and even my voice was strong.
Without hesitation I replied, The Messenger and the Prophet of God
towards all men, Muhammad, the son of Abdullah, May Peace be Upon Him
and his progeny. He is the seal of the Messengers and the head of the
Prophets.

The moment I replied, their anger vanished completely and their faces
brightened and became happy. Then they questioned me about my Book,
Temple, and the Imams and the successors of the Holy Prophet. I replied,
SMY book is the Holy Our'an which was revealed by the benevolent Lord
unto the sagacious Prophet (S.A.). And my temple is the Ka’ba and the
Masjdol-Haraam 'wherever you maybe, turn your faces towards it' and 'I
have turned my face towards the Creator at the heavens and the earth
completely and submissively and I am not from the polytheists'. And my
imams and the successors of the Holy Prophet are the Twelve Imams, the
first of them Ali, and the last Imam Mehdi, who is the Imam and the
ruler of our time. Obedience unto them is obligatory and they are
infallible. They are the Witnesses on the earth and in the Hereafter
they are the intercessors." Then I named each Imam with his parentage
and other details.

To this they replied that such a lengthy discourse was unnecessary and
the answers should be brief. I promptly remarked "This detail was
necessary for you because you had misgivings about the creation of Adam
from the very first day. Your objection to the creation of Adam had in
fact been an objection on the action of God and from the day that I
understood your objection, it was like a burden on me and I had promised
myself that whenever I would meet you, I would question you thoroughly:
but it is sad that now when we have met, the situation does not permit
it: I am in a difficult position and you have been appointed by God to
question me."

Then I tell silent and waited to see their reaction. But they stopped
their interrogation and merely asked me the source of these answers.
This question was a source of concern and worry because I thought that
the proofs and theories that I had prepared in the world concerning the
Beliefs and principles of Islam, were they indeed necessarily true?

The possibility existed that even Aristotle, who's considered to be the
Father of Philosophy was wrong in fact, some of his fallacies were in my
notice. Secondly. Those proofs even if correct would hold true only in
the Dark and Ignorant world, whereas here was a world of Light and
Illumination. Darkness necessitates a guiding stick but here the
darkness had gone and was replaced with light of such illuminance that
even the blind would not require a guiding stick.

Of what use was the stick (my proof) now? Then what did these two want
from me? "O God I am a newcomer here and I am yet unaware of the
prevalent customs and of the nature of the beings present here. O God! I
beseech you in the name of Imam Ali, the son of Abu Talib, help me I was
thus engrossed in my thoughts and supplications when suddenly their
piercing scream, sharper than flint, rang out. "Answer at once What was
the source from which you learnt these answers?

(It is necessary to know the beliefs and principles of Islam like the
Unity of God, Divine Justice, Prophethood. Imamat and the Day of
Judgement, through understanding and logical proof. In this case,
Taqleed following a Marjia or scholar is not permitted, It is not
sufficient if one adopts these beliefs because his forefathers believed
in them, Blind following in this manner will prove useless in the
Hereafter As Islam is a religion of logic and evidence, the Muslim
should strive to know the Beliefs and principles through logic and clear
understanding of proofs.

If this is not done, then his beliefs cannot be considered free of
doubt and he would consequently not qualify to stand amongst the true
Muslims in the Hereafter Faith is a state of the heart, but it is
attained only when religion has been obtained through logic, All
children born to Muslim parents are Muslims due to parental teachings
but once a child is of age, it becomes necessary to acquire the
principles through logic. Otherwise.

Islam obtained through mere following is not of lasting quality and
does not pro wide the necessary incentive required to work for the
Hereafter, However proper understanding of religion through logic and
proofs will result in the height of awareness and knowledge which in
turn will prove to be an incentive for doing deeds for the Hereafter,
And God willing, any one who acts with sincerity and with correct
principles, will be rewarded in the Hereafter, However, if these
essentials of correct principles sincerity of intention. and quality and
quantity of deeds are lacking. then the future can prove bleak.)

I could no longer bear to look at their faces, Their eyes were red
which anger and flames were leaping up from them, their laces were
terrifying. Their mouths were wide open like a lion's with tang-like
teeth visible inside. Their iron rods were raised as it they were lust
about to strike, Overcome with tear, I almost fainted, At this moment,
the answer seemed to be revealed to me. I answered in a weak voice: -l
was guided towards these words by Allah, they replied then sleep like
the wed pride". They went away but I felt as ill had either gone to
sleep or had tainted. But I clearly felt that I was rid or the fear and
I slept peacefully.

When I revived and opened my eyes, I saw myself in a pleasant room. A
handsome youth, whose very body was fragrant was sitting next to me with
my head in his lap, waiting for me to wake up. I sat up out of respect
for him and greeted him. He smiled lovingly, embraced me and returned my
greetings, and said, "sit down and be at ease. I'm your friend and
companion, not a Prophet or an Imam."

I asked, "May I know who you are? It is indeed my good fortune to have
a companion like you. It is my desire to always remain with you."

He replied, "My name is Haadi (Guide), I am also called Abul Wafa (the
Father of fulfilment) and Abu Turab (Father of earth). I guided you to
your last answer. Had you failed to reply, they would have given you a
good beating with their iron rods and your grave would have become full
with the flames from Hell," I replied, " I am indeed grateful to you for
your help in freeing me from the dire straits I was in but as that as
I'm concerned, the last question was unnecessary and was merely in order
to lengthen the questioning process. I had replied correctly to all the
questions about the Islamic beliefs. And if one speaks truthfully about
factual events, then there is no scope left for questioning. If you keep
a red-hot iron on somebody's palm and he complains that his hand is
burning, it is superfluous to ask why he is saying so. It inspite of
this a man is foolish enough to ask, then the reply can only be to ask
him if he is blind that he cannot see the red hot iron lying on the
hand. The last questions which the angels asked can only be termed to be
of this category."

Haadi replied, "This is not correct, because man does not usually speak
the truth, It is quite possible that he admits to certain truths
verbally, but in the heart or hearts he does not believe in them. If the
heart does not firmly believe in a principle, it will not act in
accordance to it, Such words and admissions are meaningless as the heart
does not believe in them, As God has said, 'Do not claim that you have
brought faith, only say that you have submitted,' faith has not yet
entered your hearts.

"On the very first day when man was asked 'Am I not your Lord?' all did
not reply in the affirmative and submit to God's Lordship as they should
have." I inquired "Why"?

Haadi replied, In the material world when man is tested for his
religious duties and responsibilities, many tail to observe these
dutifully until the time arrives to come out of the examination hall.

After death, here in the first station, the true believer and the
hypocrite both answer the questions correctly until the last question is
asked. If true faith had place in his heart, then only is he able to
answer as you did. If, however, the foundation of his beliefs and his
religion lay in traditions and customs and not in sound logic, then as
deep down in his heart he does not believe in it, it proves useless
here. You are aware yourself of the traditions of the Prophet and his
progeny concerning this."

I replied, "That's true, the traditions of the Infallible indeed speak
of this. But the questioning terrified me so much, that I could not even
think logically, and forgot all about this. May God bless you for coming
to my help at such a crucial time. And I pray to God that he may never
bereave me of your company.

"But first, tell me, how is it that though we've never met before, you
seem to know me well, and in-spite of the short time that we've been
together, I've developed such a love for you that I cannot bear to part
with you ?"'

He replied, 'I have been with you since the very first day and have
always loved you but you never sensed my presence since in the material
world your sight lacked the power to perceive me.


