Chapter 10 â€“ a Visit To Hell
============================

I said "I'm prepared to leave, but Haadi theres one thing which saddens
me.He said. "Sadness and in the Valley of Peace! I cannot believe it."
"You are right, but didn't you notice that Hazrat Abbas (A.S.) and
Hazrat Ali Akbar (A.S.) are still in their battle-dress and blood stains
still visible on Hazrat Ali Asghar's (A.S.) neck. I wish to avenge their
deaths."

He replied, "But their enemies, the accursed beings, are in the Valley
of Barhoot and it is the duly of the Twelfth Imam. the Imam Mehdi (A.S.)
to avenge, which he shall, whenever he appears. I said, "True, but I
wish to go to the Valley of Barhoot and punish them with my own two
hands."

"God has ordained two harsh and severe angels for this task. Do you
consider yourself more capable than God and his angels?" "No, no, of
course not! Of course nobody is more severe than God and his angels
because he is the Ultimate Justice. No doubt he is Benevolent and
Merciful, but he is also the Forceful and all-powerful. However, it was
my desire to punish them personally."

"No doubt God will reward you for your feelings. But you should realise
that the Faithful's illuminance can cool down the fire of Hell. Are you
willing that the heat should decrease for the period that you are
there?" He was right and so I said, "All right, but at least take me to
some place from where I may be able to see them being punished."

When Haadi saw that I lust would not be satisfied he left to present my
request to the Holy Prophet (Peace be upon him), Hazrat Ali (A.S.) and
Hazrat Fatima (A.S.). When they learnt about this. they prayed for my
welfare and the Holy Prophet (Peace be upon him) said, "O Lord! We
Ahlebait are always content and satisfied with whatever your will is.
because you only wish the best. We cannot dare object. However today one
of your servants has come to your guest house where sorrow and sadness
cannot enter, but he loves us so much that he wishes to see our enemies
being punished and he will not be content until his desire is fulfilled.
If you please, in order to satisfy him, allow him to see the Valley of
Barhoot."

The Holy Prophet's (Peace be upon him) wish was granted and it was
ordered that I should be allowed to see the enemies of the Ahlebait
(A.S.) being punished but that angels should accompany me so that I
would not be troubled at all in this journey and the hot air would not
harm me.

When I received this news, I was overjoyed and I started preparing for
my journey along with a few of my friends. We were accompanied with
angels on all sides to protect us. Soon we approached a hill. When it
was about a hundred steps ahead we saw that the eastern horizon was
overcast with dark clouds and sparks of different shapes were emitting
from them, as if they were made of tire and were bursting. We could hear
the thunder from afar. As soon as the angels saw this, they
involuntarily said, "There is no course of circumstances and no power
except God's."

I asked, "What is the matter?" The angels replied, "This is the Valley
of Barhoot and these sparks, resembling arrows. spears, swords and
cudgels are in fact the curses which the faithfuls send upon the enemies
of the Ahlebait and these are hitting their targets. But this is not the
real punishment. The real punishment and wrath of God is being meted out
in the plains of Barhoot. The plain is even warmer than the
iron-monger's kiln. Snakes, scorpions and beasts made of fire are
present there to continuously torture those accursed beings."

We climbed the hill from here we could see that the fiery arrows would
pass clean through the bodies which they entered. Each of the arrows,
swords etc. passed through numerous people and if by chance any of the
darts fell down it would get up again to continue hitting its targets.
If the people tried to escape, the arms would follow them until they
would manage to strike. It seemed as if these arms and darts were
conscious beings and also as if somebody was picking up the enemies
bodily and throwing them down onto the ground here and there. It
reminded me of the sight of mustard seeds popping about while being
roasted. The enemies of the Ahlebait (A.S.) were wailing away and their
voices sounded like the whining and yelping of dogs. The sight gave me
great pleasure and satisfaction. I sat down on the hill to enjoy the
scennary and since I had been informed that these arms were in infect
the faithiuls curses, I repeated the curse which I used to read in
Ziarate-Ashura.

"O God! Send down your curse on the first oppressor who did injustice
to Mohammed (Peace be upon him) and his Progeny and to the last, who
followed in his footsteps. O God, send down your curse on the wretched
people who fought with Hussein (A.S.) and those who were with them and
obeyed them and followed them in killing Hussein (A.S.). O God, send
down your curse on all of them."

Then I said, ""O god especially curse on my behalf the first oppressor,
then the second, the third, and the fourth0 always and forever." "O God,
curse Yazid son of Muawiyah, the fifth and curse Obaidullah son Ziyad
and Omar son of Saad and Shimr and the families of Abu Sufyan, Ziyad and
Marwan upto the Day of Judgement."

(The above are responsible for the murder of the grandson of the Holy
Prophet)

All the angels and friends accompanying me joined me in repeating these
two curses again and again. The fiery arms increased ten fold in number
and the atmosphere became dense and dark with dust. The punishment
became much more severe. A spark would strike an enemy causing him to
jump up in the air, where he would be struck by more darts from all
directions. They were being tossed around like footballs, managing to
land only alter a length of time. On seeing this we continued cursing
until our voices became hoarse and throats dry. By now the accursed
people had been roasted alive their skins were peeling. and their bodies
had become pierced like sieves.

They were wishing that they would die but here even death could not
rescue them because here there was no death: only eternal wrath and
punishment. On earth they had oppressed until death had freed the
oppressed from their tyranny. but in the Hereafter since death does not
exist, the oppressors could not escape their eternal harsh fate.

The Quran says: "The Hereafter is in, fact life" and "Whenever their
skin will burn away. we will replace it with another.'

Here we also observed two strange sights. One that amongst these people
there were two men whom fire could not reach. Flames would leap towards
them, but would be turned away by large fans thus keeping the two men
safe. When I inquired, I was informed that one was Haatim of Taai, the
other Nausherwan the Just. Being infidels, they had been sent to Hell
but the generosity of one and the justice of the other kept its flames
away from them, as generosity and justice both were God's favourite
qualities and he does not let anybody's labour go waste or unrewarded.

Secondly, I saw some people who though also present in Hell, were out
of reach of its flames and were also not troubled by its fiery darts.
However though they were not being punished themselves, they were losing
their wits just seeing others being punished. Their faces had gone white
and they were completely bewildered and terrified. I was informed that
these were friends of Ahlebait and they used to hate the enemies of
Ahlebail but they had been neglectful of their prayers and fasts and
other obligations and had also not avoided the forbidden deeds. They
were also answerable to of hers. The Just could forgive disobedience and
sins but could not overlook the rights due to other men. So they were
sent to hell but their love of Ahlebait.

became a shield, saving them from its fire. At the termination of their
sentence, since they had been correct in their faith and beliefs, if God
so willed, they would be freed from Hell and would enjoy God's
blessings.

Seeing the fate of the enemies of Ahlebait really gratified me and we
resumed our journey saying, -O God, give them such a punishment from
which even the dwellers of Hell would wish that they were freed."


