Chapter 2 - Journey To the First Station
========================================

I realised that it was time to leave. I picked up my Bag of Deeds and
started on the road which Haadi had pointed out. The road was clear, and
a pleasant and cool breeze was blowing. I was fresh and eager to meet
Haadi again at the fourth station. I was walking briskly and managed to
cover quite some distance. Before noon, however, I was feeling a bit
tired. It had become warmer, and I was thirsty. The pathway had narrowed
and there were thorns here and there. Trying to keep tree of these, I
kept on until I reached the foot of a mountain and started climbing
uphill.

The loneliness was getting on my nerves when suddenly I looked back and
to my great relief, saw a person walking towards me on the same path. I
was happy that I had at last found a companion to lessen the loneliness
of the journey. When he came close, I saw that he was quite ugly to look
at and had a distressed took. He had huge teeth, an over hanging upper
lip and wide, fearful and stinking nostrils. He greeted me with "Saam
Alaik" that is the 'I' in the salaam was missing. This was enough to put
me on my guard, because this was not the. Islamic way; in fact, was a
sign of enmity. Furthermore it appeared to be intended that way, and did
not seem to be a mistake, so I was on my guard and merely replied "Same
to you."

Then I asked "Where are you going?" He replied "Wherever you intend to
go." I did not feel easy on having him as a companion. However I asked
"May I know who you are?" He replied I am your alter ego. They call me
Ignorance. My title is way wardness my family name Abu Lahaw (meaning
father of playfulness i.e. to waste time in non-serious things). My aim
is to create mischief, to ferment discord and dissension and to mislead
people and cause them to go astray."

All this conversation further troubled and worried me. I thought that I
should have been better of alone, without such a person as companion.

(Traditions show that when Satan lost favour at Allah he was granted
the wish that a child of his would be born whenever a human being was
born, and he would remain the tatters constant companion, even in
Barzakh. His job would be to mislead people. lithe human being had
overcome the Satanic commands and his own desires in the earthly life
then this twin would remain overpowered in Barzakh and cause no harm.
However, here he will cause problems and troubles to the extent that Man
had sinned in his earthly lie. As the Prophet had said "I too had this
Satan but he embraced Islam on my hands.

The gist of this is that human being has his carnal and material
desires from birth and no man is an exception. If he gives in to these
and errs, he will subsequently regret, feel remorseful and consequently
suffer. The successful one is he who is so firm of mind that he always
overpowers his desires. The ideal being was Holy Prophet (S.A.) who had
completely vanquished and triumphed over desires.)

I asked him "It we come to a diversion will you know which route to
take? He replied in the negative. I then asked, "I am thirsty. Is there
any water nearby?" He replied "I don't know. I asked, "Is our
destination near?" He again said, "I don't knows I said "Intelligence
and wisdom go hand in hand with existence. How is it that you do not
know any thing?"

He said "I only know that I have been at your side ever since you were
born. I have never separated tram you except when Allah has especially
favoured you and you yourself have separated from me."

I soliloquised "Then this must be the Satan who used to mislead me in
the world and on whose beckoning I used to sin. And even now he is not
leaving me alone. This is indeed the height of enmity. Allah, Oh Allah,
have mercy He kept following me, couple of paces behind. The road was
uphill and steep and it was difficult going. At last I reached the top.
I was tired, and so sat down to rest for awhile. Ignorance sat down
beside me and said "You seem to be tired. Do you want to know a short
cut which will shorten your travel to only a fifth?"

I replied "'Inspite of your ignorance it seems that' can pull
miracles." He said "It's not that. Come here, I'll show you. See this
road on which you are travelling, though it's bright is bent like a bow
and is not less than 5 Km. The chord joining the two points of the arc
is no more than one kilometre.

"Geometrically, an arc whether small or big is always bigger than its
chord. So we leave this popular road and instead take to the lesser
known path it'll be a short cut and no longer than 1 kilometre instead
of five. Surely it's wiser to take the short cut."

I replied, "Don't be stupid. Don't you know that these highways are a
result of the route being popular and constantly traversed. The people
who chose ft weren't senseless. And there's a famous saying that always
travel on routes which are popular and favoured by travellers."

He said "You are indeed stupid. You are taking poets and story tellers
to be wise men and you are content to 10110w in their foot steps. The
path that I am pointing out is obviously shorter. And it is also
possible that the people who chose the longer route had enough provision
with them or had some means of conveyance. It is possible that they
wanted to avoid that tunnel at the mouth of the chord, or maybe their
mount could not pass through it. So tell me, why shouldn't the two of us
take the short-cut?"

Here I committed the mistake of falling or what he said, mistaking him
to be a well wisher. We left the main road and took to the short-cut.
But it was not at all easy going here were deep ditches full of rubbish.
The path was strewn with needle like thorns and we often came across
snakes and scorpions As soon as we would cross one ravine, we would
reach another.

It was so hot that my tongue was literally hanging out with thirst, My
feet were also injured and bleeding. I was feeling afraid right down to
the core of my heart.

My companion seemed to be enjoying my plight. He was joking and
laughing at me. We travelled for what seemed to be ages and when at last
we reached the highway again we had covered at least 10 Km, Each step
had been an ordeal and I was dead tired, I had developed complete hatred
for my twin and I told him so WI wish we had never met. I would be
happier if we were as tar apart as the two poles".

But he kept waiting for me whilst I sat down to rest. A bit rested, I
got up to resume my journey and he again started following me. Suddenly
I spotted some greenery about one fourth kilometre away from the
highway. Seeing. his chance, ignorance again assaulted me. He came
running to me and said, "Hey do you see the greenery over there? There's
sure to be water there too. And you really are so thirsty. Let's go and
have a look. Maybe we'll find a fresh water spring and you can get a
cool drink. When we come back we'll resume our journey."

I can sincerely say that I did not want to obey him; but I was tired
and thirsty and I knew that greenery was not possible without water
(When man has to confront the consequences of his actions, he wishes he
had never committed them. But this repentance is often not serious
enough to stop him from again falling in for temptations and desires.)

So I again felt in his trap. We went towards ft and the route proved to
be an extremely difficult and painful one. When we reached, I saw that
there was no sign of water anywhere. The ground was rocky and plain.
There were huge black snakes visible everywhere. The greenery itself
consisted of self-sustaining wild shrubs which do not require additional
water. Dejected. I turned back and after again crossing the troublesome
path, reached the highway.

We were now in an open ground and all around us were fields full of
water-melon plants, laden with fruits. Ignorance at once picked up one
and busied himself eating it. He said 'Why don't you take one also.
It'll kill your thirst"

I said "It's somebody's personal property and it's not right to take
without permission'. ignorance was so engrossed in eating that he was
unmindful of the juice trickling down his beard and onto his chest.
Shaking his head, he replied "Oh:

Don't be so pious. Listen, firstly there's a good chance that the
fields are self-growing and don't belong to anybody, Secondly, even if
somebody owns them, Islamic Law allows travellers to consume the
necessary minimum from the lands adjacent to the highways. And then, you
look like you are about to die of thirst. In such conditions one is even
allowed to consume dead bodies. In Soora-e-Baqra (Cow) Verse No.173. God
says:

"Whoever is driven to necessity, not desiring, nor exceeding the limit,
then he is not guilty of sin, verily Allah is forgiving, merciful."

"And finally, you are no longer in Earth where you are required to live
according to the Islamic laws. You are now in Barzakh and those laws are
applicable there. not here. You religious people go to extremes. At
times you give rulings which even God has not decreed,"

Fool that I was, I again fell for him. I thought "Satan he maybe, but
he certainly argues logically." I plucked a watermelon and tried to eat
but it was so poisonously bitter, that it injured my mouth and throat. I
threw it way and said, "These must be Satanic watermelons. in fact of
Ignorance."

He said "No, no, you are mistaken. its just a coincidence that
particular melon was so bitter. Try another," So I tried a second and
then a third but they were all the same. He was continuously eating and
kept exclaiming, "Delicious melons, how extremely sweet.'" I snatched a
slice from his hands and tasted it. It tasted similar to the ones I had
eaten before, as bitter as one could imagine. I threw it away in disgust
and exclaimed "God damn you. why are you eating these and claiming them
to be tasty ? I think snake venom must be less bitter." Now be said.
"According to my taste, they are sweet and tasty melons. I am Ignorance
and these melons are related to me. Whatever is good or beneficial for
me is harmful for you, because lam Satan and you are a human. These are
according to my taste and nature not to yours.

(This is in accordance with the philosophical argument, the gist of
which is that people judge things in accordance with their own nature. A
sinner does not see wrong or bad in sins and disobedience, in tact finds
pleasure and contentment in these. Whereas a righteous person would be
horrified at these and lust the thought of committing evil would sicken
him. Henceforth the author has used the word "Darky" instead of Satanic
Twin, in order to make obvious the darkness of Satanic incitements.

Suddenly a vicious dog attacked us. Behind it was a guard armed with a
stick. He was cursing us and it was clear that he too intended to
attack. Darky quickly took the cue and was out onto the road in one
bound. I too, tried to escape but could not manage it. The dog caught
hold of my clothes and I fell down out of sheer fear at this sudden
attack. The guard too reached the scene and joined in with his stick, My
pleas went unheard. I kept repeating that I had not eaten a single
melon, but his answer was that as far as damage was concerned it was the
same whether I had eaten them or thrown them away. At last, after he had
given me a thorough beating, I managed to get away. I reached the road,
but I was in a bad state, deeply injured and thirsty. I cried for Haadi,
that he had left me alone to face such times.

Darky, however, was gleeful at his success. His laughter knew no
limits. He watched me from afar and taunted me, "Go on, call Haadi. Do
you really expect him to be helpful to you here, in this place ? On the
earth you had sown seeds for these sorrows in my garden: now is the time
for tasting them. 'The World is the field where the Hereafter is
cultivated and the Hereafter is the day of harvest.' You think yourself
to be a scholar.

Don't you know the Quran has said that "Whoever has sinned as much as a
grain, shall see it (in the hereafter)?" How can you expect Haadi to
help you inspite of these laws of God. I Admitted that we will soon
reach those places where Haadi will be present but don't forget I too
will be there. You will have to lace calamities at places where .Haadi
will be useless for you. Did not Haadi himself tell you that whenever
you sinned he went away, leaving you alone, though he returned to you
when you repented7 Don't you even remember your own Prophet's tradition.
"A faithful does not commit adultery as long as he is a true faithful.
Hence Haadi was never present with you at these occasions when you
sinned. so how can he help you now, when you have to pay for those deeds
of yours." I thought that there was no solution for this accursed being.
He was too well informed for my comfort. I stopped calling for Haadi,
opened my bag and took out tan apple. It was a juicy one and refreshed
me and quenched my thirst. Even my bruises became well. got up and
resumed my journey.

(From the traditions of the Infallible we gather that faith is not a
permanent resident of the faithful's heart. If he sins, faith leaves him
to return only when he repents. As faith is a divine and godly gift it
does not remain with the faithful if he indulges in sins. (e.g. lying,
adultery. fraud. rivelry, etc.) and as faith departs he is engulfed in
Darkness and Ignorance. May God grant us all the desire and chance to
Repent truly.)

After sometime I reached a bisection with one road leading to an open,
airy and bright city and the other towards a desolate place. A Sentry
was standing guard at the bisection. I approached him and said.
"Comrade. it possible can you prevent Darky from following me? He has
already caused me a great deal of trouble today."

The guard replied. 'Just as the human's shadow is inseperatable from
the body, so is Darky. Tonight, however, he will not be able to approach
you, because they are not allowed inside the City of Light. They will
stay the night in that desolate and dark place on your left. When you
resume your journey he will again be at your side. However, it is
possible that he will not trouble you so much then".

I entered the bright and developed city. This was the first station.
There were beautiful buildings; flowing lakes, greenery, and trees laden
with fruits; beautiful servants with eloquent speech,' delicate and
tasty food, and delicious drinks. I felt so happy and contented,
especially as this came after the horrible and burdensome journey and
the troubles that I had borne because of my Darky. These were now
compensated by the Edenic place, and had it not been for the urge to
meet Haadi at the fourth station, I would have been contented to stay
here only.

Here I also met a few of my students who had died a few years before
me. We spent the night here. In the morning1 the breeze was scented with
the smell of fresh fruits, We strolled in the city, chatting and
inquiring about each other's welfare because in the hereafter one can
only inquire about another's welfare at such stops as one is too busy to
even think of another when he is travelling. As the Qur'an says, "On the
Day of Judgement each man will be engrossed in his own self, oblivious
of others". We were also thankful to be rid of the Darkies.

In short, we were completely happy here, with the best of people,
service and food. The best thing was that the ugly Darkies were not near
us. We were thankful to God, that for our small deeds on the earth he
had so richly rewarded us, As Quran says in Soora-e-Safat verse 61, "For
the like of this all strivers should strive".


