Chapter 4 - Journey Towards Third Station
=========================================

We got up and resumed our journey. The road was good and it was easy
going. On both sides were dense trees laden with fruits and a lake of
cool and sweet water flowed alongside the path. A pleasant breeze
further refreshed the mind. It was as if we were beholding the very
image of the Beauty of God.

The journey passed without any problems worth mentioning. It had been
so easy that we were not in the least tired or travel-weary when we
reached the third station. Each of us was given a separate palace for
our stay. The bricks of these palaces were of silver and gold.

The palaces were elaborately equipped and furnished and not a single
thing was lacking. The delicate crockery, exquisite flooring and murals
were unbelievable, The servants were beautiful, well-mannered, eloquent
and well-dressed. They were busy, moving all around us, making
arrangements for our comfort, as if they were the very pictures
described in Quran:

"Around them circle beautiful, ever living boys (servants)" and when
you see them, you will imagine them to be spread pearls and when you
behold, then you will behold bounties and a large power."

I felt shy asking such people for service. Suddenly, I spotted a large
mirror and in it I saw the sublime station to which by his grace the
Exalted Allah had elevated me. I felt high on being so honoured and
rested back comfortably.

Night fell and the palace became illuminated. Careful scrutiny revealed
that the light was emerging from the branches of the trees. This light
was so bright that a thousand of our electric bulbs would not be able to
match it. The palace and the gardens were bright with this light. I was
wondering at this spectacle when a voice called out verse 35 of
Soor-e-Noor Allah is the light of the Heavens and the Earth. The
similitude of this light is as a niche wherein is a lamp. The lamp is in
a glass. The glass is as if it were a shining star, lit from a blessed
tree. the olive, neither of the East nor or the West, whose oil glows
forth (of itself) though fire did not touch it; light upon light; Allah
guides unto his light, whomsoever he wills."

I at once realised that the tight was of the tree of Muhammad (S.A.)
and his progeny and this city, the city of love. Only those people were
allowed to stay here who had the ultimate love for Muhammad (S.A.) and
his progeny. Here the residents were busy, recalling the sublime
qualities of Muhammad (S.A.) and his progeny and asking God to send his
peace and blessings upon them as through them only the human race had
acquired knowledge of Allah and the correct ways to worship him.

Here we were in great comfort. Out hearts were full of thankfulness to
God for his grace and bounty, and to Muhammad (S.A.) and his progeny for
having guided us towards the correct path. On the gate was a sign saying
in bold letters "The love of Ali is such a quality that in its presence
no sin can harm.""
(This tradition is believed universally by all Muslims. It means that
anyone who truly loves All, does not sin because naturally he tries to
fallow his ideal in thoughts and deed. Hence Ali's love acts as a shield
against committing sins. If one finds himself to be proclaiming love for
Ali but also committing sins, he should closely observe and question
this love as to whether there really is true love in his heart and if
so, is it just for the name "Ali" whether it is for Aliâ€™s qualities,
habits, the style, ideals, thoughts and deeds. Are all these acceptable
to him and do these appeal to him, because "ALI" represents these and
not merely a historical name.)


