Chapter 5 - the Fourth Station and Reunion With Haadi
=====================================================

In the morning we started for the next station. The road was clear and
easy. On both sides there were lush green trees in full blossom. Cool
water flowing softly in the lakes, and a pleasant breeze, all these made
it a perfect scene, beyond description. We reached the outskirts and it
seemed as if its beauties accompanied us for a little while outside the
city in order to see us out.

The path was now no longer clear and clean. in tact, it had become
narrow and rocky. Then it passed through a twisting and snaking valley.
Had we not been so many people in our group, we would surely have lost
our way. We reached a spot where numerous forks led toward the left and
it was not easy to decide which one to chose. As we went on, we suddenly
saw the Darkies approaching us from one of the paths on the left,
The moment I saw my Darky, I felt overcome with mixed emotions or
grief, sorrow and anger. In the brief moment that my eyes were or him,
my foot struck a stone and was badly injured. I limped on but could only
manage a slow pace and was soon left behind as my other companions went
toward with quick steps. Darky stayed on my left until we reached a
bisection. I could not choose which fork to take. Seeing my momentary
hesitation, Darky approached and said, "What are you thinking?" Then
pointing towards the left fork, he said, "This path is the correct
one."' So saying, he took a few steps towards the left, expecting me to
follow, However. instead of following him, I choose to go the other way,
in the opposite direction.

Darky kept insisting that I follow him but I did not pay him the least
heed, because I had already suffered enough and each time he had been
the cause. I thought of Hazart Ali's words "To try him whom you have
already tried (and he has failed) is stupidity".

In a short while we were out of the valley. The road again became clear
and the visibility also increased further on the dark shapes of trees in
a meadow could be seen. I at once understood that this was the Fourth
Station where Haadi had promised to meet me. The thought of seeing Haadi
again, spurred me on to the extent that I almost started running and
left a dejected Darky well behind.

(It is an accepted tact that the way to happiness and success lies in
opposing the satanically incitements and desires. As said below if
satanic incitements and' desires are constantly opposed, they gradually
lose the power to misguide and doing good continuously further increases
one â€˜s eagerness and appetite for good deeds.)

Soon I saw Haadi waiting for me at the city gate. When I saw him thus,
waiting as he had promised he would, I ran to him, and greeted and
embraced him. I felt as if I had been granted a fresh life. Hand in hand
we entered the city. Haadi guided me to a palace, which had been
especially built for me. It was most comfortable and peaceful here. I
rested a while then had some refreshments. Seeing me fresh once more,
Haadi asked,

"Well, how is it with you ? Tell me how was your journey through the
last three stages?" I answered "All praise is for God, the Creator and
sustainer of all Universe, He showers us with bounties inspite of our
sins, Whatever it was that befell me was nought but punishment for my
own deeds for which I alone was responsible. And if you had been with
me, Darky would never have dared to mislead me. Anyhow, all that is now
past. What matters is that I have finally reached here and met you
again. The ordeal is over and the sorrows forgotten".

(Possibly (a) knowledge and (b) piety as they have served the purpose
of a guiding stick and a shield in the world and so might take these
forms in the hereafter.)

Haadi said, "Well I wasn't with you so you kept failing in Darky's
traps; but even now when I am with you, do not imagine yourself to be
completely safe from him, My position is merely that of God's decisive
arguments My job is merely to warn and alert you against Darky's
deceptions. But never forget that Darky is equipped with powerful tools.
He will try his best to mislead you. And this lime if you fall in his
trap and are misled away from the straight path it could spell your end,
and I would be unable to help you as I have delivered to you the
ultimate proof. In these stations you have only a stick and a shield for
your protection.' But even these will prove insufficient. So, as today
is Friday, go visit your family and see if they have done any good deed
on your behalf which can help you here. (Spirits are some times able to
visit their families. according to certain traditions).

I said, Haadi, you know well that I have given up all hopes from that
quarters. Their only interest lies in their own selves. The living
forget the dead very easily. When I visited them last time, I had not
been dead even a week, but inspite of it, whatever they were doing was
only for their own sake."

Haadi said, "No, you must go there today. I'm sure they must have
remembered the Holy Prophet's tradition that 'Remember your dead with
good (deeds or words'). 'And if you go there they might recall you,
since it might cause Allah to remind them of you. And even fl you have
lost hopes of their helping you, at least have hopes from Allah. If one
keeps knocking, the door is bound to yield. And never lose hope. in
Allah, 'Allah's mercy is close to the Good-doers'.

On Haadi's insistence, I went to my old home. I saw that the name,
respect and position ft had held in the past were no more. The gate was
closed to the public unlike the way it had been in the past. My family's
earning and livelihood had dwindled almost to nil. My children lay
listless and none came to inquire their welfare, ft saddened me beyond
words. Compulsively, I turned towards Allah: 'O Most Merciful, have pity
on my children and myself, because you are the lord of all'. It seemed
as if my praying for them refreshed my remembrance in their hearts
because they started recalling me and the good time they had in my
lifetime. They wept and prayed for me.

(When a person's mind attentively concentrates on another it is
possible that it causes the other to compulsively think of him.)

When I returned, I found a beautiful and healthy horse standing besides
Haadi. I asked Haadi where it had come from, and he replied smilingly,
"your family prayed for you and God's blessing has come to you in this
form.

"And it is just as well because it would have been very difficult to
continue our journey on fool. Also your prayer for your family has been
granted and henceforth they will live in comfort and well-being.

"You can see yourself how beneficial your visit has proved for all of
you. It seems that on Earth people are careless about praying for each
other as they are ignorant of its benefits. The Holy Prophet has said
'If three days pass without people inquiring the well-being of each
other then the bond of faith between them breaks."

I returned to my room and was pleasantly surprised to find a beautiful
and lovely maiden sitting on the couch. Her eyes were bright and her
shining face seemed 10 illuminate the whole room. Haadi announced, 'This
maiden has been wed to you and especially sent here for tonight from the
Valley of Peace', So saying, he left.

The two of us were left atone. When I approached her, she stood up to
greet me, and respectfully kissed my hands, We then sat down next to
each other. We spent the night in blissful comfort.

(Praying sincerely for the dead can improve their lot as God can bless
them through his mercy and forgiveness.)


