Chapter 10
==========

   
 After the death of the Prophet those companions who were critical of
his action at Ghadir al-Khum and who opposed Ali, immediately got
together at "Saqifah Bani Sa'dah" which was specially made for vain
consultations (Ghayathul Lughaat) and a few individuals, whose number
might have been about 200 and in whom both agreeing and disagreeing
immigrants and supporters were included, laid the foundation of a
personal government. When they returned to Medina from Saqifah, after
the burial of the Prophet, they started demanding allegiance from people
in order to give that personal government a collective and democratic
form. To achieve this end they behaved not only with the dignified
companions but also with the Ahlul Bayt in such a manner that humanity
shudders even to mention it.  
    
 The gist of the painful story of this period is that Ali was compelled
to swear allegiance (Rauzatul Ahbab) and on his refusal the army of the
caliph took him to the court with his neck tied with a rope. (Ibn Abil
Hadid Mo'tazali). Fatimah's house was set on fire. (Tarikh Tabari,
Tarikh al-Imamah wa as-Siyasah, Mir'atul Uqul).

The door of the house was dropped on Fatimah resulting in the
miscarriage of her male child. (al-Milal wan Nahl of Shahristani).
Allamah Mullah Mu 'in Kashifi writes that Fatimah fell ill on account of
this shock, which caused her death [^1]. Then those who had refused
fealty to Abu Bakr were forced with an iron hand to show allegiance, and
some were badly beaten. Salman Farsi whom the Prophet had included in
his Ahlul Bayt was also one of the victims of their tyranny. He was so
severely beaten that his neck became tilted and the tilt lasted till his
death.  
    
 The names of those who were in Medina and who refused allegiance to Abu
Bakr are given below:  
 Imam Ali, Abu Dharr, Salman Farsi, Ammar bin al-Yasir , Miqdad bin
al-Aswad, Khalid bin Sa'id, Burayda Aslami, Ubay bin Ka'b, Huzayma bin
Thabit, Suhayl bin Hanif, Uthman bin Hanif, Abu Ayyub Ansari, Huzayfa
bin al-Yamani, Sa'd bin Ubaydah, Qays bin Sa'd, Abdullah bin Abbas,
Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib, Abdul Haytham bin Tayhan, Jabir bin Abdullah,
Abdullah bin Thamit, Ubaydah bin Thamit, Abu Sa 'id Khudari, [^2]  
    
 It is written on page 43 of the same book (Tabsaratul- Awam) that after
a few days Sa'd bin Ubaydah was killed with arrows on account of his
refusal to pay allegiance.  
    
 Anyway, this political hoolinganism continued after the death of the
Holy Prophet. Historians write that the land of Fadak, the property of
Ahlul Bayt was confiscated only on account of this refusal of
allegiance. These people said that Caliphate was Ali's inalienable right
and he should get it. The details of this claim ate still available In
Ali's sermon of Shiqshiqiyyah recorded.in Nahjul Balaghah. He has stated
in clear terms that Caliphate was his right which was snatched away from
him. He has also mentioned his attempt for the establishment of his
claim as is seen on page 231 of the book an-Nihayah of Ibn Athir. Now we
quote from Tarikh-i Ahmadi this great tragedy and catastrophic event
which happened to the Ahlul Bayt and the sincere companions after the
death of the Holy Prophet, so that the reader may know after all what
happened to the progeny of the Prophet and his sincere companions only
two weeks after the Prophet's death, and what role Abu Dharr played at
that juncture.  
    
 According to Tarikh Ibn Jarir, Umar was present at the time of the Holy
Prophet's death but Abu Bakr was not there. He was in the village Sakh.
When the Prophet died Umar said, "According to the presumption of
hypocrites the Prophet is dead, but I swear by Allah that he is
alive".  
    
 According to al-Milal wan Nahl of Shahristani Umar threatened to kill
the man with his sword if he said that the Prophet was dead. This
incident is also recorded in other books such as, (Tarikh Abul Fida vol.
1, p. 164, Tabaqatul Kubra vol. 2, p. 271, Sunan Ibn Maja vol. 1, p.
571, Hadith 1618, Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal vol. 1.)  
    
 According to Rauzatul Ahbab the people started doubting the death of
the Prophet when they heard this threat of Umar At that time Abu Bakr
was in his house at Sakh. When he was informed of the death of the
Prophet he immediately rode to Medina and on reaching Masjid an-Nabi saw
that the people were in a melee.  
    
 According to Tarikh Abul Fida when Abu Bakr witnessed this condition of
people he recited the verse meaning: ***"Muhammad is but a Messenger of
Allah and before him also many messengers (like him) have passed away.
Should Muhammad die or be slain, would you then turn back to your
pre-Islamic behaviour?"***[^3] Hearing this people became convinced of
the demise of the Holy Prophet. After that, all of them hastened to
Saqifah Bani Sa'da.  
    
 According to Tarikh Ibn Khaldun Abu Bakr on reaching Saqifah said, "We
are the companions and kinsmen of the Prophet and hence have a better
claim to the Caliphate of the Prophet than anybody else".  
    
 According to Tarikh Tabari of Ibn Jarir Umar said to Abu Bakr: "Hold
out your hand so that I may swear allegiance to you". Abu Bakr said,
"No; you should hold out your hand because you are in every way more
powerful than I". This tussle continued for sometime. At last Umar
stretched the hand of Abu Bakr and promised loyalty to him and also
said, "You should count my strength also combined with yours".  
    
 According to Tarikh Kamil of Ibn Athir, Umar and others promised
loyalty to Abu Bakr, but all or some of the Ansar said, "We will not
swear allegiance to anybody except Ali". According to Tarikh Khamis when
Abu Bakr got relief from the work of allegiance he returned from Saqifah
to Masjidun Nabi and took his seat on the pulpit. Here, too, he took
allegiance till the day came to an end and the people failed to attend
the burial of the Holy Prophet. It was Tuesday night.  
    
 According to Kanzul 'Ummal it is narrated by Urwa that Abu Bakr and
Umar were not present at the burial of the Holy Prophet, but were
present in the crowd of the "Ansar" (at Saqifa Bani Sa'dah) and the
Prophet had been buried before they returned from there.  
    
 According to Nihayah of Ibn Athir Jazari, Majma' al-Bihar of Mulla
Tahir Qutni and al-Milal wan Nahl of Shahristani, Umar said afterwards
that the allegiance of Abu Bakr was an expected event but Allah saved us
from its evil.  
    
 According to Tarikh Abul Fida a group of Hashimites and also Zubayr bin
al-'Awam, Miqdad bin 'Amr, Salman Farsi, Abu Dharr, Ammar al-Yasir,
Bara' bin Azib etc. siding with Ali kept away from swearing allegiance
to Abu Bakr.  
    
 It is written in Isti'ab of Abdul Barr that when loyalty was promised
to Abu Bakr, Ali did not promise loyalty to him and stayed at home.  
    
 According to Muruj uz-Zahab of Mas'udi, when on the day of Saqifah
allegiance was promised to Abu Bakr, Ali said to Abu Bakr, “You ruined
our affairs, did not consult us and did not regard our right". Abu Bakr
said, "Your complaint is justified but I have done so for fear of
revolt".  
    
 According to Rauzatul Ahbab when Abu Bakr became free from the work of
seeking allegiance he called Ali through some Muhajir and Ansar. Ali
came and asked, "Why have I been called?" Umar said, "You have been
called to promise loyalty as others have done". Ali said, "I put before
you the same argument, which you have presented before the Ansar to
acquire the Caliphate. Tell me honestly the man nearest to the Prophet".
Umar said, "We will not leave you unless you promise allegiance". Ali
said, "Answer my question first and than ask me for allegiance". Abu
Ubaydah bin Jarrah said, "O Abul Hasan! Only you deserve the Caliphate
and administration on account of your priority in Islam and your
nearness to the Prophet, but as the companions have agreed on Abu Bakr,
it is better that you also join them. Ali said, "O Abu Ubaydah! You want
to transfer to other place the great blessing which Allah has bestowed
upon the Family of the Prophet. Look! We are the place of descent of
revelation, the place of arrival of commands and prohibitions, source of
virtue and learning, and mine of reason and forbearance". Hearing this
Bashir bin Sa'id said, "O Abul Hasan! We presumed by your staying at
home that you like to withdraw from the Caliphate". Ali said, "Do you
people deem it proper that leaving the dead body of the Prophet (s)
unwashed, unshrouded and unburied, I should have involved myself in the
dispute and hospitality to seek the Caliphate?"  
    
 It is recorded in Usud ul-Ghabah that Ali quoted the Holy Prophet (s)
as saying, "O Ali! You are like Ka'bah to which everybody goes, whereas
it does not go to anybody. So, if the people of your group come to you
to swear allegiance to you, accept it. Do not go to them till they
themselves come to you".  
    
 According the Rauzatul Ahbab when Abu Bakr heard these things and saw
that every reason and argument of Ali was as indisputable, solid and
irrefutable as one thousand arguments, he said politely, "O Abul Hasan!
I had presumed that you would not refuse allegiance to me. Had I known
that you would withhold your allegiance to me I would not have accepted
it. Now, as people have sworn allegiance to me I think you should also
join them, if you like. But, in case, you have any hesitation in this
connection I do not blame you". At this Ali rose from there and came
back home.  
    
 According to 'Iqdul Farid by Shahabuddin ibn Abd Rabbihi Undlusi, the
people who refused allegiance to Abu Bakr were Ali, Abbas, Zubayr and
S'ad bin Ubadah. Of them Ali, Abbas and Zubayr stayed in the house of
Lady Fatimah till Abu Bakr sent Umar to turn out of the house those who
were staying there and to use sword if they refused to go out. Hence
Umar reached there with some fire in order to ignite the house. When
Fatimah came to know of it she said, "O the son of Khattab! Have you
come to burn my house?" Umar said, "of course, I have come with the same
intention, or else, those who are in this house should come out to
promise allegiance to Abu Bakr”.  
    
 According to Tarikh Abul Fida Umar came with some fire with the
intention of burning the house of Fatimah. When she came to know of it,
she said, "O the son of Khattab! Have you come to burn my house?" Umar
replied, "Yes, otherwise the people who are inside the house should
swear allegiance to Abu Bakr".  
    
 According to the Tarikhut Tabari of Ibn Jarir, Umar went to the house
of Murtaza (Imam Ali) in which there were Talha, Zubayr and some
immigrants and said, "By Allah! I will burn the house otherwise you
should come out for allegiance".  
    
 It is written in "Al-Imamah wa as-Siyasah'' of Ibn Qutaybah Dinuri that
when Abu Bakr did not see in his company when allegiance to him was
being faced, those who were with Ali, he sent Umar to call them to him.
Those people were inside the house of Ali. They refused to come out.
Umar sent for faggots and said, "Come out or by Allah I will bum those
people who are inside the house by setting the house on fire". People
said, "Fatimah, the daughter of the Holy Prophet is also in this house",
Umar replied, "It does not matter", Hearing this all those people who
were inside the house came out except Ali who addressing the people who
had come to call him said: "O the group of immigrants! I have a better
right to Caliphate than you in every respect. I will not swear
allegiance to you. Rather, you should swear allegiance to me. Look! You
got the Caliphate by putting forth the argument before the Ansar that
you are related to the Prophet and (surprisingly enough) now you are
trying to snatch away the Caliphate from the Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet.
Do you not base your claim of superiority over the Ansar on the plea
that the Prophet belonged to your tribe? Now I put against you the same
argument which you had put against the Ansar that is, our relationship
with the Prophet is, in every way, superior to and nearer than yours
during his lifetime as well as after his death. Now be just and fair if
you believe in Allah and fear Him. O the group of immigrants! Remember
Allah and do not take the Prophet's leadership from his house to your
houses". After that Fatimah said at her doorstep, "O people! Leaving the
dead body of the Prophet to us you settled the matter of Caliphate in
your favour and ignored our right".  
    
 According to Tarikh Ibn Qutaybah when Umar went to Abu Bakr he said,
"Why do you not arrest Ali when he is opposing your allegiance?" Abu
Bakr again sent his slave Qanfaz to call Ali to him. Qanfaz said to Ali,
"The Caliph of the Prophet of Allah is calling you". Ali said, "So soon
you people have slandered the Prophet". Qanfaz went back and he repeated
to Abu Bakr what Ali had said to him. After hearing it Abu Bakr kept on
weeping for some time. Umar said to Abu Bakr, the second time, "Do not
give time to Ali who is withholding allegiance to you". Abu Bakr again
ordered Qunfaz to go to Ali and say, "The Commander of the Faithful is
calling you for allegiance. Qunfaz conveyed the message of Abu Bakr to
Ali. Ali said loudly, "Allah be praised! Your master has claimed that
relationship with which he has no connection". Qanfaz went back to Abu
Bakr and repeated Ali's words. On hearing this Abu Bakr started weeping
again. Then Umar rose and with a group of people went to Fatimah's house
and knocked at the door. Hearing the shouts of people Fatimah began to
weep and cry loudly, "O my father! O the Prophet of Allah! What a severe
trouble has been inflicted on us by the son of Khattab and the son of
Abu Quhafah! "When the people heard the wailings of Fatimah most of them
went back weeping and only a few persons stayed behind with Umar. Then
Ali came out of the house and went with them to Abu Bakr. There he was
asked to swear fealty to him. He said, "If I do not swear allegiance
then?" He said, "If you do not swear allegiance, by Allah, we will kill
you”.  
    
 Ali said, "Will you kill a man who is a slave of Allah and brother of
the Messenger of Allah?" Umar said, "We admit that you are a slave of
Allah but we do not acknowledge that you are also the brother of the
Prophet". Abu Bakr was absolutely quiet at that time. Umar said to him,
"Why do you not order and sit quietly?" Abu Bakr said, "I will not force
Ali in the life time of Fatimah". Then Ali rose from there and went to
the grave of the Prophet and there he cried bitterly saying: "O brother!
The people of the tribe have insulted me so much and were about to kill
me".  
    
 Abu Dharr was seeing these things with his own eyes. He had in his mind
what he had seen at Ghadir al-Khum. He was wonder-struck to see what was
happening. In this state of wonder his faith suddenly stirred his
sentiment and he ran up to Masjidun Nabi. His mind was agitated and
perturbed and his blood was ebullient in enthusiasm. He was waiting for
an opportunity to give vent to his feelings. When he reached the masjid
he found a gathering of companions there with Abu Bakr and Umar also in
their midst. His manly courage got excited and he started to deliver a
speech standing on a raised spot.  
    
 He said: "O the people of Quraysh! What has happened to you? How
careless are you! You have completely ignored the kinship of the Holy
Prophet! By Allah a group of Arabs have turned apostates, and have
created breaches of doubts in the faith. Listen to me! Caliphate is the
right of Ahlul Bayt. This violence and brawl is uncalled-for. What has
happened to you? You call the capable incapable and praise the
incapable. By Allah all of you know that the Prophet has declared again
and again "After me the Caliphate and leadership is for Ali, then for
Hasan, then for Husayn and then my infallible progeny will hold this
Office". You ignored the word of the Prophet and the command of Allah!
You forgot that covenant and command which was made binding on you. You
have done obeisance to the perishing world and have sold the hereafter
which is everlasting, and in which the young will not grow old, and the
blessings will not diminish, and the dwellers will not feel sorrowful or
depressed and to which angel of death will have no access. You sold away
such a valuable thing for a paltry price. You have done the same thing
which the people of the Prophets of the past had done. They had broken
the allegiance and gave up their faith when their Prophet died. They
annulled the covenants, changed the commands and metamorphosed the
faith. You have proved yourselves on a par with them. O group of
Quraysh! Very soon you will get the recompense for your misdeeds and the
punishment for your evil doing. That which you have sent through your
conduct will come before you. Remember! Whatever will happen will be
just, because Allah does not do injustice to His slaves [^4].  
    
 The manly courage of Abu Dharr may be judged by this eloquent speech.
It is obvious that he had a very sensitive heart and was endowed with
boldness and courage.  
    
 Abu Dharr delivered this speech at a time when nobody could even utter
a word. The army of the Caliph was bent upon strangling the companions
of the Holy Prophet. Whoever hinted at the refusal of allegiance was
beheaded. He who hesitated to swear allegiance was strangled. A brave
man like Ali was tied by the neck with a rope, and a companion like
Salman was strangulated and was beaten so much that he felt its torment
till he breathed his last.  
    
 Shaykh Abbas Qummi writes that when Fatimah the daughter of the
Prophet, being hurt from falling of the door, remained ill for some time
and then expired. Ali did not, according to her will, give the news of
her death to those who were planners in giving her trouble. Having
finished with the bathing of her dead body Ali sent Imam Hasan to call
Abu Dharr in order to help him in her burial, and he came along[^5].  
    
 Hafiz Muhammad bin Ali bin Shahr Ashob (died 588 A.H.) writes that the
funeral prayers of Fatimah was offered by Ali, Hasan, Husayn, Aqil,
Salman, Abu Dharr , Miqdad, Ammar and Buraydah. Another narration
includes the names of Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib, Fazal, Huzayfah and Ibn
Mas'ud also [^6].

[^1]: . Ma'arij un-Nabuwwah Rukn 4, chapter 3 p. 42

[^2]: Tabsaratul Awam p. 24, Ainul Hayat p.5

[^3]: Surah Ale Imran,   3: 144

[^4]: Al-Ishtiraki az-Zahid p. 113

[^5]: Safinatul Bihar, of Shaykh Abbas Qummi, vol. 1, p. 483

[^6]: Manaqib Ibn Shahr Ashob, vol. 2, p. 65 printed in Multan


