Chapter 11
==========

   
 Abu Dharr, by virtue of his nature, temperament, habit and the command
of the Prophet, was unable to hold his tongue from telling the truth and
lead a silent life. His main occupation besides the worship of Allah was
his stay close to the Holy Shrine of the Prophet and the praise of Ale
Muhammad (the progeny of the Prophet). It appears from some books of
history that Ali had advised him to adopt a lenient policy[^1].  
    
 Days and nights passed on till the year 13 A.H. came and Abu Bakr
passed away. According to Tarikh Tabari and Mu'jam Kabir Tabarani, Abu
Bakr said with utter regrets and sorrow, "Would that I had not opened
the house of Fatimah even if it was closed with an intention to fight,
and would that I had not accepted the Office of Caliphate, but that I
had put the chain of Caliphate round the neck of Umar or Abu Ubaydah".  
    
 It is written in Tarikh Ibn al-Wardi that after that he nominated Umar
as his successor. According to al-Milal wan Nahl of Shahristani, when
Abu Bakr nominated Umar as Caliph at the time of his death people cried
out, "You have appointed a bad tempered and a hard-hearted man as our
ruler".  
    
 According to Tarikh Abul Fida Abu Bakr died on Jumadiul Ukhra 22, 13
A.H., between Maghrib (evening) and Isha (night) and the same day
allegiance was promised to Umar. Abu Dharr did not join the funeral
prayers or burial ceremonies of Abu Bakr because no book of history
mentions his name on this occasion.  
    
 A storm of conquests rose after the death of Abu Bakr. Under the
prevailing conditions Abu Dharr decided to leave Medina for Syria and
stay and spend the rest of his life there. Musnad of Ahmad says that he
preferred Syria because of a will of the Prophet which runs as follows:
"O Abu Dharr! Leave Medina for Syria when the population of the city
grows and extends to Mount Sala".  
    
 Anyway,[^2] Abu Dharr, according to the Prophet's will left for Syria
with his wife and daughter. Shah Walyullah Dehlavi writes that Abu Dharr
left for Syria after the death of Abu Bakr and settled there .  
 Abu Dharr was very strict in the matter of truth. In this respect he
never cared for anybody's hot temper, nor feared anybody's government or
mightiness.  
    
 After Abu Dharr had left for Syria, Umar happened to go there on some
purpose when he met Abu Dharr who narrated to him a tradition of the
Prophet. Abu Dharr said, "I bear witness to the fact that the Prophet of
Allah said: "He who is made somebody's master or guardian, will be made
to stop on the bridge of Hell. He will get salvation if he is virtuous,
but if he is wicked, the bridge will crack and fall and that man will
fall into Hell.  
    
 Abu Dharr had extreme love for the Prophet. This love increased more
after the death of the Prophet and he used to weep bitterly. During his
stay in Syria, people pressed Bilal for the prayer call. Bilal said, "I
have given up calling to prayer after the Prophet. Neither I can recite
"azan" (prayer call) now, nor can I tolerate it”. Bilal was however,
prevailed upon and with great difficulty he was made to agree to it.
Bilal stood for the prayer call and started reciting the "azan" with his
strong and loud voice which once resounded in the streets of Medina
during the days of the Prophet. Abu Dharr inclined his head forward.
Tears started rolling down his cheeks. His imagination took him back to
Medina and he saw the Prophet with his inward eyes, surrounded by his
companions. He recalled the past and started crying loudly with tears
flowing from his eyes”[^3].  
    
 Abu Dharr lived for about ten years outside Medina (in Syria) and
returned to Medina after he got the information that Umar had been
assassinated. Abul Fida writes in his history that a man named Abu Lulu
attacked Umar on Zil Hijjah 24, 23 A.H. Tarikh Kamil ibn Athir gives out
that when Umar was wounded a physician of the tribe of Bani Harith was
sent for. He gave date-wine to Umar. It passed out unchanged. Then he
was given milk to drink, it also passed out similarly. Seeing this, the
physician said, "O Commander of the Faithful! Make whatever will you
like to".  
    
 It is narrated from Abu Majliz in Kanzul Ummal that Umar asked the
people, "Whom do you want to make your caliph after me?" One of them
said, "Zubayr bin al-'Awam". Umar said, "Will you make that man your
caliph who is miser and discourteous?" Another man said, "We will make
Talha our Caliph". Umar said, "Would you like to have that man your
Caliph who mortgaged with a Jewess the land granted by the Messenger of
Allah?" Hearing this yet another man said, "We will make Ali our
Caliph". Umar said, "By my life! You will not make Ali your caliph and
if by Allah, you make Ali your caliph he will not refrain from keeping
you on the right path even if you are unhappy". When Walid bin Uqbah
heard it he said, "I know who will be the caliph after you". Umar got up
and asked him, "Who?" Walid said, "Uthman". Huzayfa bin al-Yaman
narrates that Umar was asked, when he was in perfect health, as to who
would be the caliph after him. He answered, "Uthman bin Affan".  
    
 Mulk Ali Qari writes in "Sharah Fiqh Akbar" that when the time of the
death of Umar approached he confined the rank of Caliphate to Uthman,
Ali, Talha, Zubayr, Abdul Rahman bin Auf and Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas, and
said that caliphate should not go beyond these six people.  
    
 It is in Tarikh Kamil that after that Umar asked Suhayb "Lead the
people in prayers for three days, shut these six men among whom the
caliphate has been confined in a house, and watch them. If five of these
people agree to one man and one man opposes, he should be killed; if
four men agree and two disagree the opposing two should be beheaded and
if three men agree and three others disagree Abdullah bin Umar should be
appointed as judge to decide, and in case these people do not accept
Abdullah bin Umar as judge, the group in which Abdul Rahman is included
should prevail and the other group of people should be killed".  
    
 According to Tarikh Abul Fida Umar died on Saturday, the 30th of Zil
Hajjah: According to "Sharah Fiqh Akbar" when, after the death of Umar,
and according to his instructions, a meeting of the advisory body was
held in the house of Fatimah, sister of Ash'ath bin Qays. [^4]members
gave Abdul Rahman bin Auf, the right to select the caliph. Abdul Rahman
holding Ali's hand asked three times, "If we appoint you Walyyul Amr and
Imam are you willing to act according to the Divine Book, the tradition
of the Prophet and the traditions of Shaykhain?" (Abu Bakr and Umar) Ali
replied, "I will, of course, act upon the Holy Qur'an and the tradition
of the Holy Prophet but (instead of the traditions of Shaykhain) I will
pass religious commands according to my knowledge. After hearing this
Abdul Rahman asked Uthman three times, "Will you act according to the
Divine Book, the tradition of the Prophet and the traditions of Abu Bakr
and Umar, if we make you Imam? Uthman said, "Yes, of course, I will".
Then Abdul Rahman swore allegiance to him and others followed.  
    
 It is stated in Tarikh Kamil and Tarikh Abul Fida that (when allegiance
was promised to Uthman) Ali seeing the manoeuvrings in matter of
allegiance said, "Today is not the first day that you have got the upper
hand through conspiracy. Well! It is better for me to be patient. O
Abdul Rahman! By Allah! You have taken the oath of allegiance to Uthman
so that caliphate turned towards you". Abdul Rahman said, "O Ali! Do not
mind it". Then Ali came out of the house saying, "That was to be".
Miqdad said, "O Abdul Rahman! You left Ali although, by Allah, he is one
of those who are with truth and give just judgements".  
    
 Tarikh Kamil and Tarikh Tabari say that Miqdad further said, "I did not
see such a spiteful treatment meted out to the members of the Prophet's
Family after his death. I am astonished to see that the Quraysh forsook
a person whom I consider the best scholar (Alim-i Rabbani) and the best
judge ('Adil). By Allah, if I had got a supporter and a helper!" Miqdad
had only said this much when Abdul Rahman interrupted, "O Miqdad! Fear
Allah. I am afraid lest some trouble should befall you".  
    
 It is recorded in Murujuz Zahab of Mas'udi that Ammar al-Yasir stood up
in the Masjidun Nabi and said "O the group of Quraysh! When you snatched
away the Caliphate from the Ahl al-Bayt of your Prophet and moved it
sometimes here and sometimes there, we should also expect that Allah
will take it from you and give it to somebody else as you have taken it
from the deserving and given it to the one who does not deserve it".
Then Miqdad stood up and said, "I have never seen the kind of torture
and torment inflicted upon the Ahlul Bayt after the death of the
Prophet". Abdul Rahman said, "O Miqdad! What are you doing?” Miqdad
said, “Why should I not say? I am a friend of the Ahlul Bayt of the
Prophet simply because of the love for the Prophet and surely truth is
with them and in them alone. O Abdul Rahman! I wonder at Quraysh whom
you try to help gain predominance and who have conspired to snatch away
the love and greatness of the Prophet from his Ahlul Bayt after him. Of
Abdul Rahman! Know! By Allah! If I had got supporters and friends, I
would have fought against the Quraysh as I have done in the Battle of
Badr".  
    
 According to Tarikh Tabari, Ammar al-Yasir said, "O people! Allah
honoured us with His faith and gave us greatness on account of the Holy
Prophet. Where are you taking away the Caliphate from the Ahlul Bayt of
your Prophet?"  
    
 According to Rauzatul Ahbab when Abdul Rahman bin Auf swore fealty to
Uthman and those present in the meeting also followed suit, Ali said
after a pause, “O people! I ask you to tell me on oath if there is even
a single person except me among the companions of the Prophet whom the
Prophet had on the occasion of announcing “brotherhood”, after having
declared him his brother, that he was his brother in this world as well
as in the Hereafter", The audience replied, "None", Ali said, "Is there
anybody among you except me whom the Prophet might have appointed to
convey the Surah Bara 'at (Surah IX of the Holy Qur'an) with the
declaration that the duty of the Messengerhood of Allah cannot be
performed by anybody except by him or by one of his Ahlul Bayt?”, All
said, "None". Ali said, "You know that the leader of the mankind and the
interceder of the Day of Judgment sent me as the commander of all the
Muhajirs and Ansar in most of the Sariyas (battles in which the Prophet
did not participate in person) and ordered them to obey me and never
appointed anyone as a commander over me". The people said, "Yes, of
course, it is true", Ali said, "You know the Holy Prophet has proclaimed
my knowledge by saying: "I am the city of knowledge and Ali is its
gate". All of them admitted, "Yes we know". Ali said, "The companions
have often fled from the battlefield leaving the Prophet in the lurch
amidst the enemies but I never forsook him in any dangerous war and
remained present to sacrifice my life for the dear life of the Prophet".
All of them said, "Yes, indeed". Ali said, "You know that I was the
first to have accepted Islam". People said, "Yes, we know".  
    
 Then Ali asked, "Which one of us is nearer to the Prophet by virtue of
kinship?" All of them unanimously said, "There is no doubt that your
kinship with the Holy Prophet is very well proved, established, and
confirmed by all means”. When Ali was talking thus Abdul Rahman bin Auf
said, "O Abul Hasan! Nobody can deny the virtues you have recounted and
described. But, as now most of the people have sworn allegiance to
Uthman, I expect you, too, to join them", Ali answered, "By Allah you
very well know who deserved the Caliphate, but it is a pity that you
forsake him deliberately".  
    
 According to Tarikh Tabari, Ali then recited this verse from the Holy
Qur'an:  
*"Have fear of Allah in whose name you plead one another and (be mindful
of) kinship. Allah is ever watching over you”.* (Surah al-Nisa, 4:1)  
    
 The discussion on the event of Uthman's election is also recorded in
Iqdul Farid, vol. 3, p. 75, printed in Egypt and Sharah Maqasid
Taftazani, p. 296.  
    
 The historian Muhammad bin Ali ibn A'tham Kufi writes in his book (204
A.H.) that Ali bin Abi Talib further said, "O people! You know that we
are Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet and a means of protection of the ummah
against every calamity and distress. If you do not deliver our right to
us, it will automatically reach its axis, and if you do not give us our
right, we will go to wherever we think proper on our camel backs, not
minding what time it takes; and when the appointed hour comes, we will
come back. I swear by the glory of Allah that if Muhammad had not taken
the pledge from us, and had not informed us of this, I would not have
renounced my right, nor let anybody take it. I would have tried so hard
in getting my right that I would not have hesitated to achieve my goal
even at the cost of my life.  
    
 According to Tarikh Abul Fida the allegiance to the Caliphate of Uthman
was sworn on Muharram 3, 24 A.H.  
 After his selection to Caliphate, Uthman went on the right path of
rulership for sometime. But, with the passage of time, he deviated from
justice and took the wrong path, with the result that there stirred a
commotion among the companions of the Holy Prophet.  
    
 Muhammad bin Ali bin A'tham Kufi, the historian of Islam of the 3rd
century A.H. states that whatever the people said about Uthman, and
whatever of his words and deeds they tolerated, were reported from
authentic narrators in different words and styles, but as their gist is
the same, he has condensed those passages with differing words into one
passage. The narrators say that Uthman after becoming Caliph retained
the functionaries of Umar in their offices for a few days, after which
he dismissed them from their posts and gave all the regions to Bani
Umayyah who were his cousins and kinsmen. He appointed Abdullah bin Amir
Kurbuz in Basrah.  
    
 Walid bin Atbah bin Abi Mu'it in Kufah, retained Mu 'awiyah bin Abi
Sufyan as the Governor of Syria, appointed Abdullah bin Sa'd bin Abi
Saran in Egypt, and Umar bin' Aas in Palestine. A huge quantity of booty
went to the Caliph after the conquest of Khurasan, Sijistan, Pars,
Kerman, Egypt, Syria and the Islands of Iraq. Caliph Uthman also behaved
well so far, and had in view the dispensation of justice. But when huge
riches and booty came to him, his habits changed. He put the whole
dominion under the control of Bani Umayyah, and gave over all the cities
to his kinsmen. He freely granted them huge sums of money from the State
treasury .He gave away 100,000 dinars to Abdullah bin Khalid bin Asad
bin Aas bin Umayyah as soon as he reported himself present, although he
was not included in the list, gave 100,000 dinars to Hakam bin' Aas, and
the same amount to his son Harith bin Hakam. People did not approve of
this grant, complained to Abdul Rahman bin Auf and said, "You will be
responsible for its consequences. We are suffering these losses because
of you. On the day you made him Caliph we had not promised allegiance or
any loyalty to him for these wrong doings and evil practices. Now let us
know what we should do". On the day you made him Caliph we had not
promised allegiance and loyalty to him for these wrong doings and evil
practices. Now let us know what we should do". Abdul Rahman said, "I am
not yet informed of what you are talking". The following day Ali met
Abdul Rahman and asked him if he approved of such acts. Abdul Rahman
said, “I do not know. If these things are true and Uthman's conduct has
changed like this, draw your sword and I also unsheath mine". People
also conveyed this news to Uthman who got enraged and said, "Abdul
Rahman is a hypocrite and to besmear his hands with my blood is not a
difficult task for him". Abdul Rahman also heard these words, got angry
and said, "I could never even imagine that Uthman would ever call me a
hypocrite". Then he swore not to talk to Uthman till death. Now these
things became known and everybody became critical of Uthman.  
    
 News used to reach Uthman also. One day he ordered all the Muslims to
gather in the masjid. When all had gathered there, Uthman went up the
pulpit, praised Allah and recited "Salawat and Salam" (blessings) upon
the Holy Prophet. After that he said:  
 “O people! Keep thanking Allah for His bounties so that your blessings
and riches may increase. Remember Him all the time, take His name, and
have regard for His rights, you are Muslims and have with you the Divine
Book in which everything is recorded".  
    
 "Know that it is the Command of Allah that you must obey the ruler.
Have fear of Allah. Carry out His orders. Give up your connections and
contacts with opposition and sins”.  
    
 "You should know that to get the seat of the Messenger of Allah and to
administer the Caliphate is a very hard job. Also the rank of Caliphate
is beyond your comprehension. Allah has granted the rulership to Walys
and Amirs so that they decide the disputes between the weak and the
strong and keep the strong from oppressing the weak".  
    
 "There are many among you who have seen the days of the Holy Prophet,
have heard his sacred talks, and have witnessed his ways. Besides, the
Book of Allah is in your hands. You must have read in it all the
commands and prohibitions and the lawful and the unlawful acts. Allah
has given you His final notice. He has promised to enhance the blessings
of those who will offer thanks to Him for the blessings. There is a
reward for the virtuous and punishment for the wicked. You have already
heard about the pomp and show and the glory and might of the kings and
monarchs. They were more powerful than we and had a mu.ch bigger army.
They had vast cities and were living in comforts and luxuries. But,
since they did not carry out Allah's orders, preferred the world to the
hereafter, became prone to disputes and disturbances, and renounced
thankfulness for His blessings. He put them to decadence, bestowed on
you all their cities, houses and pastures, and gave all their cities,
houses and pastures, and gave all their blessings to you. The blessings
will remain with you if you keep on thanking Allah for them, or else
they will be diminished on account of your sins and disobedience, and
will ultimately perish".  
    
 Allah has granted me the Caliphate of the Prophet. I am capable of it
today. I have taken up this office in my hand and I am performing this
important and onerous duty. The same Allah who has granted me the
Caliphate, gives me the capability in consonance with His will, and I
also realized the secret of the sentence: "All of you are watchmen and
all of you will be called to account for the subjects", and I have
understood the bare fact that the person who has been made the
commander, has been entrusted with a very heavy responsibility. The
guardian of the people will be called to explain every deed of his
subjects and to account for every particle and atom. People have told me
that some of you object to the money spent by me and say to one another
that it would have been better if Uthman had given this money to the
soldiers and their children. This would have been expedient of course,
and acceptable to Allah. I admit it, and I will do so henceforward. I
will send trustworthy persons to every city to disburse among the army
men and their children as much money as they collect and to lay by
whatever is left over to be useful at the hour of need".  
    
 "If Allah wills, I will be paying the rights of the old men, poors,
orphans and widows, will consult you in my spare time, on matters that
come up for consideration and will act according to your counsel. Come
to me off and on, discuss with me problems and expediencies and explain
to me whatever you deem fit. I will accomplish the work with your
consent and according to the exigency of the time. I do not have any
guard at my door to check you. Anybody may come at anytime and tell me
whatever he likes. Peace be on you!"  
    
 Having heard Uthman all the Muslims became happy and went back home
praising him and praying for him: Uthman followed path of justice,
observed equality between the army men and the civilian people, treated
all with kindness and looked after the poor and the orphans. One year
passed in this manner.  
    
 Again his habits changed and he adopted those measures which were
contrary to the norms of tradition and virtue. The companions of the
Prophet got very much offended. They held a meeting and decided to see
the Caliph and present to him in writing a list of those things which
are repugnant to Islam and which had happened till then since his
adoption of office, because it was possible that in verbal talk they
might forget some important matters and, even if they remembered some,
they might not be able to spell them out frankly. Thus it was deemed
advisable to put those matters down in writing. After that they wrote
down all three irreligious things which took place from the beginning of
the Uthman's Caliphate till that time, and wanted to go together to hand
over that document to the Caliph.  
    
 Then these people met Ammar bin Yasir, told him what they had written
and desired him to take the document to Uthman. Ammar replied that he
was ready to hand it over to him. Then he went to Uthman with that
document. The Caliph was coming out of his house at that time. When he
saw Ammar at his door with the document he asked him, "O Abul Yaqzan! Do
you want me?" Ammar answered, “I have no personal business with you but
the companions of the Prophet have collectively prepared a list of your
actions which you have taken contrary to the religious law, so that you
may clarify your position.”  
    
 Uthman took the documents in anger, read a few lines and then threw it
away. Ammar said, "Do not throw it away as this paper has been written
by the companions of the Holy Prophet. Instead, read it carefully and
act accordingly. I am telling you these things in your own interest".
Uthman said, "O the son of Sumayyah! You are telling lies". He replied,
"Undoubtedly I am the son of Sumayyah and Yasir".  
    
 The Caliph became furious. He ordered his slaves to beat Ammar, the
companion of the Prophet. He was so much beaten that he fell down
unconscious. Then he himself came forward and gave him several kicks at
his stomach and testicles. Ammar again fainted. He got ruptured and
developed hernia. When the people of Bani Makhzum who were Ammar's
relatives and cousins, got this information, they came with Hashim bin
Walid bin Mughirah, took him home and laid him in his bed Ammar was
still unconscious when all the people swore an oath that if Ammar died
of that torture they would put Uthman to death During his faintness
Ammar's prayers of late afternoon and evening lapsed. When he regained
consciousness during the night he got up, performed ablution and offered
his lapsed prayers  
    
 This case of Ammar is also one of those misdeeds of Uthman on account
of which the companions of the Holy Prophet angrily refused allegiance
to him.[^5] This is only one of the many events recorded in the books of
history We cite below a few examples from some authentic and standard
books of history, so that it may be known what kind of deeds he
performed during the period of his Caliphate and what treatment he gave
to the public as well as to the companions of the Holy Prophet.  
    
 It is recorded in "Tarikhul Khulafa" of Suyuti that Uthman was the
first man who introduced the first “Azan" before the Friday prayers.
According to "al-Wasai'l Fi Ma'rifatul Awai'l" Uthman was the first to
make the address precede the Eid prayer. It was never done during the
days of the Prophet (s) and during the days of the first and second
Caliphs According to Murujuz Zahab of Mas'udi when Uthman became Caliph
his uncle, Hakam bin al-'Aas, Marwan bin Hakam and others from Bani
Umayyah (who had been banished from Medina under the orders of the
Prophet) gathered round Uthman. Marwan was the same outcast who was
turned out of Medina by the Prophet and was prohibited from coming in
the vicinity of Medina. Also the governors who were appointed by Uthman
included his maternal brother, Walid bin Uqbah about whom the Prophet
had informed that he would go to Hell. Walid bin Uqbah used to keep
himself busy the whole night in drinking wine with his friends,
musicians and prostitutes, and when) the mu'azzin (one who calls people
to prayer) woke him up for the prayer, he (in the state of intoxication)
went to the masjid and led the morning prayers, and after offering four
rak'ats instead of two rak 'ats of prayers showed his willingness to
conduct more rak'ats if people so desired. It is also said that when
Walid bowed down in prostration he delayed for long and said, "Drink and
make me drink". So once one of those who were in the first row behind
him said, "We do not wonder at you but we wonder at one who has sent you
here as our commander".  
    
 When the news of Walid's debauchery and his drinking wine became known
to all, a group of Muslims, including Abu Jundab and Abu Zaynab, mobbed
Walid in the masjid. They saw him lying unconscious. People tried to
wake him up, but when he could not come to his senses they took off the
seal-ring from his finger and immediately coming to Medina reported the
wine drinking of Walid to Uthman. Uthman asked Abu Jundab and Abu Zaynab
how they came to know that Walid had drunk wine. Presenting his ring in
testimony to his drunkenness they said, "He drank the same wine which we
used to drink during the days of our ignorance (before Islam). Uthman
instead of listening to the rest of their talk rebuked them and pushing
against their chests said, "Be off from here". Hearing this both of them
came back hastily.  
    
 According to Tarikh Abul Fida Uthman dismissed, Amr bin al-' Aas from
the Governorship of Egypt and appointed in his place his foster brother
Sa'd bin Ali Sarh and he is the same man whose killing had been made
permissible by the Prophet on the day of the conquest of Mecca.
According to Tarikh Kamil, Uthman performed Hajj with the people in 26
A.H. Marwan bin Hakam narrates in "Musnad Abu Daud Tialisi: "I saw
Uthman and Ali at the time of Hajj. Uthman was forbidding people from
Mut'atul Hajj (performance of Hajj and Umrah with the same Ehram). When
Ali saw this he recited the Tahlil (*Lailaha illallah*) of Hajj and
Umrah together and said, "I am present here for Hajj and Umrah
together". Uthman said, O Ali! You do the same thing which I forbid the
people to do". Ali replied, "I will not abandon the tradition, of the
Prophet at anybody's instance”. (This tradition may be seen in Sahih
Bukhari also).

[^1]: Nasikhul Tawarikh, vol. 2, p. 803

[^2]: Izalatul Khifa vol. 1, p. 282  

[^3]: Al- Ishtiraki az-Zahid

[^4]: According to Tarikh A'atham, p. 112

[^5]: Tarikh A'atham Kufi pp 128 -130


