Chapter 12
==========

   
 Abdul Hamid of Egypt and Allamah Abdullah Subaiti write that Abu Dharr
stayed in Medina after the death of Umar. He saw that Uthman was
favourably inclined towards Bani Umayyah whose influence had grown deep
into the Islamic State which had assumed the magnificence of a kingdom.
People indulged in pomp and show, and led highly luxurious lives. They
had become fond of the worldly gains. He saw that most of the companions
were totally changed. Zubayr, Talha and Abdul Rahman bin, Auf (having
reconciled with the government) had purchased lands and houses. Sa'd bin
Abi Waqqas had agates fixed in his palace, had raised it very high,
broadened the  courtyard and made turrets on it. Therefore, Abu Dharr
stood up and came out openly. He was not to be deterred by any commander
or caliph. He started inviting people to austerity and attacking Uthman
in his speeches.  
    
 One day he came to know that Uthman had given the fifth part of the
tribute from Africa to Marwan bin Hakam, 300,000 dirhams to Harith bin
al 'As, 100,000 dirhams to Zayd bin Thabit, immeasurable wealth from the
booties of Africa to his foster brother, Abdullah bin Ali Sarah and the
land of Fadak to Marwan which had been snatched from Fatimah, the
daughter of the Holy Prophet. He started to recite this verse in the
masjid.  
* *  
*“Announce a painful torture to those who amass gold and silver and do
not spend them in the way of Allah".*  (Surah Taubah, 9: 34)  
    
 Marwan came to know that Abu Dharr attacked him and Uthman, he
complained to Uthman, who ordered his slave to call Abu Dharr to him.
Abu Dharr went to him. At sight of him Uthman said: “Abu Dharr ! Desist
from what I am hearing, otherwise you will not find anybody more
inimical to you than I". Abu Dharr said, "O Commander! What have you
heard about me?" Uthman said, "I have come to know that you instigate
people against me". Abu Dharr asked, "How is it?" Uthman said, "You
recite the verse, *“Announce a painful torture………”* in the masjid. Abu
Dharr said, "O Commander! Do you stop me from reciting the Book of Allah
and from disclosing the short-comings of those who have abandoned the
commands of Allah! By Allah, I cannot offend Allah for the sake of
Uthman. The displeasure of Uthman is better for me than the displeasure
of Allah".  
    
 Hearing this Uthman frowned at Abu Dharr but could not decide how to
refute the charge. Therefore, he did not say anything and kept quiet for
some time. Abu Dharr rose and went away from there, with a firm
determination to criticise those who worked against the commands of
Allah more than ever.  
    
 Abu Dharr attacked Uthman more frequently. So he got very angry and
waited for an opportunity to exile Abu Dharr. One day he got the chance
and availed himself of it.  
    
 According to Ibn Wazih the author of ‘Tarikh Ya'qubi’ people informed
Uthman that Abu Dharr Ghifari taunted him in the masjid and had
delivered a speech at the gate of the masjid thus:  
 "O people! He who knows me knows me, but let him, who does not
recognize me know that I am Abu Dharr Ghifari. My name is Jundab bin
Junadah Rabazi. Allah elevated Adam, Nuh, the progeny of Ibrahim and the
children of Imran, out of the people of the world. The Prophet Muhammad
is the heir to Adam's knowledge and to all virtues which had
distinguished the Prophets, and Ali ibn Abi Talib is the successor of
the Prophet and heir to his knowledge".  
    
 "O bewildered people! If after your Prophet you had preferred one whom
Allah has preferred, and had put him last whom Allah has placed last,
and had confined the governance and inheritance among the Ahlul Bayt,
you would have got countless blessings from above your heads and from
under your feet, and no friend of Allah would have been poor and
destitute, and no part of the Divine obligations would have been lost,
and no two persons would have disputed about the Divine command simply
because they would have found the information about that commandment in
the Divine Book and the tradition of the Prophet, according to the Ahlul
Bayt of their Prophet. But since you have wilfully done what you should
not have done, you must suffer the punishment for your wrong doing, and
it will not be long before those who have wronged will know to whom they
will return”.

It is also recorded in the same book of history that Uthman was also
informed that he had made changes in the Sunnah of the Holy Prophet and
the traditions of Abu Bakr and Umar on the foundation of which the
edifice of his Caliphate was raised, and that Abu Dharr placed that
complaint before the public.

On hearing these things Uthman sent Abu Dharr to Mu'awiyah, Governor of
Syria. According to Tarikh Abul Fida, this thing happened in 30 AH.  
 Scholars say that as Abu Dharr continuously criticized Uthman's actions
which violated the religious laws, Uthman imposed severe restrictions on
him. It was his directive that nobody should talk to Abu Dharr, or go
near him or sit with him. Public meetings were held again and again to
proclaim this order.

According to the version of Allamah Majlisi and Allamah Subaiti, Ahnaf
bin Qays often used to come to the masjid and sit there. One day he
prayed to Allah "O Lord! Replace my unsociability with love and my
loneliness with company and grant me such a worthy companion as has no
peer".  
    
 After finishing this prayer he saw a man sitting and worshipping in a
corner of the masjid. He rose from his seat, approached him and sat down
by his side. Then he said to him, "Who are you gentleman and what is
your name?" He answered, "Jundab bin Junadah". On hearing this he said,
"Allah is great, Allah is great".  
    
 Abu Dharr said, why did you recite Takbir. He answered, "When I entered
the masjid today I prayed to Allah to grant me the best companion. He
fulfilled my wish very soon and granted me the honour of meeting with
you".  
    
 Abu Dharr said, "I awe it to Allah, more than you, to glorify Him
because I was adjudged to be a suitable companion. O Man! Listen to me.
The Holy Prophet has told me that you and I will be on a very high place
and will remain there till all are free from reckoning". Abu Dharr
further added: "O slave of Allah! Get away from me or you will face some
trouble". He asked, "How is that, friend?” Abu Dharr replied, “Uthman
bin Affan has forbidden people to sit with me and has ordered that
whosoever meets me, talks to me and sits with me, will be punished".
(Hayat ul-Qulub, by Allamah Majlisi vol. 2. and Abu Dharr al-Ghifari, by
Allamah Subaiti).  
    
 In short, Uthman became disgusted with Abu Dharr's truthfulness. He
carried on his work despite the restrictions and Uthman got regular
information about it. At last, being tired of Abu Dharr he decided to
send him to Syria.


