Chapter 15
==========

   
 When Abu Dharr was leaving, people accompanied him to bid farewell to
him till they reached Dair Maran outside the city. There he offered his
prayers in congregation. Then he delivered an address, whose translation
is given here from Hayat ul-Qulub:  
    
 “O people! I bequest a thing which is useful to you”. After that he
asked them to thank Allah. All said, "All praises are for Allah”. Then
he bore testimony to the Oneness of Allah and the Prophethood of the
Muhammad and all followed suit. Then he said, "I acknowledge the
Resurrection on the Day of Judgment, and the existence of Heaven and
Hell. I believe in what the Prophet brought from Allah and I call you as
witness to this belief of mine". All said, "We are witness to what you
have said", After that he said, "Whosoever of you will die with this
belief will be given the glad tidings of Allah's mercy and generosity,
provided that he is not the helper of the sinners, supporter of the
actions of oppressors, and accomplice of the tyrants. O group of people!
Fury and indignation should also be a part of your prayers and fastings,
when you see that people on earth sin against Allah. Do not please your
leaders with things which are the cause of Allah's wrath. If those
people introduce such things in the Divine faith the reality of which
you do not know, leave them and bring their guilts to limelight, even if
they torture you and turn you out of their company, deprive you of their
gifts, and banish you from the cities, so that Allah may be pleased with
you. Certainly Allah is most Glorious and Elevated. It is not proper to
enrage Him to please His creations. May Allah forgive you and me. I now
leave you to Allah and wish that peace and mercy of Allah be upon
you".  
    
 All said in reply, "O Abu Dharr! O companion of the Messenger of Allah!
May Allah keep you safe and bestow His blessings upon you! Would you not
like us take you again back to our city and support you in the face of
enemies". Abu Dharr said, "May Allah send mercy on you! Now you may go
back. Certainly I am more forbearing than you in calamities. Never be
scattered and worried, and do not have differences among you".  
    
 Historians say that when Abu Dharr reached Medina, leaving his family
behind in Syria, extremely tired and exhausted he was presented before
the king of the time, Caliph Uthman. At that time there were many people
present in the court. As soon as Caliph Uthman saw Abu Dharr, he started
reviling him without having any regard for his honour in the eyes of the
Holy Prophet. It appears from the statements of the historians that
Uthman said whatever came to his mind in that state of fury and rage. He
even said, "It is you who have committed improper acts". Abu Dharr said,
"I did nothing except that I gave you an advice and you took it ill and
sent me away from you. Then I advised Mu'awiyah. He also did not like it
and turned me out". Uthman said, "You are a liar. You are nursing
sedition in your mind. You want to provoke Syria against me". Abu Dharr
said, "O Uthman! only follow Abu Bakr and Umar and nobody will say
anything against you". Uthman said, "What does it matter if I follow
them or not. May your mother die!" Abu Dharr said, "By Allah, you cannot
accuse me of anything except that I direct people to do good and prevent
them from doing unlawful acts". At this Uthman was filled with rage and
said, "O courtiers! Advise me as to what I should do with this old liar.
Should I punish him with flogging, send him to prison, get him killed,
or exile him. He has created dissensions in the Muslim society. Having
heard this Ali, who was present there, said, "O Uthman! I advise you
like the believer of the nation of Firaun to leave him to himself. If he
is a liar he will get the recompense for it, and if he is truthful you
will certainly be a sufferer. Allah does not guide him who is
extravagant and liar. At this there arose an altercation between Uthman
and Ali which I do not want to narrate [^1].  
    
 Muhammad bin Ali bin A'tham Kufi, writes in this connection:  
 Ali said to Caliph Uthman, "Do not give him (Abu Dharr) any trouble. If
he is a liar he will suffer its consequences, and if he is truthful,
that what he says will come to light". Uthman did not approve of this
talk of Ali. Angrily he said to Ali, "Dust in your mouth!" Ali also
repeated the same words. Then Ali said, "O Uthman! What is all this you
are doing? What an injustice are you committing! It is not proper for
you to utter such words about Abu Dharr who is the friend of the Prophet
of Allah, on the basis of some unknown things which Mu'awiyah has said.
Are you not aware of the opposition, oppression, sedition and corruption
of Mu'awiyah? On hearing this Caliph Uthman kept quiet". (Tarikh A'tham
Kufi and Majalisul Mu'minin)  
    
 Nurullah Shustari writes that as soon as Abu Dharr saw Caliph Uthman
before himself he used to recite the Qur'anic verse: "Fear the day when
the Fire of Hell will blaze up and their foreheads will be branded”, by
which he meant to say, “O Uthman! It is wrong that you do not give to
the poor the riches you hoard, but give to your kinsmen if you ever
give. The day is not far off when your flanks and foreheads will be
branded in Hell", (Majalisul Mu'minin, p. 94)  
    
 According to Tabari once Ali addressed Uthman and said, "You have given
up following your predecessors, and now you simply concentrate upon the
Children of Umayyah and your own kinsfolk. You have completely ignored
the poor. This is not right at all. From where have you got the right of
unlawful distribution of the property of Muslims?" Uthman grew angry at
this talk of Ali and retorted, "Those who went before us did wrong to
their relatives. I don't want to do that. I am giving to my poor
relatives whatever I can" Ali said, "Are they only rightful people whom
you give thousand of dirhams from the Public Treasury of the Muslims? Is
there no other poor man?" [^2]  
    
 Historians such as Abul Hasan Ali bin Husayn bin Ali al-Mas'udi (died
346 A.H.), Ahmad bin Abi Ya'qub and Ishaq bin Ja'far bin Wahhab bin
Wazeh Ya'qubi (died 278 A.H.), and Muhammad bin Sa'd al-Zahri al-Basri,
Katib al-Abbasi al-Waqidi (died 230 A.H.) narrates this incident thus:  
    
 “When Abu Dharr was presented in the court of Uthman he said to Abu
Dharr, “I am informed that you have told the people the hadith of the
Prophet that when the number of males of Bani Umayyah rises to full
thirty, they will consider the cities of Allah as their booty and the
slaves of Allah their own slaves and maids, and they will adopt the
religion of Allah as a fraud". Abu Dharr said, "Yes, I have heard the
Prophet say so". Uthman asked the audience of the court, "Have you heard
the Prophet say so?" They said, "No". Then he called Ali and said, "O
Abul Hasan! Do you certify this hadith?" Ali said, "Yes". Uthman said,
"What is the proof of the authenticity of this hadith?" Ali replied,
"The Holy Prophet's statement that there is no speaker, under the sky
and upon the earth, who is more truthful than Abu Dharr".  
    
 Abu Dharr had stayed in Medina only for a few days after this incident
when Uthman sent word to him, saying "By Allah, You will certainly be
banished from Medina"[^3].  
    
 Allamah Majlisi writes that after his return from Syria Abu Dharr was
taken ill. One day he entered the court with the support of his staff.
He had just arrived there when the functionaries of the government
appeared in the court with 100,000 dirhams, which they had realized from
the different parts of the State. As soon as Abu Dharr saw it he said,
"0 Uthman! Whose property is this? "He replied, "Of the Muslims". He
asked, "How long will it remain stored and not reach the Muslims?" The
Caliph said, "This money will lie with me till 100,000 dirhams more are
received, because they have brought this wealth for me. Hence I am
waiting for more, so that I may give it to anybody I like, and spend it
where 1 deem proper". Abu Dharr said, "Which are more, four dinars or
100,000 dirhams?" Uthman said, "100,000 dirhams are more". Hearing this
Abu Dharr said:  
    
 "O Uthman! Do you not remember that when you and I went to the Prophet
late one night and seeing him sad asked him the reason for his sadness
he did not even talk to us on account of the intensity of his grief.
Then when we went to him next morning and seeing him happy and smiling
asked him why he was so sad the last night and why he was happy that
morning he said, "Last night after the distribution of the property of
the Muslims only four dinars remained with me; so I was perturbed but I
have now given them to the rightful person. Therefore, I am now happy".

[^1]: Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd al-Waqidi, died 230 A.H. vol. 4, p.168

[^2]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 4, p. 534 and Iqdul Farid, vol. 2, p. 272

[^3]: Murujuz Zahab al-Mas'udi, vol. 1, p. 438 and Tarikh Ya'qubi, vol.
2, p. 148


