Chapter 16
==========

We have briefly thrown light on the excesses of Uthman in the foregoing
pages, and have told that by distributing the money of the Muslims only
among his kinsmen he had deprived the poor people of their right, and
Abu Dharr, by virtue of his religious fervour and in pursuance of the
precept of the Holy Prophet had been forced to raise his voice against
these evil practices, in consequence of which he was sent to Syria. Then
he was called back to Medina from Syria in a horrible manner and was put
to great hardship, As Abu Dharr was a man of principle and was very keen
on keeping his promise of being truthful, which he had made to the Holy
Prophet he continued with his mission without caring for any authority
or reproach from any side. He never cared whether he was talking to a
king or to a common man. It did not matter to him if the place where he
talked was a street, a bazar, a masjid or a court. The burden and the
mode of his truthful cry remained the same throughout.

We now want to write in detail for your information how Uthman had
opened the door of the Public Treasury for his own associates and how
enormously wealthy his relatives and special followers had become. We
present here a list in this connection from which it will be easy for
you to judge how those following in the footsteps of the Prophet such as
Ali, Abu Dharr, Salman, Miqdad, Ammar and some other companions of the
Prophet, could remain quiet. After all, they, too, had their obligation
towards Islam. That is why these people protested against these
practices.

Now we want to quote a few examples of Uthman's extravagance and
nepotism. But, before that, we want to explain how the idea of showing
favour to the descendants of Umayyah cropped up his mind and how he
exceeded the limit of decency. Ibn Asakir, a historian and commentator
of probably the second century hijri writes:

“According to the narration of Anas bin Malik one day Abu Sufyan bin
Harb, who had become blind, came to Uthman and inquired if there was
anybody else present there. His companions said,"No". Then he said, “O
Uthman! Make this Islamic State a pre-Islamic state; let the country be
like that snatched from somebody, and make it secure and lasting for the
descendants of Umayyah"[^1].

Respected readers! He is the same Abu Sufyan who had played such a
detestable role against the Holy Prophet before the appearance of Islam,
as bears no parallel. Then he became a Muslim willy-nilly. He had no
respect for Islam in his heart.

Uthman accepted his suggestion and he paid his fullest support to Bani
Umayyah, made them rich and taking the State to be a country snatched
away from somebody, started treating their original owners cruelly and
scornfully. As is obvious the rightful ownership of the Islamic dominion
went to Ali and his progeny. Therefore Uthman's treatment with them at
the suggestion of Abu Sufyan is unparalleled.

It is evident from the historical accounts that on the night of the
death of Umm Kulthum, he had sexual intercourse with another woman
simply because she was related to the Prophet, and did not care that his
wife Umme Kulthum was about to die [^2].
To explain why people became Uthman's opponents, the historians have
written that Uthman gave Fadak to Marwan bin Hakam, which had been
snatched away from Fatima during the reign of Abu Bakr, the first
Caliph.

Fadak remained in the possession of Marwan and his descendants till
Umar bin Abdul Aziz took it back from him and gave it to the Ahlul Bayt
who were its rightful owners [^3]. Uthman not only gave away Fadak to
Marwan bin Hakam who was his cousin and the husband of his daughter,
Umme Aban, but also gave the fifth part of the booty received from
Africa i.e. five lac dinars about which Abdul Rahman bin Hambal
al-Jama'i al-Kindi addressing the Caliph recited sarcastic verses. In
one of its verses he says:

"O Caliph! You brought the accursed Marwan near you in opposition to
those who have gone before you, and made him your son-in-law, and then
gave him the fifth part of the booties of Africa, doing injustice to the
poor".[^4] The historians lbn Kathir and Waqidi narrate that the total
value of the African booties given to Marwan was two crore twenty
thousand gold coins[^5]. Tabari says that the amount was two crore five
lac twenty thousand gold coins.[^6] Besides this, he was given the fifth
part of the booties of Egypt also.[^7] Ibn Abil Hadid writes, "The
Caliph having married his daughter to Marwan also gave him one lac
dirhams from the Public Treasury. At this action of his Zayd bin Arqam
brought the keys of the treasury and threw them before Uthman and said
that Marwan did not deserve even one hundred dirhams out of it"[^8].

All the historians, commentators, traditionists and narrators among whom
Ayesha holds a distinguished position, say it clearly that both Marwan
and his father Hakam and also their progeny was cursed and detested by
the Prophet. Ayesha says that Marwan was born of the sperm cursed by the
Prophet. The Prophet did not tolerate their dwelling on earth. Allah had
declared them, their forefathers, and their descendants an accursed
genealogical tree and the Prophet of Allah had banished Hakam from
Medina. Abu Bakr and Umar also did not allow them to come back. But
Uthman called them back, gave them gifts and married his daughter Umm
Aban to Marwan.

For details see Mustadrak Hakim, vol, 4, p. 481, Tafsir Qurtabi, vol.
16, p. 197, Tafsir Kashashaf vol. 3, p. 99, printed in Egypt) Tafsir
al-Fai'q Zamakhshari, vol. 2, p. 352, Tafsir Ibn Kathir, vol. 4, p. 159,
Tafsir Kabir, vol. 7, p. 491, Usudul Ghabah, Ibn Athir, vol. 2, p. 34,
Nihaya Ibn Athir, vol. 3, p. 23, printed in Egypt, Sharah Ibn Abil
Hadid, vol. 2, p. 55, Tafsir Naishapuri on the marginal-note of Tabari,
vol. 26, p. 13, Sawaiq Muhriqah p. 108)

When Marwan bin Hakam came back at the call of Uthman he was dressed in
tatters and when he came out of his court he was wearing silken clothes
with a mantle. The Caliph gave him three lac dirhams out of the
charities of Yemen.[^9] He was the man who had been banished by the
Prophet of Allah and Abu Bakr and Umar also did not allow him to enter
Medina. But Uthman called him back and gave him a gift of one lac
dinars.[^10]

Harith bin Hakam was the brother of Marwan and the husband of Ayesha,
the daughter of Uthman. Uthman gave him three lac dirhams from the
property of the Muslims. He also gave him many camels which had been
received as charity.[^11] Uthman also gave him a market "Mahzun", which
was established by the Prophet in Medina.[^12] Apart from this the tenth
part of the income received from the markets of Medina was also fixed
for Harith.[^13]

Uthman gave one lac dirhams to Sa'id bin' Aas bin Umayyah. (Abu Makhnaf
and Waqidi) Sa'idi's father, Aas was the person who used to torment the
Prophet very much. Ali had killed him in the Battle of Badr. (Tabaqat
Commentators and historians are of the view that Uqbah is the accursed
person who had become apostate after embracing Islam. It was about him
that this verse was revealed: "On that day the tyrant will bite his
hands".[^14] In this verse the tyrant means this very accursed Uqbah
[^15].

In short, there is such a large material in the books on history and
traditions about the bad character of Walid and his father that a
separate and independent book can be written on them. It can be said
briefly that Walid was lewd, adulterer, debauchee, and drunkard, who
desecrated faith. We give here some significant incidents which throw
light on his character.
(1) In the Masjid of Kufah Walid offered four rakats in the morning
prayers instead of two as he was intoxicated.
(2) At the command of Imam Ali, Abdullah ibn Ja'far punished him for
drinking wine inflicting eighty lashes on him.
(3) When Walid bin' Aas succeeded him to the Governorship of Kufah he
got the pulpit washed thoroughly and said, "Remove the filth of Walid
from it". And so on and so forth.[^16]
Caliph Uthman gave 3 lac dirhams to Abdullah bin Khalid bin Usayd bin
Abil ' Aas bin Umayyah and one thousand dirhams to each one of his whole
tribe.[^17] Ibn Abil Hadid has written the figure of four lac[^18].

Ya'qubi writes that Uthman married his daughter to Abdullah bin Khalid
bin Usayd and ordered him to be paid six lac dirhams and in this
connection wrote to Abdullah bin Aamir that the amount should be paid
from the Public Treasure of Basrah[^19]

Everybody knows the character of Abu Sufyan bin Harb. Uthman gave him
also two lac dirhams from the Public Treasury. This money was given on
the same day when he had given one lac dinars to Marwan bin
Hakam.[^20]

Caliph Uthman gave one-fifth of the booties of Africa to his foster
brother Abdullah bin Sa'd bin Abi Sarah. According to Abul Fida its
value was one lac dinars[^21] Ibn Abil Hadid writes that he gave to
Abdullah ibn Sa'd the whole booty received from West Africa without
giving anything out of it to any other Muslim.[^22]

Sa'd bin Abi Sarah is the man who had embraced Islam before the
conquest of Mecca. Then he migrated to Medina and became an apostate.
After his apostasy the Prophet of Allah announced that Sa'd bin Abi
Sarah should be killed wherever he was found even if he was under the
covering of the Holy Ka'bah. Viewing these things Uthman had hidden him
and got him forgiven. (Sunan Abu Daud and Mustadrak Hakim).

Uthman gave two lac dinar (gold coins) to Talha bin Abdul1ah[^23], and
gave him several bags of gold and silver.

The examples quoted above have brought to light Uthman's nepotism and
his making Bani Umayyah roll in the wealth belonging to the Muslims. Now
we want to explain how the people, other than some special companions,
had become the seekers of the world after the demise of the Prophet, and
how the world had over-powered them. But, before that, we want to point
out that the boost given to Bani Umayyah by Uthman was contrary to the
Will of Allah and His Prophet. Allah has called them the damned "tree".
The Prophet of Allah has called them the accursed people of the ummah.
Scholars are unanimous that Bani Umayyah had great spite against the
Prophet. Ali says that every ummah had some trouble or the other. The
calamity for this ummah is Bani Umayyah.[^24]

According to the confirmed view of the Prophet and his progeny Bani
Umayyah were a calamity for the ummah but Uthman's attitude towards them
was that he took pride in opening the Public Treasure for them. Caliph
Uthman used to say "The Public Treasury is ours. We will spend it as we
like and will not accept anybody's advice".[^25]

Now we throw light on the patrimonies of the companions. It will be
ascertained from them how much wealth of the Muslims Uthman had
squandered and how he had made his kinsmen wealthy.

Zubayr bin 'Awam was the son-in-law of the first Caliph. What he left
behind after his death consisted of:
(1) Eleven houses in Medina (2) Two houses in Basrah (3) One house in
Kufah (4) One house in Egypt (5) He had four wives

After deducting one-third of his wealth every wife got one-fourth, the
value of the whole property came to fifty nine crore and eight
lacs.[^26]

Muhammad bin Sa'd al-Zahri al-Basri, Kitib al-Abbasi al-Waqidi (died
230 A.H.) writes that he had lands in Alexandria, Egypt, and Kufah and
several houses in Basrah. He received countless bags of grain from
Medina.[^27] Abul Hasan Ali bin Husayn bin Ali Mas'udi (died 346 A.H.)
writes that besides these things he had left behind one thousand horses,
one thousand slaves, one thousand maids and many tracts of land.[^28]

Talha bin Ubaydullah Tamimi was also the son-in-law of the first
Caliph. He had a house in Kufah known by the name of Kanaas. His daily
income from the grains was one thousand dinars. He had several inns
between Tahama and Tai'f. He had lofty palace in Medina. He had a
property in Iraq yielding a monthly income of 10,000 dinars. Musa bin
Talha states that he had left two crore two lac dirhams and two lac
dinars in cash. He had also left agricultural lands. Besides, he had
left three hundred bags of bullock skin full of gold and silver. Ibn
Jauzi says that they were bags of camel-skin and were very large[^29]

Abdur Rahman bin Auf was the brother-in-law of Uthman and it was he who
at the instance of Umar made Uthman Caliph instead of Ali as has already
been narrated. He left behind one thousand camels, thirty thousand goats
and one hundred horses, and left so much gold that it was cut by an axe
and then divided. He had four wives. Every one of them got eighty three
thousand dinars. He had divorced one of them during his illness and had
even him 83 thousand dinars. Besides this he left ten thousand sheep
valued at eighty four thousand dinars.[^30]. Now it becomes evident from
his patrimony why he had made Uthman Caliph in place of Ali ibn Abi
Talib.

Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas left behind two lac fifty thousand dirhams and a
house which he had got constructed at Aqiq. That was very magnificent,
sky-high and very spacious palace with beautiful turrets constructed on
its upper stories.[^31] It is written on page 120 of the translation of
the book of Abdul Hamid Jaudatus Sahar that Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas had got
agates inset in his palace.

Ya'la bin Umayyah who was the Governor of Yemen left behind him, five
lac dinars, many loans with the people and a vast land. Besides, he left
a property worth one lac dinars.[^32]

Zayd bin Thabit was the man who helped Uthman in every way and was
submissive to him. He left behind gold and silver in such form that it
was cut with axe and hatchet and then divided. In addition to it, he
left other assets also which valued about one lac dinars. (Murujuz
Zahab, Mas'udi)

This was the generosity, nepotism and favouritism of Uthman, the third
Caliph towards his well-wishers. No follower of the Prophet could
tolerate the way in which he distributed the wealth of the Muslims among
his own people. That is why Ali, Salman, Abu Dharr, Miqdad and Ammar
kept on protesting against his behaviour.

Maybe some people might say that whatever Uthman did was for his poor
kinsmen as he himself said that he considered them deserving of help,
and he did not do anything for his own well-being. It may be said in
response to it that he who does not have regard for the religious law in
matters pertaining to his relatives, will certainly not be careful about
himself either. Uthman had a set of teeth made of gold. He used to wear
silken fur mantle which cost one hundred dinars. The covering of his
wife, Nailah, also cost one hundred dinars.[^33] There was safe in the
Public Treasury at Medina, which was full of gold and silver. He got the
ornaments for his family made out of it. The people protested very much
against this, and he had an altercation with Ali also, but he did not
care for anybody.[^34] He got a palace constructed in Medina; it was
strengthened by stone and pinnacle and its doors were made of teak and
plane. He had hoarded immense wealth. He owned several springs in
Medina. The historians write that he left behind, after his
assassination, thirty crore five lac dirhams and fifty lac dinars. Out
of his assets and other belongings which he left only those which were
in the valley of Qura and Hunayn, cost one lac dinars. Besides, he left
many horses and camels. According to Ibn Sa'd the value of his patrimony
in the valley of Qura and Khaybar was two lac dinars[^35], And according
to Jorji Zaydan it was ten lac dinars.[^36] Moreover, he left one
thousand slaves,[^37] and at Rabazah he left one thousand camels.[^38]

Umar the second Caliph also could not avoid the taste of capitalism. He
had a garden in Hijaz with an annual income of forty thousand dirhams
which he spent to satisfy the needs of himself and his family Bani
'Adi[^39]. According to a tradition in Sahih Bukhari Umar asked at the
time of his death about the loan which he had to pay back to Public
Treasury. People calculated it, and told him that it was eighty six
thousand dirhams. He asked them to pay it from the money of Ale Umar.
Ibn Hajar Asqalani says that by the word "Ale Umar" he meant his own
relatives. That is, he asked them to pay it up from his own assets[^40].
Naafe' the slave of Ibn Umar, has denied that Umar was under debt and
has said how Umar could have been under debt when one of his heirs sold
his share of the property for one lac dirhams. (Kitab Medina Umar bin
Shaybah).

Commenting on the statement of Naafe' lbn Hajar said that sometimes it
so happens that a man is in debt in spite of his being wealthy.[^41] A
relative asked Umar for some money. At first he scolded him, but later
sent him ten thousand dinars.[^42] With these conditions in view when we
look at the progeny of the Prophet and how they suffered, we feel sorry
and are very much shocked to learn that these people had deprived the
Ahlul Bayt even of their right of "Khums"[^43] and snatched Fadak also
from them.

[^1]: Tarikh Ibn Kathir, vol. 6, p. 407

[^2]: Tajul Urus, vol. 6, p. 220, Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd, vol. 8, p. 31,
Musnad Ahmad, vol. 3, p. 126 Mustadrak, vol. 4, p. 47, Sunan al-Kubra
Bayhaqi, vol. 4, p. 53, Nihaya Ibn Athir, vol. 3, p. 286 printed in
Egypt, Lisanul Arab vol. 11, p. 889, Isabah, vol. 4, p.489

[^3]: Ma'arif of ibn Qutayba, p. 84, Tarikh Abul Fida, vol. 1, p. 168,
Sunan al-Kubra Bayhaqi, vol. 6, p. 301, Iqdul Farid, vol. 2, p. 261

[^4]: Ma'arif p. 84, Abul Fida, vol.1, p.160

[^5]: Tarikh lbn Kathir, vol. 7, p. 152

[^6]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 5, p.50

[^7]: Ansab al-Ashraf Balazari, vol. 5, p. 25, and Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd,
vol. 3, p. 44, printed in London

[^8]: Sharah lbn Abil Hadid, vol. 1, p. 67

[^9]: Tarikh Ya'qubi, vol. 2, p. 41

[^10]: Ma'arif lbn Qutaibah, p. 83, Iqdul Farid, vol. 2, p. 261,
Mahazirat Raghib Isfahani vol. 2, p. 212, and Mira't al-Jinan Yafe'i
vol. 1, p. 85

[^11]: Ansabul Ashraf, Balazari, vol. 5, p. 52

[^12]: Ma'arif, p. 84, Iqdul Farid, vol. 2, p. 261, Sharah Ibn Abil
Hadid, vol. 1, p. 67, Mahazarat Raghib Isfahani vol. 2, p, 212

[^13]: Sirat Halabiah, vol. 2

[^14]: Surah al-Furqan, 25:27

[^15]: Tafsir Tabari, vol. 9, p. 6, Tafsir Baizawi, vol. 2, p. 161,
Tafsir Qurtabi, vol. 13, p. 25, Tafsir Zamakhshari, vol. 2, p. 326,
Tafsir Ibn Kathir, vol. 3, p. 317, Tafsir Naishapuri in the marginal-
note of Tabari, vol. 19, p. 10, Tafsir Kabir Razi, vol. 6, p. 369, etc.)

[^16]: Al-Ghadir by Allamah Amini, vol. 1, p. 274

[^17]: Iqdul Farid, vol. 2 p. 261, and Ma'arif of ibn Qutayba, p. 84

[^18]: Sharah Nahjul Balaghah vol. 1, p. 66

[^19]: Tarikh Ibn Wazih Ya'qubi, vol. 2, p. 45

[^20]: Sharah Nahjul Balaghah, vol. 1, p. 67

[^21]: Usudul Ghaba, vol 3, p. 173 and Tarikh Ibn Kathir, vol. 7, p. 152

[^22]: Sharah Nahjul Balaghah, vol.l, p. 67

[^23]: Balazari, vol. 5, p. 7

[^24]: Tathir al-Jinan in the marginal note Sawaiq Muhriqah, p, 143 and
Kanzul Ummal, vol. 6, p. 91

[^25]: Sahih Bukhari, vol. 5, p. 17/15 and Tarhut Tashrib, vol. 7

[^26]: Sahih Bukhari, Kitabul Jihad Baab Barakat al-Ghifari Fi-Malihi,
vol. 5, p. 17 & 21 Irshad al-Sare Umdat al-Qari Shazarat al-Zahab vol.
1, p. 43, Tarikh Ibn Kathir vol. 7, p. 249 and Tarikh Khamis vol. 2, p.
311

[^27]: Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd Waqidi vol. 3, p. 77 printed in London

[^28]: Murujuz Zahab p. 434

[^29]: Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd, vol. 3, p. 158; Ansabul Ashraf Balazari; vol.
5, p. 7 Murujuz Zahab, vol. 1, p. 434 Iqdul Farid, vol. 2, p. 279,
Riazun Nazrah, vol. 2, p. 258, Duwalul Islam Zahabi, vol 1, p.18 and
Al-khulasah Khazraji, p. 152

[^30]: Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd, vol. 3, p. 96, Murujuz Zahab, vol. 1, p. 434
Tarikh Ya'qubi, vol. 2, p. 146, Safwatus Safwah Ibn Jauzi, vol. 1 p.
138, Riazun Nazrah, vol. 2, p. 291, Isti'ab Abdul Barr Makki, vol. 2, p.
404 and Tuhfah Ithna Ashariyah by Muhaddith Dehlavi

[^31]: Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd, vol. 3, p. 105 and Murujuz Zahab, vol.1, p. 434

[^32]: Murujuz Zahab, vol. 1, p. 432

[^33]: Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd, vol. 3, p. 40, Ansab, Balazari vol. 3, p. 4 and
Isti'ab, vol. 4, p. 476

[^34]: Ansab, Balazari vol. 3, p. 4

[^35]: Tabaqat ibn Sa'd, vol. 3, p. 53 and Mas'udi, vol. 1, p. 433

[^36]: Tamaddune Islam, vol. 1, p. 22, printed in Egypt

[^37]: Duwalul Islam, Zahabi, vol. 1 p. 12

[^38]: Ibn Sa'd, vol. 3, p. 53

[^39]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 2, p. 82, printed in Egypt

[^40]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 2, p.382

[^41]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 3, p. 383

[^42]: Tarikh Tabari, vol, 5, p.19

[^43]: Izilatul Khifi, vol. 2, p. 256


