Preface
=======

When, after thirteen years of continuous suffering and struggle, the
Prophet of Islam left Mecca for Medina, he felt that the period of the
violability of Islam and its being practised secretly had come to an end
and with the assistance of his faithful and brave companions he should
build the grand edifice of Islamic polity and lay the foundation of his
political regime in the manner desired by Allah.

Immediately after his arrival in Medina the Holy Prophet built a masjid
there. He built for himself a house adjacent to it, and made its door
open into the masjid. There was no change in his life from the beginning
to the end. His behaviour, manners, and conduct remained the same even
after the establishment of the Islamic Government throughout Arabia.

A new regime and a new State came into existence in the midst of the two
great super powers of that time. In this Islamic State there was no
ruler and subject, no officer and subordinate, and no master and slave.
All were equal before Allah.

The founder of this regime breathed his last and with the deprivation of
Ali and the formation of political factions. The first deviation which
rocked the Islamic foundation took place in the matter of Caliphate.

One of the most sincere and brave companions of the Holy Prophet (s) was
Abu Dharr. He was the fifth person to embrace Islam and his sword had
been very effective for the advancement of the Islamic movement. He now
saw all these deviations. Ali, who was the embodiment of virtue and
truth, had to go into seclusion and the enemies of Islam had penetrated
into the organization of the Caliphate and were destroying Islam like
termite.

Abu Dharr was immensely disturbed and alarmed and saw that the future of
Islam was dark and dreadful. However, he also saw that in any case the
caravan of Islam was proceeding on its path and, although a great right
had been violated, the Islamic system had not completely broken down.
Hence, though he was extremely grieved and agitated, yet he remained
silent.

When Uthman's regime acquired mastery of Islam the rights of workers and
the helpless Muslims were violated by the usurers, the dealers in
slaves, the rich and the aristocrats, who frequented the courts of
Uthman and Mu'awiyah. Class distinctions and hoarding of wealth were
revived and Islam was threatened by a great danger.

The ways and manners of the Holy Prophet were abandoned. Thousands of
dinars were spent on the construction of the Green Palace of the Islamic
Ruler (Mu'awiyah) and an organization like the imperial courts was set
up. Umar led his life like an ordinary man and Abu Bakr, in order to
earn his livelihood, used to milk the she-goats of a Jew, whereas the
necklace of the wife of Uthman, the third Caliph, cost as much as one
third of the revenue received from Africa.

Taking undue advantage of the position of his father, the son of one of
the highest officers of Umar took the horse of a man by force and Umar
prosecuted both the father and the son. On the other hand Uthman
appointed Marwan bin Hakam as his adviser, the man who had been exiled
by the Holy Prophet and gifted him the estate of Khayber as well as the
revenue received from Africa!

When Abu Dharr observed these shameful activities he could no longer
tolerate all this, he rose against that tyrannical regime. It was a
courageous and bold rising which made all the Islamic territories revolt
against Uthman; its roaring waves can still be seen in the human
societies.

Abu Dharr was anxious to establish the abandoned Islamic values, whereas
Uthman's administration was violating it by reviving aristocracy. Abu
Dharr considered Islam to be the refuge of those, who were helpless,
oppressed and deprived, and Uthman had made it the means of support for
the aristocrats and the usurers.

This rift between Abu Dharr and Uthman continued, and eventually Abu
Dharr lost his life on this account.

Abu Dharr recognized the Almighty Allah; hence he never became lax in
His path even for a moment. He turned up to be a 'perfect man' in the
school of Islam and this very thing should be sufficient to show his
greatness.

Abu Dharr is one of those leaders and saviours of freedom whom humanity
needs today. Especially since the time machinery has created a serious
crisis in the world of economy, and the economic problems have been
treated to be the most basic problems of life, his views have gained
greater importance.

The same situation, which he created in Syria and Medina by collecting
the needy and helpless persons around him and instigating them to rise
against the usurers and the hoarders of wealth, has also been created in
these days.

The Muslims of the world recall his fascinating words, correct views and
fiery speeches. It may be said that they can see in the remote parts of
history that he has collected the oppressed and the helpless in the
masjid and is stirring their feelings against the inmates of Green
Palaces and the dirty organization of Uthman and announcing in public.

***Those who hoard up gold and silver and do not spend it for the cause
of Allah, should know that their recompense will be a painful
torment.*** **(Surah al-Tawbah, 9: 34) **  
    
 “O Mu 'awiyah! If you are constructing this palace with your own money
it is extravagance, and, if you are constructing it with the public
funds, it is misappropriation".  
 “O Uthman! The poor have been made poorer by you and the rich have been
made richer by you".  
 Publishers


