Chapter 18
==========

Abu Dharr having returned to Medina from Syria was busy in his
preachings when one more heart rending incident came to pass and that
was the burning of the Holy Qur'an. He was already grieved to see that
the Islamic State was being ruined. The wealth of Muslim ummah was being
spent on relatives and kinsmen of the Caliph. The door of the Public
Treasury was completely closed to the needy, the poor, the orphans and
the widows, but it was wide open to the descendants of Umayyah. The poor
people were starving while the relatives of the Caliph were purchasing
houses, gardens and lands. All of a sudden he got the news that the
Caliph got different copies of the Qur'an collected from a far and wide,
and put them to flames. Therefore, this important incident became the
target of his preaching. The historian Abul Fida writes that this
happened in 30 A.H[^1].

The historian Ya'qubi (died 278 A.H.) writes in his book that Uthman
collected the Qur'an arid arranged it in such a way that he placed big
surahs (chapters) together and the small surahs together separately, and
sending for copies from all sides, got them washed with hot water and
vinegar and set fire to them. As a result of it no Qur'an was left
except the copy belonging to Ibn Mas'ud which was with him in Kufah.
When Abdullah Ibn 'Amir, the Governor of Kufah, asked Ibn Mas'ud for his
copy he refused to give it. At this news Uthman wrote to 'Amir to arrest
Ibn Mas'ud and send him to Medina. When Ibn Mas'ud came and entered the
masjid, Uthman was busy delivering his speech. Seeing Ibn Mas'ud he
said, "An ugly and ill-natured animal has come". Ibn Mas'ud also
strongly retorted in response. Hearing it Uthman ordered people to beat
him. So the people beat him and dragged him in such a way that two of
his ribs got fractured.

It is written in the Persian translation of Tarikh A'tham Kufi (printed
in Bombay vide page 147 line 8) that Uthman tore off the Qur'an and got
it burnt. The same is given in the book "Successors of Muhammad". (W.
Irving p.160 printed in London, 1850 A.D.). According to "Najatul
Mu'minin" by Mulla Mohsin Kashmiri, Uthman got the ribs of Ibn Mas'ud
fractured and snatching his Qur'an got it burnt. According to Rauzatul
Ahbab vol. 2, p. 229 printed Lucknow, Uthman ordered, "My Qur'an must be
given currency in my domain and the remaining Qur'ans should be burnt".
Accordingly all the remaining copies of Qur'an were got burnt. According
to Tarikh al-Qur'an by Abdul Qadir Makki, p. 36 printed Jeddah 1365 A.H.
Sahih Bukhari vol. 6, p. 26 printed Bombay, Mishkit Sharif printed
Dehli, p. 150, and Tafsir Itqan Suyuti, printed Ahmadi, vol. 1, p. 84;
Uthman sent word to Hafsah, the wife of the Holy Prophet, to send him
the Scriptures so that he might copy them out and then return them to
her. Hafsah sent those Scriptures which were with her and Uthman
appointed Zayd bin Thabit, Abdullah bin Zubayr, Sa'id bin 'As, Abdul
Rahman bin Harith to collect and copy the Scriptures, and asked all the
three men of the Quraysh to write the Qur'an in the colloquy of Quraysh
in case there arose some difference on some point in it, because the
Qur'an had been revealed in their language. They did accordingly till
the Scripture was copied out and Uthman returned the Scriptures to
Hafsah as promised and sent one newly-prepared copy to her. Now only the
copy of the Qur'an prepared by Uthman remained in existence and all the
other copies were got burnt. According to Fathul Bari of Ibn Hajar
'Asqalani vol. 4, p. 226, Uthman sent back the Qur'an of Hafsah but
Marwan snatched it forcibly from her and burnt it. According to Tarikh
Khamis p. 270, Isti'ab p. 373 and Sawa'iq Muhriqah p. 68

Uthman got all the copies of the Qur'an burnt except his own and got
Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud beaten so much that he developed the disease of
hernia. Then he sent him to prison where he died. According to Tuhfah
lthna ' Ashariyah of Abdul Aziz, Ubayy bin Ka'b gave his Qur'an to
Uthman and he escaped beating. That Qur'an was also burnt.

It is however recorded in innumerable books that Uthman got the Divine
Scriptures burnt. These were the Qur'ans which were compiled in the days
of Abu Bakr. When Ummul Mu'minin 'Ayesha got the news of the burning of
Qur'ans she became restless. She said, "O Muslims! Kill this man who has
burnt the Qur'an. He has committed a great oppression"[^2].

Ayesha was not content with this much, but she constantly expressed her
displeasure against Uthman. She said again and again "Kill this jew,
Na'thal. May Allah kill him. He has become an apostate"[^3]. According
to Tazkirah Khawasul Ummah pp. 38, 40, 41 Ibn Athir Jazari, she used to
say, "Kill this Na'thal. May Allah kill him". By this she meant Caliph
Uthman. Then Ibn Athir explains why she called Uthman Na'thal. The
reason that Na'thal was ajew in Egypt and his beard resembled that of
Uthman. Again he says that according to a statement by Shaykh it meant a
fool. He further says that after that 'Ayesha went to Mecca. (Nihayah
Ibn Athir)

The historian Ibn Taqtaqi writes that Uthman was killed in consequence
of 'Ayesha 's order "Kill this Na'thal". The very day his house was
surrounded 'Ayesha went to Mecca[^4].

It is obvious that when 'Ayesha, being a woman was so much shocked by
this incident, why should Ali not have been shocked by this horrible
event? It is learnt from the writings of authentic scholars that Ali got
highly shocked by the incident of burning of the Qur'an. Consequently he
felt the necessity of consulting Abu Dharr in this respect. Allamah
Majlisi writes that after this incident Ali asked Abdul Malik, the son
of Abu Dharr to send his father to him. When he came he exchanged views
with him about this incident, expressed his grief and said, "It has been
ironed and torn to pieces. It is possible that Allah may take revenge
upon him with iron". Abu Dharr said, "O Ali I have heard the Prophet of
Allah saying, that the tyrant kings would kill the members of his
house". Ali said, "O Abu Dharr! Are you drawing my attention to my being
murdered, Abu Dharr said, "No doubt, this will happen and you will be
the first out of the progeny of the Prophet to be assassinated"[^5].

In short, it becomes evident that Abu Dharr was deeply affected by this
terrible event. He also added one more theme to his speeches and called
it an un-Islamic way. Let it be known that as the burning of the Qur'an
injures the Islamic spirit so some modern writers have changed the word
"burning” where the burning of the Qur'an is narrated. Shah Walyullah
Dehlavi, in the life events of Uthman writes, "He did away with other
Scriptures which were considered to spread differences". (Izalatul Khifa
vol. 1, p. 274)

[^1]: Tarikh Abul Fida, vol. 2, p. 100, printed in Amritsar, 1901 A.D

[^2]: Anwarul Qulub, Muhammad Baqir Majlisi p.313

[^3]: Rauzatul Ahbab vol. 3,  p. 12

[^4]: Tarikhul Fakhri p. 62, printed Egypt

[^5]: Hayat ul-Qulub, vol. 2, p. 104


