Chapter 21
==========

Having suffered continuous oppressions, constant tortures and hardships
of the successive exiles at the hands of the worldly-minded men, Abu
Dharr left this transient world at Rabzah, but the story of his love for
Allah is still living and will last for ever. History is replete with
examples, truthfulness and his straightforward and honest speeches are
resounding in the hearts of the believers. He is still alive through his
character even after his death; and he will remain immortal through the
principles he held so dear.

The world knows that he died in the way of Allah. He suffered troubles
and hardships in support of truth and in establishing and propagating
the principles of Islam in the Islamic State. But it is a pity that the
tyrant does not repent of his tyranny. We reproduce this incident here
in the word of the translator of the "History" written by Muhammad bin
Ali bin A'tham Kufi, a historian of the 3rd century hijri. He writes:

"When the news of Abu Dharr's death reached Uthman, Ammar bin Yasir was
present there. Ammar said, "May Allah have His Mercy upon Abu Dharr.
Allah! Bear witness that we pray for mercy for him with all our heart
and soul. O Allah! forgive him".

As soon as the Caliph heard it he lost his temper and said, "O fool!"
You will meet the same fate. Listen to me! I don't feel ashamed on
account of the exile of Abu Dharr and his death in the wilderness".
Ammar said, "By Allah, this will not be my end".

Hearing this, the Caliph ordered his courtiers, “Push him out, banish
him from Medina and send him to the same place where Abu Dharr had been
sent. Let him also lead the same life and don't let him come to Medina
as long as I am alive".


Ammar said, "By Allah! I prefer the vicinity of wolves and dogs to my
stay near you”. After that he rose from there and came back to his
house.

When the Caliph decided to send Ammar to Rabzah and the news reached
the tribe of Bani Makhzum they flew into a rage. They said among
themselves that Uthman had crossed the bounds of decency. After that
they held a council and thought that it would be better if before taking
any step this matter is settled by compromise. With this aim in view
they came to Ali. Ali asked them, “Why have all of you come at this
time?" They said, "A serious problem is facing us; the Caliph has
decided to banish Ammar from Medina to Rabzah. Be kind enough to go to
the Caliph and persuade him in suitable words to leave Ammar alone and
not to banish him from the city otherwise such a disturbance will stir
as would hardly be quelled".

Imam Ali listened to them, consoled them and asked them not to make
haste. He told them, "I'll go to the Caliph and will try to settle the
matter. I am sure it will be settled amicably. I am fully conscious of
the situation. I'll bring him round to your view point.

After this Ali went to Caliph Uthman and said, "O Uthman! You are too
hasty in some matters and ignore the suggestions of friends and
advisors. Once you turned Abu Dharr out of Medina. He was a very
virtuous Muslim, a dignified companion of the Prophet of Allah and the
best of immigrants. You sent him to Rabzah where the poor fellow died in
solitude. On account of this incident, the Muslims have turned all the
more against you. Now I hear that you have decided to banish Ammar as
well from the city. This is not a good thing. Have fear of Allah and
desist from banishing Ammar from Medina. For Allah's sake don't give
such troubles to the companions of the Prophet and let them live in
peace". Hearing this Uthman angrily said to Ali. "You should be the
first to be banished from the city because it is you who are ruining
Ammar and others".

Hearing these indecent words Ali said, "O Uthman! How dare you think
like this about me? You will not be able to do it even if you wish it,
and if you doubt my words just try. Then you will realize the actual
state of affairs and will come to know whom you are facing. And now you
say that I am ruining Ammar and others. By Allah all this disorder is
from your side. I don't see any fault with them. You are committing such
acts as are against the religion and decency. People cannot tolerate
them, and are turning against you, and you cannot tolerate these things.
You fell offended with everyone and then you cause them trouble. This
attitude is far from the ways of the elders". After that he rose from
there and went out.

When the people of Bani Makkzum came to Ali, to know what the Caliph
had told him in their case, Ali said, "Tell Ammar to remain indoors and
not to come out. Allah will save him from the evil designs. The Caliph
also came to know of this conversation through somebody and he gave up
the idea of exiling Ammar. Zayd bin Thabit said to Uthman, "If the
Caliph wishes we can go to Ali to have an exchange of views with him so
that the misunderstandings which have cropped up may be removed and the
normal relations are restored". The Caliph said, "You are at liberty to
do so".

Zayd bin Thabit and Mughyrah bin Ahnas Thaqafi came to Ali, saluted him
and took their seats. Then Zayd bin Thabit started praising Ali and
said, “Nobody in the world holds that nearness, kinship, status, and
honour with the Holy Prophet which you have. None could equal you in the
support of and priority in Islam. You are the fountain of virtue and
source of generosity”.

After this eulogy Zayd bin Thabit expressed his real aim and said, "O
Ali bin Abi Talib! We had gone to Caliph Uthman. He has made a sort of
complaint against you, and has said that you sometimes object to his
actions and interfere in matters which he wants to dispose of. So we
considered it wise to come to you and explain those things, so that the
mutual annoyances and displeasures may be removed, as it will be a
matter of joy and pleasure for all the Muslims".

Ali said, "By Allah, so long as I could. I never objected to nor
interfered with anything. But, now, matters have come to such a pass
that it is not possible to show tolerance or assume silence. I had told
him the truth about Ammar which implied his (Uthman's) welfare, safety
and expediency. It was my duty which I performed and now it is upto him
to do as he pleases".

Hearing this Mughyrah bin Ahnas spoke out. "O Ali! You should agree to
what the Caliph says or does, whether you are convinced of it at heart
or not. You should consider the obedience to his orders imperative,
because he has control over you and you do not have control over him. He
has sent us to you only to testify what you say after which he may be
considered excused for whatever he says about you".

"Having heard Mughyrah's words Ali got angry and said, "By Allah he
whom you support will never be honoured and he whom you set in motion,
will never be at rest. Be off from me".

Mughyrah was dumbfounded at what Ali said, and he could not utter a
word any more. Seeing this Zayd bin Thabit said, "O Ali! Mughyrah talks
nonsense. He has said these things of his own accord. By Allah, we have
not come to you to bear witness, nor is it our intention to criticize
you or to object to what you say. We wanted to open the door of mutual
good will and reconciliation and that was the reason for our coming
here. We request you to think over it. Ali expressed his pleasure and
Zayd bin Thabit went back.

It has been narrated above how Ali protested to Uthman. It goes without
saying that Uthman's excesses had made the companions of the Holy
Prophet awfully worried and distressed. They had already become
disgusted with Uthman when they heard of Abu Dharr's sufferings. This
episode caused great annoyance to the Muslims of all classes. As a
consequence of it, people began to criticize the Caliph individually and
collectively.

In this connection, Zubayrbin al-'Awam, a companion of the Prophet went
to Uthman and said, "Had Umar taken a promise from you that you would
not impose children of Abi Mu'it on the people?" The Caliph said, "Yes,
he had taken that promise from me". Zubayr said, "Why did you, then,
appoint Walid Din Uqbah, Governor of Kufah?" The Caliph said, "I have
done it just as Umar bin Khattab had granted the Governorship of Kufah
to Mughyrah bin Shu'bah. I had, of course, appointed him the Governor of
Kufah but when his conduct became anti- Islamic, that is, he started
drinking wine and committing adultery, I deposed him and appointed
another man in his place". Then Zubayr said, "Why did you appoint
Mu'awiyah as Governor of Syria?" The Caliph answered, "I appointed him
Governor of Syria according to the views of Umar bin Khattab because
before me it was he who had appointed Mu'awiyah the Governor of Syria".
Again he asked him, "Why did you rebuke the companions of the Prophet,
although you are not superior to them in any way?" Uthman said, "I did
not speak ill of you. What does it matter if I spoke ill of others?" He,
then asked, "Why did you say that the recitation of Abdullah ibn Mas'ud
was bad, when he had learnt the recitation of the Holy Qur'an from the
Prophet? Besides, why did you oppress him? You got him beaten so much
that he fainted”. The Caliph said, "He used to utter such sentences as
could not be tolerated". Again he asked, "Why did you kick Ammar bin
Yasir and got him beaten so much that he developed hernia?" Uthman said,
it was because he used to incite people against me".

Zubayr then asked him, "Why did you exile Abu Dharr and threw him into
a place which was desolate and without a tree. The poor fellow died in a
state of helpless despair. O Uthman! Did you not know that the Prophet
of Allah considered him a great friend of his, and said that there is no
one more truthful than Abu Dharr between the heavens and the earth? Did
you not know that the Prophet of Allah did not tolerate his separation
and whenever he was away from him, he used to go out in search of Abu
Dharr?" Uthman bin Affan answered, "He used to instigate the Syrians
against me, defamed me and disclosed my faults to the people".

Zubayr then asked, "Why did you turn Malik Ashtar and his companions
out of Kufah, and why did you separate them from their families?" Uthman
said, "They used to create disturbances in Kufah and disobey my
Governor, Sa'id bin 'Aas". At this Zubayr bin 'Awam said, "O Uthman!
Your actions are not justified. You did not think against whom you are
taking such steps. The facts you mentioned did not warrant that you
should have subjected the most revered companions of the Prophet to such
tortures. O Uthman! If you allow me, I can point out to you your actions
which contravened the very tenets of faith. I insist that you should
fear Allah and should not be beside yourself on account of the Islamic
State of which you are the Head, otherwise the day is not far off when
you will get the retribution of your actions in this very world. This
punishment will be in addition to the punishment which you will get in
the Hereafter".

After the tragic death of Abu Dharr when the nobles of Egypt came to
Medina to seek a remedy for their grievances and went into the masjid of
the Holy Prophet, they saw there a gathering of the Muhajirs and the
Ansar. They saluted them and were saluted in return. The Muslims who
were gathered there asked the Egyptians, "Why have you come over here
from Egypt?" They explained to them the reason for their undertaking
such a long journey. They said that the Governor who had been appointed
in Egypt was utterly incompetent and mean”.

The Egyptians however, went to the door of Caliph Uthman and sought
permission for an audience. They got the permission and went in and
after paying their respects said, "O Uthman! We have been persecuted by
your Governor. The acts which he is committing are simply heart-rending,
painful and saddening. O Caliph! Allah has given you abundant wealth. Be
thankful to Allah, have a strict watch over your functionaries and make
the welfare of the masses your aim. We have not only brought you
complaints against your Governour, but we also protest that the things
being done by you are extremely troublesome.”

Uthman said: “Just tell me what these things are”. The answered: “You
called back Hakam Ibn ‘Aas to Medina again, although the Prophet had
exiled him from Medina to Ta’if for good, and Abu Bakr and Umar had
respected his decision ion their respective regime. You tore the Holy
Qur’an into pieces and got it burnt into ashes. You have given control
of your kinsmen, the rain-water which was meant for the use of the
masses and the people have been deprived of its benefits. You have
banished some companions of the holy Prophet from Medina. You want
people to follow you under all circumstances whether what you do is in
conformity with the laws of faith or otherwise.

O Uthman! Listen; we tell you openly that we will follow you faithfully
if you tread a right path and if you persist ion what you are doing at
the moment, we will be obliged to throw off the yoke of your allegiance
and consequently both of us will definitely be ruined.

“O Uthamn! Allah knows everybody’s condition. Every Muslim must fear
Him. Listen! The relations between the ruler and the ruled are very
delicate. The ruler must fear Allah and should desist from doing things
which are against the commands of Allah. We have said what we wanted to
say. Now it is up to you to do as you like”.

Hearing this Uthman inclined his head forward and after remaining silent
for quite some time said, “For the present I do not want to give
explanation to your objections because they are so many but I can simply
say about Hakam bin ‘Aas that the Prophet of Allah had not got offended
with him due to some of his indecent and improper actions and that is
why he had expelled him from the city. Now, when I became Caliph I
called him back in view of our kinship. Tell me if the people of Medina
have any grievance against him, I will definitely call for an
explanation from him.

Historians say that when people directed at Uthman a volley of
objections about some matters he decided to think over those things and
in that connection he wrote to all the governors of the dominion to ask
the people to come to Medina and make direct complaints to him against
the governors. As soon as these letters reached the governors,
complaints from all quarters of the dominion started coming to Medina in
succession.

The first to come were the people from Kufah, Basrah and Egypt. From
Kufah Malik bin Ashtar Nakha'i in the company of one hundred people,
from Basrah Hakam bin Heil with two hundred and fifty people, and from
Egypt four hundred people including Abu Umar bin Badil, Wahhab bin
Waraqa Khuza'i, Kanana bin Shir al-Hammi and Sa'id bin Hamran Muradi
reached Medina.

After their arrival in Medina those Muhajirs and Ansar who were
disgusted with the behaviour of Uthman and were very much distressed and
sad owing to his wrong doings, joined them, and all of them decided by
mutual consent that if Uthman thought over those points which they had
presented before him and gave correct and satisfactory answers, they
would follow him, but if he gave evasive replies as was his wont, they
would depose him and make some able and noble man Caliph in his place.

When the informer conveyed this news to Uthman he very such repented
and admitted that he had committed a great blunder in calling them to
Medina. After seriously thinking over the matter however, came to
conclusion that he should not see them. This was his wrong decision, but
he took it, hid himself in the house and got the gates closed from
inside.

When the people reached the gate of Uthman's palace, he started a
dialogue with them from the roof of his house. He said, "Which action of
mine do you consider wrong? Rest assured that I will accept every demand
of yours and will do as you say. Don't be worried, I won't let you feel
aggrieved in anyway".

Those people said, “You have made rainwater unlawful for the people and
have given it to your relatives instead. The Caliph said, "Don't feel
perturbed. Listen to me carefully. I have stopped water because I have
reserved it for the camels which have come to me in charity, but if you
want me to allow it for all the people I have no objection to it".

They said, "You have torn countless copies of the Qur'an and got them
burnt. This is quite in contravention of the Islamic laws". The Caliph
replied, "As there had been many versions of it I compiled one Qur'an
and destroyed all other copies". They said, "Why did you not bury them
instead of setting fire to them?"
They said, "Why did you not accompany the Holy Prophet in the Battle of
Badr and why did you not participate in it?" He answered, "At that time,
my wife was ill and I was busy in nursing her". They said, "Why did you
not participate in Bay'atur Rizwan (allegiance promised to the Prophet
at the place of Rizwan)?" He answered, "I had gone out at that time".
They asked, "Why did you run away leaving the Holy Prophet alone in the
Battle of Uhud?" He replied, "I had run away of course, but this sin of
mine had been forgiven. So there should be no questioning about it
now".

They said, "You have banished many companions of the Prophet who
suffered great hardships in exile. Some of them were such as were highly
revered and dignified. You expelled them from their homes and entrusted
their affairs to such inexperienced young men and wicked people who made
lawful for themselves bloodshed and forbidden wealth. O Uthman! Among
those exiled people was also the companion whom the Prophet loved very
dearly, and about whom he said that Allah also loved him and that Allah
had ordered the Prophet to love him. You know whenever Abu Dharr went
somewhere the Prophet himself used to go out in search of him. You sent
him to a desolate desert and there he died of hunger and thirst. What
explanation can you give for this misdeed of yours".

Uthman said, "I banished these people from their hometown when they
began to incite people against me. I feared that they would create
dissension and discord. Leave it to Allah if you consider it my sin. Now
about those people who are still in exile I say that you can call them
back through somebody if you so wish. I have no objection”.

They said, "The tyranny that you have let loose upon Ammar cannot be
forgiven. Why did you get him beaten so much that he developed hernia
and is still lying sick". The Caliph said, "He criticized me and gave
publicity to my defects openly”.

They said, "Why did you distribute the money of the Public Treasury
among your kinsmen and made them rich? The poor starve and your
relatives live in affluence". He answered, "Umar bin Khattab also used
to do the same. He gave more to one who was capable". They said, "He did
not practise nepotism so much as you did. You gave all the money to your
own relatives. Is merit confined to your family only? Were Salman,
Miqdad, Ammar, Abu Dharr etc. not competent so as to be deprived of
grants and allowances? You have squandered the money and wasted the
wealth of the Muslims". Uthman said, "If you think so, calculate the
amount payable by me. I will pay up the money gradually and deposit it
in the Public Treasury.

After that the Caliph talked in soft words and cringed before them, and
at that time those people went away. The Caliph was not satisfied even
after they had left. He knew that those people would attack him shortly.
Therefore, he called Abdullah bin Umar and consulted him. He advised him
to call Ali and ask him to calm those people. He was sure that they
would follow Ali's advice.

The Caliph called Ali through a special messenger and explaining to him
the whole thing desired him to pacify the people. Ali promised him to do
accordingly and coming to the people said to them, "It is better to be
cool-hearted". They were very much angry. They said, "We hold you in
high esteem, but we cannot tolerate the outrages and excesses of
Uthman". According to A'tham Kufi, Ali stood surety and said, “Don't be
worried, compromise is better than dispute". After that Ali went to
Uthman with the leaders of those groups. After a lot of argumentation
they concluded a compromise and Uthman wrote down the following
agreement, which we quote here in the words of the translator of Tarikh
A'tham Kufi:

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.
On behalf of Uthman, this document is given in writing to the people of
Basrah, Kufah and Egypt who have objected to my actions, and I accept
that from now onwards I will act upon the Book of Allah and the Sunnah
of the Prophet, will not ignore the will of the people and will avoid
disputes. I will call back the people who have been banished from their
hometown and will return to the people their confiscated grants. I will
depose Abdullah ibn Sa'd ibn Abi Sarah from the Governorship of Egypt
and will appoint a man whom the Egyptians like".

The Egyptians said, "We want that Muhammad bin Abi Bakr bin Abi Quhafah
should be appointed our ruler". Uthman said, "Yes, that will be done".
In short, Ali, was held surety to all these matters and the evidences of
Zubayr bin al-'Awam, Talhah bin Abdullah bin Umar, Zayd bin Thabit,
Sohayl bin Hanif, and Abu Ayyub bin Zayd, were recorded and their seals
were affixed. The last sentence was, "This document was written in the
month of Ziqa'dah 35 A.H.". After that Ali and all the people left the
place.

Historians say that when Uthman gave a written document of governorship
to the Egyptians they left Medina for Egypt happy and satisfied.
Accompanied by Muhammad bin Abi Bakr (son of the First Caliph) they were
going along their way stage by stage till, according to Ibn Qutaybah and
A'tham Kufi, they had traversed three stages or had covered a distance
of three nights, when they caught sight of camel-rider going hastily
towards Egypt. Muhammad Bin Abi Bakr ordered him to be arrested and
brought to him. People rushed up and brought him. Muhammad asked him,
"Where are you coming from, and where are you going to?" He said, "I am
coming from Medina and am going to Egypt". They asked him why he was
going to Egypt. He replied that he had a personal business. As they had
become suspicious they asked him if he had any letter. He denied it.
Muhammad bin Abi Bakr ordered him to be searched. When a search was made
no letter could be found. Muhammad said, "Search his leather bottle".
When the bottle was emptied of water they found a letter in a ball of
wax. When they unfolded it, they discovered that the letter was written
from Uthman with his seal on it and addressed to the Governor of Egypt;
Abdullah bin Sa'd bin Abi Sarah.

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.
I, the servant of Allah, Uthman order you (Abdullah bin Sarah) that as
soon as Umar bin Badil Khuza'i reaches you, you should behead him, and
cut the limbs of 'Alqamah bin Adis, Kananah bin Bashir, and 'Urwaisi so
that they die rolling and wriggling in their blood. Then get their dead
bodies hanged by the trees at crossroads. Ignore the orders written in
my hand, which Muhammad bin Abi Bakr carries to you, and if possible
kill him with some design. Stick to your post with confidence. Do not
fear anything and rule over Egypt".

Muhammad bin Abi Bakr and the other dignitaries of Egypt got astonished
to read this letter and said, "What a sound agreement has been
concluded! How sincerely the vow has been made and how faithfully the
word has been kept! What would have happened if we had reached Egypt and
this slave had reached earlier!"

In short they thanked Allah that they had escaped the danger, and
returned to Medina in great haste. There they collected all the
companions of the Prophet and read out the letter of Uthman bin' Affan
before them. .

After listening to the contents of the letter and discovering the real
fact, no inhabitant of Medina remained sympathetic to the Caliph. Strong
revolt stirred up and all people began to talk openly against the
Caliph. Hearts were filled with excitement and on account of this
cunningness everybody got disgusted with the rule of the Caliph. Those
people (according to al-Fakhri) who had heard Ayesha's sentence "Kill
this Jew Uthman" and those people who (according to'Atham Kufi) had
become fed up and extremely sad, because their elders had been tortured,
got ready to fight.

Bani Salim were enraged because of Abdullah bin Mas'ud, Bani Makhzum
were excited owing to the tragic incident that had occurred to Ammar bin
Yasir and Bani Ghifar had been infuriated on account of the treatment
meted out to Abu Dharr Ghifari. In other words, these tribes revolted
because of Uthman's behaviour in relation to their leaders and became so
much inflamed that they could not think of anything except to kill
Uthman.

Under these circumstances all tribes including the Egyptians resolved
to see Ali at first, because he had stood surety for them and had signed
the document in that capacity. So all of them came to Ali and presented
before him the intercepted letter of the Caliph. As Ali read the letter
and came to know of its contents he felt highly shocked. He said in
great surprise, "I am very astonished. What has Uthman done?" After that
he went to Uthman with that letter and putting it before him he said,
"Read it". When Uthman had gone through it Ali said, "I am at a loss to
understand what to do in your case. You have played havoc. I had made
these people agreeable at your instance. Now you have done what is
unbecoming of a Muslim. I am sorry that you did not even realize the
difficulty with which I had removed their antagonism for you. You know
that they had started for their homeland fully satisfied and happy on
account of their confidence in me. O Uthman! I thought the matter had
been settled once for all. I thought that enmity was removed and the
Muslims got rid of this dispute. But alas! You yourself ruined the
already settled case. O Uthman! Tell me what kind of letter is this? Who
is the writer? What kind of act is it? What opinion will the world form
about this unbecoming act? What will the world think of this fraud and
design?"

Uthman said, "O Abul Hasan! By Allah, I did not write this letter, not
did I order anybody to write it, nor did I ask my slave to go to Egypt.
I am quite ignorant of this case". Ali asked. "Is this camel yours?" He
replied, "Yes". Ali again asked, "Is the seal of this letter yours?"
Uthman replied, "Yes". Ali said, "The hand-writing resembles that of
your scribe. The seal is yours. The slave is yours and the camel is
yours; even then you say that you do not know anything". The Caliph
said, "It is possible that I was not informed, and the letter was
written and despatched". Anyway, Ali left that place after this
conversation.

At last, the Caliph delivered an address in the central Masjid and
tried to explain his position regarding the letter. People said, "All
right! We suppose that you have not written this letter. But it is
established that it has been written in the hand of your scribe, Marwan.
The seal is yours. The camel is yours. The slave is yours. Now we ask
you to go back to your palace and hand over Marwan to us". The Caliph
said, "No, it will never be".

A great disturbance arose after this talk. According to A'tham Kufi
fighting broke out and the masjid turned into an arena, so much so that
Uthman became unconscious on account of his being stoned. He was then
removed to his home.

Now the time approached when those people, who were ordered by Uthman
to be killed in Egypt decided to carry out the orders of Ummul Mo'minin,
Ayesha, the daughter of Abi Bakr, which she was giving constantly with
the words, "Kill this Jew, Uthman. He has become an apostate". So the
people surrounded the house of the Caliph. Al-Fakhri writes that as soon
as the house was besieged by the rebels Ayesha left Medina for Mecca and
Caliph Uthman was killed by the people, under the leadership of her
brother Muhammad bin Abi Bakr.

According to Tarikh Abul Fida, Uthman was killed on 18th Zilhajjah 35
A.H. His Caliphate lasted for about thirteen years. His body remained
unburied for three days because his enemies prevented his burial.
According to Ibn Jarir Tabari the dead body of Uthman lay for two days
and nobody could dare bury him. The historian A'tham Kufi writes that
the dead body of Uthman could not be buried for three days and remained
unguarded till the dogs took away one of his legs. After that Hubayr bin
Mut'im Taujeer bin Mut'im and Hakim bin Hizam went to Ali and said,
"Please try to get the dead body buried somehow". Accordingly under
threats from Ali arrangement were made to bury the dead body. But the
people could not agree in any way to bury it in the graveyard of the
Muslims. At last his dead body was buried in Hash Kaukab, the graveyard
of the Jews.

After that the same historian writes that this event took place on the
17th Zilhajjah, 35 A.H. on Friday after the Asr prayers. Uthman's age at
that time was eighty two years. When the news of this event reached
'Ayesha the Mother of the Faithful, at Mecca and she came to know that
Uthman had been killed by the distinguished companions of the Holy
Prophet she was overjoyed and said, "Allah gave him the retribution for
his deeds. I thank Allah He punished him appropriately". (Tarikh 'Atham
Kufi, Tarikh Al-Imamah vas Siyasah,vol. 1, Tarikh al-Fakhri, Tarikh Abul
Fida, Tarikh Tabari etc.)

In short, Uthman was killed only three years after the tragic death of
Abu Dharr. If you think carefully, his murder was occasioned by those
very acts from which Abu Dharr asked him to desist. If Uthman had
accepted the counsels of the revered Abu Dharr, he would not have faced
this day, and such calamities would not have fallen on him and Abu Dharr
also would not have been thrown into seclusion at Rabzah where he died a
tragic death.


