Chapter 2
=========

   
 After listening to his brother Abu Dharr said, "I am not satisfied with
your report. I shall go there myself, see him and listen to him
personally".  
    
 Abu Dharr reached Mecca, entered the vicinity of Ka'bah and started
looking for the Prophet, but neither he found him there, nor did he hear
any mention of him. He stayed there till sunset. Ali came and passed by
Abu Dharr, who was sitting. Ali asked him, “You look to be a traveller.
Isn't it?”

Abu Dharr: Yes!  
 Ali: Come on with me. Ali took him to his house. Both of them were
going silently. Abu Dharr did not ask him anything till they reached the
house. Ali made arrangements for his stay and Abu Dharr went to sleep.
Next morning he again went to Ka'bah in search of the Prophet. Neither
he asked anybody of him, nor did anybody tell him anything. He kept
waiting anxiously till the day came to an end. Ali came round again as
usual and passed in front of him. As soon as he saw Abu Dharr, he asked,
“Could you not go back home up till now?"

Abu Dharr: No!  
 Ali: All right! Then, come along with me. Both of them were going
silently when Ali asked, "Why! What is the reason of your coming over
here?"  
 Abu Dharr: I can tell you the reason if you do not disclose it.

Ali: "Speak out frankly whatever you want to say. I will not tell it to
anybody”.  
 Abu Dharr: I have come to know that a man has appeared and he calls
himself a prophet. I had sent my brother to talk to him. He returned and
could not give me any satisfactory information. Now, I am determined to
see him myself.

Ali: You have come upto the right man. I am going towards him. Just
follow me. Enter wherever I enter. If I feel any danger I shall be
setting my shoe right, standing near a wall, and when I start doing so
you should go back.

Abu Dharr says, "Ali took me into a house. I saw that a light
personified was manifest there. As soon as I saw him I was attracted
towards him and felt like kissing his feet. Hence I saluted him saying
Assalamu Alaykum". (He was the first man who saluted the Prophet of
Islam in an Islamic way, before embracing Islam).  
    
 Returning the salute he said, wa Alaykum as Salam wa rahmatullahe wa
barakatoh. "Yes, what do you want?"  
    
 I replied, "I have come to you in a spirit of faith". He instructed me
about necessary matters and asked me to recite the Kalimah (La ilaha
illallah Muhammadun Rasulullah) I recited it to him and thus entered the
fold of Islam.  
    
 Thereafter he took leave of the Prophet and started for the Ka'bah.
Upon reaching there, when he saw a big gathering of Qurayshite infidels,
he shouted in a loud voice, "Hear O Quraysh, I stand witness that Allah
is One and Muhammad is His Prophet".  
    
 This voice frightened the audition of Quraysh and demolished the image
of their Laat and Uzza. The feeling of the Quraysh that the dignity of
their idols had been pulled down made them extremely perturbed.  
    
 At last people in unison encircled Abu Dharr. They started beating him
so severely that he fainted. He would have nearly died but for the
sudden arrival of Abbas bin Abd al-Muttalib. When he saw that the
devotee of Muhammad was about to die, he could not help laying himself
down on Abu Dharr.  
    
 He said, "O people! What has happened to you? You are killing a great
man of Bani Ghifar. Why have you forgotten that you carry on trade with
Bani Ghifar and visit them off and on. Don't you fear his tribe at all".
At this those people left Abu Dharr and went away.  
    
 After they had left, Abu Dharr who was bleeding, got up from there and.
went to the well of Zamzam.

He felt extremely thirsty on account of severe wounds and profuse
bleeding. Hence he drank water first and then cleansed his body. After
that he came groaning to the Holy Prophet. As soon as the Prophet saw
him in this condition he felt very sorry for him and said, Abu Dharr!
Have you eaten or drunk something?"

Abu Dharr: My master! I have felt some relief after drinking the water
of Zamzam.  
 Prophet: No doubt it gives relief.  
 After that he consoled Abu Dharr and provided him with food.

Though Abu Dharr had suffered much because of his speech, yet his
religious fervour did not allow him to return to his country calmly. His
firm belief demanded to make Quraysh believe that human intelligence
despises the superstition of idolatry.  
    
 He took leave of the Prophet and came to the precincts of Ka'bah again.
He stood upon a raised spot and called out with a firm determination. "O
people of Quraysh! Listen to me. I bear witness that there is no god
except Allah and I testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah".  
    
 Hearing this, those perverts who saw the foundations of their gods
being shaken and who had been so much agitated by his earlier speech
were once again startled and in a state of confusion turned towards his
voice and hurriedly gathered around him. They were shouting. "Kill this
Ghifari as soon as possible as he is bent upon insulting our gods".  
    
 The whole assembly cried with one voice “Kill Abu Dharr”. Consequently
they beat Abu Dharr so severely that he fainted.  
    
 Seeing this Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib came forward and laid himself down
on him as he did the day before, and said, "O Quraysh! What has happened
to you that you are killing a Ghifari although you have good relations
with his tribe and your trade is flourishing with the help of his tribe.
Get aside. Do not beat him any more".  
    
 Upon hearing this all of them went away leaving Abu Dharr in a state of
unconsciousness. When Abu Dharr came to his senses, he went to the well
of Zamzam and after drinking its water cleaned his body of blood.  
    
 Abdullah Subaiti writes that though Abu Dharr had suffered wounds yet
he forced the Quraysh to form an opinion through his speeches that Islam
had spread around the people and they had been deeply impressed by it.  
    
 In short Abu Dharr got up from the well of Zamzam and reached the Holy
Prophet. When the Prophet saw Abu Dharr in this condition he said, "O
Abu Dharr! Where have you been and why are you in this condition?" Abu
Dharr replied, "I had gone to Ka'bah again. I delivered a speech there
and took a blood bath. Now I have come to you after cleaning my body
with the water of Zamzam.

The Prophet said, "O Abu Dharr! Now I order you to go back to your
country at once. Listen! When you reach your home, your uncle will have
died. Since he has no heir but you, you will be his sole successor and
owner of his property. Go and spend the property for the propagation of
Islam. I shall shortly migrate from Mecca to the town of date-palms. You
should continue working there till I migrate". Abu Dharr said, "Yes! My
master it is all the good. I shall leave very soon and keep on
propagating Islam ". [^1]

[^1]: Sahih Bukhari vol. p. 47 chapter Islam and Abu Dharr, printed in
Egypt, 1312 Hijra


