Chapter 3
=========

   
 After embracing Islam, Abu Dharr left Mecca for his country. Abdullah
Subaiti writes what when Abu Dharr took leave of the Prophet he was
brimful of complete faith, and Islam had pervaded his personality. He
started from there with great joy. He was very happy that Allah had
guided him to a faith which is accepted by pure bondmen and conscience
is satisfied with it and reason whole-heartedly welcomes it.  
    
 He went on and reached his country. The first man to greet him was his
brother Unais, and he was also the first to get the flash of his faith.
Unais came forward to kiss his brother's feet and said, "O brother! You
have spent so many days in Mecca. Now tell me what you have made out".  
 Abu Dharr said:

"Unais! I have arrived at a conclusion which is welcomed by sound
reason. I concluded after a lot of thinking that I should accept the
faith of Muhammad. O Unais! I cannot tell you that when I met Muhammad
and looked at his face, I felt as if my chest was expanding. My heart
was filled with pleasure and the mind was intoxicated with faith. I, at
once, recited the formula of faith (Kalimah) and acknowledging his
Prophethood requested him to teach me the articles of faith. So he
explained to me the principles of Islam. O Unais! I ask you honestly
with the sincerity of intention to bow your head humbly before Allah and
leave the worship of these men made gods of stone".  
    
 Hearing this, Unais sat down with his head bowed and started thinking.
He got in such a state as if intoxicated. Unais recalled all those
things which he himself had seen in Mecca. He spoke after a while, "O
brother! My mind confirms your truthfulness and my sound reason asks me
not to disobey you. Hence listen! I bear witness that there is no god
except Allah and I testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah".  
    
 Abu Dharr became very happy on Unais's accepting the faith. He said to
him: "Now let us go to our mother". Both of them then went to their
mother.  
    
 Greeting his mother Abu Dharr said, "Dear mother! I beg your pardon! I
have been away from you for a very long time. But, I have brought a
treasure which nobody possesses here".  
    
 His mother asked, "What is that treasure which distinguishes you?" Abu
Dharr said, it is the treasure of faith, mother. I met a person in Mecca
whose face gleamed with nobleness. He is peerless in good manners and
magnanimity. He speaks what is true. He says what is right. He does what
is just. There is wisdom in his words. Mother! His enemies also call him
truthful and trustworthy. He invites people towards Allah who is the
creator of heaven and the earth and is the organizer of the existence of
this universe. I have acknowledged faith in him having been influenced
by his bearing, statements and sayings, and Unais has also become a
Muslim. We have accepted the Oneness of Allah and the Prophethood of
Muhammad (s).  
    
 Abu Dharr's mother said: "My son, if it is so I also bear witness that
there is no god but Allah, and testifies that Muhammad is the Messenger
of Allah".  
    
 Abu Dharr was encouraged when his brother and mother also embraced
Islam and now he began thinking how to influence his tribesmen and
persuade them towards the right path.  
    
 After great deliberation Abu Dharr came out of his house. His mother
and brother were also with him. After travelling a little distance they
pitched their tent near their tribe's tents.  
    
 The night had fallen. These tired travellers were lying in their tents
to sleep when they felt that many tribesmen who were present at that
place were telling stories among themselves and narrating different
events. They were busy in continuous conversation.  
    
 When Abu Dharr tried to overhear them he heard that they were talking
about him.  
 After that the people got up from their place and reached near the tent
of Abu Dharr. Abu Dharr said to his brother, Unais, "The tribesmen have
come close to our tent. Go out and see them".

Unais went out at once. He saw that some young men of the tribe had
come. They had come to know that Unais and Abu Dharr were there. They
saluted him. Unais, after saluting them in return, asked the reason for
their visit. They said, "We have come simply to see you and Abu Dharr".

Unais went in to Abu Dharr and said, "The youths of our tribe have come
to know the conditions of journey".

Abu Dharr said, "Call them in. I shall talk to them. May be I make them
the worshippers of Allah, the One".

Unais came out and said, "Come in as brother Abu Dharr is calling
you”.  
 All of them went to Abu Dharr. One of them said, "O Abu Dharr! We have
not seen you since long as a result of which we have become very sad".

Abu Dharr said, "My dear young men! I have great love and sympathy for
you in my heart”.

One man: "Abu Dharr! Where have you been so long? We have not been able
to see you for quite some time".

Abu Dharr: "I had gone to Mecca. I came back a few days ago".  
 Second man: "We are happy that you have been to Mecca".  
 Abu Dharr: "I had, of course, gone to Mecca, but I did not offer any
sacrifice to Hubal nor did I prostrate before Laat and Uzza. My young
men! Why should have I done all this when I know that these idols have
neither life, nor can they harm or benefit anybody? They can neither see
nor hear, nor can they ward off a calamity which may befall them.  
    
 Listen! I resort to Allah in all my actions and matters. He is
certainly single without peer or partner, and I testify to Allah who
alone is to be worshipped. He is the Creator of everything and Nourisher
of every creature.  
    
 I ask you to join me in our plan of action and testify to the Oneness
of Allah like us”.  
    
 Hearing this all the people began to tremble. One of them said in
amazement, "O Abu Dharr! What are you saying?”   
    
 Abu Dharr: "Listen to what I say. Though I cannot see Allah with my
eyes, yet I see Him with the internal eye; and listen! He is seen in
everything of the world. Think for a while! How can anything be worthy
of human worship when it is made by human hands? It is not wise to
worship idols made of stone and wood, and pray to them to satisfy our
needs. My tribesmen! You know that these idols do not have any power.
They can neither ward off evil, nor do they have the strength to acquire
benefit". 

Hearing this exhortation of Abu Dharr’s people started whispering to one
another.  
    
 One of them said, "I have told you already that a man has appeared in
Mecca, he calls himself a prophet and invites people to worship One
Allah. Abu Dharr has met him and has been moved by his preaching, so
much so that whatever ideas he puts forth belong to that man".  
    
 The other man said, "Conditions are very grave. We are exposed to
danger by Abu Dharr's personality and his preaching. We feel that if he
goes on preaching like these differences will crop up within our tribe
and our lives will be ruined. Better it is that we go to Khafaf, the
chief of our tribe, explain to him all the dangers involved, and insist
upon him to give full attention to counteract them.  
    
 The youngmen of Ghifar took leave of Abu Dharr and went to see Khafaf.
On the way they exchanged views with one another.  
    
 One of them said, "Abu Dharr has raised a great disturbance”.  
    
 The other said, "It will be very shameful for us to ignore this great
sin of Abu Dharr. He openly outrages our religion and ridicules our
gods".  
    
 The third one said, "It is obligatory on us to turn him out of our
tribe without the least delay, because if we delay his excommunication
little; he will overpower our young men, women and slaves and instil his
corrupt ideas in their minds. In case it so happened, we shall suffer a
great loss".  
    
 The fourth one said, "Your viewpoint is correct. But who will bell the
cat? He is not a man of an ordinary stature. He is a great man of the
tribe, and an elder of the family. I also see that Unais holds the same
views, and he is also a man of repute".  
    
 The fifth one said, "There is no cause for alarm. Come and let us put
the case before Khafaf. We are sure that Khafaf, and other nobles of the
tribe will themselves expel him from the tribe".  
    
 The sixth one said, "I am pondering over their ideas. I am not sure
they will be able to change them. It is possible that they may of
themselves come to the right path. We should not be perturbed but should
reflect on their religion. Listen to me! I am noticing reality in their
faith, Anyway, we are about to reach Khafaf. After our talk with him we
expect to arrive at some definite conclusion".  
    
 In short, conversing together, these people reached the chief of Ghifar
tribe and said to him, "We are coming from Abu Dharr to you”.  
    
 Khafaf: "Has Abu Dharr come back from the journey to Mecca?"  
    
 A man said, "Sir, Abu Dharr has turned a pervert. He ridicules our
gods. He says that a man has been appointed as a prophet. His duty is to
invite people to the worship of One God and also to teach good things.
Abu Dharr is not content with acknowledging his prophethood and keeping
it to himself, but he is constantly preaching in the masses and is
inviting all others to that prophet and his God.  
    
 When Khafaf heard it, he said, "It is a pity that Abu Dharr, leaving
all gods, propagates the worship of a Single God. It is a great evil and
very repugnant. I foresee that it will stir up a serious commotion in
our tribe, which will be destroyed in consequence. O my young men! Do
not make haste but give me some time to think over the case of Abu
Dharr".  
    
 After the young men went back, Khafaf, the chief of the tribe, began to
think why all of them were speaking against Abu Dharr. He kept on
pondering over the matter the whole night in his bed. He was extremely
bewildered and could not form a definite opinion. But his mind had the
deep impression of the hearsay expressed by Abu Dharr. He passed
sleepless hours and was simply closing and opening his eyes.  
    
 He also recalled an address of the Arab philosopher, Qays bin Sa'idah,
in the market-place; He had said that the Creator of the universe is
undoubtedly One and only He is worthy of worship. He had completely
endorsed Abu Dharr's views in his remarkable address, and had also
mentioned that the ideas of Warqa bin Naufil, Zayd bin Amr, Uthman bin
Hoverath and Abdullah bin Hajash had changed, and all of them were
inclined towards the faith of Abu Dharr .  
    
 He was in this puzzling situation when his reason guided him and he
said to himself, "Indeed! Abu Dharr is right because Qays bin Sa'ida has
supported him and I am sure that Qays will not misunderstand, nor will
he accept any false belief. Undoubtedly, there must be a reformer for
this world, and there must exist a Being who may run the system of the
universe, and it is quite obvious that our gods of stone and wood are
far from such capabilities. O God of Abu Dharr! Guide us and delivering
us from this perversion put us on the right path”.  
    
 While Khafaf was busy making his important decision, the day dawned
till the sun appeared in the sky and with the spread of sunlight the
news also gained currency that Abu Dharr, his brother and his mother
have all come back from Mecca and worship only One God.  
    
 With the spreading of this news there stirred an agitation. People
started reviling Abu Dharr and said, "He has gone mad and has seen
incapacitated to understand that these very idols of ours heal us, give
us food and protect us. Abu Dharr is a strange man who invites us to an
Invisible God. It appears to us that Abu Dharr wants to create
disturbance and trouble among our young people and mislead our children
and women. Surely he is a liar and what he claims is wrong. He should be
expelled from the tribe".  
    
 One of them said, "Why! How could you express the idea of his
expulsion? How can it be done? No, never! It can not happen. He is the
bravest man of our tribe".  
    
 After these conversations those people decided to draw the attention of
their elders to this point. Accordingly they asked their elders to
deliberate on this matter. The elders of the tribe decided to take the
case of Abu Dharr to the chief. Consequently all of them went to
Khafaf.  
    
 The chief of the tribe sent his slave immediately to call Abu Dharr to
him. The slave on reaching him said, "Abu Dharr! you and Unais have been
called on by the chief".  
    
 Abu Dharr said that he was just coming. After the slave had left, Abu
Dharr held his sword in the belt and said to his brother Unais, "Come
on; let us go to Khafaf".  
    
 Unais: "O brother! I hear bad things about you from the people. I am
afraid this meeting of ours may not prove useful; something unexpected
may come out, instead".  
    
 Abu Dharr: "No, it is not so. I know Khafaf very well. He is a wise
man. Allah has blessed him with wisdom. He is the most intelligent man
of our tribe".  
    
 The two brothers were going on talking together till they reached
Khafaf. There they saw that the nobles of the tribe were sitting in a
circle around him.  
    
 Addressing them all Abu Dharr said, "Salamun Alaykum" (Peace be upon
you).  
    
 Hearing Abu Dharr's salutation in the Islamic way the nobles of the
tribe got enraged and spoke in a furious manner. "What is this wishing
which we have never heard before”.  
    
 Then one of them said, “It is a pity. We do not know which side Abu
Dharr goes".  
 Another man said, "Just look at him. He is sitting with his sword, and
has no respect for the chief".

The third man said, "You are right. But he is a horse rider of the tribe
and brave people are always armed".

Abu Dharr spoke, “Listen! I respect you because you are the nobles of
the tribe, worthy of our pride and esteem. The salute I have offered to
you is the Islamic salute".

After this Abu Dharr and Unais took their seats face to face with the
chief of the tribe, Khafaf.

Khafaf spoke in a kind but sharp tone, “O Abu Dharr! I am informed that
you have been inclined to the worship of Allah Who is Invisible. The
nobles of the tribe are offended with this attitude of yours. They say
that Abu Dharr insults their gods and calls them devoid of all
wisdom".  
    
 “O Abu Dharr! We do respect you but it does not mean that we are
willing to tolerate the insult of our gods. I ask you to give up your
present ideas and come back to your ancestral faith, or else explain
your faith to me so that I may be able to understand the reality of your
faith. Also, I assure you that I shall think to accept it if you prove
that your faith is reasonably better than ours".  
    
 At this Abu Dharr replied, “O chief of the tribe! We respect you and
honour whatever you say. But, at the same time, we want to explain that
Allah, the One, Whom we have decided to worship and in Whom we believe,
is the same Who has created the earth and the sky, Who gives sustenance
to all creatures, Who has a control over the life of every animate
object and Whose power knows no bounds".  
    
 The idols whom we have been worshipping up till now, have been made by
our own hands and have been cut with our own chisels and hammers. Can
reason believe that he who is our handmade should be our creator, our
sustainer and the listener of our prayers?"  
    
 "Man is the noblest of the creation. How can it be worthy of his
dignity to bow his head before a stone? My chief! Please think
dispassionately what I say. They have no power even to repel their enemy
from themselves".  
    
 Listen to me, O chief! Once I went to Manat and offered a cup of milk
to him. I was still there when a fox came, drank up the cupful of milk
and urinated on Manat. This incident had a great effect on me and I
thought how a god could be so helpless!"  
    
 "This thing made it clear to me that it cannot be god. I am sure and
every reasonable man will believe that the Creator of the heavens is
better than the heavens and the Maker of the earth is better than the
earth. According to this rule of reason the idols cannot be better than
us and when they are not superior to us it is meaningless for us to
worship them".  
    
 "O my chief! I have come to the truth that Allah is one Who is the
Creator and Sustainer of the whole universe, and Muhammad Mustafa who
had been sent in Mecca is His Messenger".  
    
 "He possesses such good qualities that he has no match in the world.
The Quraysh who are his bitter enemies admit his truthfulness and
capability. Even knowing well that Muhammad is against their gods and
religion, they have given him the title of Sadiq and Amin, as I have
come to know quite lately. Listen! Light reflects from his face and
wisdom flows from his words".  
    
 As soon as Abu Dharr finished his speech there arose a great noise all
round, "How sweetly Abu Dharr talks! So, our gods are deaf and dumb! Abu
Dharr has humiliated our faith and has insulted our gods". A group of
them also said, "My friends! Do not talk nonsense. We sincerely say that
whatever Abu Dharr has said appears to be right, and reason demands that
we should accept the truth. We are sure that we cannot get better
guidance than whatever Abu Dharr has brought for us".  
    
 Another voice arose: "Arabia needs a reformer and there does not appear
to be a better reformer than the one introduced by Abu Dharr”. Then
another voice was raised, "Abu Dharr's speech is very reasonable". After
this a very loud voice rose; it pierced the ear drums, "O Abu Dharr! I
bear witness that there is no god except Allah and I testify that
Muhammad is His Messenger".

Seeing this, Khafaf, the chief of the tribe, after intense thinking
raised up his head and said to his people: "My dear tribesmen! Listen
attentively. You have heard whatever Abu Dharr said. It is our duty to
think over his speech very carefully and intensively and find out how
much truth it contains. Hastiness is not advisable. It does not carry
sense to dismiss somebody's suggestion without examining it.

My friends! You are aware how much confusion prevails among us and how
excessive are the crimes in which we are involved. The rich squeeze the
poor, and there is no limit to sins and evils.  I have come to the
conclusion that I should accept and endorse what Abu Dharr says. Now it
is up to you to form an opinion for yourselves.  Listen you all: I bear
witness that there is no god but Allah and Muhammad is His Messenger”  
    
 As soon as Khafaf recited the Kalimah (La ila ha illal lah Muhammadun
Rasulullah) there was an outburst of noise in the tribe, "Khafaf became
a Muslim. Khafaf embraced Islam".  
    
 No sooner had Khafaf become a Muslim than the condition of the tribe
completely changed. Most of them accepted Islam then and there, while
others waited to acknowledge Islam at the hands of the Holy Prophet at
the time of his arrival at Medina.  
    
 In short, with the great efforts of Abu Dharr the majority of the
tribesmen of Ghifar embraced Islam, and there arose the cries of "God is
the Greatest”, and "God is praise worthy”, and the name of the Holy
Prophet began to be proclaimed day and night.  
    
 After infusing the spirit of Islam in the tribe of Ghifar and
converting the people to Islam Abu Dharr turned his attention to Asfan.
Reaching there he preached Islam among the people. As this place lay on
the high way frequented by the Quraysh, and he had developed a feeling
against them which was due to the tortures he had suffered at their
hands he exercised a little strictness in making them Muslims. When a
group of the Quraysh came over there, he presented Islam to them, and
consequently a large number of the Quraysh embraced Islam.


