Chapter 5
=========

   
 History bears witness that Abu Dharr was so much enlightened after
embracing Islam that he became without a parallel. He achieved such
perfection in purity of faith and sincerity of heart that he proved to
be a beacon light for the people of insight. He enriched the people's
mind with his counsels, after the appearance of Islam, taught them the
lesson of equality and love, and showed them the way of obedience to
Allah and the Holy Prophet.  
    
 His Islamic life had been so dignified that it had no parallel.
Abdullah Subaiti writes that Abu Dharr was distinguished among those
companions who excelled in piety, abstemiousness, worship of Allah,
truthfulness, firmness in faith and peerless in resignation to the Will
of Allah. His daily diet was, during the life time of the Holy Prophet,
three kilo of dates and he maintained it throughout the rest of his
life.  
    
 He further writes that he was so elevated in morality and virtue that
the Holy Prophet had to include him, like Salman Farsi, in Ahlul Bayt
(People of his House). Hafiz Abu Na'im says that Abu Dharr was a devout
worshipper, a man of piety and had a highly contented heart. He was the
fourth person to have embraced Islam .He had given up all evils even
before the enforcement of Islamic law. It was his cherished goal not to
bow down his head before the tyrant rulers. He stood firm in bearing
pains and sorrows. He won distinction in learning by heart the
traditions and exhortations of the Holy Prophet.  
    
 Abu Na'im writes that Abu Dharr did great service to the Holy Prophet
and acquired the knowledge of the articles of faith and articles of the
practice in his company, and abstained from evils. One speciality of his
was that he used to ask questions from the Holy Prophet. He learnt by
heart the meanings and interpretations given by him and was very greedy
in this respect. In short, as far as possible, he not only satisfied
himself with his questioning but gathered a vast treasure of Islamic
knowledge for the followers of Islam.  
    
 Another notable deed of his life was that he treaded on the same path
which the Holy Prophet meant and approved of, and for which he had
commanded. He attached himself with Imam Ali after the Holy Prophet and
did not forsake him at any moment. He followed him, and received benefit
from his vast knowledge. He imbibed his knowledge, asceticism worship,
benevolence, moral virtues and habits. That is why the Holy Prophet
said; "Abu Dharr is the most truthful of this nation". He said at
another place, "Abu Dharr is like Prophet Isa (Jesus) in asceticism".
According to a tradition he said, "One who wants to see the austerity
and modesty of Isa should look at Abu Dharr”.  
    
 It is obvious that the worship of a divine like Abu Dharr was not
limited to ritual prayers only. He had practical proficiency in all the
forms of worship. It is undeniable that to think over the existence of
Allah and His creations is also a great worship. Abu Dharr was
accomplished in this worship too.  
    
 Historians and traditionalists are unanimous that Abu Dharr had
attained to the great degree of knowledge and it was because he acquired
knowledge very sincerely in the company of the Holy Prophet. He put
questions to the Prophet all the time and learnt his answers by heart.
He had become well-versed in knowledge in his company.

The author of "Kitabud Darajatur Rafi'ah" says that Abu Dharr was
reckoned in the rank of great scholars and austeres and held a
distinctive rank in scholarship. He was a senior companion of the
Prophet, was one of those great persons who fulfilled their covenant
with Allah, viz. who kept their promise which they had made to Him about
their following the complete faith, and was one of those four
personalities whose love has been made obligatory on all.  
    
 Allamah Manazir Ahsan Gilani throwing light on the lofty scholarship of
Abu Dharr writes: "Read the testimony of Ali, the best judge out of the
companions, and the Gate of Knowledge and conclude yourself that he is
right when he says, "Abu Dharr was very greedy and avaricious”.  
    
 Is this testimony of Imam Ali does not justify Abu Dharr's claim?
Sometimes Abu Dharr himself said enthusiastically, "We have separated
from the Holy Prophet at a time when there has not been left a single
bird flying with flapping wings in the sky, about which we have not come
to know some special thing".[^1]  
    
 Allamah Gilani writes about the knowledge of Abu Dharr, "Somebody asked
Imam Ali, how he considered Abu Dharr". He replied that ‘wa'aa 'ilman
'ajaza fihe,’ viz. "He (Abu Dharr) preserved knowledge which overpowered
him".  
    
 You have read how sensitive he was to accept impression, and can
yourself surmise from the events. That is why he was always ready to act
according as he heard from the Holy Prophet. Just as he tried to hear
from the Holy Prophet he wanted to put it into action without the least
hesitation. It was his earnest desire to see that his action completely
conformed to knowledge.  
    
 Abu Dharr was so determined and firm about it that he never cared for
the biggest power on earth if it came in his way. Sermons and
exhortations could not shake him from the stand that he had taken.
Taking pride in this distinction he sometimes said, "O people! On the
Day of Judgment I shall remain nearest to the Holy Prophet's assembly,
because I have heard him saying that the nearest to him on the Day of
Judgment will be the man who departs from the world in the same
condition in which he has left him. I swear by Allah that now nobody is
left among you except I who am in my original state and have not been
contaminated with anything new. [^2]  
    
 This was not his assertion only but the leader of the world and last of
the Prophets had also certified it. It is written in the Tabaqat Ibn
Sa'd that one day the Holy Prophet said, "Who amongst you will come to
see me (at Kauthar) in the same condition in which I leave him". Abu
Dharr said, "I". The Prophet said in reply to it, "You are true", i.e.
you will die in the same state of faith in which I leave you.  
    
 Imam Ali also used to say, “Now there is nobody left who does not fear
the taunt and sarcasm of the reproacher in matters of Allah, except Abu
Dharr”.  
    
 Hence 'ajaza fihe clearly means that Abu Dharr had been overpowered by
his knowledge and information. He did not have control over doing
against what he knew.  
    
 In other words, Abu Dharr acquired knowledge, knew its reality and
basis and propagated it well. He never cared about anybody's reproach in
communicating to the people the learnings which he had gathered from the
Prophet. He was never cowed by any government. He was not moved by the
politics of Mu'awiyah, nor was he overawed by the wealth of Uthman; but
he called right, what the Prophet had called right, till he breathed
last. He acted upon the principles and learnings as explained by the
Holy Prophet and also repeated them verbally till he was exiled and died
in a remotest place.  
    
 It is quoted from, the Commander of the Faithful, Imam Ali, in the book
"al-Isti'ab" that Abu Dharr knew some of those secrets of knowledge
which other people were unable to bear, and confined them to himself
only.  
    
 Hafiz Basri writes in "Al-Mashariq" that faith has ten stages. One who
has attained to the first stage, does not know the limits of the faith
of the person who is in the second stage, and the one in the second
stage is ignorant of the person in the third stage, and the same is the
condition of all of the ten stages. Salman Farsi was at the acme of
esoteric knowledge. Abu Dharr held the same position in relation to
Salman as Moses had in relation to Khizr.  
    
 Kharajaski has written in "Kanz" that Salman while addressing Imam Ali
used to say, "Be abi anta wa ummi ya qatila Kufah ", (O’ the martyr of
Kufah! May my parents be sacrificed for you). He further said, "If I
disclose those facts which I know of your (Imam Ali's) real insight an
excitement will be stirred up within the people".

Allamah Majlisi has quoted a hadith of the same type about Salman and
Miqdad in "Sharhu Usulil Kafi".  
    
 It means that when a companion cannot gauge the extent of the learning
of another companion how can the common people bear the learnings of a
firm believer like Abu Dharr.  
    
 Ali's above quoted remark "Knowledge overpowered Abu Dharr" can also be
seen in Tabaqatul Kubra, vol. 5, Usudul Ghabah, vol. 5, and Sunan Abu
Daud.  
    
 Abdul Hamid Jaudatus Sahar in his book "Al-Ishtiraki az-Zahid" writes:
"Allah wanted to do good to him so he gave him the capacity and
eagerness to learn, bestowed on him conviction and truthfulness and also
discerning eyes and attentive ears. Hence he memorized whatever he heard
from the Prophet of Islam. He got the tradition and narrated it. He was
reckoned among the great traditionalists.  
    
 Abdul Hamid writes on page 14 of the same book, "Abu Dharr was a
muhaddith (narrator of hadith) of the first order, and spoke very fluent
and eloquent Arabic. He was a model of a pious Muslim. Hence he became
the most respectable of all the people. One day he was sitting in the
masjid and was narrating, as usual, the traditions of the Prophet when a
man expressed his wish to have seen the Prophet. Abu Dharr quoted the
Prophet of Allah as having said that those people of his nation would
love him most, who would come after him and would wish to see him even
at the cost of their children and wealth".  
    
 Morality means good habits and the knowledge of morals or ethics is a
kind of practical philosophy. Abu Dharr had attained to the highest
degree of morality. Good habits of the Holy Prophet reflected in his
personality. There is nothing in his character which can be criticized
by a just man. Whatever he did in his lifetime was an unparalleled
example of morality, and whatever he said was according to the
exigencies of society .This is something different if some ignorant
people regard his good habits as impolite.  
    
 Allamah Subaiti says that the examples of morality set by Abu Dharr
deserve commendation. The narrator says, "Seeing Abu Dharr wrapped in a
black blanket in a corner of the masjid I asked him why he was sitting
there alone. He said that he had heard the Holy Prophet saying: "It is
better to sit in a lonely corner than to sit amidst the bad company and
it is better to sit in the company of moralists than to sit in a lonely
corner. To observe silence is better than telling a bad thing and to say
a good thing is better than keeping quiet".  
    
 Abu Dharr said that the Holy Prophet has told many things regarding the
instruction in good morals. Here are seven of them:

1. Have friendship with poor people and try to keep them near yourself.

2. In order to improve your own condition have a look at the people of
lesser means and do not compare yourself with the people of better
means.

3. Do not beg of anybody for material help and make contentment your
habit.

4. Have sympathy with your relatives and help them in their hour of
need.

5. Do not hesitate to tell the truth even if the whole world turns
against you.

6. Do not mind the reproaches of a blasphemous person about Allah.

7. Always keep saying, "La hawala wa la quwwata ilia billah", (There is
no power except Allah). In other words Allah is the Super Power. .  
    
 Abu Dharr says, "Having said these things the Prophet touching my chest
with his hand said, "O Abu Dharr! No wisdom is better than good
planning, no piety is better than self-control, and no beauty is better
than good morals".  
    
 Allamah Gilani quoting Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal mentions only two
precepts out of the above mentioned seven, which pertain to the
friendship with the poor and to look at the people of lesser means, and
then writes:

"In fact, this is the best remedy of the ailment of the love for riches
and love for the world. Suppose there is a man who has a shirt of Muslin
and a trouser of long-cloth to wear, wheat bread and mutton to eat, and
a neat and clean clay house to live in. Now, if this man compares
himself with a man who has nothing except a coarse dress, a bread of
barley and a cottage of straw, he will thank Allah for his better
condition and will be free from the mental tortures with which he would
have suffered had he compared himself to a wealthier man with costlier
dresses and more delicious food. This is the best way to get worldly
satisfaction and other worldly benefits. But how many of us are acting
upon it today? I even say that a man will not suffer any trouble if he
acts upon this principle.

This is the only golden rule for this world and for the Hereafter, which
is explained in the following sentence of Shaykh Sa'di, the celebrated
poet of Iran:

"I wept for a pair of shoes unless I saw a man who had no feet".  
    
 After love for riches another part of the love for world is the love
for status and power. This is even more dangerous and a cause for the
corruption of the system of the world. The mischiefs perpetrated in the
world by the slaves of wealth are much less than those caused by the
over-ambitious for status and power.  
    
 The real cause of this disease is that when a man feels his own
perfection in some field, he forgets the power of that Being who bestows
this perfection on him, and considers himself of some consequence. Then
he tries to make others, who are around him, realize his importance
which he has attributed to himself.

With this end in view, he prepares plans according to the power of his
thinking. It is seldom seen that a slave of greed and avarice leaves any
stone unturned to achieve this end. He fills his mind with hypocrisy and
remains busy all the time with making the world conscious of his
existence through fair and foul means.

The perfection that Abu Dharr had achieved or was about to achieve, was
that of piety. It was feared that it might produce in him pride and
conceit, after which the ambition of status and honour sweeps away the
peace of the world and the Hereafter. Hence the Prophet prevented it
before hand and addressing Abu Dharr, one day, said to him in clear
words:  
    
 "Allah said: O my bondmen! You are all sinners except those whom I keep
safe. So all of you must be praying to me regularly for your
forgiveness. I will forgive you. I forgave the sins of the person who
considers Me powerful enough to redeem the sins and that I redeem them,
and of the person who prayed for the forgiveness of his sins through My
power".  
    
 "O my slaves! All of you are deviators except those whom I show the
right path. Hence you should pray to Me for guidance. All of you are
poor and needy except those whom I make affluent. Pray to Me for your
livelihood and remember that if all of your alive and dead, old and
young, vicious and virtuous, become united to practice abstinence there
will not be the least addition to My existing realm, and if all of you
dead and alive, old and young, vicious and virtuous gather together and
request Me to fulfil their needs and I satisfy their requirements there
will not be any deficiency in My dominion not even equal to the quantity
of water taken out with the needle when somebody dips it into the ocean.
This is because I am the Bountiful, Forgiver, Great, Exalted and
Dominant over all ends".  
    
 Can anybody take pride in his existence or achievements and
accomplishments after believing in the truthfulness of the Divine Glory
and Majesty which you behold in this version? Can anybody take airs even
for a moment after this? Can any believer in Allah excite sedition on
the face of the earth for the sake of his station in life, honour, show
and perpetuity after this? Who is crazy to be proud of his piety when
everyone of us is a sinner?  
    
 When all the wealth of the rich people is under the control and
authority of Allah; is not he a fool who shows vanity over the purses of
money? If it is correct that our great and small cannot even untidily
add a jot to the grandeur of the Divine dominion, what does a man who is
only a handful of dust boast of? When this is the state of his freedom
from want that even in matters of guidance and mental maturity he
considers His favour and power to be the real agents, on what basis does
a clergyman or a reformer consider his efforts worth appreciating?  
    
 Alas! When everything belongs to Him and we are simply poor and needy
why, then, is this self-conceit and why this presumption and
arrogance?  
    
 These were the commands and sermons which instilled the austerity of
Prophet Isa in the spirit of Abu Dharr. Anyway, this was the case and
even more than that the Prophet used to stir up the ascetic nature of
Abu Dharr. But we should take special view of that side of his teachings
and exhortations wherein Islam stands out distinguished from all other
religions.  
    
 You must be feeling tempted to think that if this was the teaching of
the Holy Prophet why did Islam oppose the monastic life and consider it
one of the innovations of monks and clergymen?  
    
 I want to draw your attention to the reply of this question. Generally
abstinence and piety mean to leave the cities for mountains and forests
to worship Allah in seclusion. Abu Dharr narrates as under:  
    
 “The Holy Prophet told me that it is also a good turn to pick up stones
from the path, to help the weak is also a charity and even the sexual
intercourse with the wife is a charitable act”.[^3]  
    
 I asked the Holy Prophet in astonishment, "Is it also a charity to
cohabit with ones wife, although he satisfies his urge by this act? If a
man satisfies his urge, will he also get a recompense for it? The
Prophet said, "Well, tell me, would it not been a sin if you had
satisfied this urge through some unlawful and forbidden means?" I
replied, "Certainly". He said, "You people think of the sin but not of
the good. Usually those leading the life of austerity give up their
practice of earning and craftsmanship and afterwards when their worldly
needs press them hard they are willy-nilly driven in to begging”.  
    
 The Prophet one day called me and said, "Would you like to swear
allegiance on the point that after it there will be only Heaven for
you". I replied, "Yes". And then I stretched out my hand. The Holy
Prophet said, "I want to take word from you that you will not beg
anything of anybody". I replied, "All right". He said, "Not even that
whip which falls down from your horse. You should rather, get down and
pick it up yourself".  
    
 Abu Dharr says that the Holy Prophet told him, "Do not think any
kindness and favour to be trivial and insignificant. If you have nothing
to give to a Muslim brother, you should at least meet him with a smiling
face".  
    
 Abu Dharr says, "My beloved (the Prophet) has made a will to me that I
should keep on showing kindness to my relatives, even if I am unable to
do it completely;[^4] because it is very difficult”. Anyway, one should
do good to all as far as possible.  
    
 Abu Dharr's character becomes apparent when we find that he is always
seen in the company of indigent and the needy and holds the poor dear.
He had a deep impression of Prophet's teachings and was not among the
stone-hearted companions who could not be moved by the morals of the
Prophet. He was such a staunch supporter of Imam Ali that he had fully
absorbed the lofty character and the good habits of the Prophet.  
    
 The order of the Prophet was: "Give your slaves and maids
(subordinates) what you eat, and give them to wear what you wear".[^5]
And the same was the routine of Abu Dharr .He always fed his slaves and
slave-girls with what he ate and gave them to wear what he himself
wore.  
    
 In view of the tradition of the Holy Prophet Abu Dharr considered
marriage essential. He was married but to him marriage never meant joy
and happiness. He thought that marriage was the name of following the
tradition of the Holy Prophet. It is learnt about him that his wife
accompanied him wherever he went.  
    
 Since his wife belonged to Africa, people sometimes said, "Do you keep
a black woman? He used to answer, "I consider it better to have a black
and ugly wife than to have a beautiful wife and be mentioned by people
simply because of my wife's beauty". Abu Dharr had great regard for his
wife.  
    
 Hospitality is not only one of the best attributes, but it is the
essence of humanism. The more aware one is of the principles of Islam
the more imbued will he be with the spirit of hospitality.  
    
 Na'im bin Qa'nat Riyahi says, "One day I went to see Abu Dharr and said
that I loved him as well as despised him at the same time". Abu Dharr
said, "How could these two states come together?" I said, "I have been
killing my children. Now I have become aware that this has been a wrong
practice. So whenever I think that I should come to you to ask about its
redemption and forgiveness both the emotions rise at a time. When I
thought that it would be better if you told me its solution the emotion
of love rose high, but when I thought that it would be painful for me
forever if you declared it as irremediable hatred against you swelled
up. Now I have come to you for the solution of this problem".  
    
 Abu Dharr said, "All right! Tell me if you have done all this during
the days of ignorance or after accepting Islam?"  
 I said, "In the days of ignorance".  
 Abu Dharr said, "Your sin has been forgiven. Islam is the remedy for
all such pollutions and sins".

On hearing it I became satisfied. After it I wanted to beg leave of him
when he said, "Wait!" And I stopped at his instruction.

After this he asked his wife in gestures to bring some food for the
guest. At this his wife went inside and came out after a while with
food.

Abu Dharr said, "Na 'im, Bismillah" (which means begin eating in the
name of Allah)

Before I started I requested him also to join me. He said, "I am
fasting". Saying this he started his prayers. I started eating and when
I was about to finish meals he finished his prayers and started
eating.  
    
 I said, "To tell a lie is a great sin in Islam and even if I presume
somebody a liar it is possible that he may be a liar, but I wonder what
opinion I should form of you".  
 Abu Dharr said, "You have been sitting for such a long time with me. In
which thing did you find me a liar?"

I said, "A little before you told me that you were fasting and now you
are eating with me".  
 He told me, and “I have not told a lie. I am fasting as well as eating
with you”.  
 I asked him, "How?"

He said, "The Holy Prophet has said that whoever observes fast on the
13th, 14th and 15th day of this month of Sha'ban, in a way observes fast
for the whole month. In other words, he will get the recompense of ten
fasts for each fast. As I have observed fast during these dates I have
right to think from the point of view of recompense that I am fasting
the whole month".[^6]  
    
 Allamah Bayhaqi has also narrated an event of the same kind. Its
summary is as follows:

One day Abu Dharr and Abdullah bin Shafiq Uqaili went to somebody as
guests. Abu Dharr had already said that he was fasting and when food was
brought he started eating. Abdullah hinted, "You are fasting". Abu Dharr
said, "I remember my fast. I have not forgotten it. I always observe
fast strictly on those three days of every month which are called
Ayyam-al-Beez and according to the tradition of the Holy Prophet regard
myself fasting.[^7]

[^1]: Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd vol. 4, p.10

[^2]: Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd and Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal

[^3]: Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal

[^4]: Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal

[^5]: Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal

[^6]: Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal and Hayat ul-Qulub, Allamah Majlisi

[^7]: Sunan Bayhaqi.


