Chapter 6
=========

   
 Shaheed Thalith Allamah Nurullah Shustari writes: "He was one of the
greatest companions and is reckoned among the foremost of the companions
who embraced Islam. In embracing Islam his number was third, that is, he
embraced Islam after Mother of the Faithful Khadijahtul Kubra and
Commander of the Faithful Ali. According to the author of "Isti'ab" he
was distinguished in knowledge, austerity, piety and truthfulness, among
all the companions. Ali has said that Abu Dharr achieved that position
in the acquisition and comprehension of religious learnings which nobody
else could reach. The Holy Prophet used to say, "Abu Dharr is like
Prophet Isa in my ummah. Abu Dharr possesses the same austerity as
Prophet Isa had".  
    
 According to a tradition one who wants to see the modesty of Prophet
Isa should see Abu Dharr. Shaykh Saduq in his book “Uyunul Akhbar
ar-Ridha” writes that Imam Ali ar-Ridha (a) has said from the authority
of his forefathers that according to the hadith of the Holy Prophet,
"Abu Dharr is the truthful person of this ummah".  
    
 Ali says that Abu Dharr is the only person who will never care for any
reproaches about Allah and His orders and commands, that is, he will say
whatever is right and will act upon it, and will neither care for any
threats in this connection, nor will he be over-awed by the power of the
government.  
    
 Scholars have written that Abu Dharr had sworn allegiance to the
Prophet (s) with the promise that in the faith of Allah he would not
care for any reproacher and that he would speak out the truth
howmuchsoever bitter it might be.  
    
 Truthfulness and courage is a quality which even the greatest
personalities do not hold fast. The Holy Prophet (s) has prophesied this
quality of Abu Dharr and said that Abu Dharr would perform a great role
in this matter and will remain steadfast even in the face of severe
persecution which he had to bear.  
    
 The Prophet said: "There is nobody more truthful than Abu Dharr between
the canopy of the sky and the carpet of the earth".[^1]  
    
 In the elucidation of this hadith Allamah Subaiti writes: “The Holy
Prophet addressing his companions said, "O my companions! Who is one out
of you who will meet me on the Day of Reckoning in the same condition in
which I leave him in the world?” On hearing this everyone kept quiet,
except Abu Dharr who spoke that it was he. The Holy Prophet said, "No
doubt! You are true". After that he added, "O my companions! Remember
what I am telling you. There is no man between the earth and the sky
more truthful than Abu Dharr".[^2]  
    
 Allamah Majlisi has written some narratives after having quoted the
above mentioned tradition in his book Hayat ul-Qulub.  
    
 Ibn Babwayh has narrated on reliable authority that somebody asked Imam
al-Sadiq if Abu Dharr was better than the Ahlul Bayt of the Holy Prophet
or otherwise. The Imam said, "How many months are there in a year?" He
answered, "Twelve". The Imam said, "How many of these months are
respectable and sanctified?"

He said, "Four months? The Imam asked, "Is Ramadhan also included in
those four months?" He said "No". The Imam asked “Is Ramzan better or
those four months?" He answered, "The month of Ramzan is better". The
Imam said, “The same is the case with us, the Ahlul Bayt. You cannot
compare anybody with us".  
    
 One day Abu Dharr was sitting in the company of people who were
describing the virtues of this nation. Abu Dharr said, "Ali is best of
all in this nation, and he is the apportioner of Heaven and Hell, the
Siddiq and Farooq of the ummah and, the divine proof for this nation".

Hearing it from him those hypocrites turned their faces from him and
refuting his statement called him a liar. At once Abu Amamah rose from
there, went to the Holy Prophet and told him what Abu Dharr had said,
and how that group had refused to accept it. The Holy Prophet (s) said,
"There is no man between the earth and the sky more truthful than Abu
Dharr".  
    
 The same book has narrated on another authority that somebody asked
Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a) if that was an authentic hadith wherein the
Holy Prophet (s) has declared like this. The Imam said, "Yes". He said,
"Then what positions do the Holy Prophet, Ali, Imam Hasan and Imam
Husayn hold?" The Imam replied, "We are like the month of Ramadhan which
contains one such night the worship of which is equal to that of one
thousand months while the rest of the companions are like the respected
month in relation to other months, and nobody can be compared with us,
the Ahlul Bayt".  
    
 It becomes as clear as day light from the above mentioned hadith of the
Holy Prophet that Abu Dharr was second to none in truthfulness. The
commentary and the elucidation of the same hadith as made by Subaiti,
describes that Abu Dharr will leave the world in the same condition, in
which the Prophet had left him, and will see him in the same condition
in the Hereafter.

If it is looked into deeply, Abu Dharr's firm stand on the path which
had been strengthened by the Holy Prophet (s) reveals his important
virtue. Scholars agree on the point that Abu Dharr did not swerve an
inch from the path of the Holy Prophet. After the Prophet even a
companion like Salman was forced to swear allegiance and was so much
beaten in the masjid one day that his neck became swollen. But Abu Dharr
was never found silent.  
    
 Allamah Subaiti writes: "Abu Dharr was one of those followers of the
Holy Prophet (s) who stuck to their path and stood firm on the covenant
which they had made with Allah. He obeyed the Holy Prophet faithfully,
followed in his footsteps and imitated his conduct. He did not leave
Imam Ali (a) even for a moment, followed him to the end and received the
benefits of the light of his knowledge.  
    
 Allamah Majlisi writes: Ibn Babwayh narrates on reliable authority from
Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a) that one day Abu Dharr happened to pass by the
Prophet (s) while Jibrail was talking to him in privacy in the form of
"Dahyah Kalbi". Abu Dharr went back presuming that Dahyah Kalbi was
talking to the Prophet in private. After his return Jibrail said to the
Prophet "O Muhammad! Abu Dharr came just now and went back without
wishing me. Believe me if he had wished me I would have certainly wished
him back. O Muhammad! Abu Dharr has an invocation with him which is well
known among the Heavenly people. Look! When I go up to the heavens ask
him of that”. He said, "All right".  
    
 When Jibrail had left, and Abu Dharr came to the Prophet he said, "O
Abu Dharr! Why did you not greet us when you came here a little before?"
Abu Dharr replied, "When I came Dahyah Kalbi was sitting with you and
you were busy in conversation with him. I thought you were talking about
some secret things and did not consider it proper to intrude upon you.
Therefore I went back". The Holy Prophet said, "He was not Dahyah Kalbi
but Jibrail who had come to me in the form of Dahyah Kalbi. O Abu Dharr!
He was telling me that if you had wished him he would have wished you
back. He was also telling me that you possess an invocation which is
famous among the celestial people". Abu Dharr felt very much ashamed and
expressed his regret..  
    
 Then the Holy Prophet said, "O Abu Dharr! Just let me know the prayer
which you read and which is talked of in the heavens". Abu Dharr then
told him the following prayer:  
 “Allahumma Inni Asalukal amna wal eimana bika wat tasdiqa bi nabiyyika
wal afiyata min jami’il blaa'e wa shukra ‘alal afiyate wal ghina ‘an
shirarin naase”.[^3]  
    
 We find countless traditions of both Shi'ahs and Sunnis in which
special orders have been given for the love of four companions. Scholars
say that those four companions are Ali, Abu Dharr, Miqdad and Salman.
Umar Kashi, writes in his Rijal, Abu Ja'far Qummi in Khasa'il, Abdullah
Humayri in Qurbul Asnad, Shaykh Mufid in Ikhtisas, Ayashi in his
commentary, Saduq in Uyun Akhbar ar-Ridha, Abdul Barr in Isti'ab, Ibn
Sa'd in Tabaqat and the author of Usudul Ghabah in his book: "The Holy
Prophet (s) says that Allah has commanded me to keep my four companions
my friends and love them, and I have also been told that He (Allah) too
holds them as friends. Here are the names of those four companions: 1.
Ali bin Abi Talib. 2. Abu Dharr Ghifari 3. Miqdad bin Aswad 4. Salman
Farsi.[^4]  
    
 A tradition says that by four companions are meant Salman, Abu Dharr,
Miqdad and Ammar. Scholars are of the opinion that these are the
companions whom the Heaven and the dwellers of Heaven are fond of. It is
narrated in a tradition that when a proclaimer will proclaim on the Day
of Judgment, "Where are those companions of Muhammad bin Abdullah who
did not break their promise of love for Ahlul Bayt al-Risalah, but
remained steadfast to it?" Salman, Miqdad and Abu Dharr will stand up.  
    
 Allamah Nuri writes quoting Rauzatul Wai'zin of Shaykh Shahid Muhammad
bin Ahmad bin Ali bin Fital Nishapuri that Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a)
has said, "There are ten degrees of faith. Miqdad has attained to eight
degrees, Abu Dharr to nine and Salman to all the ten of them.”  
    
 Bond of brotherhood refers to that historical event in which the Holy
Prophet had established brotherhood in the pairs of his companions
before and after his migration.  
    
 Before the migration he established the bond of brotherhood between two
companions so that they may remain sympathetic to each other. In this
brotherhood he had in consideration the agreement of the temperaments of
the pair. He made those two companions brother to each other as they had
the similarity of nature and consonance of temperament. In this way he
declared brotherhood between Abu Bakr and Umar, Talhah and Zubayr,
Uthman and Abdur Rahman bin Auf, Hamza and Zayd bin Harithah, Salman and
Abu Dharr and between Ali and himself.  
    
 Then five or eight months after the migration the Holy Prophet again
established the bond of brotherhood in the same way. It was necessary to
establish brotherhood between the immigrants and the supporters in order
to create sympathy between them. In this connection he established
brotherhood among fifty companions.  
    
 Allamah Shibli No'mani writes: "Islam has in its domain the best morals
and perfect virtues. It was kept in view that the companions between
whom the relationship of brotherhood was established had the similarity
of taste. This unity of taste between the teacher and the student is
necessary for the assimilation of knowledge. On inquiry and examination
it is learnt that this unity of taste of those two who were made
brothers was taken into consideration, and when we see that it is nearly
impossible to judge completely and correctly the temperaments and tastes
of hundreds of people in such a short time, it will have to be
acknowledged that the Holy Prophet's judgment was an example of specific
attribute of Prophethood". [^5]  
    
 Besides, this is also worthy of note that the Prophet got nobody
possessing the taste of Ali either among the “Muhajirin” (immigrants) or
the "Ansar” (supporters). Ali said, "O Messenger of Allah! With whom
have you united me as brother? He replied, "You are my brother in this
world as well as in the Hereafter”. That is why Ali announced again and
again from the pulpit of the Masjid of Kufa, "I am the slave of Allah
and brother of the Prophet of Allah".[^6] The Holy Prophet also said
about Salman, "Salman is one of our Ahlul Bayt (People of the House)".  
    
 In my opinion this is also one of the superior merits of Abu Dharr that
a person of mature judgment like the Holy Prophet (s) declared him the
brother of Salman. Allamah Subaiti quotes the statement of Saleh
al-Ahwal who had heard Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a) saying that the Holy
Prophet established the bond of brotherhood between Salman and Abu Dharr
and asked Abu Dharr not to oppose Salman.[^7]  
    
 The status of Abu Dharr is so high that the verses of the Holy Qur'an
have been revealed in his praise. Here is one of them:

**"*****The righteous striving believers will have the gardens of
Paradise as their dwelling place and therein they will live
forever*****".**[^8]  
    
 Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a) says that this verse has been revealed about
Abu Dharr, Miqdad, Ammar and Salman. According to a tradition, the
Prophet said that Allah had commanded him to love Salman, Abu Dharr,
Miqdad and Ammar, and he further added that he himself held them
friends. According to another tradition the Prophet said, "Paradise is
eager for these people".[^9]  
    
 Allamah Gilani writes that Abu Dharr's honour and prestige were
increasing day by day in the circle of the Prophet, so much so, that
when the Holy Prophet went for the Battle of Zaat al-Ruqa [^10] he made
him the chief of Medina, and not he alone was appointed a chief but for
his sake sometimes other Ghifaris also got this rank. For example, the
Holy Prophet appointed Saya' bin Urfah al-Ghifari as the chief of Medina
on the occasion of the Battle of Daumatul Jandal.[^11]  
    
 It was a common practice in Arabia that whenever somebody rode a camel
he made his special man his "file". When the file sat behind, he used to
hold the rider by the waist. According to this general tradition the
Holy Prophet also made somebody his file. During the last pilgrimage his
file was Fazl bin Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib.  
    
 The companions considered it a great honour to be a file. The file of
the Prophet was called "Radifun Nabi". The scholars say that the Prophet
bestowed this honour mostly upon Abu Dharr. The Prophet used to ride not
only the camels but also other smaller animals. Asses have also been
often seen for his riding. He used to seat Abu Dharr behind him and rode
talking to him.[^12]  
    
 Shah Walyullah Dehlavi, while describing the disturbances in Islam
writes about the event of Harrah: Abu Dawud quotes Abu Dharr who said,
"One day I was riding behind the Holy Prophet on an ass. When we had
gone out of the populated area of Medina he asked me as to what my
condition would be when hunger overtakes Medina, and I would hardly bear
it before I could reach the masjid from my bed. I said, "Allah and His
Messenger know it best", He said, "O Abu Dharr! Do not go for begging at
that time", Then he said, "What would be your condition when the price
of a grave is equal to that of a slave due to high death rate?" I said,
"Allah and His Messenger know it best", He said, "O Abu Dharr! Practise
patience then".  
    
 Again he asked, "O Abu Dharr! What will be your condition when there is
such a general massacre in Medina that the stones and the sand will be
soaked in blood?" I replied, "Allah and His Messenger know well" He
said, "You should, then, confine yourself to your house" I asked,
"Should I take the sword in hand at that time?" He replied, "If you do
so you will be considered their partner", I then asked, "O Messenger of
Allah! What should I do then?" He said, "Even if you fear that the flash
of the sword would dazzle your eyes, you should only cover your face
with the cloth of your dress, and do not fight but be silent".  
    
 It is given on page 176 in vol. 5 of Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal (printed
in Egypt) that the Holy Prophet (s) used to confide in Abu Dharr his
secrets and said that he trusted him fully well. Abu Dharr, too, was
very keen to guard his secrets. Whenever he was asked about a tradition
he said, "Except those things which the Holy Prophet (s) has told me to
keep secret I am willing to tell you everything.You may ask me whatever
you want to".

[^1]: Mustadrak Hakim p. 342, Isabah ibn Hajar 'Asqalani, vol. 2 p. 622,
Fehrist-i Tusi, p. 70

[^2]: Tarikhul A'immah p. 251.

[^3]: Hayat ul-Qulub, vol. 2 p. 455, Mustatraf, vol. 1, p. 166 ; Rabi'ul
Abrar, chapter 23, hand written, Mamba'us Sadiqin.

[^4]: Mishkat Sharif p. 572

[^5]: Siratun Nabi vol.1, p.112.

[^6]: Tarikh Abul Fida, vol. 1, p.127.

[^7]: Abu Dharr al-Ghifari p.86 as quoted by Usulul Kafi.

[^8]: Surah al-Kahf, 18: 107

[^9]: Hayat ul-Qulub, vol. 2.

[^10]: This battle was called Zaat al-Ruqa' (the battle of Patches of
Cloth) because the path was stony and rugged, on account of which the
feet of the people were rent and they had tied them with patches of
cloth. (Zaadul Ma'ad).

[^11]: Zaadul Ma'ad

[^12]: Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd


