Chapter 7
=========

There are countless exhortations which the Prophet made to Abu Dharr.
We here throw light on a few of them. Muhammad Harun Zangipuri writes on
the authority of "Amali" of Shaykh Tusi that the Prophet said to Abu
Dharr:
“O Abu Dharr! Worship Allah as if you are seeing Him, or He is seeing
you and even if you are not seeing him”.

Know that His foremost worship is His cognition i.e. to understand that
He is the First before whom there was none. He is One without a partner.
He is Eternal having no end. He is the Creator of all things between the
earth and the heavens. He is Pure and Omniscient. He is Free from every
blemish, and is the Creator of all things.

After understanding the Oneness of Allah it is necessary to acknowledge
my Prophethood and to believe that Allah has sent me as a messenger of
good news; a warner, and a shining lamp of guidance to invite people to
Allah.

After the acknowledgement of my Prophethood it is compulsory and
essential to have love for my Ahlul Bayt whom Allah has purified from
all sorts of pollution.

Take special note of two important blessings: Sound health and
opportunity for worship.

Value five things before five things:  Value youth before old age, sound
health before sickness, wealth before want, leisure before occupation,
and life before death.

Live in the world like a stranger or pass your days as a traveller goes
along the path.

When you get up in the morning do not hope for the evening, and after
spending the day do not expect the morning. Take advantage of your sound
health (for worship) before sickness and spend your life (for the sake
of Allah) before death, because we do not know what people will call us
tomorrow living or dead; that is we are not aware whether we shall
remain alive tomorrow or not.

Be more parsimonious about your life than about your money. In other
words, just as you spend your money stingily and try not to spend
anything unreasonably, in the same way, you should be miserly about your
life and try not to waste it in evil deeds.

On the Day of Reckoning Allah will cast the most disapproving look at
those "ulema" (scholars) whose knowledge has not benefited the people,
or, who have acquired knowledge simply to gain worldly honour without
benefiting anyone else. Such "ulema" will never smell the scent of
Paradise.

Whenever you are asked about a thing which you do not know, express
your ignorance plainly. Look! Never give judgment in a matter about
which you do not know fully well.

A day will come when some Heaven-dwellers will tell some Hell-dwellers,
"What is the reason that we have entered the Heaven on account of your
teachings and exhortations, but you have gone to Hell?" In response to
it they will say, "We ordered others to do good but did not do that
ourselves".

Allah has many rights on you. In order to acquit yourself of them you
should ask for His forgiveness at bed time as well as when you get up in
the morning.

Death is after you and it may come any time. Hence, you should do good
deeds and do them with hastiness, and listen! As one sows so one reaps.
Wheat is grown of wheat and barley of barley. Forget not the retribution
for your actions.

Abstemious people are commanders and the jurists are leaders. There is
a limitless benefit in their company.

A believer considers a sin a huge burden like a mountain. He feels as
if he is being pressed by a mountain. But the unbeliever regards a sin
as a fly on the nose.

Do not look at the smallness of a sin but see against whom you are
committing the sin.

The self of the believer is more restless in this world than the bird
caught in your net. He wants to get out of it as quickly as possible.

It is not advisable to interfere in every matter and you should control
your tongue in the same way as you protect your food.

Allah has made prayers the coolness for my eyes. O Abu Dharr! The
hungry eats food to his fill and the thirsty drinks water to satiety,
but I am not satiated with prayers.

As long as you are offering prayers you are, as if, knocking the door
of an Absolute Monarch. You should know that, by knocking constantly,
the door opens at last.

Do not make your house a grave. The house, in which prayers are not
offered, is dark like a grave. You should make an arrangement for a
light in your grave by offering prayers in your house as the prayers in
the house become a light for the grave.

Prayer is a pillar of faith, and charity redeems the sin, but to have
control over your tongue is more necessary than both.

A hard-hearted man cannot go near Allah. Hence, you should make your
heart tender.

Remember Allah in the state of Khumul (obscurity). I asked him, "O the
Messenger of Allah! What is Khumul?" He replied, "It means to remember
Allah in secrecy".

Allah says, "My slave is one who fears Me. I will make one fearless on
the Day of Judgement, if one fears me. He will not be perturbed by the
dread of Resurrection and will remain in peace instead”.

Intelligent is he who regards his self humble and acts for the
Hereafter; and helpless and foolish is he who follows his carnal desires
and is negligent of the Hereafter.

The world and the people of the world are accursed only those things
which have been spent in the way of Allah can benefit the people of the
world.

Allah revealed to my brother, Prophet Isa, "O Isa! Do not love the
world because I do not love it. O Isa! I love the Hereafter because it
is the place of return. Everybody has to return to it and will be called
to account there. The recompense for good deeds will be good and for bad
deeds will be bad.

Allah will fill the heart of that man, who practises austerity, with
wisdom. He will give correct speaking power to his tongue, will show him
the vices of the world and their treatment, and will lift him from the
world in such a way that he will reach "Darus Salam" (the house of
peace) in the proper way.

Allah never commanded to accumulate wealth. Instead He has ordered for
His worship. So you should become a worshipper, prostrate before Him and
go on worshipping Him till you die.

I wear ordinary clothes, sit on the ground and ride an unsaddled ass.
Listen! You should be my file and follow my tradition. One who turns
ones back to my tradition will not be reckoned among my people.

Congratulations to austeres who are careless about the world and are
inclined to the Hereafter; who sit on the ground, and consider its earth
their carpet and regard its water good; who have the Divine Book, the
Holy Qur'an as their standard and invocations their honour, and keep
away from the world.

The produce of the world is children and riches and the produce for the
Hereafter is good deeds.

Fear Allah and do not care for the people. People will also respect you
if you fear Allah.
Keep quiet when a dead body is being carried, or when you are with a
dead body. Also keep silent when fighting is in progress and also remain
silent when the Holy Qur'an is being recited.

Salt [^1]saves everything from rotting, but there is no remedy when the
salt goes bad. (This tradition relates to the scholars and means that
faith gets corrupt when the scholars become corrupt).

Two short prayers offered with sincerity and meditation is better than
the prayers of full one night offered without sincerity.

Call your self to account before the Day of Reckoning so that it may
help you at the reckoning on the Day of Judgment.

To pray without good deeds is to shoot an arrow without target.

When somebody offers his prayers in a jungle Allah commands the angels
to offer prayers in a file behind him and say Amin after his prayer,
provided that “azan " ( call to prayer) and "iqamat" (call to stand up
for prayers) have been said before those prayers. If the prayers are
offered without these two calls, only two angels are made to attend it.

To remember Allah in the midst of the negligent people is like fighting
in the battlefield.

To be in the good company is better than seclusion, and seclusion is
better than the company of the bad people.

Always have friendship with the believers, and eat and drink with the
abstemious.

Allah is always close to the tongue of every speaker. Therefore think of
Allah while speaking.
For lying it is sufficient that one tells whatever one hears.
It is essential to keep the tongue under complete control.

Respect for knowledge, scholars, elderly Muslims, followers of the Holy
Qur'an and a just ruler, is liked f by Allah.

Guard and follow the commandments of Allah. He will guard you and you
will find Him before you. Remember Him in your happiness and he will
remember you in your hardship and will deliver you from it. If you need
something, beg from Him only. Nobody can harm you even if the entire
world becomes your enemy, provided that Allah is not against you. You
cannot be benefited even if all the people want unitedly to benefit you
unless Allah wills so Allah helps you in patience. It is He who removes
your pain. There is always comfort after every hardship.

Allah does not look at your faces or riches; He only watches your
intentions and actions.
A believer's attributes are to be peaceful, to show courtesy and to
remember Allah under all circumstances.
Accursed is he who tells lies in a company only to make people laugh.

Abstain from backbiting because it is worse than adultery. I asked,
"How is it, O! the Messenger of Allah?"
The Prophet replied, "When the adulterer is repentant Allah accepts his
repentance but the sin of backbiting is not forgiven until and unless
the man, against whom backbiting has been done, forgives it".

He who abuses a believer is a sinner and he who fights against him is
an unbeliever; by backbiting, he is the eater of his flesh and a great
sinner; and the protection of his property is equal to the protection of
his life. I said, "O, the Messenger of Allah! What is backbiting?" He
said, "To remember your brother with things with which he does not like
to be remembered”. I said, “Even if he has those attributes?" He said,
"That is backbiting, in fact; but, if you mention those things which he
does not possess, it will be a calumny for which there is a separate
punishment".

Allah will reward a man with Paradise if he removes the hardship of his
brother in faith.
"Qatat” will not enter Paradise". I asked, “Who are Qatat” He replied.
"Backbiters”.

A backbiter will not be able to escape the punishment of Allah in the
Hereafter.

A double crosser will go to Hell. To disclose a friend's secret is
treachery. If a man dies before feeling repentant having shown vainglory
even once, he will not smell the scent of Paradise.
He who possesses two shirts should use one for himself and give the
other to his needy brother. He who gives up wearing costly dresses, in
spite of his wealth, only for the sake of Allah, will get robes in
Heaven from Allah.

Before the advent of Mahdi (a)[^2] there will be some people who will
wear woolen clothes in summer and winter both, to show their superiority
over others. Allah will curse them.

This world is a prison for the believer and Paradise for the
unbeliever.
Your intention in all circumstances must be honest. Even your eating
and sleeping must be done with the honesty of purpose.

According to Hafiz Abu Na'im, as explained in his book 'Hulyatul
Awliya', Abu Dharr says: One day I went to the Holy Prophet when he was
sitting in the masjid. I had hardly taken my seat respectfully before
him when he said to me, "You have not paid respect to the mosque". I
asked, "What is that a master!" He replied, "Two rak'at (units) of
prayers. O Abu Dharr! When you enter the masjid you should immediately
perform two rak'at of prayers". According to his command I, at once,
offered two rak'at of prayers.

Then I asked, "What is the basis and theme of the prayer?" He replied,
"The best of worship".

Then I asked, "Which is the best deed?" He replied, "Belief in Allah and
fighting in the way of Allah are the best deeds?" I asked, "O master!
Who are those believers whose faith is considered perfect? "He replied,
"Those whose deeds and manners are good". I asked, "Which of the
believers are true Muslims?" He said, "Those from whose tongues and
hands other Muslims are safe". I asked "Which things are best to avoid".
He replied, "To abstain and keep away from sins". I asked, "Which
prayers are considered the best?" He replied, "In which long Qunut
(prayer) is recited". I asked, "O master! What is a fast?" He answered,
"It is an obligatory worship which carries immense reward". I asked,
"Which is the best jihad?" He answered, "In which the feet of the riding
animal are cut and the rider is slain”. I asked, "Which is the best
charity?”

He answered, "That charity which is given out of the wages earned from
hard labour is best". I asked, "O master! which verses out of those
revealed by Allah are superior to others?" He replied, "Ayat al-Kursi
the verses of the throne[^3] I said, "O master! Give me a piece of
advice". He said:

I advise you to fear Allah because it is the foundation of all good
deeds.
Recite the Holy Qur'an which is the cause of light for you on earth,
and of your favourable mention in the heavens.

Do not laugh much, by it the heart dies and the face loses its
brightness.
Remain silent mostly, for it will save you from many troubles.
Be friendly with destitutes and keep company with them.
Look at those who are financially lower and do not compare yourself
with those who are higher economically.

Treat your relatives well, even if they despise you.
Do not care for any censure if your action is for the sake of Allah.
Speak the truth even, it be bitter.

As the Holy Prophet was prescient, he mentioned again and again to Abu
Dharr the future events and troubles befalling him.

It is written in Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal that one day Abu Dharr, being
tired of the preaching work, went to the masjid and fell asleep there.
The Prophet went in the masjid to express sympathy for him and saw that
he was sleeping. The Prophet woke him with the sign of his thumb and
said: "O Abu Dharr! What will you do when you are turned out of this
masjid?" Abu Dharr said, "O master! If it comes to that I will unsheath
my sword and will chop off his head". The Prophet said, "O Abu Dharr! Do
not do that but be patient at that time; go to wherever you are sent,
and move on to the place you are driven to".

Allamah Muhammad Baqir Majlisi writes that someday the Prophet said to
Abu Dharr “O Abu Dharr! You will lead your life alone, and will die
alone. You will rise on the Day of Resurrection alone. You will die
alone in a strange place. Some people of Iraq will wash you, shroud you,
and bury you"[^4].

He also writes that one day Uthman and Abu Dharr entered the masjid of
the Prophet talking together. There they saw that the Prophet was
sitting leaning on a pillow. Both of them went to him. After a short
while Uthman left the place. After that the Prophet said, "O Abu Dharr!
What were you talking to Uthman?" Abu Dharr said, "We were having a
discussion on a verse of the Holy Qur'an". The Prophet said, "O Abu
Dharr! The day is not far off when there will arise a serious difference
between you and Uthman and both of you will be sworn enemies of each
other. At that time one of you will be an oppressed and the other an
oppressor. Abu Dharr! You should not refrain from telling the truth,
whatever the tyranny may befall you.”[^5]


It is most probable that the verse mentioned in the above passage
related to the question of Zakat because Allamah Subaiti, hinting at it
in his book, has written that there had arisen a discussion between
Uthman and Abu Dharr about the question of Zakat, which was settled by
the Holy Prophet[^6].

Historians and traditionalists agree that Abu Dharr was at the acme of
his piety .He passed his life in preaching, and the reason is that he
had sworn allegiance to the Holy Prophet on this very point. He had said
that he would not care for any reproacher with regard to the
commandments of Allah. His sermons are innumerable some of them are
mentioned hereunder:

According to the statement of Allam ah Turayhi, Abu Dharr has often
said in his preachings, "O people! Even if your backs get bent and your
limbs cease functioning on account of your excessive prayers and other
divine services, they will not benefit you unless you have love for the
Ahlul Bayt (Household of the Prophet) in your hearts. Hence, you should
first of all, create love for Household of Muhmmad in your hearts[^7].
[^8]

Allamah Subaiti writes that one day Abu Dharr called loudly at the door
of the Ka'bah, "O my brothers! Come nearer and listen to me carefully".
At this people gathered round him. Abu Dharr said, "Every one of you
collects provisions for his journey and sets upon the journey after the
provisions have been collected. There will be hardly anybody who will
start on a journey without provisions. O my brothers! Your journey to
the Day of Resurrection is ahead. Therefore it is essential for you to
provide provision for the way".

People said, "O brother! there is no doubt about the journey to
Resurrection, but we do not know what provision we should carry with
us". Abu Dharr said, "The provision for this journey is "Hajj" to
Ka'bah. Its provision is fasting during the hottest days and to offer
two rak 'at of prayers in order to be free from the horror of the grave
in the dark night. O my brothers! Do good deeds. Guard your tongue
against bad utterances. Spend your wealth in charity. Pass your days in
pursuit of the Hereafter, and search for the lawful means. If you get
two dirhams spend one on your kith and kin and give the other in charity
for the welfare of the Hereafter.

"Now Listen! Your life is divided into two stages. One of them has
passed away and the other is to follow. Do good deeds and save yourself
from sins in the present time for the coming stage. Listen! If you do
not act upon these counsels you will certainly be ruined and you will be
damned in the Hereafter”.

A man asked him: “Well! Let us know why do we not like death?" He said,
"You have ruined your afterlife on account of love for the world. You
know that you did not do anything for the Hereafter and you will have
trouble there. Therefore, how can a man like to go to a place, about
which he knows that it will be bad for him".

Then he asked as to how we shall be presented before Allah. Abu Dharr
answered, "Those who have done good deeds will go to Him as a traveller
returns to his home, and those who are sinners will reach there as an
absconder is brought arrested".

He, then, asked, "What will be our condition before Allah?”, Abu Dharr
replied, "You can judge it for yourself . Judge your actions in the
light of the Divine Book. Allah says: The virtuous will go to Heaven and
the evil-doers to Hell". He asked, "If it is so, how will His mercy help
us?" Abu Dharr said, "Allah has already told that His mercy is for the
virtuous".

A man wrote to Abu Dharr, "Write to me some things of knowledge". He
replied, "The things of knowledge are not limited. How far can I write
to you about them? Only take care not to do ill to your friend", He then
wrote, "Is there anybody who does ill to his friend?" Abu Dharr wrote,
"You love yourself the most and you do not have anybody more friendly
than it. Under the circumstances, if you commit a sin against Allah it
will certainly be a bad treatment with yourself".

At one place he has also said, “O people! Allah has created you as man.
Do not make yourself an animal and a beast of prey by sinning against
Him".

Allamah Shaykh Mufid writes: One day Abu Dharr said in a sermon: "You
will be recompensed as you do. You will reap as you sow, viz. you will
get the reward commensurate with your deeds. If you do good deeds in the
world you will get good reward in the Hereafter, and if you do evil
deeds you will get the retribution accordingly. This tongue of yours is
a key to good and evil both. You should seal your heart as you seal your
purse. That is, as you guard your wealth, so should you guard your heart
and try not to let any wrong thing enter it. The ideas which gather
there must be pure"[^9].

Allamah Majlisi writes: Abu Dharr used to say in his lectures and
sermons. "O the seeker of knowledge! All things of the world are not
free from either of the two conditions. Their good benefits you or their
evil harms you. You should desire a thing which has a prospect of
benefit. O the seeker of knowledge! It is feared lest your family and
riches should make you careless of your life, because one day you shall
surely part with your family and property, and when you will be about to
leave you will be like a guest who stays with a group of people
overnight and departs from them in the morning. Listen! The distance
between death and Resurrection is like the state of a dream from which
we wake up so soon".

"O the seeker of knowledge! Despatch your good deeds in advance for the
day when you will be made to stand before Allah for accountability and
interrogation. On that day you will get the reward of your good deeds
and will be recompensed for whatever good you will have done"[^10].


[^1]: Salt is a very useful thing created by Allah. Countless benefits
can be derived from it. It is narrated in hadith that a man will be
saved from many diseases including leucoderma leprosy, etc. if he tastes
salt before and after meals.

[^2]: see: ISP 1979, The Awaited Saviour

[^3]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:255 -257

[^4]: AnwarulQulub

[^5]: Hayat ul-Qulub vol. 2.

[^6]: Hayat ul-Qulub vol. 2.

[^7]: For details regarding "Love of Kinship”, see: Master and
Mastership, ISP, 1979

[^8]: Majma'ul Bahrain p.356

[^9]: Amali, Shaykh Mufid

[^10]: Hayat ul-Qulub, vol. 2


