Publisher's Word
================

Too many are the Qur'anic verses and traditions that emphasize on the
necessity of referring to Almighty God, the Creator, on all occasions
and under all circumstances so that the relation between the
All-merciful God and His servants will be firmer. One of such relations,
if not the most important, is the supplication, which is familiarly
known as *Du'a*.

In the Holy Qur'an, Almighty God has guaranteed responding to the pure,
well-intended prayers of His servants and, moreover, has encouraged on
making *Du'a* a daily activity that connects the needy servant to the
Perfect Lord to Whom everything is returned. Hence, a believer must
never dispense with *Du'a* and must always direct all his feelings
towards the Creator asking for help and guidance.

In point of fact, *Du'a*, like any other item of connection with the
All-beneficent God, is conditional upon a set of matters and spiritual
and material preparations so that it will achieve its aims and purposes
as completely as expected.

In this book, *Du'a* is presented with thorough details so that its
conditions, circumstances and effects will be exposed for the gentle
readers hoping they will act upon such affairs so as to achieve the best
connection with God.

The book is in fact a translation of the preface of the famous
Persian-origin book entitled *'Shuhoud wa Shenakht'* (Witnesses and
Knowledge), which is of several volumes explaining in details the
innumerable points contained by the famous *al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyyah*
of Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn Zayn al-Abidin. This famous epistle is called
'the Psalms of Islam' for it comprises the most subtle points of the
worldly and hereafter lives that each mortal will pass by.

The Ansariyan Publications is pleased to present this book to the dear
readers for it believes in the necessity of shedding more light on the
reality and significance of *Du'a*.


