Introduction
============

The school of supplication (*du'a*) is a huge divine door open to the
believers. It has absorbed divine attention towards this world and has
awakened the ignorant and busy man from getting involved in the wrong
entertainments, pastimes and diversion. It has, as well, informed him of
his genuine needs.

The most significant Islamic scientific resources are reserved in this
sublime treasure and have been handed down to us. Thus centuries should
pass before a genius is found to open up this valuable reserve and to
reveal the mysteries hidden there.

Of course, during the long history of man, this untold secret has always
been hidden in the hearts of the men of piety and knowledge and the
present wits have not been well-equipped to solve them. Thus, that
precious jewel has always remained intact in the hearts of men of God.

We hope we shall never be deprived of this great asset in the years to
come. We also hope that the elite and scholars could take advantage of
this immense divine knowledge in their lectures and discussions. We hope
as well that this group of thinkers could reveal to people the
brightness of this divine revelation in such a way so as to release this
nation from the false holders of this sea of knowledge, those who
unlawfully connect themselves with divine knowledge.

At the end, during the present century, a salvaged man who has more than
the others been involved in the publication of these divine facts and in
the education of this government, is Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabataba'i,
the head of all masters in the field of research, a well-educated son in
the school of Ahlul Bayt[^1] (s) and the translator of the Holy Qur'an.
The present article is a humble acknowledgement of this endless ocean of
knowledge. I hope that His mercy will include this humble servant of
His.

[^1]: Ahlul Bayt: the Prophetâ€™s progeny (s).


