Closeness: The Nigh Relationship
================================

The Holy Qur'an deals with the issue of closeness in different verses. A
close look at them will illuminate:

The First Stage
---------------

When the Almighty God invites the servants through different
expressions, He uses different techniques. For instance, sometimes He
makes use of the third person pronoun in referring to Himself and asks
us to refer to Him in this way:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأدعوهُ خَوْفًا وَطَمَعًا إِنَّ رَحْمَةَ اللَّهِ قَرِيبٌ مِنْ
الْمُحْسِنِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And call on Him fearing and hoping; surely the mercy of Allah is
nigh to those who do good to others. 7:56”***

It seems as though there was a big distance between the Creator and the
creatures and the earth-dwellers should remember God and then send their
hearts towards the sky-dwellers and then, through the close angels, they
reach the presence of God the Almighty. Then man should wait for the
answer to reach him through certain means.

The Second Stage
----------------

Sometimes Allah would select a closer approach and would send the good
news to the earth through his Messenger.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا سَأَلَكَ عِبَادِي عَنِّي فَإِنِّي قَرِيبٌ أُجِيبُ دَعْوَةَ
الدَّاعِي إِذَا دَعَانِي فَلْيَسْتَجِيبُوا لِي وَلْيُؤْمِنُوا بِي
لَعَلَّهُمْ يَرْشُدُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when My servants ask you concerning Me, then surely I am very
near; I answer the prayer of the suppliant when he calls on Me, so they
should answer My call and believe in Me that they may walk in the right
way. 2:186”***

Due to much attention, man could feel deep in his heart the true meaning
of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ بِالنَّاسِ لَرَءُوفٌ رَحِيمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Most surely Allah is Affectionate, Merciful to the people. 2:143”***

One can also fill his heart with the generosity of that Great Generous
One. Imam al-Baqir (s) in this concern says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَكتُوبٌ في التّوراةِ الّتي لَمْ تُغَيَّرْ أنَّ مُوسى سَألَ رَبَّهُ
فَقالَ: يا رَبِّ، أقَريبٌ مِنيّ فَأُناجِيكَ أمْ بَعيدٌ فَأُنادِيكَ؟
فَأوْحى اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ إلَيهِ: يا مُوسى، أنا جَلِيسُ مَنْ
ذَكَرَني.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is written in Torah which has not been distorted that Moses (s) has
asked his God: “O God, are you close to me to talk with You, or You are
far so that I may call You?” God revealed to him: “O Moses, I associate
with anybody who calls on Me.”[^1]  
 The Great Prophet (s) in Sha'banieh Sermon says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَارْفَعوا إلَيهِ أيْدِيَكُم بِالدُّعاءِ في أوْقاتِ صَلَواتِكُم
فَإنَّها أفْضَلُ السّاعاتِ، يَنْظُرُ اللهُ تَعالى فِيها بِالرَّحْمَةِ
إلى عِبادِهِ يُجِيبُهُم إذَا ناجَوهُ وَيُلَبِّيهِمْ إذا نادَوهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“During your prayers raise your hands to engage in supplication because
the prayer time is the best time. At that time Allah looks on His
servants mercifully and if they call on Him, He will respond.”  
 Al-Koleyni, on the issue of the requirements of supplication writes:
“First, say “ya rabb: O God” ten times and then say “rabb”. This is
because man feels himself distant from Allah. He will call Him with
vocative sign. Sometimes this sign is explicitly mentioned and sometimes
it is deleted. But when he comes closer to Allah, he will use the
vocative sign less and will resort to whisper.

The Third Stage
---------------

At this stage Allah is so close to His servants that He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَحْنُ أَقْرَبُ إِلَيْهِ مِنْكُمْ وَلَكِنْ لَا تُبْصِرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And we are nearer to it than you, but you do not see. 56:85”***

This verse refers to the generosity and pardoning of Allah. The verse
indicates a significant secret and discloses a strange hidden point: God
has not employed distance as a measure; rather, He introduces His
Closeness in such a way difficult to be comprehended. This verse
notifies the one, who is embracing a dying man that Allah is close to
him.

Concerning this, Imam As-Sadiq (s) says:  
 “Imam Hasan (s) was busy praying when somebody crossed in front of him.
Some one of the attendants prevented him. When Imam Hasan (s) finished
his prayer, he said to the man: why did you prevent him from crossing?
The man said: “O son of the messenger of Allah, he crossed between you
and your mihrab. Imam Hasan (s) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيْحَكَ! إنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ أقْرَبُ إلَيَّ مِنْ أنْ يَخْطُرَ
فِيما بَينِي وَبَيْنَهُ أحَدٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Woe to you! God is so close to me that no one can intervene between Him
and me.”  
 Here, mihrab (praying-place) is used to absorb one's attention to one
specific point.

The Fourth Stage
----------------

In the Qur'anic verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَحْنُ أَقْرَبُ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ حَبْلِ الْوَرِيدِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We are nearer to him than his life-vein. 50:16”***

God refers to another secret and gives good news to the true believers
and the monotheists, i.e., God is closer to man than his life. This
verse depicts the relation between God and man. This shows firstly that
if we comprehend the situation, we do not have any other choice than to
resort to Allah and secondly it clarifies the sacred tradition (O Moses,
I am your necessary piety).

And let us know that the only resort at the time of depression is Allah.
If man pays constant attention to God, he will be engulfed in the world
of light and life will be of a different flavor to him and he will
behave differently than the others. His world will change and life will
be interesting to him since he will be surrounded by the infinite sea of
knowledge. He will always be delighted as long as he is with his love.
Every moment he adds something to his virtues.

Imam Ali (s) was one of those, who had conquered this mount of knowledge
and tasted the flavor of being close to his love. Seyyid Ibn Tawus says:

Habbah al-Arani says: when Nouf and I were sleeping in the yard of the
Governor's building we saw Ali (s) putting his hands against the wall
like a distracted person. He was whispering: “Most surely in the
creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night
and the day there are sings for men who understand…etc.”[^2]

Habbah al-Arani adds: “Ali (s) was reciting these verses and was walking
about like one, who has lost his mind. Then he told me: Are you asleep
or awake? I answered I was awake. “If you are in this condition, so what
about us then?” Then Imam Ali (s) stared at the ground and begun crying.
He, then, said to me: “Allah knows everything we do. O Habba, Allah is
closer to us than our life-veins. He knows everything”.

Then he added: “O Nouf! Are you awake? He said: “Yes, I am awake”. Imam
Ali (s) then gave them some advice. He advised them to fear God. Then he
said: “O God, I do not know whether You care for me or not. I wish I
knew how I should be with the amount of sins that I have committed. Nouf
says: “Imam Ali (s) was still in this state until the dawn.”[^3]

The Fifth Stage
---------------

A verse, which is more exciting than the previous verses, is the one,
whose comprehension is in the domain of the believers and the sincere
gnostics, who are really rare in the creation system. In this sacred
verse we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنَّ اللَّهَ يَحُولُ بَيْنَ الْمَرْءِ وَقَلْبِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah intervenes between man and his heart. 8:24”***

Thus man belongs to God and he is in direct relation with the Great
love. Hafiz, the Iranian poet says:

*“There is no wall between the lover and the loved one,*

*You, yourself, Hafiz, are the hindrance, get vanished.”*

In this process, if a person could, by good luck, stay on the right path
and delve deep inside himself, he will realize that he is a servant of
God before becoming an independent being and that he does not possess
any prestige and identity except being a servant to God, the Almighty.
At such a stage he will find the necessity to submit to God. Since he
may not separate himself from the great love, he is proud to be
permanently at God's presence. He is not ready to lose such a status.
This is such a great honor for him that he does not wish to let it go.
Imam Ali (s) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللّهُمّ كَتَبْتَ الآثامَ وَاطَّلَعْتَ عَلى السَّرائِرِ وَحَلَلْتَ
بَينَ القُلوبِ، فَالقُلُوبُ إلَيكَ مُصْغِيَةٌ وَالسَّرُّ عِندَكَ
عَلانِيَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O God! You have registered our sins, You are aware of the inners of
people and You are between man and his heart. The hearts are submissive
to You and the secrets are open before You.”[^4]  
 Hafiz says:

*“I asked her why your beautiful face is hidden from us,*

*She said: you are a curtain yourself, or else my face is visible.*

*I asked: how much more separation! She replied: as long as you live,*

*Is said: I have the last breath. She said: I won't change my
decision.”*

The Sixth Stage
---------------

This stage corresponds with the following two Qur'anic verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِلَّهِ الْمَشْرِقُ وَالْمَغْرِبُ فَأَيْنَمَا تُوَلُّوا فَثَمَّ
وَجْهُ اللَّهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Allah's is the East and the West, therefore, whither you turn,
thither is Allah's purpose; surely Allah is Ample-giving, knowing.
2:115”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَدْعُ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَهًا آخَرَ لَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا هُوَ كُلُّ
شَيْءٍ هَالِكٌ إِلَّا وَجْهَهُ لَهُ الْحُكْمُ وَإِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And call not with Allah any other god; there is no god but He;
everything is perishable but He; His is the judgement, and to Him you
shall be brought back. 28:88”***

At this stage, a well-informed subject of God, sees the world as God's
presence and recognizes a will-power dominating the whole creation. This
is because man is familiar with the attributes of the Great Initiator.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ طُوبَى لَهُمْ وَحُسْنُ
مَآبٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“As for those who believe and do good, a good final state shall be
theirs and a goodly return. 13:29”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِمَنْ الْمُلْكُ الْيَوْمَ لِلَّهِ الْوَاحِدِ الْقَهَّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“To whom belongs the kingdom this day? To Allah, the One, the Subduer
of all. 40:16”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خِتَامُهُ مِسْكٌ وَفِي ذَلِكَ فَلْيَتَنَافَسْ الْمُتَنَافِسُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The sealing of it is (with) musk; and for that let the aspirers
aspire. 83:26”***

The Seventh Stage
-----------------

This is complete self-denial and believing in the content of the
following holy verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الْأَوَّلُ وَالْآخِرُ وَالظَّاهِرُ وَالْبَاطِنٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He is the First and the Last and the Ascendant (over all) and the
Knower of hidden things. 57:3”***

Conclusion
----------

These seven stages are, in fact, the natural direction for human
perfection which is clearly depicted in the Holy Qur'an. Meanwhile, the
ignorant ones are going away from the right path. It is as though there
is nothing in this world except superficial pleasures.

Being away from God is the most hazardous of all calamities of mankind.
It is so misleading that it causes man to disconnect from God and
concentrate wholly on material issues. What a losing deal! Our heart,
which, by nature, is the place for God's secrets, is filled with wishes
and whims.[^5] Imam Husayn (s) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنْتَ الّذي أَزَلْتَ الأغْيارَ عَنْ قُلوبِ أحِبّائِكَ حَتىّ لَمْ
يُحِبُّوا سِواكَ وَلَمْ يَلْجَأوا إلى غَيرِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“You have removed the others from the hearts of Your lovers until they
have not loved other than You and have not resorted to other than
You.”  
 If anybody paid sufficient attention to this issue, he would not stop
weeping and would regret his wasting time. Then he would start all over
again paying full attention to the way he has selected.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ شَرَّ الدَّوَابِّ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ الصُّمُّ الْبُكْمُ الَّذِينَ
لَا يَعْقِلُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely the vilest of animals, in Allah's sight, are the deaf, the
dumb, who do not understand. 8:22”***

In fact, the verses of the Qur'an cover all stages of human development,
from the very lowest stage of human fall to the highest degree of human
status. These verses want us to move in the right direction. A cursory
comparison between the following two verses Clearly shows the distance
between two ways of thinking:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
َأَيْنَمَا تُوَلُّوا فَثَمَّ وَجْهُ اللَّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whither you turn, thither is Allah's purpose. 2:115”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ شَرَّ الدَّوَابِّ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ الصُّمُّ الْبُكْمُ الَّذِينَ
لَا يَعْقِلُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely the vilest of animals, in Allah's sight, are the deaf, the
dumb, who do not understand. 8:22”***

The ambitious, self-centered man, who interprets everything in the light
of his own desires, at the time of dying suddenly becomes aware of the
great loss of having wasted his time and realizes that he has not done
anything in this world for the hereafter. This state is depicted clearly
in the verse of the Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَكُونُوا كَالَّذِينَ نَسُوا اللَّهَ فَأَنْسَاهُمْ أَنْفُسَهُمْ
أُوْلَئِكَ هُمْ الْفَاسِقُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And be not like those who forsook Allah, so He made them forsake
their own souls. Such are the transgressors. 59:19”***

At this time they regret what they have lost.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْ تَقُولَ نَفْسٌ يَا حَسْرَتَا عَلَى مَا فَرَّطْتُ فِي جَنْبِ
اللَّهِ وَإِنْ كُنْتُ لَمِنْ السَّاخِرِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Lest a soul should say: O woe to me! For what I fell short of my
duty to Allah and most surely I was of those who laughed to scorn.
39:56”***

[^1]: Al-Jawahir al-Saniyyah, p. 40.

[^2]: The Holy Verse reads: إِنَّ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ
وَاخْتِلَافِ اللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ لَآيَاتٍ لِأُولِي الْأَلْبَابِ.
الَّذِينَ يَذْكُرُونَ اللَّهَ قِيَامًا وَقُعُودًا وَعَلَى جُنُوبِهِمْ
وَيَتَفَكَّرُونَ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَيَتَفَكَّرُونَ
فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ رَبَّنَا مَا خَلَقْتَ هَذَا
بَاطِلًا سُبْحَانَكَ فَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ. “Most surely in the
creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night
and the day there are sings for men who understand. Those who remember
Allah standing and sitting and lying on their sides and reflect on the
creation of the heavens and the earth: Our Lord! Thou hast not created
this in vain! Glory be to Thee; save us then from the chastisement of
the fire. 3:190 -191”

[^3]: Falah as-Sa’il by Seyyid Ibn Tawus, p. 266.

[^4]: Al-Sahifah al-Alawiyyah, p. 56.

[^5]: Imam As-Sadiq (s) has said: “The heart is the sanctum of God;
therefore, do not let anyone else dwell in this sanctum.” (Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 70, p. 25)


