The Truth Behind Supplication And Its Effects
=============================================

In the previous discussions we pointed to two issues:  
 The first point is that a human need is determined genetically and it
will not let man alone to the last minute of his life. This leads man to
resort to a power, which could supply him with these needs. Now, he may
do this through resorting to Allah to fill this natural gap.

The second point is man's God-seeking nature. Since man has experienced
illusionary powers and the system of formal cause and effect and has
observed their limitations, he is after an infinite and limitless power
to resort to. He is after an invincible power, which is dominating the
whole creation. This is frequently observed that man at the time of
great despair and depression is absorbed to the unparalleled power of
Allah. This state of affairs is repeatedly stated by the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُ دَعْوَةُ الْحَقِّ وَالَّذِينَ يَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِهِ لَا
يَسْتَجِيبُونَ لَهُمْ بِشَيْءٍ إِلَّا كَبَاسِطِ كَفَّيْهِ إِلَى
الْمَاءِ لِيَبْلُغَ فَاهُ وَمَا هُوَ بِبَالِغِهِ وَمَا دُعَاءُ
الْكَافِرِينَ إِلَّا فِي ضَلَالٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“To Him is due the true prayer; and those whom they pray to besides
Allah give them no answer, but they are like one who stretches forth his
two hands towards water that it may reach his mouth, but it will not
reach it; and the prayer of the unbelievers is only in error. 13:14”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا مَسَّكُمْ الضُّرُّ فِي الْبَحْرِ ضَلَّ مَنْ تَدْعُونَ إِلَّا
إِيَّاهُ فَلَمَّا نَجَّاكُمْ إِلَى الْبَرِّ أَعْرَضْتُمْ وَكَانَ
الْإِنْسَانُ كَفُورًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when distress afflicts you in the sea, away go those whom you
call on except He; but when He brings you safe to the land, you turn
aside; and man is ever ungrateful. 17:67”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا مَسَّ الْإِنْسَانَ الضُّرُّ دَعَانَا لِجَنْبِهِ أَوْ قَاعِدًا
أَوْ قَائِمًا فَلَمَّا كَشَفْنَا عَنْهُ ضُرَّهُ مَرَّ كَأَنْ لَمْ
يَدْعُنَا إِلَى ضُرٍّ مَسَّهُ كَذَلِكَ زُيِّنَ لِلْمُسْرِفِينَ مَا
كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when affliction touches a man, he calls on Us, whether lying on
his side or sitting or standing; but when We remove his affliction from
him, he passes on as though he had never called on Us on account of an
affliction that touched him; thus that which they do is made
fair-seeming to the extravagant. 10:12”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا أَنْعَمْنَا عَلَى الْإِنْسَانِ أَعْرَضَ وَنَأى بِجَانِبِهِ
وَإِذَا مَسَّهُ الشَّرُّ فَذُو دُعَاءٍ عَرِيضٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When We give man an asset, he avoids Us, but when he is afflicted,
he has long prayers. 41:51”***

The First Effect of Supplication
--------------------------------

With an eye on the above points, the first effect of supplication is to
fill out the gap which exists in the human nature. This will stop man's
falling in the wrong path and will help him to avoid the hazards. This
is because resorting to limited powers causes man to engage in
flattering others, man's humiliation, and mental failures. It also
causes, above all, to forger God, and, as a result, to suffer greatly.
In fact, the school of supplication is a general invitation to all
needy, depressed and sufferers and the promise to accept and to respond
to these needs on the part of that great Almighty's power, which is the
only power that can solve the problems.

The Second Effect of Supplication
---------------------------------

The second effect of supplication is the relation of the unlimited
divine power with the weak man which will bring froth permanent security
for man and will fill out his mental gap and will bring him grandeur and
glory with which he may confront problems easily. As the following verse
from the Holy Quarn depicts:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَا بِذِكْرِ اللَّهِ تَطْمَئِنُّ الْقُلُوبُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Now surely by Allah's remembrance are the hearts set at rest.
13:28”***

God's remembrance is the only pacifying agent which dominates us.
Al-Khidhr (s), at the time of Imam Ali's death, described Imam Ali (s)
in this way:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُنْتَ كَالجَبَلِ لا تُحَرِّكُهُ العَواصِفُ وَلا تُزِيلُهُ القَواصِفُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“You were like a mountain which could not be moved by storms nor by
tornados.”[^1]  
 It is strange that man at this stage does not surrender to any power
because he connects his power to an ever-lasting one. Imam Husayn (s)
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنْتَ مُؤَيِّدِي بِالنَّصْرِ عَلى أعْدائِي وَلَو لا نَصْرُكَ إيّايَ
لَكُنْتُ مِنَ المَغْلوبِينَ. يا مَنْ خَصَّ نَفْسَهُ بِالسُّمُوِّ
وَالرِّفْعَةِ، فَأوْلِياؤُهُ بِعِزِّهِ يَعْتَزُّونَ. يا مَنْ جُعِلَتْ
لهُ المُلوكُ نير المَذَلّةِ عَلى أعْناقِهِمْ فَهُمْ مِن سَطَواتِهِ
خائِفونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O God! It is You, who have supported me to defeat my foes. If You have
not assist me, I would be defeated. O You, Who have distinguished
Yourself with grandeur and highness. Your guardians are invincible with
Your glory. O You, Who have made the kings put the yoke of lowness on
their necks and to be frightened of Your influence!”

A cursory look at history will elaborate this issue. The history of the
prophets (s) shows that those great ones have always stood firmly in
front of the powers of their time. This means that, in front of any
prophet, there was always a pharaoh, Shaddad or Nimrod. These great men
of God in those days lacked even the simplest physical means to defend
themselves. However, they have never given up. It is interesting to note
that the prophets were always victorious. Prophet Moses (s) had Aaron
only; Abraham (s) had nobody to help him and our prophet only enjoyed
Abu Talib's protection. But finally, the will of Allah has defeated all
the others:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَضِيَ اللَّهُ عَنْهُمْ وَرَضُوا عَنْهُ أُوْلَئِكَ حِزْبُ اللَّهِ
أَلَا إِنَّ حِزْبَ اللَّهِ هُمْ الْمُفْلِحُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah is well-pleased with them and they are well-pleased with Him;
these are Allah's party: now surely the party of Allah are the
successful ones. 58:22”***

Another instance is the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُمْ لَهُمْ الْمَنصُورُونَ. وَإِنَّ جُندَنَا لَهُمْ
الْغَالِبُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Most surely they shall be the assisted ones and most surely our host
alone shall be the victorious ones. 37:172-173”***

The Third Effect of Supplication
--------------------------------

The third effect of supplication is believing in God, which accompanies
numerous hidden benefits. This great secret is one of the major causes
for the establishment of supplication. This is one of the great customs
of Allah to which everybody is invited and given special dress of
knowledge. If one could grasp the true value of this asset, he would
realize that God has not given men any better asset than this one. But
how engagement in supplication entails believing in God is an issue, to
which we will turn now:

● We saw in previous sections that man in his internal and external
relations with the environment comes across numerous needs which he has
to satisfy. Therefore, he is always looking for assistance. If man looks
at God as an assistant, he will engage in worship and supplication.

Since man is always under the pressure of his needs, he will constantly
need God's assistance. This constant attention and permanent worship
open up to man a horizon of precious treasures. For this reason, the
Holy Qur'an constantly recommends the remembrance of God. Some of these
verses are presented here:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ قِيَامًا وَقُعُودًا وَعَلَى جُنُوبِكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Remember Allah standing and sitting and reclining. 4:103”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ ذِكْرًا كَثِيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe, remember Allah, remembering frequently. 33:41”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ كَثِيرًا لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Remember Allah much, that you may be successful.
8:45”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاذْكُرُونِي أَذْكُرْكُمْ وَاشْكُرُوا لِي وَلَا تَكْفُرُونِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Therefore remember Me, I will remember you, and be thankful to Me,
and do not be ungrateful to Me. 2:152”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تُلْهِكُمْ أَمْوَالُكُمْ وَلَا
أَوْلَادُكُمْ عَنْ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ وَمَنْ يَفْعَلْ ذَلِكَ فَأُوْلَئِكَ
هُمْ الْخَاسِرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Let not your wealth, or your children, divert you
from the remembrance of Allah; and whoever does that, these are the
losers. 63:9”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رِجَالٌ لَا تُلْهِيهِمْ تِجَارَةٌ وَلَا بَيْعٌ عَنْ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Men whom neither merchandise nor selling diverts from the
remembrance of Allah. 24:37”***

The Holy Qur'an, reproaching those who shun remembering God, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّنْ ذُكِّرَ بِآيَاتِ رَبِّهِ ثُمَّ أَعْرَضَ
عَنْهَا إِنَّا مِنْ الْمُجْرِمِينَ مُنتَقِمُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And who is more unjust than he who is reminded of the communications
of his Lord, then he turns away from them? Surely We will give
punishment to the guilty. 32:22”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يَعْشُ عَنْ ذِكْرِ الرَّحْمَانِ نُقَيِّضْ لَهُ شَيْطَانًا
فَهُوَ لَهُ قَرِينٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whoever turns himself away from the remembrance of the
Beneficent God, we appoint for him a shaitan, so he becomes his
associate. 43:36”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ أَعْرَضَ عَنْ ذِكْرِي فَإِنَّ لَهُ مَعِيشَةً ضَنكًا
وَنَحْشُرُهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ أَعْمَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whoever turns away from My reminder, his shall be a straitened
life, and we will raise him on the day of resurrection, blind.
20:142”***

Concerning the hypocrites, God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
َلَا يَذْكُرُونَ اللَّهَ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they do not remember Allah save a little. 4:142”***

And concerning the infidels, God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ كَانَتْ أَعْيُنُهُمْ فِي غِطَاءٍ عَنْ ذِكْرِي وَكَانُوا لَا
يَسْتَطِيعُونَ سَمْعًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They whose eyes were under a cover from My reminder, and they could
not even hear. 18:101”***

In the Holy Qur'an, there are many advantages mentioned for
supplication, for instance:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَتَطْمَئِنُّ قُلُوبُهُمْ بِذِكْرِ اللَّهِ أَلَا
بِذِكْرِ اللَّهِ تَطْمَئِنُّ الْقُلُوبُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those who believe and whose hearts are set at rest by the
remembrance of Allah; now surely by Allah's remembrance are the hearts
set at rest. 13:28”***

Definitely, much engagement in supplication needs knowledge and full
recognition. In the holy verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ كَثِيرًا لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And remember Allah much, that you may be successful. 8:45”***

The word ”*Felah*” (progress) indicates progress in the divine and
spiritual perfection. This invitation gives a positive response to the
servant's prayers and it responds to the most of their logical needs and
requirements. Another advantage of it is our familiarity with the
Creator. God has given this asset to His special servants:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُمْ مَا يَشَاءُونَ فِيهَا وَلَدَيْنَا مَزِيدٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They have therein what they wish and with Us is more yet. 50:35”***

The Fourth Effect of Supplication
---------------------------------

The fourth advantage of supplication is self-believing and
self-recognition. Under the protection of supplication man gets rid of
being distant from God and resorts to a power, which dominates
everything.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِي لَهُ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَاللَّه عَلَى كُلِّ
شَيْءٍ شَهِيدٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whose is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; and Allah is a
witness of all things. 85:9”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِلَّهِ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ
بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ مُحِيطًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is
Allah's, and Allah encompasses all things. 4:126”***

In supplication we will come across:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحانَكَ يُسَبِّحُ الخَلْقُ كُلُّهُمْ لَكَ وَقامَ الخَلْقُ كُلُّهُمْ
بِكَ وَأشْفَقَ الخَلْقُ كُلُّهُمْ مِنْكَ وَضَرَعَ الخَلْقُ كُلُّهُمْ
إلَيكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O God! Glory be to You. All the creatures glorify You, all the
creatures live by You, all the creatures fear You and all the creatures
beg you earnestly.”[^2]  
 In another supplication we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبحانَكَ خَلَقْتَ كُلَّ شَيءٍ وَإلَيكَ مَعادُهُ وَبَدَأتَ كُلَّ شَيءٍ
وَإلَيكَ مُنْتَهاهُ وَأنْشَأتَ كُلَّ شَيءٍ وَإلَيكَ مَصِيرُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O God! Glory be to You. You have created everything and everything
returns to You. You have initiated everything and everything will end to
You. You have established everything and the fate of everything will be
to You.”

In fact, not remembering the One, Who is the initiator of everything
means forgetting everything. In such a state of mind, man has not
recognized the real value of things. He has seen everything in a
diverted form and he has lived confusedly. The Holy Qur'an deals with
the significant matter of “forgetting God,” which is not dealt with by
any school of thinking. There are numerous interpretations in the Holy
Qur'an about the concept of “forgetting God.” In the surah of Hashr, we
read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَكُونُوا كَالَّذِينَ نَسُوا اللَّهَ فَأَنْسَاهُمْ أَنْفُسَهُمْ
أُوْلَئِكَ هُمْ الْفَاسِقُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And be not like those who forsook Allah, so He made them forsake
their own souls: such are the transgressors. 59:19”***

From all these verses two issues come to mind: Firstly, forgetting God
entails self-forgetting and secondly, one, who forgets God, will be
forgotten by the Almighty God. With a little attention the relation
between these two groups of verses will become clear. Allamah Tabataba’i
concerning the verse, ***“The day when the spirit and the angels stand
in ranks, 78:38***”[^3] discusses the issue of the soul and refers to
the sacred verse in which the topic of soul is brought out:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنْ الرُّوحِ قُلْ الرُّوحُ مِنْ أَمْرِ رَبِّي وَمَا
أُوتِيتُمْ مِنْ الْعِلْمِ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they ask you about the soul. Say: The soul is one of the
commands of my Lord. 17:85”***

Then he explains the word “command” and refers to the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا أَمْرُهُ إِذَا أَرَادَ شَيْئًا أَنْ يَقُولَ لَهُ كُنْ
فَيَكُونُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“His command, when He intends anything, is only to say to it: Be, so
it is. 36:82”***

God's command refers to the initiation of a power by anything which He
wishes to take on life and the soul belongs to this world of command.
There is another verse interpreting “soul” in the following manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ قَالَ رَبُّكَ لِلْمَلَائِكَةِ إِنِّي خَالِقٌ بَشَرًا مِنْ طِينٍ
فَإِذَا سَوَّيْتُهُ وَنَفَخْتُ فِيهِ مِنْ رُوحِي فَقَعُوا لَهُ
سَاجِدِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When your Lord said to the angels: surely I am going to create a
mortal from dust; so when I have made him complete and breathed into him
of My spirit, then fall dawn making obeisance to him. 38:71-72”***

From this verse it is clear that spirit or soul is from God. All these
verses depict man's relation to Allah. From the sacred verse “and We are
nearer to him than his life-vein” the relation becomes even clearer. And
from the verse “…Allah intervenes between man and his heart” it is
understood that man is nearer to God than to himself.

Thus, we will conclude that forgetting God is, in fact, self-forgetting.
This is because if a person forgets God, he will forget His command, as
well. Thus, man's soul, which is also of the category of Allah's
command, will be forgotten. Since man's very truth lies in his soul and
spirit, therefore, he has forgotten himself. This discussion will reveal
that the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَكُونُوا كَالَّذِينَ نَسُوا اللَّهَ فَأَنْسَاهُمْ أَنْفُسَهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Be not like those who forsook Allah so He made them forsake their
own souls, 59:19”***

This verse is in complete harmony with

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبِّ لِمَ حَشَرْتَنِي أَعْمَى وَقَدْ كُنتُ بَصِيرًا قَالَ
كَذَلِكَ أَتَتْكَ آيَاتُنَا فَنَسِيتَهَا وَكَذَلِكَ الْيَوْمَ تُنسَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He shall say: My Lord! Why hast thou raised me blind, and I was a
seeing one indeed? He will say: Even so, our communications came to you,
but you neglected them; even thus shall you be forsaken this day.
20:125-126”***

This is because if God, who is closer to man than himself, forgets man,
man will definitely end up in self-denial. But what is the consequence
of this self-denial? Where does it take us? And how does the delicate
man endure this state? A cursory look at a blind and non-hearing man,
who has not forgotten himself yet, will make this clear. If such a man
is left alone in a perilous desert, he will have a deplorable condition,
“let alone a person who has forgotten himself.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَمَنْ شَرَحَ اللَّهُ صَدْرَهُ لِلْإِسْلَامِ فَهُوَ عَلَى نُورٍ مِنْ
رَبِّهِ فَوَيْلٌ لِلْقَاسِيَةِ قُلُوبُهُمْ مِنْ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ
أُوْلَئِكَ فِي ضَلَالٍ مُبِينٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“What! Is he whose heart Allah has opened for Islam so that he is in
a light from his Lord (like the hard-hearted)? Nay, woe to those whose
hearts are hard against the remembrance of Allah; those are in clear
error. 39:22”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يُعْرِضْ عَنْ ذِكْرِ رَبِّهِ يَسْلُكْهُ عَذَابًا صَعَدًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whoever turns aside from the reminder of his Lord, He will make
him enter into an*** ***afflicting chastisement. 72:17”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تُطِعْ مَنْ أَغْفَلْنَا قَلْبَهُ عَنْ ذِكْرِنَا وَاتَّبَعَ
هَوَاهُ وَكَانَ أَمْرُهُ فُرُطًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And do not follow him whose heart we have made unmindful to Our
remembrance, and he follows his low desires and his case is one in which
due bounds are exceeded. 18:28”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اسْتَحْوَذَ عَلَيْهِمْ الشَّيْطَانُ فَأَنسَاهُمْ ذِكْرَ اللَّهِ
أُوْلَئِكَ حِزْبُ الشَّيْطَانِ أَلَا إِنَّ حِزْبَ الشَّيْطَانِ هُمْ
الْخَاسِرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The shaitan has gained the mastery over them, so he has made them
forget the remembrance of Allah; they are the shaitan's party; now
surely the shaitan's party are the losers. 58:19”***

It is the Holy Qur'an which has made this prediction and has commanded
and invited man to the right path:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ادْعُ إِلَى سَبِيلِ رَبِّكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Call to the way of your Lord. 16:125”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّ هَذَا صِرَاطِي مُسْتَقِيمًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And know that this is My path, the right one. 6:153”***

The Fifth Effect of Supplication
--------------------------------

Besides the applicant's needs being satisfied, the supplication has
numerous other effects. Despite the erroneous assumption of those
simple-minded individuals who think that if their needs are not
satisfied through supplication, then their supplication is useless, it
should be said that the very engagement in supplication is of utmost
significance. Imam as-Sadiq (s) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيْكُمْ بِالدُّعاءِ فَإنَّكُم لا تَقَرَّبونَ إلى اللهِ بِمِثْلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Engage in supplication because it is the best way through which you
come close to God.”[^4]  
 He also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما يَعْلَمُ عِظَمَ ثَوابِ الدُّعاءِ وَتَسْبِيحِ العَبْدِ فِيما بَينَهُ
وَبَينَ نَفْسِه إلاّ اللهُ تَبارَكَ وَتعالى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“No one knows the magnitude of supplication and glorifying Allah when
one invokes and glorifies with himself (secretly) save Allah.”[^5]  
 He also stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا أبْرَزَ عَبْدٌ يَدَهُ إلى اللهِ العَزيزِ الجَبّارِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
إلاّ اسْتَحْيَى اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ أنْ يَرُدَّها صِفْراً حَتىّ
يَجْعَلَ فِيها مِنْ رَحْمَتِهِ مَا يَشاءُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“No servant raises his hand toward Allah the Almighty, unless Allah
feels shy to leave it empty. He will put in it some of His mercy as He
wills.”

It is for this reason that it is said that there is no supplication
without being responded to.[^6] In the verse “Call upon Me and I will
respond to you” responding is based on delivering the supplication. If
supplication takes place, its response is inevitable, though some
supplications do not lead to being answered superficially.

The Sixth Effect of Supplication
--------------------------------

The sixth effect of supplication, which can be considered as one of the
basic causes for the establishment of supplication by the infallible
imams, is our recognition of the divine knowledge, our understanding of
life instructions, our learning the divine traditions and our learning
of the way to communicate with Almighty God. One of the features of
supplications is that we can find in them the whole truth of the
infallible imams who always prayed Allah.

The important point in the traditions reported from the infallible imams
is that the narrator has understood the answer to each question offered
to the infallible imams in accordance with his own talent. It has
happened that one question was offered to the infallible imams and one
answer was given but the narrators mentioned the answer differently. The
question was: “Can God put the world in an egg shell without making it
smaller or making the egg shell larger?” The Imam (s) has answered:
“This question is like your eyes because what you see is by the lenses
of your eyes whereas neither your eyes have become larger nor the world
has become smaller.”[^7]

The same question, however, is answered to another person in the
following way: “This is an impossible question.”[^8] Thus, in reporting
the traditions the skill of the narrators is a crucial factor. However,
since in supplications, the narrator does not have any role, it shows
that the infallible one is manifested in the expressions which are used
by him. They have taught us a great amount of knowledge through
supplications. They have commanded that these supplications are to be
read as they are without adding or subtracting and be used in
communicating with God and be handed down to the offspring. This is
shown by the Prophet's statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَرُبَّ حامِلِ فِقْهٍ غَيرِ فَقيهٍ وَرُبَّ حامِلِ فِقْهٍ إلى مَنْ هُو
أفْقَهُ مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There may be one, who has knowledge but he is not an expert and there
may be one, who teaches another, who is more learned than him.”[^9]  
 It is reported in several traditions that Imam as-Sajjad (s) has been
asked some questions on monotheism to which he replied:

“Allah knows well that at the end of the world there will be some expert
people, who will be profoundly learned. Therefore He has revealed:
***“say: He, Allah, is One. Allah, the Eternal, Absolute.” (sura of
Al-Ikhlas, 112)*** and also He has revealed some verses at the beginning
of the sura of al-Hadid (57) up to His saying: ***“…and He is cognizant
of what is in the hearts.”***[^10] ***So*** ***anybody wishing for
anything else will be perished.”***[^11]

Thus, the supplications are among the greatest treasures left by the
infallible imams (s) for their people. Today, we see that no single page
of this great library is lost and it has remained intact. It should be
mentioned here that the issue of ziyara[^12] is the same as the issue of
supplication. The significant point concerning the ziyara is people's
attention towards the dignities of the infallible imams and towards the
carrying out of their commands or else, simply repeating these lifeless
words will be of no effect.

In fact, if an individual says, when offering ziyara: “peace be upon
you” it simply means that “you are secure in my presence and you are not
going to get any harm from me”. Such a person will never commit a sin,
however. This is because engaging in sins is to destroy the intentions
of the infallible imams (s) who have sacrificed their lives so that the
Sharia can continue. Committing sins is the most vicious blow to the
presence of those great ones, however.

Thus, besides other advantages, the school of supplication and ziyara
tries to establish supreme divine knowledge which has not been raised in
the traditions. Therefore the school of supplication is, in fact, an
educational institute which have sublime objectives in mind and which is
one of the greatest educational policies of Islam.

The Seventh Effect of Supplication
----------------------------------

The seventh effect of supplication is to educate a perfect man.
Observing those, who have reached the highest points of mental
maturation and have gained the climax of virtues, reveals that these
high positions in the divine culture of Islam are not a series of
idealizations as the feeble-minded ones erroneously assume and then
declare: “This is not the present. They refer to the future of which we
know nothing. We will enjoy now.” This is completely unfounded, however.

Of course, anybody, who is familiar with the culture of supplication,
knows well that a man can not have uttered statements in the form of
supplication unless he has reached a high degree of knowledge and
virtues. In other words, the very presence of an supplication indicates
the high standard of spirituality. The man standing besides the Arafat
Mountain invokes his God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنْتَ الّذِي لا إلَهَ غَيرُكَ تَعَرَّفْتَ بِكُلِّ شَيءٍ وَأنْتَ الّذي
تَعَرَّفْتَ إلَيَّ فِي كُلّ شَيْءٍ فَرَأَيْتُكَ ظاهِراً فِي كُلِّ
شَيءٍ وَأنْتَ الظّاهِرُ لِكُلِّ شَيءٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“You are the God, whom there is no god other than. You have made
yourself known by everything. You have made yourself known to me in
every thing. I see You apparent in everything and You are apparent to
everything.”[^13]

The negative forms are used in these statements to emphasize the
absolute power of God. The words are selected with such a delicate
manner that it will take centuries for people to realize the depth of
this passage. Where has this infallible one got these delicate words
from? This statement has not been uttered by anybody else before.

Let us notice another occasion when in an orchard in the middle of
Medina, at midnight, a man recites, “By Your attributes that have filled
the corners of everything,”[^14] (If he had not seen it, he could not
have uttered anything), and his statement bewilders everybody. How could
he see Allah's attributes manifested in every phase of the creation?

Thus, as it was previously mentioned, the high issues behind
supplication, before everything else points to the high spirit and
sublime position of the utterer of the supplication. In other words, we
could safely say that Kumayl, Abu Hamza ath-Thamali and Arafah
supplications are really the itineraries of these dignitaries in the
voyage “From people towards God and from God towards people”. Through
supplying us with these precious treasures, they have invited men to
their original resorts and have asked everybody to attain these divine
positions through their research on the Islamic and divine ethics. These
supplications reveal to us that the doors leading to perfection are
always open to man. Thus, they should ask God to show them the ways.

This is because Islam is not a series of words to be uttered only,
without considering the contents behind prayers and supplications. For
instance, the prayer that we perform everyday is a complex set of
concepts, in which all human positions are considered and man is invited
to go towards them. In the Sha'baniyyah supplication, we are told to ask
God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلَهي هَبْ لِي كَمالَ الإنْقِطاعِ إلَيكَ وَأَنِرْ أبْصارَ قُلوبِنا
بِضِياءِ نَظَرِها إلَيكَ حَتىّ تَخْرِقَ أبْصارُ القُلوبِ حُجُبَ
النّورِ فَتَصِلَ إلَى مَعْدِنِ العَظَمَةِ وَتَصيرَ أرْواحُنا
مُعَلَّقَةُ بِعِزِّ قُدْسِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O my God, grant me to devote myself to You only and light the sights of
our hearts with the light of seeing You until the sights of the hearts
pierce the screens of light to reach to the essence of greatness and our
souls become hung with the glory of Your holiness”  
 We also read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلَهي وَألْحِقْني بِنُورِ عِزِّكَ الأبْهَجِ فَأكُونَ لَكَ عارِفاً
وَعَنْ سِواكَ مُنْحَرِفاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O my God! Let me reach the light of your bright glory so that I can
recognize You and divert from anyone other than You.”

This supplication is an invitation to the highest degree of the position
which is assumed for a gnostic and it is good news for people to know
that the doors leading to perfection are always open.

Hindrances on the way to Supplication
-------------------------------------

In Imam Ali's (Kumayl) supplication we read that there are some
obstacles on the way of supplication, which if are not removed by the
suppliant, then there will be no response to the supplication. Imam Ali
(s) has referred to these significant conditions through this statement:
“O my God, forgive my sins that invalidate the supplication!” It
indicates that the major hindrances on the way of supplications are
sins. Then he has ordered us to ask for pardon to cure this situation.

Concerning this issue, there is a tradition, narrated by Ma'ath Ibn
Jabal from the Prophet (s) referring to the major obstacles on the way
of supplication.[^15] In that tradition the Prophet (s) refers to the
innate aspects of the affairs, i.e., those aspects which are unknown
even by the angels. In this tradition, the obstacles are enumerated:

1. Backbiting one's brothers in religion.

2. An action through which a God's servant wishes to gain some worldly
benefits.

3. Pride.

4. Macro-mania.

5. Jealousy towards those who engage in knowledge and practice.

6. Lack of mercy towards the others.

7. An action through which a God's servant wishes publicity.

8. An action which is not carried out for the sake of God.

9. Impudence.

10. Projecting one's sins and wrong-doings over the others.

11. Belittling the others by being macro-maniac.

12. Referring to the others' filth by pretending to be clean.

13. Not providing for the Hereafter through this world.

14. Finding faults with the others.

15. Whispering in the presence of the others.

16. Being malevolent towards the others.

The above inventory is a collection of obstacles before the acceptance
of our actions. It is clear that these things can be considered as
impediments in the way of supplications. This is because supplication is
by itself a kind of worship and it takes us close to God and it is
responded if it is accepted. But if it fails to function properly, it
naturally will not be accepted.

[^1]: Shaykh Saduq: Al-Amali, p. 241.

[^2]: Al-Balad al-Amin, p. 103.

[^3]: The Holy Verse reads: يَوْمَ يَقُومُ الرُّوحُ وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ
صَفًّا.

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 93, p. 303.

[^5]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 93, p. 319.

[^6]: Shaykh Saduq: Al-Khisal, p. 101 and Ma’ani Al-Akhbar, p. 323.

[^7]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 79.

[^8]: Shaykh Saduq: Al-Tawhid, p. 130.

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 100, p. 46.

[^10]: The Holy Verses intended read: سَبَّحَ لِلَّهِ مَا فِي
السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ. لَهُ مُلْكُ
السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ يُحْيِ وَيُمِيتُ وَهُوَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ
قَدِيرٌ. هُوَ الْأَوَّلُ وَالْآخِرُ وَالظَّاهِرُ وَالْبَاطِنُ وَهُوَ
بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ. هُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ
فِي سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ ثُمَّ اسْتَوَى عَلَى الْعَرْشِ يَعْلَمُ مَا يَلِجُ
فِي الْأَرْضِ وَمَا يَخْرُجُ مِنْهَا وَمَا يَنْزِلُ مِنْ السَّمَاءِ
وَمَا يَعْرُجُ فِيهَا وَهُوَ مَعَكُمْ أَيْنَ مَا كُنْتُمْ وَاللَّهُ
بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ. لَهُ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَإِلَى
اللَّهِ تُرْجَعُ الْأُمُورُ. يُولِجُ اللَّيْلَ فِي النَّهَارِ وَيُولِجُ
النَّهَارَ فِي اللَّيْلِ وَهُوَ عَلِيمٌ بِذَاتِ الصُّدُورِ. “Whatever is
in the heavens and the earth declares the glory of Allah, and He is the
Mighty, the Wise. His is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; He
gives life and causes death; and He has power over all things. He is the
First and the Last and the Ascendant (over all) and the Knower of hidden
things, and He is Cognizant of all things. He it is who created the
heavens and the earth in six periods, and He is firm in power; He knows
that which goes deep down into the earth and that which comes forth out
of it, and that which comes down from the heaven and that which goes up
into it, and He is with you wherever you are; and Allah sees what you
do. His is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; and to Allah are
(all) affairs returned. He causes the night to enter in upon the day,
and causes the day to enter in upon the night, and He is Cognizant of
what is in the hearts.”

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 3, p. 263 and Shaykh Saduq: Al-Tawhid, p.
283.

[^12]: Special wordings recited when visiting one of the holy shrines of
the infallible imams or their progenies.

[^13]: Imam Husayn’s Arafah supplication.

[^14]: Imam Ali’s Kumayl Supplication.

[^15]: Uddat al-Da’ee: Ibn Fahad al-Hilli, p. 242.


