Surah Al-Ma’idah, Chapter 5, Section 12
=======================================

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 87
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ لاَ تُحَرِّمُواْ طَيِّبَاتِ مَا
أَحَلَّ اللّهُ لَكُمْ وَلاَ تَعْتَدُواْ إِنَّ اللّهَ لاَ يُحِبُّ
الْمُعْتَدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***87. "O' you who have Faith! Do not prohibit the good things that
Allah has made lawful to you, and do not transgress. Verily Allah does
not like the transgressors."***

It happened that one day the Messenger of Allah (S) was speaking for
people about the Hereafter and the scenes of the gathering-place of
Resurrection. The audience were so touched at heart and wept that some
of them decided, from then on, not to consume any good food, to prohibit
comfort unto themselves, to observe a fast, to abandon their wives, and
to sleep at nights less than before.

They swore over that decision to be loyal to it. When the Prophet (S)
was informed of it, he mustered people in the mosque and told them: "I
eat food; I sleep at nights and do not abandon my wives. Our religion is
not the creed of retreat and monasticism. The monasticism of my ummah is
the holy struggle. Whoever goes a direction other than my style is not a
Muslim."

Some of them asked what they would do for the oaths they had taken. The
subsequent verses were revealed saying that Allah does not call them to
account for their vain (unintentional) oaths.

Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*"Whoever makes a lawful thing unlawful for, himself (through a vow),
the one must accomplish it, and there is nothing upon him. ..."*[^1]

### Explanations

1. Islam is the religion of 'Fitrah' (nature), wherein retreat and
monasticism, or excess and defect are forbidden.

2. A Muslim submits to the command of Allah*.* He neither turns a lawful
thing into an unlawful one, nor vice versa.

The Holy Prophet (S) said:

*"O' people! What I have made lawful is lawful until the day of
Judgment, and what I have forbidden is forbidden until the day of
Judgment."* [^2]

3. Edible things, clothing, and the whole lawful pleasures have been
created for the usage of humankind.

4. When using the lawful things, be careful of avoiding extravagance.

***"... Do not transgress ..."***

5. The vows, covenants and oaths that are against the explicit
prohibitions of the text of the Qur'an, are worthless and invalid.

Surah Al-Ma’idah, Verse 88
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكُلُواْ مِمَّا رَزَقَكُمُ اللّهُ حَلاَلاً طَيِّبًا وَاتَّقُواْ
اللّهَ الَّذِيَ أَنتُم بِهِ مُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***88. "And eat from the lawful and good things which Allah has provided
for you; and be in awe of Allah Whom you have Faith in."***

In the previous verse, the words were about the prohibition of unlawful
things, while in this verse it has enjoined people to lawfully enjoying
the merits of Allah*.* It says:

***"And eat from the lawful and good things which Allah has provided for
you;"***

The only condition in this course is that you should avoid opposing the
command of Allah in whom you believe.

***"... and be in awe of*** ***Allah*** ***whom you have Faith in."***

That is, your faith to Allah requires that you respect all his
commandments both in enjoying the merits of Allah and observing
moderation and piety.

The Holy Prophet (S) said:

*"It is obligatory for every Muslim believer, man or woman, to gain
lawful things."* [^3]

Again, the Holy Prophet (S) said:

*"Worship consists of seventy parts, the best of which is seeking the
lawful material."*[^4]

Also, the Holy Prophet (S) said:

*"Seeking for lawful sustenance is the same as holy struggle in the way
of Allah".* [^5]

The Holy Prophet (S) said:

*"Next to the obligatory prayers, seeking for lawful (sustenance) is
necessary and compulsory."* [^6]

The Holy Prophet (S) said:

*"Gaining income through a lawful way, is the most exalted deed."*[^7]

Surah Al-Ma’idah, Verse 89
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يُؤَاخِذُكُمُ اللّهُ بِاللَّغْوِ فِي أَيْمَانِكُمْ وَلَـكِن
يُؤَاخِذُكُم بِمَا عَقَّدتُّمُ الأَيْمَانَ فَكَفَّارَتُهُ إِطْعَامُ
عَشَرَةِ مَسَاكِينَ مِنْ أَوْسَطِ مَا تُطْعِمُونَ أَهْلِيكُمْ أَوْ
كِسْوَتُهُمْ أَوْ تَحْرِيرُ رَقَبَةٍ فَمَن لَّمْ يَجِدْ فَصِيَامُ
ثَلاَثَةِ أَيَّامٍ ذَلِكَ كَفَّارَةُ أَيْمَانِكُمْ إِذَا حَلَفْتُمْ
وَاحْفَظُواْ أَيْمَانَكُمْ كَذَلِكَ يُبَيِّنُ اللّهُ لَكُمْ آيَاتِهِ
لَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***89. "Allah does not call you to account for your vain (unintentional)
oaths, but he calls you to account for what you have pledged solemnly.
So its atonement is feeding ten paupers with the average of what you
feed your own families, or clothing them, or freeing a slave. But
whoever does not find (the means to do so), should fast for three days.
That is the atonement of your oaths when you pledge. But guard your
oaths. Thus Allah makes His Signs clear for you in order that you might
be thankful."***

### The Atonement of Oaths

In this verse, the general discussion is about the oaths which are taken
upon the fields of making the lawful things into unlawful ones, and the
like of them. These oaths, from this point of view, are divided into two
sorts. At first, it says:

***"Allah does not call you to account for your vain (unintentional)
oaths....."***

The objective meaning of 'vain oaths', as the commentators and
jurisprudents have said, is the oaths that do not aim a definite goal
and those that have not been taken intentionally and decidedly. Besides,
the contents of such oaths are against the laws of religion, viz. they
are estimated as opposite to the commands of Allah*.*

The second sort is the oaths which are taken willfully, intentionally,
decidedly, and earnestly. Referring to these kinds of oaths, in the
continuation of the verse, the Qur'an says:

***"... but he calls you to account for what you have pledged
solemnly....."***

And Allah charges you with a duty to fulfill these oaths.

For the validity of an oath, of course, only its being earnest is not
enough, but the content of the oath should be a lawful matter, at least.
It should also be noted that an oath is not reputable except by the Name
of Allah*.*

Therefore, if someone takes an oath by Allah*,* it is obligatory to
perform it according to his oath. So, if he breaches his pledge, one of
the following three atonements is necessary to be performed by the one.
At first, it says:

***"... So its atonement is feeding ten paupers ..."***

Yet, in order that some people do not take this general ordinance so
that they think they can give any low and worthless material of food as
atonement, the Qur'an clearly explains the quality of this food, saying
that it must be:

***"... With the average of what you feed your own families....."***

The second is: to cloth ten needy persons with proper clothing.

***"... or clothing them....."***

The appearance of this verse, of course, indicates that the clothing
should be of a sort which normally covers the body.

Yet it can be of various kinds according to the seasons and places in
different periods.

To answer to the question that whether, from the point of quality, the
minimum material is enough or the average should be observed here, too,
as the absoluteness of the verse implies, any sort of clothing can be
enough.

The third is:

**".*****...freeing a slave.*****..."**

Sometimes it happens that there may be some persons who are able to
fulfill neither of the above two atonements. Therefore, next to stating
these ordinances, it says:

***"... But whoever does not find (the means to do so), should fast for
three days....."***

After that, as an emphasis, the Qur'an says:

***"... That is the atonement of your oaths when you pledge ..."***

But, in order that no one might consider that by giving atonement,
breaching the proper oaths is not unlawful, it says:

***"... But guard your oaths ..."***

The purpose or this phrase is that you should be careful not to commit
sins by breaching your oaths.

And, finally, at the end of the verse, in order that you might be
grateful for these ordinances and commandments, which guarantee the
happiness and felicity of both an individual and society, the Qur'an
says:

***"... Thus*** ***Allah*** ***makes His Signs clear for you in order
that you might be thankful."***

Surah Al-Ma’idah, Verse 90
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ إِنَّمَا الْخَمْرُ وَالْمَيْسِرُ
وَالأَنصَابُ وَالأَزْلاَمُ رِجْسٌ مِّنْ عَمَلِ الشَّيْطَانِ
فَاجْتَنِبُوهُ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**90.** ***"O' you who have Faith! Verily wine, gambling, idols, and
(dividing by) arrows are an abomination of the Satan's work, so avoid
it, that you may be prosperous."***

At the time of the advent of Islam, the Arabs customarily were
intensively interested in poetry, wine, and fighting. The Divine
revelations concerning the prohibition of wine were gradually conveyed.

At first, there revealed a verse stating that provision is supplied from
date and grapes either, from which you can obtain intoxication,
too[^8]**.** This indication of intoxication implies the statement of
its badness.

The Qur'an, then, has referred to the benefits of gambling and wine (and
also that their containing sin is greater than their benefits[^9]**.**
After that the Divine verse was revealed enjoining not to establish
prayer at the state of being intoxicated[^10]**.** And, finally, the
above verse was revealed which considered wine as an abomination, a
Satanic action, and ordained that it is unlawful.[^11]

The Arabic term /xamr/ (wine) is derived from the same root as the
Arabic word /xumur/ (cover) is. In Arabic, the veil of a woman is called
/ximar/; since it covers the hairs. Similarly, wine covers the wisdom.

The Arabic term /maysir/ is derived from /yusr/ with the meaning of
easiness, since, in gambling, players sometimes earn money by that play
without tolerating any trouble.

The Qur'anic term /'azlam/ means a kind of lottery done with some sticks
of arrows. It used to be performed before Islam, at the Age of
Ignorance.

### Explanations

1. In Islam, having Faith and drinking wine do not agree with each
other.

2. Drinking wine and gambling are in the same row with idolatry.

***"….Verily wine, gambling, idols, and…"***[^12]

3. The Islamic commandments and prohibitions have been ordained
reasonably and wisely.

***"... and (dividing by) arrows are an abomination of the Satan's work,
so avoid it ..."***

4. The verse enjoins to avoid not only drinking wine, but also
approaching it. The reason of this ordinance is that a sound nutrition
is effective in the prosperity of human beings. Therefore, it enjoins to
avoid intoxication, so that you may be prosperous. The verse says:

***"... So avoid it, that you may be prosperous."***

Any kind of cooperation concerning wine, including its production,
distribution and consumption, prohibited.

Imam Baqir (as) has narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) that he cursed
ten groups of people who are concerned somehow with drinking wine. They
are as follows:

*"Its planter, its guardian, its maker, its drinker, its cupbearer, its
bearer, its receiver, its seller, its purchaser, and anyone who, in a
way, devours from its income."*[^13]

Surah Al-Ma’idah, Verse 91
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ الشَّيْطَانُ أَن يُوقِعَ بَيْنَكُمُ الْعَدَاوَةَ
وَالْبَغْضَاء فِي الْخَمْرِ وَالْمَيْسِرِ وَيَصُدَّكُمْ عَن ذِكْرِ
اللّهِ وَعَنِ الصَّلاَةِ فَهَلْ أَنتُم مُّنتَهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**91.** ***"Certainly Satan desires to cast enmity and hatred among you
by wine and gambling, and to hinder you from the remembrance of***
***Allah, and from prayer. So will you stop?"***

Considering the concerning statistics, a great number of murders,
crimes, accidents, divorces, psychic sicknesses, and renal diseases and
so on, are caused by wine, liquor. Here, in stating the philosophy of
its prohibition, the Qur'an emphasizes on two points: social harms and
spiritual losses, (including enmity, and neglecting both prayers and the
remembrance of Allah*).*

### Explanations

1. Stating the philosophy of ordinances is one of the factors of the
effectiveness of speech.

2. All the factors that may create grudge and rancor should be
challenged against.

3. Any action or any person that causes enmity and hatred amongst people
is Satanic.

4. Anything, like wine or gambling, that causes the negligence of a
person from the remembrance of Allah and establishment of prayers is
obscene.

5. Wherever enmity and hatred come forth, it is appropriate to devote
material gains, whatever they may be. (There is some profit in wine and
gambling, too, but, because of their evil effects, they are prohibited).

6. The mental harms and spiritual losses are the most important damages,
both bodily and financially. Wine has also bodily harm, yet, here,
hatred and negligence have been emphasized on.

Thus, the prohibition of drinking liquor and gambling, enjoined by
Allah*,* is for the goodness and improvement of people's affairs both in
this world and the Hereafter.

Ibn-Abas, a leading commentator, says that the target of the verse is
Sa'd-ibn-'Abi-Waghghas and a man from the Helpers who had compacted the
agreement of brotherhood with each other. A man from among the Helpers
invited Sa'd to a party. They prepared a table of food and wine and
drank so much so that they became intoxicated.

At that time they boasted to each other so violently that their dispute
ended to a conflict. The Helper took a piece of bone and struck on the
nose of Sa'd so vigorously that his nose was smashed. Then Allah sent
down this verse about them.

The verse means that Satan wishes to seduce you and attract you toward
drinking wine in order to take your wisdom from you, and persuade you to
do some evil things that you do not do them in an ordinary state.

Ghattadah says that some people played gambling upon their own property
and wives. At last, those who had lost their property and their wives
sat in grief, planning to take vengeance from their rivals. Therefore,
gambling has no consequence but grudge and enmity.

By this way, Satan desires to hinder you from the remembrance of
Allah*,* so that you do not offer your thanks for His bounties.

Satan also desires to make you neglectful of prayer, which is the firm
base of the religion. So, obey Allah (S.w.T.) and be not heedless of His
prohibition. The verse says:

***"Certainly Satan desires to cast enmity and hatred among you by wine
and gambling, and to hinder you from the remembrance of*** ***Allah, and
from prayer. So will you stop?"***

Surah Al-Ma’idah, Verse 92
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَطِيعُواْ اللّهَ وَأَطِيعُواْ الرَّسُولَ وَاحْذَرُواْ فَإِن
تَوَلَّيْتُمْ فَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّمَا عَلَى رَسُولِنَا الْبَلاَغُ
الْمُبِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**92.** ***" And obey*** ***Allah*** ***and obey the Messenger, and
beware but if you turn away, then know that Our Messenger's duty is only
conveyance (of the Message) Manifest."***

The governmental and political commandments of the Messenger of Allah
(S) are similar to, and the same as, the commandments of Allah*,* and
for this reason it is obligatory to obey them.

Those who refrain to obey the command of Allah deserve to be punished.
So, there is no responsibility upon the Messenger of Allah save
conveying the message of Allah and stating it manifestly.

The verse says:

***"And obey*** ***Allah*** ***and obey the Messenger, and beware, but
if you turn away, then know that Our Messenger's duty is only conveyance
(of the Message) Manifest."***

### Surah Al-Ma’idah, Verse 93

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْسَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ وَعَمِلُواْ الصَّالِحَاتِ جُنَاحٌ
فِيمَا طَعِمُواْ إِذَا مَا اتَّقَواْ وَّآمَنُواْ وَعَمِلُواْ
الصَّالِحَاتِ ثُمَّ اتَّقَواْ وَّآمَنُواْ ثُمَّ اتَّقَواْ
وَّأَحْسَنُواْ وَاللّهُ يُحِبُّ الْمُحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**93.** ***"On those who have Faith and do good deeds, there is no sin
in regard to what they ate (before prohibition) so long as they are
virtuous and faithful and do good deeds, then still they be virtuous
(upon prohibited things) and believe (in their prohibition), then they
are virtuous (due to prohibited things) and do good; and*** ***Allah***
***loves the doers of good."***

When the verse of prohibitions of gambling and drinking wine was
revealed, there were some people who asked about their condition
regarding to the time before that revelation or the condition of those
who had not heard of that ordinance yet and were living in some far
distances.

The verse answers them implying that those who have believed and have
done good deeds but have not received this ordinance, if they have drunk
wine or have devoured from the income of gambling, there is no sin on
them. The verse says:

***"On those who have Faith and do good deeds, there is no sin in regard
to what they ate (before prohibition) ..."***

Yet, this ordinance has conditioned that such people should be virtuous,
have Faith, and do good actions. Here is the continuation of the verse:

***"... so long as they are virtuous and faithful and do good
deeds....."***

This subject is repeated once more in the verse, when it says:

***"... then still they be virtuous (upon prohibited things) and believe
(in their prohibition)....."***

And, for the third time this meaning is repeated, with a little
difference, of course. It says:

***"... then they are virtuous (due to prohibited things) and do
good...."***

So, at the end of the verse, it says:

***"... and*** ***Allah*** ***loves the doers of good."***

Each of these three senses of virtuousness refers to a stage of feeling
responsibility and piety.

However, the great commentators of both outstanding sects of Islam:
Sunnites and Shi'ites, have vastly explained upon the commentary of this
verse, especially about the phrase /fi ma ta'imu/ (in regard to what
they ate), and mentioning the subject of 'virtue' for three times in
their commentary books.

In order to observe conciseness here, we have not narrated those
detailed explanations, but you can refer to their commentary books, some
of which are as follows:

Tafsir-i-Al-Mizan, Ali-ibn-'Ibrahim, Al-Kashif, Majma'-ul-Bayan,
At-Tibyan, 'Atyab-ul-Bayan, Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, Abul-Futuh-i-Razi,
Manhaj-us-Sadiqin, As-safi, Mulla-Sadra, Shubbar, Ayyashi, Ibn-i-'Abbas,
Furat-ul-Kafi, At-Tafsir by Imam Hasan-'Askari, Jawami'-uj-Jami',
Jami'-ul-Bayan by Muhammad-ibn-Jarir-i-Tabari, Vol. 5 PP. 36 - 37,
Zad-ul-Masir-Fi-'Ilm-ut- Tafsir by Ibn-ul-JauZi, Vol. 2, P. 419,
Tafsir-i-Ibn-i-Kathir, Vol. 2, PP. 91 - 92, Tafsir-ul-kabir by
Fakhr-i-Razi; Parts 11 - 12, P. 83.

[^1]: Mustadrak-ul-Wasa'il, vol. 3, p. 52

[^2]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol., 2, p. 260

[^3]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 100, p. 9

[^4]: Safinat-ul-Bihar, ward /halala/, p. 298

[^5]: Kanz-ul-'Ummal, vol. 1, p. 6

[^6]: Kanz-ul-'Ummal, vol. 4, p. 5

[^7]: Kanz-ul-'Ummal, vol. 4, p. 4

[^8]: Surah 'An- Nahl. No.16. verse 67

[^9]: Surah Al-Baqarah. No.2. verse 219

[^10]: Surah An- Nisa'. No.4. verse 43

[^11]: Musnad Ahmad-i-Hanbal, Sunan-i-Abi-Dawood, Nisaiee and Tarmathi
have stated a vast explanation about the Occasion of Revelation of this
verse which is suggested to be referred to.

[^12]: Some Islamic traditions indicate that the drinker of wine is
counted like an idolater.

[^13]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 1, P. 670


