Section 4: Those who disbelieve the meeting of Allah are certainly losers
=========================================================================

Rejection of Truth is a sure loss. Life of this world is nothing but
play and pastime -The abode of the Hereafter is the best for the pious.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 31
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ خَسِرَ الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُواْ بِلِقَاء اللّهِ حَتَّى إِذَا
جَاءتْهُمُ السَّاعَةُ بَغْتَةً قَالُواْ يَا حَسْرَتَنَا عَلَى مَا
فَرَّطْنَا فِيهَا وَهُمْ يَحْمِلُونَ أَوْزَارَهُمْ عَلَى ظُهُورِهِمْ
أَلاَ سَاء مَا يَزِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**31*****. "They indeed are losers who deny the meeting with***
***Allah*** ***until, when the hour comes on them all of a sudden, they
will say: 'Alas for us, for what we neglected in it!' And they shall
bear their burdens on their backs; now beware, evil is that which they
bear! "***

The purpose of "meeting of Allah*"* is the spiritual meeting and inner
intuition in the Hereafter. The reason of it is that all of the
dependences of man unto wealth, position, and relatives will be ceased
from him there, and, by facing with the divine reward and retribution,
he will perceive the absolute

### Sovereignty of Allah

Regret is for losing merits and interests, while remorse is for damages
coming forth.[^1] However, in the Hereafter regret is useless. That is
why sins will be burdens on the shoulder of the sinners. They feel their
evil consequence like a heavy load on their back, especially when they
see the scene of the Divine punishment.

Therefore, evil is the burden that will be stored for the evil doers!
The verse says:

***"They indeed are losers who deny the meeting with*** ***Allah***
***until, when the hour comes on them all of a sudden, they will say:
'Alas for us, for what we neglected in it!' And they shall bear their
burdens on their back; now beware, evil is that which they bear!"***

The Holy Prophet (S) said:

*"A loser is the one who is neglectful of improving his Hereafter's
affair."*[^2]

Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) said:

*"How much loser the one is who possesses no merit in hereafter."*[^3]

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 32
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا إِلاَّ لَعِبٌ وَلَهْوٌ وَلَلدَّارُ
الآخِرَةُ خَيْرٌ لِّلَّذِينَ يَتَّقُونَ أَفَلاَ تَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**32.** ***"And the life of the world is naught but play and pastime,
and certainly the abode of the Hereafter is better for those who keep
from evil; have you then no sense?"***

If the life of this world does not be considered as a field for the
coming world, it becomes a toy, and human beings will be busy, as
children, with play things such as property, position and so on. Their
status can be resembled to the scene of a theater where a person appears
in the guise of a king, another one plays in the function of a servant,
and the third one becomes a minister therein.

After some while, all the clothing and functions will be set aside and
these persons actually find out that it has been only a play or a film
wherein they had a role of playing.

The resemblance of the world to 'play and pastime' is found in the
following aspects:

A) The lifetime in this world is short as the length of the time of a
game.

B) Similar to a game, which contains of pleasure and tiredness, the
world is also a combination of sweetness and bitterness.

C) Some neglectful aimless persons take playing games as their
businesses.

Anyhow, when the Creator of the world knows the negligence of man from
the coming world and being busy with the present world as 'play and
pastime', why do we not believe in it?

This world, without observing the next world, is dangerous; but if this
world be used as a pass way, towards the next world, and also a
preliminary field of planting the plants of goodness for the coming
world, it can be a place of development.

It should be noted, of course, that the cause of development, and
reaching the blesses in the Hereafter, is virtue.

The verse says:

***"And the life of the world is naught but play and pastime, and
certainly the abode of the Hereafter is better for those who keep from
evil; have you then no sense?"***

Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) said:

*"Allah, the Glorified, has distributed among people nothing better than
wisdom."*[^4]

Again, he (as) said:

*"The best bounty is the bounty of intellect."*[^5]

Also, the Imam (as) said:

*"Avoid (vain) pastime and play, chaffy words, too much laugh and joke,
and futile statements."*[^6]

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 33
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ نَعْلَمُ إِنَّهُ لَيَحْزُنُكَ الَّذِي يَقُولُونَ فَإِنَّهُمْ لاَ
يُكَذِّبُونَكَ وَلَكِنَّ الظَّالِمِينَ بِآيَاتِ اللّهِ يَجْحَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**33.** ***"Indeed We know that what they say surely grieves you. Yet
verily it is not you (that) they belie, but the unjust deny the Signs
of*** ***Allah."***

It is cited in the occasion of revelation of this verse that the enemies
of the Prophet (S) knew him as truthful and trustworthy person. But they
said if they confirmed him, their tribe and their rank would be
despised. Or, they said that Muhammad (S) was truthful, but he imagined
that he was revealed to. They rejected the divine verses in such manner.

Rejecting the Prophet (S) is the same as rejecting Allah (S.w.T.)*.* It
is similar to the allegiance with the Prophet (S) that is allegiance
with Allah*.*

The opponents of the Prophet (S) are adversaries of Allah*.* Thus, we
should not be sorry.

The fruit of rejecting the Divine verses and the saints of Allah *is*
being unjust both to themselves that they do not believe in the truth,
and to the Messenger of Allah *that* they grieve him (S), and to Islam,
and to generations.

The verse says:

***"Indeed We know that what they say surely grieves you. Yet verily it
is not you (that) they belie, but the unjust deny the Signs of***
***Allah."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 34
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ كُذِّبَتْ رُسُلٌ مِّن قَبْلِكَ فَصَبَرُواْ عَلَى مَا
كُذِّبُواْ وَأُوذُواْ حَتَّى أَتَاهُمْ نَصْرُنَا وَلاَ مُبَدِّلَ
لِكَلِمَاتِ اللّهِ وَلَقدْ جَاءكَ مِن نَّبَإِ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**34.** ***"Messengers indeed have been denied before you, but they were
patient on being denied and hurt, until Our help came unto them; and
there is none to change the words of*** ***Allah, and certainly there
has come to you some information about the messengers."***

The former prophets and their patience should be our models. The
destruction of old nations such as: the people of Hud, the people of
Salih, the people of Lut and some others, who belied the truth, should
be taken an example of Allah’s way of treatment is to send messengers,
and people are free to accept them or not.

Then, He punishes the disbelievers and assists the messengers in their
way of invitation.

***"Messengers indeed have been denied before you, but they were patient
on being denied and hurt, until Our help came unto them....."***

It is certain that the opponents neglect no effort against the Truth.
They belie it and hurt, but Truth is always victorious.[^7] Moreover,
Allah’s way of treatment is not changeable.

***"... and there is none to change the words of*** ***Allah, and
certainly there has come to you some information about the
messengers."***

The Qur'anic term /kalimat/, mentioned in the holy verse, means 'Allah’s
way of treatment'. The evidences for this meaning are the following holy
verses:

***"And certainly Our word has already gone forth in respect of Our
servants, the apostles."*** **(Surah As-Saffat No. 37, verse 171)**,

***"Most surely they shall be the assisted ones."*** **(Surah As-Saffat
No.37 verse 172*****).***

***"And most surely Our host alone shall be the victorious ones."***
**(Surah As-Saffat No.37. verse 173).**

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 35
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن كَانَ كَبُرَ عَلَيْكَ إِعْرَاضُهُمْ فَإِنِ اسْتَطَعْتَ أَن
تَبْتَغِيَ نَفَقًا فِي الأَرْضِ أَوْ سُلَّمًا فِي السَّمَاء
فَتَأْتِيَهُم بِآيَةٍ وَلَوْ شَاء اللّهُ لَجَمَعَهُمْ عَلَى الْهُدَى
فَلاَ تَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الْجَاهِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**35.** ***"And if their turning away is hard upon you, then if you can
seek a hole into the earth, or a ladder to heaven, so that you bring
them a sign (they will not believe); and had*** ***Allah*** ***willed,
He would have gathered them all to the guidance; so be not you of the
ignorants."***

The occasion of revelation of this verse indicates that pagans told the
Messenger of Allah (S) that they would not believe in him unless he
could make an opening in the earth so that a spring should gush for
them, or he could climb up the sky: And they say:

***"We will by no means believe in you until you cause a fountain to
gush forth from the earth for us."*** **(Surah Al-Isra, No.17, verse
90).**

Haply, the verse points to the kind of their inappropriate requests that
even if he seeks a hole in the earth or climbs up a ladder unto the sky,
confronting himself with difficulties, it will be useless in this
regard.

There is no deficiency in the Prophet's invitation, but these people are
arrogant and obstinate. So, he ought not sympathize with them so much
for guiding them.

***"And if their turning away is hard upon you, then if you can seek a
hole into the earth, or a ladder to heaven, so that you bring them a
sign (they will not believe)....."***

Yet, in order that no one imagines that Allah *is* not able to make them
surrendered, the Qur'an immediately continues saying:

***"... and had*** ***Allah*** ***willed, He would have gathered them
all to the guidance....."***

But it is clear that such a forceful faith is vain. The creation of
humankind is for the purpose of a development that is based on authority
and free-will. It is only in the situation of free-will that the value
of 'believers' comparing with 'disbelievers', and 'good doers' compared
with 'evil-doers' is recognized.

Then, the verse says:

***"... so be not you of the ignorants."***

This holy concluding phrase means that the Prophet (S) should not be
restless so that he might lose patience and perseverance. He ought not
to be worried about them more than the required measure because of their
infidelity and polytheism, but he ought to know that the right way is
the same one that he paves.

No doubt the Prophet (S) was aware of these facts, but the Lord, as a
remembrance and in order to comfort His Prophet (S), tells him these
matters.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 36
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يَسْتَجِيبُ الَّذِينَ يَسْمَعُونَ وَالْمَوْتَى يَبْعَثُهُمُ
اللّهُ ثُمَّ إِلَيْهِ يُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**36.** ***"Only those accept who hearken, and (as for) the dead,***
***Allah*** ***will raise them up; then unto Him they will be
returned."***

The Qur'an has repeatedly resembled the rejecters of Truth as the dead
and the deaf. For example, Surah An-Naml, No.27, verse 80 as well as
Surah Ar-Rum, No.30, verse 52, are cited as this:

***"Surely you do not make the dead to hear, and you do not make the
deaf to hear the call when they go back retreating."***

Human beings are free to choose their own path, whether it is right or
wrong.

Hearing the truth and accepting it, is a sign of the existence of the
spiritual life and alertness in a person. The person, who is in lack of
spiritual life and does not accept the truth, is dead, because the
animal life, which is usually rendered into eating and drinking to
survive, is something that all living creatures possess, too.

The verse addresses the Holy Prophet (S) implying that he should take
care of the truth-seekers, and dealing with disbelievers is referred to
Allah who will call them to account on the Day of Resurrection. It says:

***"Only those accept who hearken, and (as for) the dead, Allah will
raise them up; then unto Him they will be returned."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 37
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُواْ لَوْلاَ نُزِّلَ عَلَيْهِ آيَةٌ مِّن رَّبِّهِ قُلْ إِنَّ
اللّهَ قَادِرٌ عَلَى أَن يُنَزِّلٍ آيَةً وَلَـكِنَّ أَكْثَرَهُمْ لاَ
يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***37. "And they say: While has not a Sign been sent down to him
(Muhammad) from his Lord?' Say: 'Verily*** ***Allah*** ***is able to
send down a Sign, but most of them do not know'."***

Upon the occasion of revelation of the verse, it has been cited that
some of the chiefs of the Quraysh, seeking for excuses, told the Prophet
(S) that merely the Qur'an was not enough to work as his miracle.

They wanted him to bring some miracles similar to what Jesus, Moses,
Salih and Prophets like them had brought.[^8]

The Prophet (S) who reminds people of the miracles of the former
prophets, of course, can surely bring the like of those miracles
himself; otherwise he might not remind people of them so that they ask
him for something similar to them.

Moreover, as the Islamic literature, that he recorded by Shi'ites and
Sunnites scholars denote, the Messenger of *Allah* had some other
miracles besides the Qur'an, too.

The main purpose of bringing miracles is showing the sign of Allah’s
infinite Power and the particular relation between Allah and His
Messenger, not necessarily responding to the endless wishes of the
obstinate people. Of course, sometimes miracles come forth to answer to
people's request, too. The verse says:

***"And they say: 'Why has not a Sign been sent down to him (Muhammad)
from his Lord?' Say: Verily*** ***Allah*** ***is able to send down a
Sign,'..."***

However, a great deal of pretexts should not be listened to. The Qur'an
says:

***"And even if We had sent down to them the angels and the dead had
spoken to them and We had brought together all things before them, they
would not have believed…"*** **(Surah Al-'An'am No.6, verse 111).**

By the way, it should be noted that if these sorts of demands, which are
produced obstinately, be replied fully and then they do not believe, all
of them will be faced with the Divine punishment and will be destroyed.
The reason is that this manner is the utmost dishonour unto the Holy
Presence of Allah*,* His Messenger, His revelations, and His miracles.
So, at the end of the verse, it says:

***"…but most of them do not know'."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 38
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا مِن دَآبَّةٍ فِي الأَرْضِ وَلاَ طَائِرٍ يَطِيرُ بِجَنَاحَيْهِ
إِلاَّ أُمَمٌ أَمْثَالُكُم مَّا فَرَّطْنَا فِي الكِتَابِ مِن شَيْءٍ
ثُمَّ إِلَى رَبِّهِمْ يُحْشَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**38.** ***"And there is no creature (that walks) on the earth nor a
bird that flies with its two wings, but they are communities the like of
you, We have not neglected anything in the Book, then unto their Lord
shall they (all) be mustered."***

This verse speaks about Resurrection and the general assemblage of all
living creatures, i.e. all kinds of animals, in Hereafter. At first, the
verse says:

***"And there is no creature (that walks) on the earth nor a bird that
flies with its two wings, but they are communities the like of you.…"***

Thus, similar to human beings, each kind of animals and birds are a
community by themselves. That is, they also have knowledge, awareness,
and perception in their own conditions, and they know the Lord Whom they
glorify and sanctify as much as they are able to, although the standard
of their perception is lower than that of human beings.

Then, in the next phrase of the verse, the Lord says:

***"….We have not neglected anything in the Book...."***

And at the end of the verse, the statement is:

***".... then unto their Lord shall they (all) be mustered."***

Hence, the verse warns the polytheists that the Lord, Who has created
all groups of animals and supplies their necessities and who watches
whatever they do, has appointed a resurrection for them entirely. How is
it possible that He does not appoint a resurrection and a gathering for
you? And, as some pagans say, there would not exist anything beyond this
life and death?

### Is there a Resurrection for Animals?

No doubt that the first condition of reckoning and rewards is the
existence of intellect and awareness and, thereafter, duty and
responsibility come forth.

The adherents of this idea believe that the life of many animals
continues with an interesting and surprising regularity that denotes to
their high level of perception and awareness. There are a few persons
who have heard no words about ants, bees, their formicaries, their
beehives and their wonderful order and their surprising system.

It is certain that we cannot simply count it as a phenomenon resulted
from instinct. Natural disposition is usually the source of monotonous
and constant activities. But the deeds that are not predictable in some
specific conditions, done as reactions, are more similar to perception
and awareness than instinct.

For example, when a lamb, which has never seen a wolf in its life, sees
that savage animal for the first time, it recognizes well that this
enemy is dangerous. So, the lamb tries to defend and to save itself from
the danger by any means that it can find.

Apart from all of these, there are recited some meanings in a lot of
verses of the Qur'an which can be counted as a considerable reason for
the existence of perception and awareness in some animals.

For instance, the story of ants and their escape from the army of
Solomon; the story of the hoopoe when it came into the zone of Sheba and
brought some exciting news for Solomon, are a few evidences to this
claim.

In Islamic literature, there are also many traditions upon the
resurrection of animals, including as follows:

It is narrated from Abu thar who says: "We were at the presence of the
Prophet (S) where, in front of us, two goats bunted each other.

The Prophet (S) said

*'Do you know why they bunted each other?'*

The audience answered:

*'No, we do not know'*.

The Prophet (S) said:

*'But Allah knows why, and He will judge between them soon '."*

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 39
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ كَذَّبُواْ بِآيَاتِنَا صُمٌّ وَبُكْمٌ فِي الظُّلُمَاتِ مَن
يَشَإِ اللّهُ يُضْلِلْهُ وَمَن يَشَأْ يَجْعَلْهُ عَلَى صِرَاطٍ
مُّسْتَقِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**39.** ***"And those who belied Our Signs are deaf and dumb, in
darkness; whomever*** ***Allah*** ***pleases He leads astray, and
whomever He pleases, He sets him on a straight path."***

It is true that both guidance and misguidance are in knowledge and power
of Allah*,* but the will of man and the abilities existed in him are
effective, too. Besides, the Will of Allah is also based on Wisdom. Holy
struggle on the way of Allah *is* a cause for the Divine guidance, while
being unjust toward people is a cause for misguidance.

Therefore, infidelity and hostility are some darkness that causes
separation from salvation.

Concealing the Truth is counted dumbness and not hearkening it is
deafness, and the fruit of people's rejection is misguidance and Allah’s
wrath. The verse says:

***"And those who belied Our Signs are deaf and dumb, in darkness;
whomever*** ***Allah*** ***pleases He leads astray, and whomever He
pleases, He sets him on a straight path."***

However, paving the straight path needs a hearing ear, an impartial
tongue and a transparent inward.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 40
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُكُم إِنْ أَتَاكُمْ عَذَابُ اللّهِ أَوْ أَتَتْكُمُ
السَّاعَةُ أَغَيْرَ اللّهِ تَدْعُونَ إِن كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**40.** ***"Say: "Have you considered if*** ***Allah’s*** ***torment
comes to you (in the world) or the Hour (of Resurrection) comes to you,
will you supplicate anyone other than*** ***Allah, if you are
truthful?"***

Once more, the Qur'an addresses the polytheists and, in front of them,
reasons Divine Unity and monotheism in another way. It reminds them the
extraordinary difficult and grievous moments of life, and seeks
assistance from their conscience. It asks them whether they consider any
shelter save Allah *when* they forget everything during these moments.

Concerning such people, the verse commands the Prophet (S) to tell them
to answer truly that if the punishment of Allah befalls them, or the
Hereafter be set up with all its horrors, excitements and terrible
events, do they have anyone except Allah to remove their calamities?

***"Say: "Have you considered if*** ***Allah’s*** ***torment comes to
you (in the world) or the Hour (of Resurrection) comes to you, will you
supplicate anyone other than*** ***Allah, if you are truthful?"***

The essence of the meaning of this verse is perceivable not only for
pagans but also for every one when calamities and painful events come
forth unto them.

In ordinary cases, and in minor events, men may eek protection from
others than Allah*.* But, when the event is extraordinarily violent, men
neglect everything. At the very circumstance they feel a kind of hope
for rescue in the depth of their heart, which originates from a
mysterious unknown source of power. This is the very attention to Allah
*and* the reality of Unity.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 41
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ إِيَّاهُ تَدْعُونَ فَيَكْشِفُ مَا تَدْعُونَ إِلَيْهِ إِنْ شَاء
وَتَنسَوْنَ مَا تُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**41.** ***"Rather upon Him you will call, and He removes that for which
you supplicated Him, if He pleases, and you forget what you have
associated (with Him)."***

Natural Disposition, an Even Path toward Theology
-------------------------------------------------

A sincere supplication is the gateway toward security from dangers in
this life. (Pagan's invocation has no answer in Hereafter.)

Thus, why do you refer to *Allah* only at the times of danger when you
neglect your imaginary gods, and in ordinary circumstances you do not
refer to Allah?[^9] The verse says:

***"Rather upon Him you will call, and He removes that for which you
supplicated Him, if He pleases, and you forget what you have associated
(with Him)."***

[^1]: A tradition narrated from the Prophet (S) indicates that those who
are in the Hell Fire will see their places in Heaven and say: "Alas for
us." (Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 1, P. 711)

[^2]: Madinat-ul-Balagha , vol. 2, p. 492

[^3]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, vol. 1, p. 746

[^4]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, vol. 6, p. 90

[^5]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, vol. 1, p. 176

[^6]: Nasikh-ut-Tawarikh, vol. 6, p. 4

[^7]: We recite in some other verses of the Qur'an: "…I will most
certainly prevail, I and My apostles ;...(Surah Al-Mujadilah, No, 58,
verse 21), "…and helping the believers is ever incumbent on Us," (Surah
Ar-Rum, No, 30, verse 47), "Most surely We help Our apostles,"… (Surah
Al-Mu'min, No, 40, verse 51), "…and surely Allah will help him who helps
His cause…" (Surah Al-Hajj, No.22, verse 40).

[^8]: Majma'ul-Bayan, Vol. 3, P. 296 (Arabic version)

[^9]: In the Second World War even Khrushof and Stalin, the leaders of
Russia, invoked churches and priests asked for victory.


