Section 5
=========

How the former disbelievers were seized with distress and affliction –
Warning against the approach of the punishment

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 42
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلنَا إِلَى أُمَمٍ مِّن قَبْلِكَ فَأَخَذْنَاهُمْ
بِالْبَأْسَاء وَالضَّرَّاء لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَضَرَّعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**42.** ***"Indeed We sent (messengers) to nations before you, then We
seized them with distress and affliction in order that they might humble
themselves."***

The Qur'anic word /ba'sa'/ has been applied in the senses of
difficulties, fight, poverty, famine, flood, earthquake, and infectious
diseases; and the Arabic term /qarra' / has been used in the Arabic
language with the meanings of: 'sorrow, grief, disgrace, ignorance, and
failure'.

The appointment of Divine prophets, of course, and completing the
argument has been a process and a Divine way of treatment in the length
of history. So, the history of the past is an example for the coming
generations.

Meantime, difficulties are some means for regarding Allah and managing
transgressors.

Therefore, neither any welfare is a grace nor any difficulty is a wrath.
At the time of calamities, the hands are raised up for supplication and
asking help.

The verse says:

***"Indeed We sent (messengers) to nations before you, then We seized
them with distress and affliction in order that they might humble
themselves."***

It is cited in Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 1, p. 717 that Imam
Ali-ibn-Abi-Talib (as) said:

*"If people invocate truthfully to* *Allah* *when calamities fall down
upon them, they will be removed from all their difficulties....."*

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 43
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَوْلا إِذْ جَاءهُمْ بَأْسُنَا تَضَرَّعُواْ وَلَـكِن قَسَتْ
قُلُوبُهُمْ وَزَيَّنَ لَهُمُ الشَّيْطَانُ مَا كَانُواْ يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**43. "*****Why then did they not entreat when Our distress came to
them*****?** ***But their hearts were hard, and Satan made all that they
used to do seem fair unto them.*****"**

To be heedless unto divine warnings and not to be regardful is a sign of
hard-heartedness.

It is for this reason that the verse implies why they did not take
counsel from these painful and awakening factors, and they did not
awaken from the sleep of negligence, and did not return toward Allah*.*
The Qur'an says:

***"Why then did they not entreat when Our distress came to them?..."***

In fact, the reason of their unawareness was two things. The first was
that, as a result of extra amount of sin and persisting in disbelief,
their hearts became dark and hardened, and their souls changed to be
inflexible.

***"... But their hearts were hard....."***

The second factor was that (applying their mood of sensuality) Satan
made their deeds seem decorous to them. So, they considered right
whatever wrong they did, and counted aright and correct every offence
they committed. The verse says:

***"... and Satan made all that they used to do seem fair unto them."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 44
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا نَسُواْ مَا ذُكِّرُواْ بِهِ فَتَحْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ أَبْوَابَ
كُلِّ شَيْءٍ حَتَّى إِذَا فَرِحُواْ بِمَا أُوتُواْ أَخَذْنَاهُم
بَغْتَةً فَإِذَا هُم مُّبْلِسُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**44.** ***"Then, when they forgot that which they had been admonished
to, We opened for them the doors of all things (of enjoyments), until
when they rejoiced in what they were given, We seized them suddenly
when, behold, they were in utter despair."***

The Arabic term /'ilas/ means a grief accompanied with despair. It is a
status that criminals may have in the court when they cannot find an
answer to offer.

It is not such that always the welfare of life to be a sign of mercy. On
the contrary, it is sometime the cause of chastisement.

Giving respite to evildoers and preparing welfare and comfortable life
for offenders is one of Allah’s way of treatment. The world and its
bounties can be both a favor and indignation. It depends to whom they
are given. In Surah' A 'raf, No.7, verse 94 faith and piety have been
counted as the cause of blessings of Allah*.* It says:

***"And if the people of the towns had believed and guarded (against
evil) We would certainly have opened up for them blessings from heavens
and the earth ..."***

In the verse under discussion, the world has been counted as a divine
blessing.[^1] The verse says:

***"Then, when they forgot that which they had been admonished to, We
opened for them the doors of all things (of enjoyments), until when they
rejoiced in what they were given, We seized them suddenly when, behold,
they were in utter despair."***

This fact should also be noted that the wrath of Allah *and* death both
happen suddenly. So, we should be always prepared. Verily, it happens
that the happy shout of men of pleasure usually changes into a
despondent groan all of a sudden.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 45
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقُطِعَ دَابِرُ الْقَوْمِ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُواْ وَالْحَمْدُ لِلّهِ
رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**45.** ***"So the people who were unjust were rooted out, and praise
belongs to*** Allah***, the Lord of the worlds."***

The annihilation of unjust people is conclusive and certain. Cruelty
cannot resist long. Transgression is also effective in generation. The
verse says:

***"So the people who were unjust were rooted out....."***

Therefore, as it is mentioned in the current holy verse, when the
transgressors are destroyed, Allah should be thanked and praised. So,
the verse continues saying:

***"... and praise belongs to*** ***Allah,*** ***the Lord of the
worlds."***

This phrase, mentioned in this verse, hints to this fact that cutting
off the roots of mischief and transgression, which ends to the
destruction of a people who can continue committing it, is so important
that requires to thank Allah and to be gratitude of Him.

A tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) says:

*"He who loves the imperishability of the unjust, its meaning is that*
*Allah* *to be disobeyed (by means of sins), and (the phenomenon of
transgression is so important that)* *Allah* *(the Blessed and Exalted)
has praised His Essence for the destruction of the unjust and He has
said:*

***"So the people who were unjust were rooted out, and praise belongs
to*** ***Allah, the Lord of the worlds'."*** [^2]

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 46
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُمْ إِنْ أَخَذَ اللّهُ سَمْعَكُمْ وَأَبْصَارَكُمْ
وَخَتَمَ عَلَى قُلُوبِكُم مَّنْ إِلَـهٌ غَيْرُ اللّهِ يَأْتِيكُم بِهِ
انظُرْ كَيْفَ نُصَرِّفُ الآيَاتِ ثُمَّ هُمْ يَصْدِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**46.** ***"Say: 'Have you considered if*** ***Allah*** ***takes away
your hearing and your eyesight and seals on your hearts, which god other
than*** ***Allah*** ***can give it back to you?' See you, how We repeat
the Signs, yet they turn away."***

### Do know the Bestower of Bounties

In this verse, the Qur'an addresses the pagans and, at first, it implies
if Allah takes away His worthy blessings, such as your ears and your
eyes, from you and sets a seal on your hearts so that you cannot realize
between right and wrong and good and evil, which god, save Allah*,* is
able to return these blessings to you? The verse says:

***"Say: ' Have you considered if*** ***Allah*** ***takes away your
hearing and your eyesight and seals on your hearts, which god other
than*** ***Allah*** ***can give it back to you?'..."***

In fact, pagans believed this fact that the creator and the giver of
sustenance is Allah*,* but they worshipped idols as the intercessors
with Allah*.*

Then, the Qur'an continues the statement and commands them to see how
Allah stated the verses and reasons in different forms for them, but
they still turn away from the Truth. It says:

***"... See you, how We repeat the Signs, yet they turn away."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 47
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَرَأَيْتَكُمْ إِنْ أَتَاكُمْ عَذَابُ اللّهِ بَغْتَةً أَوْ
جَهْرَةً هَلْ يُهْلَكُ إِلاَّ الْقَوْمُ الظَّالِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**47.** ***"Say: 'Have you considered if the punishment of***
***Allah*** ***comes to you suddenly or openly, will anyone be destroyed
but the unjust people '."***

Next to mentioning these three great blessings of Allah*,* (i.e. eyes,
ears, and comprehension), which can be the origin of all blessings in
this world and the next, this verse hints to the possible removal of all
these blessings in general. It says:

***"Say: 'Have you considered if the punishment of*** ***Allah***
***comes to you suddenly or openly, will anyone be destroyed but the
unjust people'."***

The purpose of this statement is that the only one who is able to punish
through different chastisements and to take up the existing blessings,
is Allah*.* Thus, idols have no function in this process.

Therefore, there is no reason that you refuge to them.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verses 48 - 49
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا نُرْسِلُ الْمُرْسَلِينَ إِلاَّ مُبَشِّرِينَ وَمُنذِرِينَ فَمَنْ
آمَنَ وَأَصْلَحَ فَلاَ خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلاَ هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ كَذَّبُواْ بِآيَاتِنَا يَمَسُّهُمُ الْعَذَابُ بِمَا
كَانُواْ يَفْسُقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**48.** ***"And We do not send the messengers but (as) announcers of
good news and warners, then whoever believes and amends (himself) -no
fear shall be upon them, nor shall they grieve."***  
**49.** ***"And as for those who belie Our Signs, chastisement shall
afflict them for what they were transgressing."***

In this verse, the Qur'an points to the situation of messengers of Allah
and indicates that not only the lifeless idols are not able to do
anything, but the great prophets and divine leaders also have not
anything, to do except communicating messenger ship, glad tidings,
warning, encouragement, and threat.

So, all blessings that exist are from the source of Allah (S.w.T.) and
they wholly have come into being merely under His command.

Therefore, whatever even the prophets desire, they may ask Him. The
verse says:

***"And We do not send the messengers but (as) announcers of good news
and warners...."***

Then, The Qur'an adds that the way to felicity is found in two things.
Firstly people should believe, and secondly they amend themselves (by
doing good deeds). For such people, there will be no fear because of
Divine punishments, nor shall they grieve for their former actions. The
verse says:

***"... then whoever believes and amends (himself) - no fear shall be
upon them, nor shall they grieve."***

Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) said:

*"Whoever is in awe of* *Allah, He, the Purified, will secure him from
every thing."* [^3]

Imam Zayn-ul-'Abidin (as) said:

*"The origin and the commencement of every knowledge is the awe of*
*Allah* *".* [^4]

Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) said:

*"Whoever is in awe of his Lord stops transgressing."* [^5]

The contrary status is for those who reject the Divine revelations. They
will be confronted with the punishment of Allah for the very mischief
and disobedience. The verse says:

***"And as for those who belie Our Signs, chastisement shall afflict
them for what they were transgressing."***

Imam Sajjad, the fourth Imam, (as) said:

*"Avoid being a companion of sinners, helping transgressors, and
neighboring with evil-doers; and beware of their sedition, and go away
from their surroundings."* [^6]

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 50
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لاَّ أَقُولُ لَكُمْ عِندِي خَزَآئِنُ اللّهِ وَلا أَعْلَمُ
الْغَيْبَ وَلا أَقُولُ لَكُمْ إِنِّي مَلَكٌ إِنْ أَتَّبِعُ إِلاَّ مَا
يُوحَى إِلَيَّ قُلْ هَلْ يَسْتَوِي الأَعْمَى وَالْبَصِيرُ أَفَلاَ
تَتَفَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**50.** ***"Say: (O' Our prophet!) , I do not say to you that the
treasures of*** Allah***, are with me, nor do I know the Unseen, nor do
I say to you that I am an angel. I do not follow but what is revealed to
me.' Say: 'Are the blind and the seeing one equal? Do you not then
ponder?'"***

### Knowing the Unseen!

This verse is a complementary statement to answering the different
protests of pagans and polytheists. Here, three divisions of their
protests are responded in some short sentences.

The first one is that they suggested the Prophet (S) to bring some
surprising and wonderful miracles. Secondly each of them suggested a
separate thing as the one wished. Thirdly they were not contented with
observing the miracles that some others asked for.

Their desires were sometimes some houses made of gold, sometimes the
descent of angels, and another time they wished the dry hot land of
Mecca to be changed into; a vast garden full of water and fruits.

By demanding these amazing things from the Prophet (S), as if, they
expected the rank of a kind of divinity and ownership of the earth and
the heaven for him. That is why, in answer to these people, Allah
commands the Prophet (S):

***"Say: (O' Our Prophet!), I do not say to you that the treasures of***
***Allah, are with me....."***

The Arabic term /xaza'in/ is the plural form of /xazinah/ with the
meaning of 'source and treasure of everything '. Thus, the Qur'anic
phrase /xaza'inullah/ (the treasures of Allah*)* encompasses the
treasures of the whole things. This originates from His Infinite
Essence, Who is the source of all virtues and powers.

Some of those people expected that the Prophet (S) would inform them of
the entire secrets concerning the future and the past. They expected him
to tell them what happenings would occur in their lives, so that they
could try to repel their harms and attract their profits.

Then, in answer to such people, through the continuation of the verse,
the Prophet (S) was told to say:

***"... nor do I know the Unseen....."***

Some of them expected that the Prophet (S) himself to be an angel, or an
angel could accompany him. They desired that there would be no quality
of human beings in him, such as eating food, walking in the roads and
markets, and so on. To answer the rejection of these people, in the
third sentence of the verse, the Qur'an says:

***"….nor do I say to you that I am an angel....."***

Then, in the continuation of this statement, he adds that he follows
only the commandments and instructions that are communicated to him
through revelation from the Lord.

***"... I do not follow but what is revealed to me.'..."***

At the end of the verse, the Prophet (S) is ordered to ask them whether
the blind and those who can see are equal. Are those whose eyes, minds
and intellects are shut equal with those whose eyes see the facts well
and recognize them?

***"... Say: ' Are the blind and the seeing one equal? Do you not then
ponder? ' "***

[^1]: Faith and piety bring the blessing of the heavens and the earth
for the bearers of them, while negligence shut the gates of all good
things to the ignorant persons.

[^2]: Majma'-ul-Bayan. Vol. 3 P. 302

[^3]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, vol. 5, p. 421

[^4]: Bi har-ul-'Anwar, vol. 74, p. 180

[^5]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, vol. 5, p. 275

[^6]: Bihar-ul- Anwar. vol. 75, p. 151


