Section 7: The Judgment
=======================

Kingdom is only Allah’s – Allah’s knowledge comprehends every thing.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 56
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنِّي نُهِيتُ أَنْ أَعْبُدَ الَّذِينَ تَدْعُونَ مِن دُونِ اللّهِ
قُل لاَّ أَتَّبِعُ أَهْوَاءكُمْ قَدْ ضَلَلْتُ إِذًا وَمَا أَنَاْ مِنَ
الْمُهْتَدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**56.** ***"Say: ' I am forbidden to worship those whom you call
besides*** Allah ***Say: 'I do not follow your low desires, for then
indeed I should have gone astray and I will not be of the (rightly)
guided."***

The undue desires, from anybody they are issued, should be explicitly
responded with a negative answer.

The sources of the Prophet’s (S) determinations are Divine revelation.

Acquaintance from infidelity is a part of Islam. Polytheistic belief is
the root of sensual desires.

Thus, a preacher of the Faith ought not follow to quench the people's
desires, but he should act for the sake and pleasure of Allah*.* The
verse says:

***"Say: ' I am forbidden to worship those whom you call besides Allah
Say: 'I do not follow your low desires, for then indeed I should have
gone astray and I will not be of the (rightly) guided."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 57
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنِّي عَلَى بَيِّنَةٍ مِّن رَّبِّي وَكَذَّبْتُم بِهِ مَا عِندِي
مَا تَسْتَعْجِلُونَ بِهِ إِنِ الْحُكْمُ إِلاَّ لِلّهِ يَقُصُّ الْحَقَّ
وَهُوَ خَيْرُ الْفَاصِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**57.** ***"Say: "Verily I am (relying) to clear proof from my Lord,
while you belied it; I have not with me that (chastisement) which you
hasten, for the Judgment is only*** ***Allah’s*** ***; Who declares the
truth and He is the best of deciders '."***

The Arabic term /bayyinah/ (clear proof), mentioned in the verse, is
derived from /baynunah/ (separation). It is so called for the reason
that it clearly and completely separates between right and wrong.

Pagans said that if it was true, why the divine chastisement was not
sent down upon them. This expression is a similar meaning to the content
of another verse where they said if He was right, He should send down
stones upon them. Here is the verse:

***"... if this is the truth from You, then rain upon us stones from
heaven or inflict on us a painful punishment."*** **(Surah Al -Anfal.**
**No. 8 Verse 32)**

The proofs and miracles of prophets had neither heaviness nor ambiguity.
Everybody could understand them, and, if those people were not stubborn
they would heartily accept them. That was why the divine prophets used
to introduce themselves as messengers of Allah with some proofs.

Seeking for chastisement and hastening for the punishment of Allah were
found in other communities, too. The peoples of Salih, Hud, and Noah
also said that if the prophet of their time was true, he would bring the
promised punishment upon them. They said

***"Then bring to us what you threaten us with, if you are of the
truthful ones"*** **(Surah Al -Araf. No.7. verse 7o , 77).** **(Surah
Hud No.11 verse 32).**

The invitation of prophets is done on proofs. It is not based on
imagination and blindly imitation.

***"... on clear proof ..."***

Prophets should have proofs from the origin of Allah*.* They might not
work according to what people demand every day.

***"Say: "Verily I am (relying) on clear proof from my Lord, while you
belied it; I have not with me that (chastisement) which you hasten for,
the judgment is only*** ***Allah*** ***'s; Who declares the truth and He
is the best of deciders '."***

For what reason or which evidence it can be that pagans belie the proof
of the Prophet (S) while they expect him to follow their low desires.
Can this cause be anything save rudeness, stubbornness, and enmity?

A prophet is a divine messenger supported with logic and proofs, while
the order of the world of existence is with Allah*.*

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 58
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لَّوْ أَنَّ عِندِي مَا تَسْتَعْجِلُونَ بِهِ لَقُضِيَ الأَمْرُ
بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكُمْ وَاللّهُ أَعْلَمُ بِالظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**58.** ***"Say: 'If that which you hasten for were with me, certainly
the matter would be decided between you and me, and*** ***Allah***
***knows best the unjust."***

Retributions are with Allah*,* but he respites the unjust as His
Knowledge and Wisdom requires.

***"Say: ' If that which you hasten for were with me, certainly the
matter would be decided between you and me...."***

People's haste does not change Allah’s Wisdom. Yet, the respite in
receiving Allah’s punishment should not cause that pagans think that
their infidelity has been neglected.

***"... and*** ***Allah*** ***knows best the unjust '."***

Allah better knows the status of the transgressors and that in what
thing there lies their interest; and that whether their punishment
should be sent down now or later.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 59
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعِندَهُ مَفَاتِحُ الْغَيْبِ لاَ يَعْلَمُهَا إِلاَّ هُوَ وَيَعْلَمُ
مَا فِي الْبَرِّ وَالْبَحْرِ وَمَا تَسْقُطُ مِن وَرَقَةٍ إِلاَّ
يَعْلَمُهَا وَلاَ حَبَّةٍ فِي ظُلُمَاتِ الأَرْضِ وَلاَ رَطْبٍ وَلاَ
يَابِسٍ إِلاَّ فِي كِتَابٍ مُّبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**59.** ***"And with Him are the keys of the Unseen. None but He knows
them. And He knows whatever is in the land and the sea; and no leaf (of
a tree) drops down but He knows it, nor is there a grain in the darkness
of the earth nor anything wet or dry but it is (noted) in a clear
Book."***

### Secrets of the Unseen!

In the former verses, the words were about Allah’s Knowledge, Power, and
the expansion of the circle of His commandment. From this verse on, the
meaning stated in those verses concisely has been mentioned with some
explanation. At first, the subject of Allah’s knowledge is pointed out.

The verse say's

***"And with Him are the keys of the Unseen. None but He knows them.
..."***

Then, for a more emphasis and explanation, it adds:

***"... And He knows whatever is in the land and the sea....."***

The Arabic term /barr/ means 'a vast place', which is usually used for a
(dry) land. The term /bahr/ originally also means 'a vast place' where a
plenty of water is found. It is often applied for the seas and,
sometimes, for the great streams.

However, Allah’s knowledge upon whatever exists in the lands and the
seas is something which hints to Allah’s omniscience, and that His
knowledge encompasses all things.

That is, He knows the movements of millions of million living creatures,
small and big, in the depths of the seas. He knows the true number of
the cells of every human being as well as his blood cells.

He knows the mystic circulations of all electrons inside atoms. And,
finally, He knows all thoughts and contemplations pass through different
parts and levels of our minds and those which penetrate into the depths
of our soul.

Yes, He knows equally all of these things! Again, in the second phrase,
in order to emphasize on Allah’s Omniscience, it has particularly
pointed to this aspect, and says:

***"... and no leaf (of a tree) drops down but He knows it, nor a grain
in the darkness of the earth ..."***

In fact, it has taken two sensitive subjects with which no human being
can be thoroughly acquainted even if he lives millions of years and that
the technical sets be surprisingly completed.

Who knows that, in each day, which seeds the winds separate from the
plants throughout the earth, and on which spots of the ground they
scatter them? Which electronic mind can count exactly the number of the
leaves that separate from the branches of trees of the forests only
during a day?

A glance upon the trees of a forest, especially in fall, when the leaves
drop ceaselessly and make up beautiful scenery, proves this fact well
that such sciences will never be within the reach of human beings.

The fall of the leaves of trees, in fact, is the moment of their death,
and the fall of seeds into the concealed holes of the land is the first
step of their lives. It is only He Who is aware of the system of death
and life.

The statement of this subject has two effects: a philosophical effect
and a training effect. Its philosophical effect is that it nullifies the
imagination of those who restrict Allah’s knowledge to general
principles and believe that He is not aware of the details of this
world. It clearly specifies that Allah *is* aware of both all general
principles and the details.

Its training effect is also clear, because having belief in the vast
knowledge of Allah*,* that He is Omniscience, tells us that the whole
secrets of our entity, our deeds and speeches, our intentions and our
thoughts are utterly clear for His Pure Essence.

With such a belief, how is it possible that a person be careless of his
own condition and does not control his own deeds, speeches, and
intentions?

So, at the end of the verse, it says:

***"... nor anything wet or dry but it is (noted) in a clear Book."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 60
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِي يَتَوَفَّاكُم بِاللَّيْلِ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا جَرَحْتُم
بِالنَّهَارِ ثُمَّ يَبْعَثُكُمْ فِيهِ لِيُقْضَى أَجَلٌ مُّسَمًّى ثُمَّ
إِلَيْهِ مَرْجِعُكُمْ ثُمَّ يُنَبِّئُكُم بِمَا كُنتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**60.** ***"And He it is Who takes your souls at night (in sleep), and
He knows what you commit in the day, then He raises you up therein that
an appointed term may be accomplished, then unto Him is your return,
then He will inform you of what you were doing."***

By night, Allah takes activity out of your soul the same as He takes it
by death.

He is also aware of what you do during the day.

During the night you sleep, and during the day you perform some
activities. Then, Allah will raise you up from your graves so that He
reckons you for what you spend your lives upon.

It is so until the appointed time comes forth, when Allah has assigned
for raising the dead from their graves and giving them the fruit of
their deeds. This is the Hereafter.

Thus, your return is unto Him. That is, you will attend where you will
be reckoned.

On that Day, the Lord will inform you of the deeds you used to
accomplish in the world, day and night.

Some commentators have rendered this part of the verse into the sense
that He awakens you from sleep during the day in order that you gain
sufficient interest from your life. In this verse, Allah has resembled
awakening people from sleep to raising them up. The verse says:

***"And He it is Who takes your souls at night (in sleep), and He knows
what you commit in the day, then He raises you up therein that an
appointed term may be accomplished, then unto Him is your return, then
He will inform you of what you were doing."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 61
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الْقَاهِرُ فَوْقَ عِبَادِهِ وَيُرْسِلُ عَلَيْكُم حَفَظَةً
حَتَّىَ إِذَا جَاء أَحَدَكُمُ الْمَوْتُ تَوَفَّتْهُ رُسُلُنَا وَهُمْ
لاَ يُفَرِّطُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**61.** ***"And He is the Omnipotent over His servants, and He sends
guardians (to watch) over you until when death comes to one of you, Our
messengers take his soul and they never neglect."***

Again, in this verse, in order to emphasize on Allah’s scientific
conversance with the deeds of the servants and that He keeps their
account minutely to be dealt with on the Resurrection Day, it says:

***"And He is the Omnipotent over His servants, and He sends guardians
(to watch) over you ..."***

Then the Qur'an goes on stating that keeping this account continues
until the ending moments of life, when death approaches you. At this
time, the messengers of Allah (the angels), who are missioner to take
the souls, take the mortal away.

***"... until when death comes to one of you, Our messengers take his
soul... "***

And, at the end of the verse, it adds that these angels never neglect
their duty and no shortcoming nor any defect they perform. They take the
soul of a person neither a moment sooner nor a moment later. The holy
verse says:

***"... and they never neglect."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 62
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ رُدُّواْ إِلَى اللّهِ مَوْلاَهُمُ الْحَقِّ أَلاَ لَهُ الْحُكْمُ
وَهُوَ أَسْرَعُ الْحَاسِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**62.** ***"Then they are returned unto*** ***Allah, their Maula
(Master), the Real One. Beware! His (alone) is the Judgment (on that
Day), and He is the swiftest of reckoners."***

After that (death), people are taken toward the divine Judgment and
Allah’s reward. The Lord is their owner, their master and the guardian
of their affairs. He (S.w.T.) is the Judge, Who does not judge but in
truth.

On That Day, the command is only His command, not that of other than
His.

Allah will reckon all humankind in a short time and neither of the
accounts hinders Him to reckon those of others.

Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) once was asked when Allah is not seen,
then how He reckons people. He (as) answered them:

*"In the same way that He gives them sustenance and they do not see
Him."*[^1]

This very subject is evidence to the fact that reckoning one person does
not detain Him from reckoning others. ,

Again, it is an evidence to prove that He communicates without, talking
a word, otherwise it is impossible that all people be reckoned at the
same time.

However, the return of all is unto Him, and He is the only Judge in the
Hereafter.

And the real master is the One in Whose authority is creation,
guardianship, sleep and wakefulness, death and raising up, judgment and
reckoning, and He is the Lord.

The verse says

***"Then they are returned unto*** ***Allah, their Maula (Master), the
Real One. Beware! His (alone) is the Judgment (on that Day), and He is
the swiftest of reckoners. "***

By the way, the fright from Hereafter is the fear from our own offences
and Allah is both the guardian, the rightful, and the bestower of mercy
and virtue.

Concerning reckoning 'and judgment on that Day, there is a tradition
from the Prophet (S) who has said:

*"The more a person tortures people in this world, the heavier than
everybody's chastisement his punishment will be on the Day Judgment."*
[^2]

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 63 - 64
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ مَن يُنَجِّيكُم مِّن ظُلُمَاتِ الْبَرِّ وَالْبَحْرِ تَدْعُونَهُ
تَضَرُّعاً وَخُفْيَةً لَّئِنْ أَنجَانَا مِنْ هَـذِهِ لَنَكُونَنَّ مِنَ
الشَّاكِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلِ اللّهُ يُنَجِّيكُم مِّنْهَا وَمِن كُلِّ كَرْبٍ ثُمَّ أَنتُمْ
تُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**63.** ***"Say: 'Who delivers you from the darkness of the land and the
sea? You call upon Him humbly and secretly, (saying): If He delivers us
from this (darkness), certainly we shall be of the grateful ones'."***

**64.** ***"Say:*** ***Allah*** ***delivers you from them and from every
affliction, then again you assign (Him) associates'."***

### The Light that Glitters in Darkness

Once more the Qur'an takes the hand of pagans and leads them into inside
their innate disposition, and in that mysterious place it shows them the
light of Unity and monotheism.

So, it commands the Prophet (S) to question them who delivers them from
the darkness of the land and the sea. The verse says:

***"Say: ' Who delivers you from the darkness of the land and the
sea?...."***

Darkness has sometimes a substantial aspect and sometimes a spiritual
aspect. The substantial aspect of darkness is when the light ceases
utterly, or it becomes so weak that one cannot see anywhere or he sees
with difficulty.

The spiritual aspect of darkness is the same hardships, entanglements,
disturbances and pollutions whose end is both dark and ambiguous.

If this darkness combines with some terrible incidents and, for example,
in a voyage by night, a person be surrounded with some awful waves in a
whirlpool, its horror is of a higher degree than that of difficulties
that come forth in daytime.

It is in these moments that one delivers everything to forgetfulness and
does not care of anything except himself and the light, which glitters
the depth of his soul, invites him to a source wherein only He can solve
such problems.

These kinds of cases, which happen for everybody, are some windows to
Unity and monotheism.

That is why, in the next phrase of the verses, the Qur'an says that it
is in this status that:

***"... You call upon Him humbly and secretly....."***

And, it is in this condition that immediately you make covenant with
that great source, promising that if He delivers you from danger you
will certainly be grateful of His blesses and rely on none but Him.

***"... (saying): If He delivers us from this (darkness), certainly we
shall be of the grateful ones '."***

Then, The Qur'an commands the Prophet (S) to tell them that Allah will
deliver them from these darkness and from any other sorrow, as He has
delivered them frequently), but, after deliverance, they pave again the
path of polytheism and paganism.

The verse says:

***"Say: 'Allah*** ***delivers you from them and from every affliction;
then again you assign (Him) associates'."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verses 65 - 66
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هُوَ الْقَادِرُ عَلَى أَن يَبْعَثَ عَلَيْكُمْ عَذَابًا مِّن
فَوْقِكُمْ أَوْ مِن تَحْتِ أَرْجُلِكُمْ أَوْ يَلْبِسَكُمْ شِيَعاً
وَيُذِيقَ بَعْضَكُم بَأْسَ بَعْضٍ انظُرْ كَيْفَ نُصَرِّفُ الآيَاتِ
لَعَلَّهُمْ يَفْقَهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ كَذَّبَ بِهِ قَوْمُكَ وَ هُوَ الْحَقُّ قُلْ لَسْتُ عَلَيْكُمْ
بِوَكِيلٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**65.** ***"Say: 'He is able to send forth upon you a chastisement, from
above you or from beneath your feet, or to confuse you of different
parties, and to make you taste the violence of (fighting) one another.'
See how We repeat the Signs that they may understand."***  
**66.** ***"And your people have belied it (the Qur'an) though it is the
truth. Say: 'I am not a guard upon you '."***

### Various Chastisements

In order to state the different ways of training, this verse has laid
emphasis on the subject of threatening to the divine punishment. Clearly
speaking, as Allah is the most Merciful of all merciful ones, and the
protector of those who are without support, He is also the Supreme and
the Avenger against tyrants and rebellious ones.

In this verse, the Prophet (S) has been ordered to threaten the sinners
with three sorts of punishment. The chastisements which come from above
and from beneath, the chastisement of dispute and the chastisement of
fight and blood shedding.

Thus, it commands the Prophet (S) to say that Allah is able to send
retributions from above them, like the punishment upon the people of
L'ut, stones over the People of the Elephant, Flood of Noah, the Cry
upon the People of Tham'ud, and the Wind against the People of 'Ad. And,
today, there are some other retribution like atomic bombs, chemical
bombs, and far-range-striking-rockets of various kinds.

And, from the downwards, there are earthquake, splitting or depressing
the land, the Pharaoh being drowned, Korah (Croesus) sank into the
ground, cholera, plague, famine, hunger, which are brought for you.

Or, that He makes you scattered in some separate groups to dispute with
each other, and that you taste the bitterness of fighting one another.
It says:

***"Say: 'He is able to send forth upon you a chastisement, from above
you or from beneath your feet, or to confuse you of different parties'
and to make you taste the violence of (fighting) one another.'..."***

The phenomenon of dispute and contradiction in speech among a society is
so dangerous that it has been counted in the row of heavenly
punishments, thunders, and earthquakes. Yes, it is truly so. Moreover,
sometimes the destructions which are resulted from disperse and dispute
are heavier than those resulted from thunders and earthquakes.

It has repeatedly happened that some developed countries have completely
been ruined under the inauspicious shade of hypocrisy and disunity. This
phrase is counted a warning unto the whole Muslims in the world.

Then, at the end of the verse, in order that they may realize the Truth
and return to it, it is added

***"... See how We repeat the Signs that they may understand."***

The second verse of the verses mentioned above, as well as its following
verse, are, in fact, to complete the discussion stated in the former
verses abut the invitation to Monotheism, Resurrection, and the facts
upon Islam and being afraid of the Divine punishment.

At first, addressing the Prophet (S)*,* it indicates that his people,
viz. Quraysh and the pagans of Mecca, belied his teachings while all of
these teachings are right and godly, so that different evidences,
accepted through intellect and innate disposition confirm them. The holy
verse says:

***"And your people have belied it (the Qur'an) though it is the
truth…."***

Therefore, their rejection and denial does not decrease anything from
the importance of these facts, although the number of opponents and
deniers may be large.

Then, the verse continues the statement implying that it is the duty of
the Prophet (S) to communicate the prophecy and he is not responsible
that they accept it.

***"... Say: I am not guard upon you '."***

The objective meaning of the Arabic term / wakil/ is 'a person who is
responsible to lead an action and who is liable due to others." [^3]

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 67
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِّكُلِّ نَبَإٍ مُّسْتَقَرٌّ وَسَوْفَ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**67.** ***"For every announcement there is a term and you will come to
know soon."***

In this verse, through a short but expressive phrase, the Qur'an warns
people and invites them to choose the right path. It announces that
whatever news that Allah or the Prophet (S) informs people, there is
finally a term for it, and it will be accomplished in its appointed
time, which they will know soon. The verse says:

***"For every announcement there is a term and you will come to know
soon."***

By giving people the proper news, Allah and the Messenger of Allah (S)
introduce the right path to them. Therefore, Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali
(as) in a tradition says:

*"He who has an intelligent mind looks to his goal. He knows his low
road as well as his high road. The caller (of the right, i.e., the
Prophet (S)) has called, and the leader (of Ummah, i.e.,
Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali* (as)*) has tended (his leadership). So, respond
to the caller (of the right) and follow (your) leader."*[^4]

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 68
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا رَأَيْتَ الَّذِينَ يَخُوضُونَ فِي آيَاتِنَا فَأَعْرِضْ
عَنْهُمْ حَتَّى يَخُوضُواْ فِي حَدِيثٍ غَيْرِهِ وَإِمَّا يُنسِيَنَّكَ
الشَّيْطَانُ فَلاَ تَقْعُدْ بَعْدَ الذِّكْرَى مَعَ الْقَوْمِ
الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**68.** ***"And when you see those who cavil about Our Signs, turn away
from them until they enter into (some) other topic. And if Satan causes
you to forget, then, after recollection, do not sit with the unjust
people."***

It has been narrated by Imam Baqir (as) who said:

*“When this verse was revealed and Muslims were prohibited from
associating with the pagans and those who mocked the verses of the
Qur'an, (a group of) Muslims said that if they wanted to treat according
to that commandment everywhere, they had to neither enter the Sacred
Mosque, nor circumambulate the Ka'bah, because those people were often
about inside the Sacred Mosque busy mocking the Divine verses which they
heard easily by a short pause. Then the next verse was revealed and
ordered Muslims to advise them and guide them as much as they
could.”*[^5]

However, since the statements of this Surah are mostly about the
circumstances of pagans and idol-worshippers, both in the current verse
and in the verse next to it, the Qur'an hints to the affairs concerning
them.

At first, it tells the Prophet (S) that when he sees the arrogant,
illogical opponents are mocking the signs of Allah*,* he should turn
away from them so that they give up the subject and be busy with another
topic.

***"And when you see those who cavil about Our Signs, turn away from
them until they enter into (some) other topic. ..."***

Then the Qur'an adds that this matter is so important that if Satan
causes you to forget and you sit with such persons unintentionally, as
soon as you remember it, you should leave that meeting and do not sit
with these unjust people. The verse says:

***"... And if Satan causes you to forget, then, after recollection, do
not sit with the unjust people."***

There arises a question here: Is it possible that Satan dominates the
Prophet (S) and causes him to forget his duty?

In answer to this question, it can be said that although the addressee
in this verse is the Prophet (S)*,* the main purpose, in fact, is the
followers of the Prophet (S)*.* It means that if they are entangled with
forgetfulness and they take part in pagans' sinful meetings, they should
come out of that meeting and leave the place as soon as they remember
it.

The like of this status happens in our daily conversations and in the
literature of different languages, that, in speech, one person is
addressed but the aim is that others hear that statement.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 69
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا عَلَى الَّذِينَ يَتَّقُونَ مِنْ حِسَابِهِم مِّن شَيْءٍ وَلَـكِن
ذِكْرَى لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**69.** ***"And nothing of the reckoning of their (deed) shall be upon
those who keep from evil, but a reminding (must be given) so that they,
too, may keep from evil."***

When the verse of prohibition upon the vain speakers and mockers of the
Divine revelations was revealed, some believers said that they should
not go to the Sacred Mosque and would not circumambulate the Ka'bah,
since the range of their mockery had stretched as far as there.

Participation in the meeting of sinners is allowed if it is with the
intention of refraining them from wrong and guiding them to the right.
Of course, this exception is only for those believers who are pious and
firm in belief, since there are some Muslims who go to save others but
they themselves drown.

Thinking and realizing the situation, in fact, is one of the principles
of intellect and of Islam. Hearing the absurd sayings temporarily with
the purpose of answering them or saving the deviated people permanently
is allowed.

***"And nothing of the reckoning of their (deed) shall be upon those who
keep from evil, but a reminding (must be given)...."***

Piety is a means of protection for man against committing sins. It is
like saving-clothes for fire-extinguishers.

Besides being pious himself, such a person must try to make others
virtuous, too.

***"... So that they, too, may keep from evil"***

By the way, there are abundant traditions narrated by the Prophet (S)
and the Immaculate Imams (as) which prohibit Muslims from companionship
with sinners or participation in a gathering where faults or a single
fault is being committed and they cannot bar it even if the people of
the gathering are from relatives.

Imam Arnir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) recommended his son:

*"Allah* *has prescribed for the ear not to listen to any sin and any
backbite."*[^6]

Imam Ali (as) also said:

*"Association with the wicked causes suspicion upon the righteous.*"[^7]

This verse may be attached as an evidence for the prohibition of some
wicked books, too.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 70
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَذَرِ الَّذِينَ اتَّخَذُواْ دِينَهُمْ لَعِبًا وَلَهْوًا وَغَرَّتْهُمُ
الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا وَذَكِّرْ بِهِ أَن تُبْسَلَ نَفْسٌ بِمَا
كَسَبَتْ لَيْسَ لَهَا مِن دُونِ اللّهِ وَلِيٌّ وَلاَ شَفِيعٌ وَإِن
تَعْدِلْ كُلَّ عَدْلٍ لاَّ يُؤْخَذْ مِنْهَا أُوْلَـئِكَ الَّذِينَ
أُبْسِلُواْ بِمَا كَسَبُواْ لَهُمْ شَرَابٌ مِّنْ حَمِيمٍ وَعَذَابٌ
أَلِيمٌ بِمَا كَانُواْ يَكْفُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**70.** ***"And leave those who have taken their religion for a play and
pastime, and whom the life of this world has deluded, and admonish
(them) by it (the Qur'an) lest a soul be destroyed for what it has
earned. It shall not have besides*** ***Allah*** ***any guardian nor any
intercessor, and though it*** ***offers every compensation it will not
be accepted from it. Those are they who are given up to destruction for
what they have earned. They will have a drink of boiling water and a
painful chastisement for what they used to disbelieve."***

The purpose of the phrase ***'leave those who ...'*** is 'hating them,
and not having any communication with them', which sometimes ends with
fighting against them. Thus, the phrase does not mean abandoning Holy
Struggle against them.

The manner of taking religion for a play has different forms in
different circumstances. Sometimes it is in the form of superstitious
beliefs, or religious laws are considered impracticable, or sins are
justified, or innovations interpretation of the Qur'an by personal
opinion, and following the allegorical verses, come forth.

However, Faith has no consistency with laziness, flattery, and playing
with ideology.

**"*****And leave those who have taken their religion for a play and
pastime....."***

Admonishment is a means to being saved from the wrath and punishment of
Allah

***".... and admonish (them) by it (the Qur'an)…."***

Be not proud of the world since there will come to help you none, in the
Hereafter, except Allah*,*

Everybody should know that the cause of all his misfortunes is his self
and is own deeds.

***"....for what it has earned...."***

Therefore, the holy verse, pointing to a part of their painful
chastisements, says:

***".... They will have a drink of boiling water and painful
chastisement for what they used to disbelieve…"***

They will be burnt from inside by boiling water and from outside by Hell
Fire.

[^1]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, Vol. 3, P. 313 (Arabic version)

[^2]: Nahaj-ul-Fisahah, p. 59, and Kanzul-'Ummal, vol. 3, p. 500

[^3]: There are some other phrases mentioned in the Qur'an which convey
the same meaning, including: Surah Al-'An'am, No.6, Verse 107 ; Surah
Yunus, No.10, Verse 41; Surah Az-Zumar, No. 39, Verse 41 and Surah
Ash-Shaura, No.42, Verse 6.

[^4]: Nahaj-ul-Balagha, sermon 154

[^5]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, Vol. 3, p, 316.

[^6]: Nahjul-Balagha

[^7]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, Vol. 1, P. 728


