Section 11: Allah the Creator and Knower of everything
======================================================

Allah the Creator of the heavens and the earth, The Divine
Unity -polytheism to be gradually wiped out -Not to abuse false gods
lest the infidels might ignorantly abuse Allah.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 101 - 102
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَدِيعُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ أَنَّى يَكُونُ لَهُ وَلَدٌ وَلَمْ
تَكُن لَّهُ صَاحِبَةٌ وَخَلَقَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ وهُوَ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ
عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكُمُ اللّهُ رَبُّكُمْ لا إِلَـهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ خَالِقُ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ
فَاعْبُدُوهُ وَهُوَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ وَكِيلٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**101.** ***"(He is the) Divisor of the heavens and the earth! How can
He have a child while there is for Him no consort, and He created
everything, and He is All-Knowing of all things?"***

**102.** ***"That is Allah your Lord! there is no god but He, the
Creator of everything, Therefore worship Him, for He is Guardian over
all things."***

This verse answers to the superstitious beliefs. At first, it says:

***"(He is the) Divisor of the heavens and the earth!"***

The Qur'anic term /badi'/ means 'the producer of something new without
having a precedent', That is, Allah*,* Glory be to Him, has brought the
heavens and the earth into being without any previous substance, or
design and plan.

Moreover, how is it possible that He can have a child while He has not a
spouse? The verse says:

***"…How can He have a child while there is for Him no consort.....?"***

Basically, He does not need a spouse, and who can be His spouse when He
has created all creatures?

Once more the Qur'an emphasizes the rank of Allah’s creative power in
respect to all existing things and all human beings, and His Scientific
Omnipotence in respect to all of them, and says:

***"... and He created everything, and He is All-Knowing of all
things?"***

After mentioning the creative power of *Allah* in respect to all things,
and bringing the heavens and the earth into existence, and that He is
Glorified to have body and bodily issues, or to have any spouse and
child, and that His Scientific Omnipotence in respect to everything and
all affairs, it concludes thus:

***"That is Allah your Lord....."***

And, since there is none to have some attributes like them, then none is
eligible to be worshipped save Allah*.* He is both the Lord and the
Creator. Therefore, only Allah (S.w.T.) can be the deity. Thus do
worship Him.

The verse continues saying:

***"... there is no god but He, the Creator of everything. Therefore
worship Him....."***

In order to cut out any hope to anything except the hope to Allah*,* and
to eradicate any idolatry and, in general, any reliance to other than
Allah*,* at the end of the verse it adds:

***"... for He is Guardian over all things."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 103
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَّ تُدْرِكُهُ الأَبْصَارُ وَهُوَ يُدْرِكُ الأَبْصَارَ وَهُوَ
اللَّطِيفُ الْخَبِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**103.** ***"The eyes do not perceive Him, but He perceives the eyes, He
is all subtle, the All-Aware."***

In order to prove Allah’s sovereignty and Guardianship over every thing,
and to prove His difference from the whole creatures, it says:

***"The eyes do not perceive Him, but He perceives the eyes...."***

Allah is the bestower of kinds of blessings, and He is aware of all
details and cognizant of everything. He knows the expedients of the
servants as well as their needs. Therefore, He treats them as His Grace
requires.

***"... He is the All-Subtle, the All-Aware"***

In fact, the one who wants to be guardian, educator, and shelter of
every existence should be qualified with these attributes.

### Allah is not seen by the Eyes

Rational demonstrations (proofs) testify that Allah can never be seen by
vision, because eyes can see only substances, or some of the qualities
of substances. Then, something which is neither a substance, nor it is
the quality of a substance, is never seen by vision.

In other words, if something is seen by vision, it certainly should have
place, direction, and material, while He, the Exalted, is above all
these things. Allah is an infinite Essence that is why He is beyond the
world of material. In the world of material, everything is finite and
limited.

It has been narrated from Imam Rida (as) who said:

*"The objective meaning of /'absar/ (the eyes) is not the eyes of head,
but it is the eye of heart, the insight."*

That is, He (S.w.T.) is beyond apparition, suspicion, and imagination.
He cannot be contained in any body's imagination, and none can
comprehend the how ness of His Essence[^1].

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 104
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ جَاءكُم بَصَآئِرُ مِن رَّبِّكُمْ فَمَنْ أَبْصَرَ فَلِنَفْسِهِ
وَمَنْ عَمِيَ فَعَلَيْهَا وَمَا أَنَاْ عَلَيْكُم بِحَفِيظٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**104.** ***"Certainly clear proofs have come to you from your Lord.
Whoever therefore sees (with insight), it is to his own gain, and
whoever be blind, it is to his own loss; and am not a keeper over
you."***

***"Certainly clear proofs have come to you from your Lord....."***

The term /basa'ir/ is the plural form of /basirat/ which means some
indications and guidance by which the truth will be manifested. It also
means the light of the heart (mind), while /basar/ means the light of
the eye. Then the phrase means that they have come to you from your Lord
with the purpose of paying attention to this matter that what is right
to Allah *and* what is not.

By means of the divine revelation, there have come down some information
that are considered as a light and the power of sight for your hearts
(minds).

***"... Whoever therefore sees (with insight), it is to his own gain,
and whoever be blind, it is to his own loss;***

That is, the person who looks at the Truth and believes in it, has
worked for his own profit; and the one who relinquishes it, has acted
toward his own loss.

It is understood from this verse that people are not obliged in doing
their affairs. They are free and authorized in choosing them and
performing them.

Then, the revelation commands the Prophet (S) to tell those people that
he is not a protector of them to keep their deeds and to give them
rewards, but he is only an admonisher, while Allah is their protector.
The verse says:

***"... and I am not a keeper over you."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 105
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَلِكَ نُصَرِّفُ الآيَاتِ وَلِيَقُولُواْ دَرَسْتَ وَلِنُبَيِّنَهُ
لِقَوْمٍ يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**105.** ***"And thus do We repeat the Signs, that they may say (unto
you): "You have studied" and that We may make it clear to a people who
know."***

In order to emphasize that the final decision for choosing the way of
right and the way of wrong is upon the servants of Allah themselves, the
verse says:

***"And thus do We repeat the Signs...."***

But a group of the opponents may oppose you and, without having any
authentic evidence or research, they say that you have learnt these
lessons from the Jews and the Christians, which have been taken from
their revealed Books.

***"... that they may say (unto you): "You have studied" ..."***

Yet, Our aim is that We make it manifest for those who have knowledge
and understanding.

***"... and that We may make it clear to a people who know."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 106
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اتَّبِعْ مَا أُوحِيَ إِلَيْكَ مِن رَّبِّكَ لا إِلَـهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ
وَأَعْرِضْ عَنِ الْمُشْرِكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**106.** ***"Follow what is revealed to you from your Lord; there is no
god but He; and turn away from the polytheists."***

Here, the Qur'an has defined the duty of the Prophet (S) against the
quarrelsomeness, rancor, and accusations of the opponents. This holy
verse implies that his duty is to follow whatever has been revealed to
him (S) from the side of Allah (S.w.T.), the Lord, and that there is no
deity but He.

The verse says:

***"Follow what is revealed to you from your Lord; there is no god but
He....."***

His duty is also to be heedless toward polytheists, their undue
accusations, and their vain words. It says:

***"... and turn away from the polytheists."***

In fact, this verse is a kind of soothing and spiritual strengthening
for the Prophet (S), so that he can be ever firm in his strong
determination and that he withdraws aught.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 107
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ شَاء اللّهُ مَا أَشْرَكُواْ وَمَا جَعَلْنَاكَ عَلَيْهِمْ
حَفِيظًا وَمَا أَنتَ عَلَيْهِم بِوَكِيلٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**107.** ***"And had*** ***Allah*** ***pleased, they would not have
associated others (with Him), and We have not made you a keeper over
them, nor are you over them a guardian."***

This fact is confirmed again in this verse that Allah does not please to
force them to believe in Truth.

***"And had Allah pleased, they would not have associated others (with
Him)....."***

Also, the holy verse emphasizes on the same subject that was mentioned
before, saying:

***"... and We have not made you a keeper over them....."***

As your duty is not to force them to believe, then:

***"... nor are you over them a guardian."***

The tones of these verses are greatly considerable from this point of
view that belief in Allah and in Islam can never have the obligatory
state. Hence progression in this way should be performed through the way
of logic, reasoning and penetrating in the souls and minds of people.

The reason of this idea is that an obligatory belief is worthless. The
important matter is that people comprehend the facts and accept them
with their own authority and will.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 108
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَسُبُّواْ الَّذِينَ يَدْعُونَ مِن دُونِ اللّهِ فَيَسُبُّواْ
اللّهَ عَدْوًا بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ كَذَلِكَ زَيَّنَّا لِكُلِّ أُمَّةٍ
عَمَلَهُمْ ثُمَّ إِلَى رَبِّهِم مَّرْجِعُهُمْ فَيُنَبِّئُهُم بِمَا
كَانُواْ يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**108.** ***"And do not abuse those whom they call upon besides***
***Allah, or they will abuse*** ***Allah*** ***in revenge without any
knowledge. Thus unto every nation have We made their behavior seem fair.
Then unto their Lord is their return, so He will inform them of what
they used to do."***

In this verse, Allah emphasizes on this meaning that idols and deities
of the pagans should never be abused. This action causes the holy
Essence of Allah to be abused by them, revengefully and unjustly,
because of their ignorance.

As it is understood from some Islamic traditions, it happened that
sometimes some of the believers, who were seriously unbecoming from the
phenomenon of idolatry, used indecent language and abused the idols of
the pagans.

The Qur'an explicitly prohibited that action. From the point of Islam,
having modesty and observing the principles of discipline, and courtesy
in speech is necessary for a believer, even if it is before the most
superstitious and the worst wrong religions.

It is not possible to prevent a person from a wrong way by means of
abusing him, because everybody is zealous unto his own beliefs and
deeds. The verse says:

***"And do not abuse those whom they call upon besides*** ***Allah, or
they will abuse*** ***Allah*** ***in revenge without any
knowledge....."***

However, every sect or group of people think that their conduct is fair,
because it is as their nature pleases, but, in the meantime, they have
been introduced the Truth in order that they act accordingly and avoid
the falsehood. The verse continues saying:

***"... thus unto every nation have We made their behavior seem fair.
Then unto their Lord is their return, so He will inform them of what
they used to do."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 109
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَقْسَمُواْ بِاللّهِ جَهْدَ أَيْمَانِهِمْ لَئِن جَاءتْهُمْ آيَةٌ
لَّيُؤْمِنُنَّ بِهَا قُلْ إِنَّمَا الآيَاتُ عِندَ اللّهِ وَمَا
يُشْعِرُكُمْ أَنَّهَا إِذَا جَاءتْ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**109.** ***"And they swore by*** ***Allah*** ***with the strongest of
their oaths, that if a sign came to them they would most certainly
believe in it. Say: 'Signs are only with*** ***Allah*** ***'. And what
should make you know that when it comes they will not believe? "***

Once a group of pagans of the Quraysh[^2] came to the Prophet (S) and
said that he should bring some miracles like those of Moses and Jesus
(as)*,* so that they could believe in him. The Messenger of Allah (S)
asked them what action he should do.

They answered him hat he should change the Safa mount (located in Mecca)
into gold, restore he dead to life, show them the Lord and the angels,
and so on. They swore that in that case they would believe.

Gabriel came down and revealed the verse to the Messenger of Allah (S)
indicating that miracles are done according to Allah’s Will, not
according to their desires.

Moreover, some suggestions that some ignorant people offer are sometimes
opposite to human intelligence. It is not such that the world becomes
the hall of exhibition and the system of existence changes with the
desires of some pagans.

Gabriel brought the divine message to the Holy Prophet (S) indicating
that if the Prophet (S) wished, his invitation would be accepted; but if
they did not believe in Islam, all of them would be punished seriously
and they would be destroyed.

So, if their desires were not performed and they were not paid attention
to, they might repent and turn to the right way. Then, the Prophet (S)
accepted it too, and the verse was revealed saying:

***"And they swore by*** ***Allah*** ***with the strongest of their
oaths, that if a sign came to them they would most certainly believe in
it. Say: 'Signs are only with*** ***Allah*** ***'. And what should make
you know that when it comes they will not believe?"***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 110
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنُقَلِّبُ أَفْئِدَتَهُمْ وَأَبْصَارَهُمْ كَمَا لَمْ يُؤْمِنُواْ بِهِ
أَوَّلَ مَرَّةٍ وَنَذَرُهُمْ فِي طُغْيَانِهِمْ يَعْمَهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**110.** ***"And (because of pertinacities of infidels) We will turn
their hearts and their sights, even as they did not believe in it the
first time; and We will leave them in their contumacy wandering
blindly."***

Here, in this verse, Allah announces that as the retribution of their
sin and their wrong conduct, He will derange their sights and their
hearts. That is, Allah is cognizant of the secrets of the hearts and the
treachery of eyes, and He sees their inward (state) that is opposite to
their apparent (aspect).

Allah*,* the Exalted, knew that there was something in those hearts and
eyes that was different from what they claimed. Therefore, if the
prophetic miracles that they asked for were performed, they could not
believe in him yet. It was similar to the condition of their former
people when they did not believe in the verses that were revealed for
the first time.

Therefore, they will be left to themselves so that they be entangled
with their own sins and disobedience. They will sink in their meanness,
and remain bewildered. Hence, as a result of their disobedience, they
will be punished in the Hereafter.

***"And (because of pertinacities of infidels) We will turn their hearts
and their sights, even as they did not believe in it the first time; and
We will leave them in their contumacy wandering blindly."***

[^1]: At-Tafsir-ul-Burhan, Vol. 1, PP. 547,548; Tafsir-us-Safi, P. 145;
Tafsir. Jawami'-ul-Jami', P. 230; and Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, Vol. 1, P. 754

[^2]: The Quraysh were the noblest tribe of Arabia, the tribe to which
the holy Prophet himself (S) belonged. They had the custody of the
Ka'bah, the central shrine of Arabia.


