Section 12: Every Apostle Had an Enemy
======================================

Opposition to the Truth from the polytheists in all ages -Every apostle
had an enemy - Polytheism totally opposed to Islam.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 111
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ أَنَّنَا نَزَّلْنَا إِلَيْهِمُ الْمَلآئِكَةَ وَكَلَّمَهُمُ
الْمَوْتَى وَحَشَرْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ قُبُلاً مَّا كَانُواْ
لِيُؤْمِنُواْ إِلاَّ أَن يَشَاء اللّهُ وَلَـكِنَّ أَكْثَرَهُمْ
يَجْهَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**111.** ***"And even if We sent down the angels to them, and the dead
spoke to them, and We mustered all things before them, (even then) they
would not believe, unless*** Allah ***pleases; but most of them
(deliberately) ignore."***

The purpose of these holy verses is to make clear that some of the
seekers of surprising miracles are not true in their demands and their
aim is not to embrace the Truth. That is why some of their wishes (like
that Allah comes in front of them) are basically impossible.

In this verse the Qur'an explicitly says that had their demands been
fulfilled in the same form that they wanted, and the angels had been
sent down upon them, and the dead had come to speak with them, and in
short whatever they had wished were provided for them, even then, they
would not believe. Here is the verse:

***"And even if We sent down the angels to them, and the dead spoke to
them, and We mustered all things before them, (even then) they would not
believe....."***

Then, to emphasize on the matter, it implies that it is in one case
possible that they believe and that is in the case that Allah forces
them to accept the Faith by His Sovereign Will:

***".... Unless*** ***Allah*** ***pleases...."***

And, it is evident that this sort of Faith will contain no training
income and no effect of perfection. So, at the end of the verse, it
adds:

***".... but most of them (deliberately) ignore."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 112
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَلِكَ جَعَلْنَا لِكُلِّ نِبِيٍّ عَدُوًّا شَيَاطِينَ الإِنسِ
وَالْجِنِّ يُوحِي بَعْضُهُمْ إِلَى بَعْضٍ زُخْرُفَ الْقَوْلِ غُرُورًا
وَلَوْ شَاء رَبُّكَ مَا فَعَلُوهُ فَذَرْهُمْ وَمَا يَفْتَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**112.** ***"And thus did We assign for every prophet an enemy, the
satans from humans and jinn, who (secretly) inspire each other with
flashy words to deceive (them). And had your Lord pleased*** ***they
would not have done it. (Allah’s*** ***way of treatment is freedom of
men) therefore, leave them with what they forge."***

It was said in the former verses that the hostility of the stubborn
enemies against the Holy Prophet (S) was not confined to him alone, but
other prophets had such enemies, too. In this verse, it says:

***"And thus did We assign for every prophet an enemy, the satans from
humans an Jinn…"***

And their manner was that they spoke some charming words secretly and
occasionally, by whispering to each other, in order to deceive them. The
verse says:

***".... who (secretly) inspire each other with flashy words to deceive
(them)...."***

Yet, it should not be made mistake, and if Allah pleased, He could
forcefully stop them doing that. The verse says:

***"... And had your Lord pleased they would not have done it. ..."***

But Allah did not do that because He wished to let people act freely in
a scene where they can be tested, improved and trained. Therefore, at
the end of the verse, He commands His Messenger that he never pays
attention to these followers of Satans and that he leaves both them and
their accusations with themselves.

***"... (Allah’s*** ***way of treatment is freedom of men) therefore,
leave them with what they forge."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 113
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِتَصْغَى إِلَيْهِ أَفْئِدَةُ الَّذِينَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالآخِرَةِ
وَلِيَرْضَوْهُ وَلِيَقْتَرِفُواْ مَا هُم مُّقْتَرِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**113. "*****And (the result of those Satanic inspirations is) so that
the hearts of those who do not believe in the Hereafter, may incline to
it, and that they may be well-pleased with it (the flashy words)*****,**
***and that they may commit (the evil) they were committing."***

The consequence of the charming suggestions and deceitful preaches of
the satans is recited in this verse, as follows:

***"And (the result of those Satanic inspirations is) so that the hearts
of those who do not believe in the Hereafter, may incline to it....."***

Then, it adds that the end of this inclination will be a complete
consent to the Satanic deeds. Here is the verse:

***"... and that they may be well-pleased with it (the flashy
words)....."***

Therefore, the end of them all, in this world, will be committing kinds
of sins, indecencies, and vices, and, consequently, they will be
involved with the result of the same corruptions people who had been
before them in the history of the world.

***"... and that they may commit (the evil) they were committing."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 114
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَغَيْرَ اللّهِ أَبْتَغِي حَكَمًا وَهُوَ الَّذِي أَنَزَلَ إِلَيْكُمُ
الْكِتَابَ مُفَصَّلاً وَالَّذِينَ آتَيْنَاهُمُ الْكِتَابَ يَعْلَمُونَ
أَنَّهُ مُنَزَّلٌ مِّن رَّبِّكَ بِالْحَقِّ فَلاَ تَكُونَنَّ مِنَ
الْمُمْتَرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**114.** ***"(Say :) 'Shall I seek a judge other than*** ***Allah, while
it is He Who has sent down to you the Book, (fully) explained? And those
whom We have given the Book know that it has been sent down from your
Lord with the truth, so be not you of the doubters."***

In fact, this verse is the conclusion of the previous verses. It
indicates that, with all these clear verses which were recited, whom
should be accepted as an arbitrator? The verse says:

***"(Say:) 'Shall I seek a judge other than*** ***Allah....."***

This heavenly Book explains all the necessary training facts of man and
has separated between right and wrong, light and darkness, and disbelief
and Faith; and it is Allah Who has sent it down to you. Concerning this
meaning, the Qur'an continues saying:

***"... while it is He Who has sent down to you the Book, (fully)
explained..."***

Then, addressing the Prophet (S)*,* the verse implies that not only he
and the Muslims know that this Book is from Allah*,* but also the people
of the Book (The Jews and the Christians), who have seen the Signs of
this heavenly Book in their own Books, know that this Book has been sent
down from the Lord with the Truth. The verse says:

***"... And those whom We have given the Book know that it has been sent
down from your Lord with the truth....."***

Therefore, there is no place of any doubt and hesitation in it, and you,
O' Our Messenger, never doubt in it.

***"...so be not you of the doubters."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 115
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَمَّتْ كَلِمَتُ رَبِّكَ صِدْقًا وَعَدْلاً لاَّ مُبَدِّلِ
لِكَلِمَاتِهِ وَهُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**115*****. "And perfected is the Word of your Lord in truth and
justice; there naught that can change His Words, and He is All-Hearing,
All-Knowing.***

In this verse, The Qur'an, addressing the Prophet (S)*,* indicates that
his Lord's Word was completed in truth and justice, so that no one
change its containing words, and the Lord is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
The verse says:

***"And perfected is the Word of your Lord in truth and justice; there
is naught that can change His Words, and He is All-Hearing,
All-Knowing."***

The objective meaning of the term 'word', mentioned in the above verse,
is 'The Qur'an', since in the former verses the subject matter was also
recited upon 'The Qur'an'.

Indeed, the verse refers to the fact that there is no doubt about
Qur'an, because it is perfect and faultless in any respects. Its facts
upon history and its information about events are all true, and its
ordinances and laws are utterly just.

Some of the commentators, attaching this verse, have reasoned the
impossibility of influencing in perverting the Qur'an.

They say that phrase: ***"... There is naught that can change His Words
..."*** points to this fact that nobody is able to cast any change in
the Qur'an, neither from point of the Arabic spelling of the words, nor
from the point of information of the events, nor from the point of
ordinances and laws.  
 Therefore, this heavenly Book, which must be the guide of humankind
until the end of the world, will be secured and protected from the
larceny of treacherous persons and distorters.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 116
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن تُطِعْ أَكْثَرَ مَن فِي الأَرْضِ يُضِلُّوكَ عَن سَبِيلِ اللّهِ
إِن يَتَّبِعُونَ إِلاَّ الظَّنَّ وَإِنْ هُمْ إِلاَّ يَخْرُصُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**116.** ***"And if you obey most of those in the earth, they will lead
you astray from the way of*** ***Allah. They follow nothing but
conjecture; and they do nothing but surmise. "***

It was said before that the current Surah was sent down in Mecca. At
that time Muslims were intensively in minority.

Concerning this minority and the conclusive majority of idol worshippers
and the opponents of Islam, sometimes it might happen that some persons
suspected that why there were so many followers of idolatry while that
creed was futile and false, and if Muslims were right, why they were so
few.

To remove this sort of imagination, the verse addresses the Prophet (S)
and says:

***"And if you obey most of these in the earth, they will lead you
astray from the way of*** ***Allah. ..."***

In the next sentence of the verse, the Qur'an states the reason of this
subject. It points out that the reason of it is that they do not behave
upon logic and a correct thought. Their guide is conjecture based on
delusion, and some imaginations polluted with low desires, lusts and
lies. The verse says:

***"... They follow nothing but conjecture; and they do nothing but
surmise."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 117
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ رَبَّكَ هُوَ أَعْلَمُ مَن يَضِلُّ عَن سَبِيلِهِ وَهُوَ أَعْلَمُ
بِالْمُهْتَدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**117*****. "Verily your Lord knows best those who stray from His way,
and He (a/so) knows best those who are guided."***

In view of the fact that the concept of the previous verse is that mere
majority can not show the way of truth and it is not the reason of
right, the result of it is that the way of truth should be taken only
from the source of Allah*,* although the followers of truth are in
minority.

The Qur'an makes the reason of this matter clear in this verse. It
points out that your Lord, Who is aware of all things and there is not
the least mistake in His endless knowledge, knows best which way is the
way of astray and which way is the way of guidance, and, then, He knows
best the misguided and the guided.

The verse says:

***"Verily your Lord knows best those who stray from His way, and He
(also) knows best those who are guided."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 118
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكُلُواْ مِمَّا ذُكِرَ اسْمُ اللّهِ عَلَيْهِ إِن كُنتُمْ بِآيَاتِهِ
مُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**118.** ***"Therefore, eat (the meat) of that over which***
***Allah’s*** ***name has been mentioned, if you are believers in His
Signs."***

### The Effects of Paganism should be removed totally

Through previous verses, the reality of Unity was proved, and the
falsehood of paganism and idolatry was made manifest.

One of the results of this question is that Muslims should avoid
consuming the meat of the animals slaughtered by the name of idols. They
should use only the meat of those animals which are slaughtered by the
name of Allah*.*

Concerning this meaning, the Qur'an says:

***"Therefore, eat (the meat) of that over which*** ***Allah’s***
***name has been mentioned, if you are believers in His Signs."***

That is, the Faith is not only a bare claim, a lonely statement, and a
simple belief. But it should be proved through practice, too.

The person, who believes in Allah*,* will consume only these kinds of
meat.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 119
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا لَكُمْ أَلاَّ تَأْكُلُواْ مِمَّا ذُكِرَ اسْمُ اللّهِ عَلَيْهِ
وَقَدْ فَصَّلَ لَكُم مَّا حَرَّمَ عَلَيْكُمْ إِلاَّ مَا اضْطُرِرْتُمْ
إِلَيْهِ وَإِنَّ كَثِيراً لَّيُضِلُّونَ بِأَهْوَائِهِم بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ
إِنَّ رَبَّكَ هُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِالْمُعْتَدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**119.** ***"And what has happened to you that you do not eat (the meat)
of that over which*** ***Allah’s*** ***name has been mentioned, while He
has (already) explained for you what He has forbidden unto you, except
what you are compelled to (eat)? And indeed many (people) mislead
(others) by their desires, without any knowledge. Verily, your Lord
knows best the transgressors."***

In this verse, the Qur'an says why you do not eat from the meat of those
animals over which the name of Allah has been mentioned, while He has
detailed for you what has been made unlawful for you. The verse says:

***"And what has happened to you that you do not eat (the meat) of that
over which*** ***Allah’s*** ***name has been mentioned, while He has (
already) explained for you what He has forbidden unto you....."***

Then, one case has been exceptional from this general law. It says:

**"...** ***except what you are compelled to (eat)*****?..."**

This condition may come forth for a person in the desert or in a
deserted place because of an intensive hunger or being captured in the
grips of some pagans who force the one against this matter.

After that statement, it adds:

***"... And indeed many (people) mislead (others) by their desires,
without any knowledge. ..."***

Then, at the end of the verse, it says that Allah is fully aware and
knows best those who are transgressors. These are those who not only go
astray from the straight and true path, but also, attaching false
proofs, try to mislead others. The verse says:

***"... Verily, your Lord knows best the transgressors."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 120
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَذَرُواْ ظَاهِرَ الإِثْمِ وَبَاطِنَهُ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَكْسِبُونَ
الإِثْمَ سَيُجْزَوْنَ بِمَا كَانُواْ يَقْتَرِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**120.** ***"And abandon outward sin and the inward one; verily those
who commit sin soon shall be recompensed with what they used to
commit."***

Since some people usually commit this unlawful action (fornication)
hidden, following that meaning, in this verse, as a general law, the
Qur'an says:

***"And abandon outward sin and the inward one....."***

It is said that at the Age of Ignorance some people believed that
fornication was not a vice when it was done secretly, and it was
considered a sin when it was committed manifestly.

Even now, in the present century, there are some persons who have
practically accepted this logic of the Age of Ignorance, and they fear
committing only the outward sins. Such people, having no feeling of
incommodity, easily commit some hidden sins. The above-mentioned verse
seriously condemns this logic.

Then, as a remembrance, the verse warns the sinners to the evil fate
that waits for them, and says:

***"... verily those who commit sin soon shall be recompensed with what
they used to commit."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 121
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَأْكُلُواْ مِمَّا لَمْ يُذْكَرِ اسْمُ اللّهِ عَلَيْهِ وَإِنَّهُ
لَفِسْقٌ وَإِنَّ الشَّيَاطِينَ لَيُوحُونَ إِلَى أَوْلِيَآئِهِمْ
لِيُجَادِلُوكُمْ وَإِنْ أَطَعْتُمُوهُمْ إِنَّكُمْ لَمُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***121. "And do not eat (anything) of that over which*** ***Allah’s***
***name has not been mentioned (at the time of slaughter) and that is
indeed transgression, and verily the Satans inspire unto their friends
to dispute with you, and if you obey them, you will indeed be
polytheists, (too)."***

This verse emphasizes on the negative aspect of the matter and its
concept of prohibition. It says:

***"And do not eat (anything) of that over which*** ***Allah’s***
***name has not been mentioned (at the time of slaughter)"....***

Then, through a short sentence, it negates this action again, and
implies that this work is a mischief, a sin, and going out from the path
and manner of servitude of Allah and obeying His commandment. It says:

***"…and that is indeed transgression…"***

And, in order that some simple hearted Muslims would not be affected by
their satanic temptations, it adds:

***".... and verily the Satans inspire unto their friends to dispute
with you....."***

But, beware that if you submit to their temptations, you will be counted
among pagans, too. The verse says:

***".... and if you obey them, you will indeed be polytheists,
(too)."***

This dispute and temptation may refer to that very logic that pagans
inspired unto each other. They said that they ate the meat of the dead
animals because the Lord had slaughtered them. That is, if they do not
eat the meat of carrions, it is a kind of heedlessness to the deed of
Allah*.*

Some commentators have said that pagans of Arab had learnt it from
Zoroastrians. Pagans were inattentive of the fact that the head of
whatever dies naturally, besides that it often dies because of a
disease, has not been cut, and, therefore, the dirty blood of its body
has remained among the levels of its meat. This blood decays thereafter,
and surely pollutes the meat, too.


