Section 13: The Arch Enemies
============================

The enemies' plot – Enemies shall not succeed – They shall meet
disgraceful end

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 122
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَ مَن كَانَ مَيْتًا فَأَحْيَيْنَاهُ وَجَعَلْنَا لَهُ نُورًا يَمْشِي
بِهِ فِي النَّاسِ كَمَن مَّثَلُهُ فِي الظُّلُمَاتِ لَيْسَ بِخَارِجٍ
مِّنْهَا كَذَلِكَ زُيِّنَ لِلْكَافِرِينَ مَا كَانُواْ يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***122. "Is he who was dead (with ignorance and polytheism) and we gave
him life (by Our guidance) and provided him with a light by which he
walks among the people, as one whose likeness is in the shadows (of
ignorance and polytheism) and he cannot come forth from them? Thus has
been made fair seeming for the disbelievers what they were doing."***

In this verse, a person who has been misguided and Allah has guided him
thereafter, is resembled to a person who has been dead and He has given
him life. For such a person, Allah has appointed a light by which he can
diffuse light among people.

And He has resembled the person who has remained in his misguidance to a
person who walks in darkness without having a guide, and he does not go
out from that darkness.

The Qur'an says:

***"Is he who was dead (with ignorance and polytheism) and we gave him
life (by Our guidance) and provided him with a light by which he walks
among the people, as one whose likeness is in the shadows (of ignorance
and polytheism) and he cannot come forth from them? ..."***

However, the purpose of this light, mentioned in the above verse, is not
only 'the Qur'an' and 'the trainings of the Prophet (S)*',* but, in
addition to these, belief in Allah gives man a new insight, and a fresh
concept, which broads the scope of his vision from the material life,
and from the inside of the material world, high up towards an
extraordinary open vast world.

Under the ray of this light, the one can find his way of life among
people and can be saved from a lot of mistakes which others may be
entangled with because of greed and avarice. Without that light, the one
may fall in such mistakes as a result of materialistic thought, and
domination of selfishness and low desires.

There is a holy phrase, recorded in Islamic narrations, which says:

*"A believer looks by means of* *Allah’s* *light."*

This phrase is a hint to this very fact.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 123
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَلِكَ جَعَلْنَا فِي كُلِّ قَرْيَةٍ أَكَابِرَ مُجَرِمِيهَا
لِيَمْكُرُواْ فِيهَا وَمَا يَمْكُرُونَ إِلاَّ بِأَنفُسِهِمْ وَمَا
يَشْعُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**123.** ***"And thus We have appointed in every town its leading
criminals that they may plot therein. Yet they do not plot except
against their own selves but they are not aware."***

The content of this verse points to the situation of the misguided
chiefs and the leaders of infidelity and mischief. It implies that
*Allah* has appointed some leading persons in every town who take the
way of committing sin, and by means of plot and deceit, they pervert
people from the straight path.

The Qur'anic text is recited:

***"And thus We have appointed in every town its leading criminals that
they may plot therein. ..."***

That is, the final end of disobedience and committing abundant sins was
that they became the: robbers of the way of truth, and misled the
servants of *Allah* from the straight path.

So, at the end of the verse, the Qur'an continues saying:

***"... Yet they do not plot except against their own selves but they
are not aware."***

It is clearly understood from this verse that the source of corruptions
and calamities, which encompass some societies, is the mischievous men
of authority and outstanding men inside these societies. These are those
who, by kinds of plot and deceit, change the way of Allah and conceal
the feature of truth from people.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 124
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا جَاءتْهُمْ آيَةٌ قَالُواْ لَن نُّؤْمِنَ حَتَّى نُؤْتَى مِثْلَ
مَا أُوتِيَ رُسُلُ اللّهِ اللّهُ أَعْلَمُ حَيْثُ يَجْعَلُ رِسَالَتَهُ
سَيُصِيبُ الَّذِينَ أَجْرَمُواْ صَغَارٌ عِندَ اللّهِ وَعَذَابٌ شَدِيدٌ
بِمَا كَانُواْ يَمْكُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***124. "And when a Sign (from Allah) comes to them, they say: 'Never
will we believe until we are given the like of what was given to Allah’s
apostles. Allah knows best where to place His apostleship. Soon there
shall befall those who are guilty humiliation from Allah and a severe
punishment because of the plots they used to devise."***

### Occasion of Revelation

It has been narrated that this verse was revealed about a pagan by the
name of Walid-ibn-Muqayrah. He was one of the well-known chiefs of the
idol worshippers.

He was considered as their reflective faculty. He told the Prophet (S)
that if the prophecy were true, he deserved to take that rank more than
him because of both his age; that was elder than the Prophet, (S) and
his wealth; which was more abundant than that of his (S)*.*

### Allah Appoints Prophets

In this verse, the Qur'an shortly, but expressively, points to the kind
of thoughts and ridiculous claims of these false leaders, or as the
Qur'an says: ***"...its leading criminals ..."***[^1] when it says:

***"And when a sign (from Allah) comes to them, they say: 'Never will we
believe until we are given the like of what was given to Allah’s
apostles. ..."***

The Qur'an gives them a clear answer, and implies that it is not
necessary for them to teach Allah how He appoints His prophets and
messengers, and among whom He might choose them, because:

***"...*** ***Allah*** ***knows best where to place His apostleship.
..."***

It is evident that messenger ship relates neither to age and wealth nor
to the circumstances of tribes. But, before mentioning anything else,
the necessary conditions of it are: spiritual receptiveness, purity of
inward, noble human virtues, splendid thoughts, strong decisions, and,
finally, an extra ordinary piety and morality with the stage of
inerrancy.

The existence of these qualities, especially the quality of the
receptiveness of the rank of inerrancy; are some things that none knows
except Allah*.* How far the difference is between these conditions and
what they have mentioned!

The successors of the Prophet (S) should also have all the qualities and
conditions of the Prophet (S)*,* except revelation and divine
legislation. That is, such a successor is both the protector of the
religion and divine laws, and the guardian of the religion and its
regulations, and the spiritual and material leader of people.

That is why he must have both the position of inerrancy and immunity of
fault and sin so that he can fulfill his mission, and to become a trusty
example and a leader whom is obeyed.

For this very reason, such a successor has to be chosen by Allah*,* not
by people or by a consultative committee. It is only Allah Who knows
where to place this position, not people.

So, at the end of the verse, the Qur'an has stated the fate of such
sinners and false leaders who claim too much. It indicates that for the
plots and deceits that these sinners applied to make people astray, soon
they will be put in humiliation and in an intensive punishment before
Allah*.* It says:

***"... Soon there shall befall those who are guilty humiliation from***
***Allah*** ***and a severe punishment because of the plots they used to
devise."***

With their wrong actions, these self-lovers wanted to protect their
social situation and grandeur, but Allah will despise them so much that
they feel the most painful spiritual tortures then.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 125
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَن يُرِدِ اللّهُ أَن يَهْدِيَهُ يَشْرَحْ صَدْرَهُ لِلإِسْلاَمِ
وَمَن يُرِدْ أَن يُضِلَّهُ يَجْعَلْ صَدْرَهُ ضَيِّقًا حَرَجًا
كَأَنَّمَا يَصَّعَّدُ فِي السَّمَاء كَذَلِكَ يَجْعَلُ اللّهُ الرِّجْسَ
عَلَى الَّذِينَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**125.** ***"Therefore, whomever Allah intends that He should guide him
aright, He opens his breast to Islam; and whomever He intends that He
should cause him to send astray, He makes his breast narrow and
straitened as if he were ascending upwards into the sky. Thus does Allah
lay abomination on those who do not believe."***

The purpose of the divine guidance and misguidance is to provide the
means of guidance for those who deserve it, and to ruin those means for
those who are not eligible of it.

The objective meaning of the Qur'anic term / Sadr / (breast) is 'heart
and spirit', and, therefore, the purpose of 'opening the breast' is
broading the scope of mind and thought, as well as the height of spirit,
for accepting the Truth and guidance.

This situation needs that the person renounces the low desires and
wishes of his heart. He who has not ***'an open breast'*** usually
remains inside of himself and does not dare to come out. The fruit of
***'an open breast'*** is, firstly, insight and luminosity and,
secondly, a tender heart which accepts the Truth.

Thus, accepting the Truth necessarily needs an innate receptiveness and
capacity.

***"Therefore, whomever*** ***Allah*** ***intends that He should guide
him aright, He opens his breast to Islam....."***

And, the one who is not ready to accept the Truth, can not ascend into
the sky of cognition.

***"....and whomever He intends that He should cause him to send astray,
He makes his breast narrow and straitened as if he were ascending
upwards into the sky…"***

The result of coming out from the course of natural disposition,
intellect, and nature is suffocation, straitened circumstances, and
stresses. The corruptors are indeed entangled with straitened
circumstances and stresses, although they see themselves in a worldly
apparent welfare and progression.

***".... Thus does*** ***Allah*** ***lay abomination on those who do not
believe."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 126
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهَـذَا صِرَاطُ رَبِّكَ مُسْتَقِيمًا قَدْ فَصَّلْنَا الآيَاتِ
لِقَوْمٍ يَذَّكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**126.** ***"And this is the path of your Lord; straight. Indeed We have
explained the Signs for people who take admonition."***

One of Allah’s ways of treatment is that He appoints 'open breasts' for
the clear-hearted truth-seekers; and, on the contrary, those obstinate
disbelievers who flee from Faith are involved with abomination and lack
of divine aid.

Therefore, all ways, save the way of Allah*,* are either false or blind.

***"And this is the path of your Lord; straight. ..."***

Allah has completed the argument to all, if they are of those who are
attentive.

***"... We have explained the Signs for people who take admonition."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 127
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُمْ دَارُ السَّلاَمِ عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ وَهُوَ وَلِيُّهُمْ بِمَا
كَانُواْ يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**127.** ***"For them shall be the abode of peace with their Lord, and
He is their Guardian because of what they used to do."***

In Heaven, there is no harshness, competition, contradiction, accusation
and jealousy, grudge and lie, grief, and no kind of worriment, death,
disease, poverty and so on,

***"For them shall be the abode of peace...."***

And, above the bounty of security and peace, there is the existence of
being under the light of especial grace of Allah therein,

Briefly speaking, the inhabitants of Heaven are those who, like the
near-stationed angels and even higher than them, have rank of nearness
with their Lord.

***".... with their Lord....."***

However, reaching to the divine security and guardianship can be
obtained under the light of (good) deeds. The verse says:

***".... and He is their Guardian because of what they used to do."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 128
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ يِحْشُرُهُمْ جَمِيعًا يَا مَعْشَرَ الْجِنِّ قَدِ
اسْتَكْثَرْتُم مِّنَ الإِنسِ وَقَالَ أَوْلِيَآؤُهُم مِّنَ الإِنسِ
رَبَّنَا اسْتَمْتَعَ بَعْضُنَا بِبَعْضٍ وَبَلَغْنَا أَجَلَنَا الَّذِيَ
أَجَّلْتَ لَنَا قَالَ النَّارُ مَثْوَاكُمْ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا إِلاَّ
مَا شَاء اللّهُ إِنَّ رَبَّكَ حَكِيمٌ عَليمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**128.** ***"And on the day He musters all together, (addressing the
Satans of jinn, He says:) 'O' assembly of jinn! you took away a great
part of mankind. 'And their friends from among the human beings will
say: 'O' our Lord! Some of us profited by others and we have reached our
term which You had assigned for us.' He will say: 'The fire is your
abode, to remain in it (forever), except that*** ***Allah*** ***wills
(to forgive some of you) '. Verily your Lord is All-Wise,
All-Knowing!'***

Following the former matters, the Qur'an says:

***"And on the day He musters all together, (addressing the Satans of
jinn, He says:) 'O' assembly of jinn! You took away a great part of
mankind.'..."***

Then those of human beings who had followed them will say that they
profited from each other. The verse says:

***"... And their friends from among the human beings will say: ' O' our
Lord! Some of us profited by others ..."***

The interest that the jinns have benefited from human beings is that
they have been their chiefs and masters and those human beings have
obeyed their low desires and lusts. The interest that human beings have
benefited from jinns is that the jinns have ornamented the vain
pleasures and lusts before their eyes and have made them amused by these
apparently fair things.

***"... and we have reached our term which You had assigned for
us.'..."***

This part of the verse means that they say: 'We have reached the death
You had appointed for us.'

Some commentators say that the purpose of this statement is to point to
the resurrection of the dead in Hereafter.

***"... He will say: 'The Fire is your abode, to remain in it
(forever)....."***

Addressing such people, Allah says that Hell Fire is their dwelling
place and they will remain in punishment there forever.

Returning from Fire is an exception that refers to guilty Muslims. If He
pleases, He will punish them; and if He wills, He will forgive them by
His grace.

At the end of the verse, the Qur'an says that Allah is Wise in His
affairs, and He knows every thing.

***"... Verily your Lord is All-Wise, All-Knowing."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 129
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَلِكَ نُوَلِّي بَعْضَ الظَّالِمِينَ بَعْضًا بِمَا كَانُواْ
يَكْسِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**129.** ***"And thus do We make some of the iniquitous to befriend
others on account of what they used to earn."***

As a trial, Allah may leave the unjust to themselves and make them
friends of each other in order that they show affection to each other.
In this case, their retribution, that He will give them, will be as much
as they deserve.

So, similar to the situation of the transgressors among jinn and human,
on the Resurrection Day, when Allah will refer them to each other and He
will declare Himself to be clear of them, we will refer the unjust to
each other, too.

There are some persons who have followed some persons other than
Allah*.* They will be left to their masters on that Day, and will be
told to go to them for the deliverance from Fire.

The purpose of this statement is to announce them that, on the
Resurrection Day, there will not be any friend to save them from the
chastisement.

In other words, as a result of the friendship and affection that they
had between themselves, they will be sent to the Hell following each
other.[^2]

***"And thus do We make some of the iniquitous to be friend others on
account of what they used to earn."***

[^1]: Surah 'An'am, No.6, Verse 123.

[^2]: According to some Islamic narrations, the retribution of the
following persons will be the domination of the cruel ones upon them.
These persons are: those who abandon enjoining right and forbidding
wrong, and those who do not pay khums (one fifth levy) alms and
religious taxes, and those who assist the unjust. (Atyab-ul-Bayan, the
commentary) A tradition indicates that when Allah is pleased with the
deeds of a group of people, He will refer their affairs to some good
persons; but when He is not pleased with their deeds, He may put their
affairs in the hands of some evil ones. (Kashf-ul- 'Asrar, the
commentary)


