Section 13: Security of the Ka 'bah Inviolable
==============================================

Hunting during pilgrimage period, prohibited-the Inviolable Security of
Ka'bah declared.

Surah Al-Ma’idah, Verse 94
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ لَيَبْلُوَنَّكُمُ اللّهُ بِشَيْءٍ
مِّنَ الصَّيْدِ تَنَالُهُ أَيْدِيكُمْ وَرِمَاحُكُمْ لِيَعْلَمَ اللّهُ
مَن يَخَافُهُ بِالْغَيْبِ فَمَنِ اعْتَدَى بَعْدَ ذَلِكَ فَلَهُ عَذَابٌ
أَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**94.** ***"O' you who have Faith!*** ***Allah*** ***will surely try you
with something of the game which your hands and your spears can reach,
so that*** ***Allah*** ***may ascertain who fears Him in secret. So
whoever transgresses after that for him there is a painful
punishment."***

During the time when a pilgrim to Mecca is in pilgrim garment and is
performing the pilgrimage rites, the one has not the right of hunting.

During the same time, occasionally it happens that a hunt approaches a
person so nigh that he can catch it by a simple jump, but the trial of
Allah is in this fact that we should not touch the hunt. So, if we hunt
it, the punishment of Allah includes us.

Hunting itself brings forth no painful chastisement, but chastisement is
for the breaking law. In the land where Abraham overlooked Ishmael, you
would overlook the hunts either. The verse says:

***"O' you who have Faith!*** ***Allah*** ***will surely try you with
something of the game which your hands and your spears can reach, so
that*** ***Allah*** ***may ascertain who fears Him in secret. So whoever
transgresses after that for him there is a painful punishment".***

Surah Al-Ma’idah, Verse 95
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ لاَ تَقْتُلُواْ الصَّيْدَ وَأَنتُمْ
حُرُمٌ وَمَن قَتَلَهُ مِنكُم مُّتَعَمِّدًا فَجَزَاء مِّثْلُ مَا قَتَلَ
مِنَ النَّعَمِ يَحْكُمُ بِهِ ذَوَا عَدْلٍ مِّنكُمْ هَدْيًا بَالِغَ
الْكَعْبَةِ أَوْ كَفَّارَةٌ طَعَامُ مَسَاكِينَ أَو عَدْلُ ذَلِكَ
صِيَامًا لِّيَذُوقَ وَبَالَ أَمْرِهِ عَفَا اللّهُ عَمَّا سَلَف وَمَنْ
عَادَ فَيَنتَقِمُ اللّهُ مِنْهُ وَاللّهُ عَزِيزٌ ذُو انْتِقَامٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***95. "O' you who have Faith! kill no game while you are in pilgrim
garb: and anyone of you who kills it intentionally, its atonement is the
like in cattle of what he has killed, as (to this likeness) two just
persons among you judge, (and the animal) will be an offering reached to
the Ka'bah, or the atonement (of it) is feeding the poor, or the
equivalent of that in fasting, that he may taste the effect of his
action. Allah has pardoned whatever is a thing of the past; and whoever
returns (to it), Allah will take vengeance on him, and Allah is Mighty,
the Lord of Retribution."***

In this verse, the command of the prohibition of hunting at the time of
being in pilgrim garment, with a general condition, has been issued more
clearly and precisely.

It says:

***"O' you who have Faith! Kill no game while you are in pilgrim
garb....."***

Then, it points to the atonement of hunting in the condition of being in
pilgrim garb, and says:

***"... and anyone of you who kills it intentionally, its atonement is
the like in cattle of what he has killed....."***

That is, such a person should sacrifice that animal and give its meat to
some needy ones.

Here, the purpose of 'the like' is the likeness of the size and the
shape of the animal. It is in this sense that, for example, if a person
hunts a wild big animal, such as the ostrich, he should choose an
ostrich as atonement; or if he hunts a deer, he should sacrifice a lamb
with nearly the same size.

And, since some people may fall into suspicion upon the subject of
likeness, in this regard, the Qur'an ordains that this matter should be
fulfilled under the judgment of two just persons, possessed of some
knowledge among you. It says:

***"... as (to this likeness) two just persons among you judge....."***

And, for the place where this animal should be sacrificed, the Qur'an
commands that it must be killed as a sacrifice dedicated to the Ka'bah
and in the land of Ka'bah. It says:

***"... (and the animal) will be an offering reached to the
ka'bah....."***

Then, the Qur'an adds that it is not necessary that the atonement should
certainly be in the form of sacrifice, but each of the two other things
can substitute it. The first is that some money equivalent to it can be
spent in the way of feeding the poor. It says:

***"... or the atonement (of it) is feeding the poor....."***

And the second thing of substitution is as follows:

***"... or the equivalent of that in fasting....."***

These atonements are for that the person sees the retribution of his
committing offence. It says:

***"... that he may taste the effect of his action...."***

But, in view of the fact that usually no ordinance includes the past,
the Qur'an stipulates that Allah has forgiven the offences that have
been done in this field, saying thus:

***"...*** ***Allah*** ***has pardoned whatever is a thing of the
past....."***

So, if a person does not pay attention to these frequent warnings and
the ordinance of atonement and hunts at the time of being in the pilgrim
garb, Allah will take vengeance of such a person and Allah is Mighty to
take vengeance in the appropriate time. It says:

***"... and whoever returns (to it),*** ***Allah*** ***will take
vengeance on him, and*** Allah ***is Mighty, the Lord of
Retribution."***

Surah Al-Ma’idah, Verse 96
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُحِلَّ لَكُمْ صَيْدُ الْبَحْرِ وَطَعَامُهُ مَتَاعًا لَّكُمْ
وَلِلسَّيَّارَةِ وَحُرِّمَ عَلَيْكُمْ صَيْدُ الْبَرِّ مَا دُمْتُمْ
حُرُمًا وَاتَّقُواْ اللّهَ الَّذِيَ إِلَيْهِ تُحْشَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**96.** ***"The game of the sea and its food is lawful for you, a
provision for you and (for the caravans, but the game of the land is
forbidden to you, so long as you are in pilgrim garb; and be in awe
of*** ***Allah*** ***toward Whom you will be gathered."***

The words in this holy verse are about the hunts of the sea. It says:

***"The games of the sea and its food are lawful for you....."***

The objective meaning of 'food', mentioned in this verse, is the food
that can be prepared from the hunted fish. The verse intends to make two
things admissible. One of them is 'hunting', and the other is 'consuming
the food made from the hunted things.'

Then, the Qur'an points to the philosophy of this ordinance, implying
that this permission is for the sake that you and the travelers can
enjoy it. It says:

***"….provision for you and for the caravans....."***

In other words, the verse means: for the sake that you do not fall in
trouble for nutrition when you are in pilgrim garb, and that you can be
able to enjoy one kind of hunting, this permission has been given due to
the hunts of the sea.

As an emphasis, the Qur'an returns to the former ordinance once more,
and says:

**"...** ***but the game of the land is forbidden to you so long as you
are in pilgrim garb…."***

And, at the end of the verse, in order to emphasize upon all the
ordinances that were mentioned, it says:

***"... and be in awe of Allah toward whom you will be gathered."***

### The Philosophy of No Hunting when Being in Pilgrim Garb!

We know that the performance of Hajj and 'Umrah is one of the worships
that makes man aloof from the world of matter and brings him into an
environment full of spiritualities.

In performing the rite of Hajj and 'Umrah, the ceremonies of the
material life, fights and conflicts, hatreds, sexual desires, and
material pleasures, will totally be put aside and the person reaches a
kind of godly legitimated asceticism. So, it seems that the prohibition
of hunting, while being in pilgrim garb, is also for the same purpose.

Besides, if hunting were an allowed action in Allah’s center of
pilgrimage, regarding to the large crowd of pilgrims that every year
come into this holy land, the existence of many animals of the zone
would be destroyed, in particular that, because of dryness and scarcity
of water, its animals are not so abundant.

Paying attention to the fact that hunting animals and picking plants of
that sacred land is also prohibited, even when the pilgrims to Mecca are
not in their pilgrim garb, it makes clear that this commandment has a
close connection with the subject of protection of environment and
maintaining the plants and animals of the locality.

Therefore, the philosophy of prohibition or making something admissible
is not always substantial, but it sometimes depends on the conditions of
time and place. Then, geography and history are effective on the
ordinance of Allah*.*

Thus, the abundance of people, and the performance of the worshipping
rite, should not be a means of annihilation and destruction for animals
and plants.

Surah Al-Ma’idah, Verse 97
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جَعَلَ اللّهُ الْكَعْبَةَ الْبَيْتَ الْحَرَامَ قِيَامًا لِّلنَّاسِ
وَالشَّهْرَ الْحَرَامَ وَالْهَدْيَ وَالْقَلاَئِدَ ذَلِكَ لِتَعْلَمُواْ
أَنَّ اللّهَ يَعْلَمُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الأَرْضِ وَأَنَّ
اللّهَ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***97. "Allah has made the Ka'bah the sacred House, a (means of) staying
(in peace) for mankind, and (also) the Sacred Month and the offerings
and the (animals with the) garlands. This is so that you may know that
Allah knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth, and
that Allah is All-Knowing of all things.***

As it is cited in Mufradat-i-Raqib, the Arabic word /qiyam/ is a means
of staying firm, like the pillar of a tent.

Imam Sadiq (as) said about the Sacred House that it has been called
Baytillah-il-Haram because it is 'haram' (forbidden) for the
disbelievers to enter it.[^1]

When the affairs of people are to be arranged and strengthened, a few
things are needed: 1) centrality, 2) security, and 3) sustenance. Allah
has set these three things in the Ka'bah and the Sacred House. It is
both a center, and no one has a right of quarrel there, and the
sacrifices are used as a means of nutrition and a means of livelihood
for Muslims.

The Qur'anic word /hady/ means 'a sign less sacrifice', while the term
/qala'id/ refers to the sacrifices with signs.

By Islamic culture, the sacred (forbidden) months, in which fighting is
prohibited, are: Rajab, Zil-Gha'dah, Zil-Hajjah, and Muharram.

The plain assembly of millions of Muslims in a sacred place without
showing any privileges to each other, and without any dispute or
practical quarrel, is peculiar to the advantages of Islam.

There are some divine graces in Hajj, like: asking forgiveness from
others at the time of leaving for Hajj and visiting each other when they
return from Mecca, commercial splendor, the payment of one fifth levy
(khums) and alms, to be acquainted with religious disciplines and
nations, being inside the most ancient center of Unity ornamented with
no ceremonies; treating the same or tracing the footsteps of prophets,
repenting in the lands of 'Arafat and Mash'ar, remembering and
illustrating the scene of Hereafter, political parade against infidels,
etc.

If we consider them all in mind, we may understand that these programs
in Hajj are sourced from the infinite knowledge of Allah*,* Who is
Well-Aware of all things of the world of existence.

Thus, a limited knowledge can never deliver such an interesting
instruction.

The verse says:

***"Allah has made the Ka'bah, the Sacred House, a (means of) staying
(in peace) for mankind, and (also) the Sacred Month and the offerings
and the (animals with the) garlands. This is so that you may know that
Allah knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth, and
that Allah is All-Knowing of all things.”***

Surah Al-Ma’idah, Verses 98 - 99
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اعْلَمُواْ أَنَّ اللّهَ شَدِيدُ الْعِقَابِ وَأَنَّ اللّهَ غَفُورٌ
رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّا عَلَى الرَّسُولِ إِلاَّ الْبَلاَغُ وَاللّهُ يَعْلَمُ مَا
تُبْدُونَ وَمَا تَكْتُمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***98. "Know that Allah is severe in retribution, and that Allah is
forgiving, Merciful."***

***99. "Nothing is (incumbent) upon the Messenger but to convey (The
message of Allah), and Allah knows what you reveal and what you
conceal."***

Encouragement and threat should be arranged with together. The verse
also implies this fact. It says:

***"Know that Allah is severe in retribution, and that Allah is
forgiving, Merciful."***

You are responsible of your own deeds and the Prophet (S) is not someone
who compels you or imposes any domain over you. His duty is only to
convey the Message. .

So, since the knowledge of Allah encompasses everything, then it is
indifferent with Him that you conceal or manifest the things, and your
receiving or rejecting the truth does not create any deficiency in the
prophet (S).

***"Nothing is (incumbent) upon the Messenger but to convey (The message
of Allah), and Allah knows what you reveal and what you conceal."***

Surah Al-Ma’idah, Verse 100
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لاَّ يَسْتَوِي الْخَبِيثُ وَالطَّيِّبُ وَلَوْ أَعْجَبَكَ كَثْرَةُ
الْخَبِيثِ فَاتَّقُواْ اللّهَ يَا أُوْلِي الأَلْبَابِ لَعَلَّكُمْ
تُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**100.** ***"Say: 'The evil and the good are not equal, though the
abundance of evil may dazzle you. 'So be in awe of*** ***Allah, O'
possessors of intellects, that you may be prosperous."***

The senses of 'evil' and 'good' refer to all men, styles, properties,
incomes, foods, and materials.

The standard of worth is 'right' and 'wrong', not the majority and
minority. Therefore, beware that the majority and abundance may be
fascinating. So, be careful that they should not attract you toward the
path of sin and evil.

The possessors of intellects, i.e. the wise, advocate the Truth, not the
crowd. The idea which says: 'when you are in Rome, do as the Romans do'
is not a Qur'anic epithet.

In view point of this school, impiety is a sign of ignorance. The verse
says:

***"Say: 'The evil and the good are not equal, though the abundance of
evil may dazzle you.' So be in awe of*** ***Allah, O' possessors of
intellects, that you may be prosperous."***

[^1]: Nur -uth-Thaqalayn, Vol. 1, PP. 680 - 681


