Section 14: The Decreed Punishment shall be unavoidable
=======================================================

The warning against the sure punishment -The decreed punishment being
unavoidable –The Superstitious infanticide -Every soul shall bear
witness against its own self

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 130
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا مَعْشَرَ الْجِنِّ وَالإِنسِ أَلَمْ يَأْتِكُمْ رُسُلٌ مِّنكُمْ
يَقُصُّونَ عَلَيْكُمْ آيَاتِي وَيُنذِرُونَكُمْ لِقَاء يَوْمِكُمْ
هَـذَا قَالُواْ شَهِدْنَا عَلَى أَنفُسِنَا وَغَرَّتْهُمُ الْحَيَاةُ
الدُّنْيَا وَشَهِدُواْ عَلَى أَنفُسِهِمْ أَنَّهُمْ كَانُواْ كَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**130.** ***" 'O' assembly of the jinn and mankind! Did there not come
to you messengers fro yourselves, recounting to you My Signs and warning
you of the meeting of this Day?' They will say: 'We bear witness against
ourselves.' And the life of this world deceived them, and they will bear
witness against their own selves that they were (constantly)
disbelievers.***

On the Day of Judgment, Allah (S.w.T.) will tell the cruel Satanic
persons:

***"'O' assembly of the jinn and mankind! Did there not come to you
messengers from yourselves…"***

Of course, all Divine prophets were appointed from humankind, but since
the totality of jinn and men have been addressed at first, due to his
respect, the prophets have been attributed to all, too, although they
have been from the same kind.

***"... recounting to you My Signs and warning you of the meeting of
this Day?'..."***

These prophets recited the proofs and verses of Allah to you, and they
warned you of meeting such a Day, too.

***"... They will say: 'We bear witness against ourselves.' And the life
of this world deceived them, and they will bear witness against their
own selves, that they were (constantly) disbelievers."***

This confession of the sinners, which occurs before Allah on the Day of
Judgment, denotes the fact that they have accepted that Allah’s argument
has been completed to them and He has sent prophets and guides toward
them.

However, it is also narrated by Ibn- 'Abbas that every prophet was
chosen from among human beings, and then, that human-prophet would
choose a messenger for jinns from among themselves.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 131
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ أَن لَّمْ يَكُن رَّبُّكَ مُهْلِكَ الْقُرَى بِظُلْمٍ وَأَهْلُهَا
غَافِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**131. "*****This is because your Lord would never destroy the towns
unjustly while their people were negligent.*****"**

One of Allah’s ways of treatment is that, by sending prophets and
different kinds of warning, He shows right and wrong to people and
states the facts for them to complete the argument. It is in that case
that if they behave heedlessly, He will punish them.

This general law and way of treatment is referred to in numerous verses
of the Qur'an, including: **Surah-Ash-Shu'ara, No.26. Verse 208** which
says:

***"And We did not destroy any town but it had (its) warners:"***,

and **Surah Al-Isra, No.17. Verse 15**; where it says:

***"... nor do We chastise until We raise an apostle."***

Therefore Allah’s chastisements are given because of justice that exists
in the Essence of His Lordship.

Regarding to this, it can be said that punishment without former
statement of admonishment and warning, is unjust and is a vice-

***"This is because your Lord would never destroy the towns unjustly
while their people were negligent."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 132
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِكُلٍّ دَرَجَاتٌ مِّمَّا عَمِلُواْ وَمَا رَبُّكَ بِغَافِلٍ عَمَّا
يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**132.** ***"And for all (men) there are ranks in accordance with what
they have done, and your Lord is not heedless of what they do."***

Allah is just and He gives everyone the rank due to the deeds the one
has performed.

Thus, both the felicity and evil fortune of people depend on their own
deeds and conduct.

***"And for all (men) there are ranks in accordance with what they have
done, and your Lord is not heedless of what they do."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verses 133 - 134
---------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَبُّكَ الْغَنِيُّ ذُو الرَّحْمَةِ إِن يَشَأْ يُذْهِبْكُمْ
وَيَسْتَخْلِفْ مِن بَعْدِكُم مَّا يَشَاء كَمَا أَنشَأَكُم مِّن
ذُرِّيَّةِ قَوْمٍ آخَرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ مَا تُوعَدُونَ لآتٍ وَمَا أَنتُم بِمُعْجِزِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**133.** ***"And your Lord Self-Sufficient, the Lord of Mercy, if He
pleases, He may take you off; and make whom He pleases successors after
you, just as He produced you from the descendants of other people."***  
**134.** ***"Verily what you are promised, will certainly come, and you
cannot make (Allah) helpless (to flee from His retribution)."***

In the previous verses the statement was about rewards justly and
without atrocity given to the eligible persons. Here, in this verse, the
Qur'an refers to the Mercy and Self -Sufficiency of Allah*,* both of
which are reasons to His Justice. The verse says:

***"And your Lord is Self-Sufficient, the Lord of Mercy....."***

That is, your Lord is not in need of His servants and their worships. He
is the owner of clemency. He bestows mercy upon people. He enjoins them
to do some duties in order to deliver some great benefits to them.

These benefits are not obtainable unless through the way of being
eligible of them. This eligibility can be gained by means of fulfilling
the divine duties accompanied with glorification and veneration unto
Allah*.*

***"... if He pleases, He may take you off; and make whom He pleases
successors after you, just as He produced you from the descendants of
other people."***

The Qur'an addresses the sinners and says that if Allah pleased He
(S.w.T.) would destroy all of you. Then, after your destruction and your
annihilation, He would appoint another group instead of you who should
obey Him, just as the same form that He created you from the generation
of other people who existed before you.

***"Verily what you are promised, will certainly come, and you cannot
make (Allah) helpless (to flee from His retribution)."***

It is completely sure that whatever you are promised to, such as
resurrection, reward and retribution, and the varieties of situations
and differences that there are between the ranks of Heaven and the
levels of Hell Fire, will certainly come, while you are not outside the
sovereignty and realm of Allah*.*

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 135
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَا قَوْمِ اعْمَلُواْ عَلَى مَكَانَتِكُمْ إِنِّي عَامِلٌ فَسَوْفَ
تَعْلَمُونَ مَن تَكُونُ لَهُ عَاقِبَةُ الدِّارِ إِنَّهُ لاَ يُفْلِحُ
الظَّالِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**135.** ***"Say: ' O' my people! act according to your ability; verily
I too act. Then soon you will know for whom will be the (good) end of
the abode. Surely the unjust will not be felicitous'."***

The verse announces to the disbelievers that they act as far as they can
and do their best as much as it is possible for them, and also in a form
that their possibilities let them.

***"Say: 'O' my people! act according to your ability....."***

It is so that I, in my turn, do my best, too.

***"... verily I too act ..."***

The purpose of this part of the verse is that the Prophet (S) says to
the disbelievers that they might remain in their infidelity and
hostility, and he (the Prophet) would persist on Islam and be affirmed
in patience before them, too.

***"... Then soon you will know for whom will be the (good) end of the
abode. ..."***

It will not be very late that you will come to know which of us will
have a good and admirable end.

***"... Surely the unjust will not be felicitous."***

This phrase has been added as a warning and threat of punishment when it
says that the unjust will not be successful in reaching to their own
ideal?

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 136
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلُواْ لِلّهِ مِمِّا ذَرَأَ مِنَ الْحَرْثِ وَالأَنْعَامِ نَصِيبًا
فَقَالُواْ هَـذَا لِلّهِ بِزَعْمِهِمْ وَهَـذَا لِشُرَكَآئِنَا فَمَا
كَانَ لِشُرَكَآئِهِمْ فَلاَ يَصِلُ إِلَى اللّهِ وَمَا كَانَ لِلّهِ
فَهُوَ يَصِلُ إِلَى شُرَكَآئِهِمْ سَاء مَا يَحْكُمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**136.** ***"And they (the polytheists) assigned to Allah out of what He
has created of filth and cattle, a portion, and said: 'This is for
Allah', according to their assertion, 'And this is for our associates.'
Then what is for their associates does not reach Allah, and what is for
Allah reaches their associates. (How) evil is the judgment that they
make!"***

The statements and decisions of those who go out of the path of
prophets' training and enter the land of imagination are imaginary and
without logic. They consider themselves the possessors of everything,
and set divisions between them.

Once they know sons as their own share and daughters as Allah’s share:

***"What! for you the male and for Him the females."*** **(Surah An-Najm
No. 53 verse 21).**

And another time, according to their imagination, they divide filth and
cattle. The verse says:

***"And they (the polytheists) assigned to Allah out of what He has
created of filth and cattle, a portion, and said: 'This is for Allah
according to their assertion, 'And this is for our associates.'***

***Then what is for their associates does not reach Allah, and what is
for Allah reaches their associates. ..."***

Polytheists imagined that the share of their idols was unchangeable.
Therefore, they spent it upon idol temples and the servants therein; but
when the money of expenditure was insufficient, they expended the share
of God for idol-temples, for the reason that the God of the skies was
free from want. They expended it neither for infants, nor for the poor,
nor for guests.

***"... (How) evil is the judgment that they make!"***

They judge badly, because they consider their idols prior to God. They
do something that is neither legal nor religious. And, which judgment is
more indecent and more shameful than this that a person supposes a
worthless piece of wood or stone higher than the Creator of the world of
existence? Can a degradation of thought worse than this be considered?

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 137
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَلِكَ زَيَّنَ لِكَثِيرٍ مِّنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ قَتْلَ أَوْلاَدِهِمْ
شُرَكَآؤُهُمْ لِيُرْدُوهُمْ وَلِيَلْبِسُواْ عَلَيْهِمْ دِينَهُمْ
وَلَوْ شَاء اللّهُ مَا فَعَلُوهُ فَذَرْهُمْ وَمَا يَفْتَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**137.** ***"And thus their associates have made fair seeming to most of
the polytheists the killing of their children, that they may destroy
them and confound their religion for them. And had*** ***Allah***
***pleased they would not have done so. Therefore, leave them with what
they forge."***

Here, Allah refers to another indecent quality of the specifications of
these people. The verse says:

***"And thus their associates have made fair seeming to most of the
polytheists the killing of their children....."***

As they assigned share from their filth and cattle for God, Satan also
made fair seeming killing their daughters and burying them alive for
fear of poverty and scorn.

Some commentators have said that the custom of killing daughters came
forth from the time when Nu'man-ibn-Munthir plundered a tribe of Arabs
and took their females captive. The daughter of Oays-ibn-' Asim was also
among the captives.

When the two parties made peace, all women went their own homes except
Qays' daughter, who preferred to stay among the enemy's troop. Qays made
an oath that he would bury alive any daughter was born in his house.

***"... that they may destroy them ..."***

The Arabic sign 'li', in this part of the verse, refers to the end of
the action. Then the phrase means that the result of ornamentation of
slaying child was the destruction of people.

There were, of course, some obstinate persons among them who intended to
kill them, too.

***"... and confound their religion for them ..."***

Another result was that their religion became dubious to them and they
hesitated.

***"... And had*** ***Allah*** ***pleased they would not have done so
..."***

If Allah (S.w.T.) had desired to prohibit them its performance, or to
force them to abandon it, He would have done it and prevented them from
doing that. But this work did not fit to responsibility, which is an
arbitrary affair.

***"... Therefore, leave them with what they forge."***

Do leave them then with their lies and calumnies and let them be in
their own state, for Allah will retribute them. This phrase is stated in
the utmost threat.

This verse indicates that ornamentation of slaying and slaughter itself
both were among their own practices, and they were liars when they
attributed it to Allah*.*

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 138
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُواْ هَـذِهِ أَنْعَامٌ وَحَرْثٌ حِجْرٌ لاَّ يَطْعَمُهَا إِلاَّ
مَن نّشَاء بِزَعْمِهِمْ وَأَنْعَامٌ حُرِّمَتْ ظُهُورُهَا وَأَنْعَامٌ
لاَّ يَذْكُرُونَ اسْمَ اللّهِ عَلَيْهَا افْتِرَاء عَلَيْهِ
سَيَجْزِيهِم بِمَا كَانُواْ يَفْتَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**138.** ***"And they said: ' These are cattle and tillage prohibited,
None may eat them except whom we please' -so they assert -'and (there
are) cattle whose back are forbidden and cattle over which they do not
mention*** ***Allah’s*** ***name' - forging a lie against Him, Soon He
will requite them for what they used to for."***

The Qur'an has referred to another false belief of idolaters' notion in
this verse. They considered camels, cows, sheep, and filth unlawful,
with their own imagination, and they divided them for gods. They said
that none could eat from their meat unless they would let.

***"And they said: ' These are cattle and tillage prohibited, None may
eat them except whom we please' -so they assert -"....***

When the holy verse says ***"So they assert"*** it means that they had
no reason for this action of theirs, but they encumbered themselves only
imaginarily.

***".... 'and (there are) cattle whose back are forbidden"....***

The objective meaning of the cattle on whose backs they believed was
unlawful to ride, were as follows:

A she-camel that had brought forth ten she-camel issues; and a she-camel
which had brought forth five issues and her ears were slit; and a male
camel which had caused ten issues.[^1]

***"... and cattle over which they do not mention*** ***Allah’s***
***name' - forging a lie against Him ..."***

Mujahid, a commentator, says that there were some cattle over which, and
over their limbs, they did not mention the name of Allah*,* and they did
not perform pilgrimage rites on them as well. Or, when slaughtering
them, they mentioned the names of idols over them, not the name of
Allah*.*

They used to do these things with the reason that Allah had commanded
them to do so. But that was a lie and a calumny.

***"... Soon He will requite them for what they used to forge."***

Allah will give them soon their retribution for the lies and calumnies
they used to forge against Him.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 139
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُواْ مَا فِي بُطُونِ هَـذِهِ الأَنْعَامِ خَالِصَةٌ لِّذُكُورِنَا
وَمُحَرَّمٌ عَلَى أَزْوَاجِنَا وَإِن يَكُن مَّيْتَةً فَهُمْ فِيهِ
شُرَكَاء سَيَجْزِيهِمْ وَصْفَهُمْ إِنَّهُ حِكِيمٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**139.** ***"And they said: 'What is in the bellies of these cattle is
exclusively for our males and forbidden to our wives. But if it be born
dead, then all of them are partners in it. Soon He will requite them for
their attributing (falsehood to Him). Verily He is All-Wise,
All-Knowing."***

Here, Allah narrates one of another false meaning of their statements.
The Qur'an says:

***"And they said: ' What is in the bellies of these cattle is
exclusively for our males and forbidden to our wives. ..."***

The pagans, whom were discussed about formerly, said that whatever was
in the wombs of those cattle, whose meat and riding on them was unlawful
for them was exclusively men's, and women were prohibited to consume it.

When it is said that something belongs exclusively to someone, it means
that there is no partner for it. It is similar to an action to be done
exclusively for Allah*.*

The term 'male' mentioned in this verse, in Arabic, originally means:
'honour, nobility. The male gender was nobler in the view of them than
female gender.

***"... But if it be born dead, then all of them are partners in it.
..."***

If the issue was born dead, men and women could share in it. Next, the
verse says:

***"... Soon He will requite them for their attributing (falsehood to
Him). ..."***

That is, they will be punished soon for their false attribution and
wrong manner.

***"... Verily He is All-Wise, All-Knowing."***

Allah (S.w.T.) is All-Wise, and according to His Wisdom, He either
precedes or postpones the retribution of persons. He is also All-Knowing
and, therefore, He is aware of their deeds.

This verse numerates four vices concerning the belief practiced by the
disbelievers.

1) They slaughtered animals without Allah’s leave.

2) They ate the meat of animals, and, claiming that they had been
purified, they belied Allah*.*

3) They made the small freed camels unlawful for women.

4) With no reason, a dead born issue was lawful for both men and women.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 140
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ خَسِرَ الَّذِينَ قَتَلُواْ أَوْلاَدَهُمْ سَفَهًا بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ
وَحَرَّمُواْ مَا رَزَقَهُمُ اللّهُ افْتِرَاء عَلَى اللّهِ قَدْ
ضَلُّواْ وَمَا كَانُواْ مُهْتَدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**140.** ***"Indeed are lost those who slay their children foolishly
without knowledge, and forbid what*** ***Allah*** ***has provided them,
forging falsehood against*** ***Allah. They have certainly gone astray
and they are not guided aright."***

Ibn-' Abbas has said that whoever wishes to know the quantity of the
ignorance of the peoples at the time of pre Islamic ignorance, may
recite the verses of Surah Al- 'An'am, (Those very verses that were
previously discussed).

The ignorant Arabs, imagining becoming nigh to the idols, or on the
supposition that they would protect honour and nobility, sacrificed
their daughters before idols or buried them alive.

Once there happened that a man came to the Prophet (S) and explained the
cause of his worriedness to him. The man said that at the Age of
Ignorance Allah had given him a daughter. He wanted to kill her but her
wife severely hindered him from committing that action.

That girl matured and there came a solicitor for her. His zeal did not
let him to accept the situation. On the other hand, it was not
appropriate for her to remain without husband, either. One day, he
brought her to a field outside the town and dropped her down into a
well. Whatever more she moaned, he did not care.

At this time, the messenger of Allah wept and said:

***"Had it not been that the past was forgiven, I would have punished
you."***

### Explanations

1. Superstitions are condemned with the most intensive statements.

2. Ignorance and foolishness are the causes of loss. (These losses may
be like losing a child, damage in emotion, the absence of lawful (halal)
bounties, Hell, and Allah’s punishment.)

***"Indeed are lost those who slay their children foolishly ..."***

3. The greatest damage is the sacrificial state of man in the way of
falsehood, whether to be sacrificed for idols or to be sacrificed by
false imaginations and undue zeals.

4. Banning something needs either canonical evidence or a rational
demonstration.

***"... without knowledge, and forbid what Allah has provided them,
forging falsehood against Allah. They have certainly gone astray and
they are not guided aright. "***

5. The undue banning of lawful things is a belie forging against
Allah*;* and it is forbidden.

***"... and forbid what*** ***Allah*** ***has provided them ..."***

[^1]: Refer to the commentary of verse 103 from Surah 5, too.


