Section 16: The Forbidden Food - the Vain Excuses
=================================================

The forbidden foods -the vain excuses of the disbelievers – Allah’s
wrath can not be averted by the guilty ones.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 145
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لاَّ أَجِدُ فِي مَا أُوْحِيَ إِلَيَّ مُحَرَّمًا عَلَى طَاعِمٍ
يَطْعَمُهُ إِلاَّ أَن يَكُونَ مَيْتَةً أَوْ دَمًا مَّسْفُوحًا أَوْ
لَحْمَ خِنزِيرٍ فَإِنَّهُ رِجْسٌ أَوْ فِسْقًا أُهِلَّ لِغَيْرِ اللّهِ
بِهِ فَمَنِ اضْطُرَّ غَيْرَ بَاغٍ وَلاَ عَادٍ فَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ غَفُورٌ
رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**145.** ***"Say: 'I do not find in what has been revealed to me
anything forbidden for an eater to eat except it be carrion, or blood
poured forth, or the flesh of swine -for that is indeed abomination or a
transgression, slain invoking (the name of) other than*** ***Allah, but
whoever is forced (to eat it by necessity), not desiring nor
transgressing, then surely your Lord is Forgiving, Merciful."***

To make the divine prohibitions clear from the innovations that pagans
had asserted in the Divine creed, in this verse, the Prophet (S) is
commanded to tell people explicitly that there is no forbidden food for
anybody, irrespective of men and women, young and old, in what was
revealed to him.

The verse says:

***"Say: 'I do not find in what has been revealed to me anything
forbidden for an eater to eat ..."***

This law lies with some exceptions. The first of them is that it should
not be carrion. The verse continues saying:

***"...except it be carrion..."***

And it should not be the blood that comes out of the animal's body.

***".... or blood poured forth…"***

This blood is not the blood which remains inside the veins and capillary
blood-vessels among its flesh that comes out from the animal's vessels
after cutting them and pouring a great deal of blood from them.

The third exception is as follows:

***".... or the flesh of swine -for that is indeed abomination…."***

All of these abovementioned things are disagreeable in man's nature and
are the source of kinds of pollutions that cause some different damages.

Then, The Qur'an points to he fourth kind of these exceptions, and says:

***".... or a transgression, slain invoking (the name of) other than***
***Allah...."***

From the point of ethical and spiritual views, this action is a sign of
being aloof from Allah and from the school of theism both,

Thus, there are assigned two kinds of Islamic conditions for lawful
slaughtering of an animal. Some of these conditions, such as cutting the
four main blood-vessels of the animal and pouring forth its blood, have
the aspect of hygiene, while some others, such as setting the animal
toward the direction of the Ka'bah, reciting the holy phrase:
'Bismillah', and it being slaughtered by a Muslim, have spiritual
aspects.

At the end of the verse, the Qur'an has made an exception, from the
usage of these prohibited meats, those who are forced to eat them by
necessity or because of lack of any other food in order to protect their
lives, but not for pleasure nor more than the limits nor with the
purpose of counting the divine unlawful things as lawful. It says:

***".... but whoever is forced (to eat it by necessity), not desiring
nor transgressing, then surely your Lord is Forgiving, Merciful."***

In fact, these two conditions are for the sake that some people do not
take this constrained circumstance as excuse for their transgression to
the limits of the laws of Allah*.*

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 146
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَلَى الَّذِينَ هَادُواْ حَرَّمْنَا كُلَّ ذِي ظُفُرٍ وَمِنَ
الْبَقَرِ وَالْغَنَمِ حَرَّمْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ شُحُومَهُمَا إِلاَّ مَا
حَمَلَتْ ظُهُورُهُمَا أَوِ الْحَوَايَا أَوْ مَا اخْتَلَطَ بِعَظْمٍ
ذَلِكَ جَزَيْنَاهُم بِبَغْيِهِمْ وِإِنَّا لَصَادِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**146.** ***"And to those who were Jews We forbade every (animal) having
claws, and of oxen and sheep We forbade unto them the fat of both, save
what is upon their backs or the entrails or what is mixed with bones.
This (prohibition) We recompensed them for their rebellion, and verily
We are truthful."***

### The Prohibitions and the Jews

In this verse a part of the prohibitions of the Jews are referred to in
order to make it clear that the forged and superstitious ordinances of
the pagans were adapted neither with the religion of Islam nor with the
creed of the Jews, (nor with the Christian creed which usually follows
the creed of the Jews), So, at first, it says:

***"And to those who were Jews We forbade every (animal) having
claws....."***

Therefore, all the animals that have not 'clean hoofs', whether they are
cattle or birds, have been forbidden for the Jews. Then, it says:

***"…and of oxen and sheep we forbade unto them the fat of both....."***

Following this matter, it makes exception three instances from it. At
first, it says:

***"…save what is upon their backs…"***

It continues saying about the fats that are on their sides and inside
their bellies.

***"…or the entrails…"***

And the fats that are mixed with their bones:

***"…This (prohibition) We recompensed them for their rebellion…."***

Yet, at the end of the verse it announces that the prohibitions were
not, in fact, decreed upon the Jews, but because of unjust and
transgression they committed, by Allah’s commandment, they became
deprived from these kinds of meat and fat that they were interested in.

***".... This (prohibition) We recompensed them for their
rebellion....."***

And, as an emphasis, the Qur'an adds that it is a fact.

***"....and verily We are truthful."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 147
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِن كَذَّبُوكَ فَقُل رَّبُّكُمْ ذُو رَحْمَةٍ وَاسِعَةٍ وَلاَ يُرَدُّ
بَأْسُهُ عَنِ الْقَوْمِ الْمُجْرِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**147.** ***"But if they belie you (O' Muhammad!), then say: 'Your Lord
is (full) of mercy all-embracing, but (if they do not repent) His
punishment will not be returned from the guilty people."***

Since, the obstinacy of the Jews and pagans was clearly fixed and they
might insist and belie the Prophet (S)*,* in this verse Allah commands
His Messenger, concerning this matter, as follows:

***"But if they belie you (O' Muhammad!), then say: 'Your Lord is (full)
of mercy all-embracing....."***

This means that such a Lord does not punish you immediately. He gives
you respite may be you repent and return from your wrong-doings, in
order to come back unto Allah*,* when you become regretful.

But if you abuse again this divine respite and continue the undue
calumnies and accusations that you used to act, do know that Allah’s
punishment is certain and, at last, it will befall you, because His
punishment is not something that can be removed from the evil-doers. The
verse says:

***"... but (if they do not repent) His punishment will not be returned
from the guilty people."***

This verse makes the greatness of the trainings of the Qur'an manifest
very clearly. It declares that, after the explanation of all these wrong
actions of the Jews and pagans, yet He does not threaten them to
punishment at once.

At first, with some affectionate words, He has left the way of return
free for them in order that they be encouraged and they return towards
the Truth. But in order that the vast mercy of Allah does not cause
their daring, boldness and disobedience, and that they may leave their
obstinacy, through the last phrase of the verse, the Qur'an threatens
them to the certain punishment of Allah*.*

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 148
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ أَشْرَكُواْ لَوْ شَاء اللّهُ مَا أَشْرَكْنَا وَلاَ
آبَاؤُنَا وَلاَ حَرَّمْنَا مِن شَيْءٍ كَذَلِكَ كَذَّبَ الَّذِينَ مِن
قَبْلِهِم حَتَّى ذَاقُواْ بَأْسَنَا قُلْ هَلْ عِندَكُم مِّنْ عِلْمٍ
فَتُخْرِجُوهُ لَنَا إِن تَتَّبِعُونَ إِلاَّ الظَّنَّ وَإِنْ أَنتُمْ
إَلاَّ تَخْرُصُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**148.** ***"Those who are polytheists will say: 'Had*** ***Allah***
***wished we would not have associated (aught with Him) nor our fathers,
nor would we have forbidden anything.' So did belie those who were
before them until they tasted Our punishment. Say: 'Have you any
knowledge with you to adduce for Us? You follow nothing but conjecture,
and you are nothing but idle talkers '."***

Following the expressions of the pagans, which were referred to through
the former verses, now some of their vain reasoning and the answers of
them are pointed out in this verse.

At first, it implies that in answer to the Prophet's objections
regarding paganism and prohibition of the lawful sustenance, soon the
pagans will say that had Allah wished they would neither have become
infidels nor would their ancestors have turned to idolatry, nor would
they have forbidden anything.

Thus, they claim that whatever they have done and they have said is
entirely referred to the Will of Allah*.* The verse says:

***"Those who are polytheists will say: 'Had*** ***Allah*** ***wished we
would not have associated (aught with Him) nor our fathers, nor would we
have forbidden anything.' ..."***

Similar to many other evil-doers, pagans wanted to flee from the
responsibilities of their wrong actions with the cover and under the
title of determinism. In fact, they claimed that Allah’s silence,
concerning idolatry and prohibition of some animals, was as a reason for
His pleasure, since if He had not been pleased with those things He
should have somehow prevented them from those things.

But, the Qur'an has decisively discussed answering them. At first, it
says that they are not alone who have forged such lies against Allah*,*
but there were also some groups of people in the past who told the same
lies, and, finally, they confronted with results of their wrong actions
and tasted the punishment of Allah*.* The verse says:

***"... So did belie those who were before them until they tasted our
punishment.... "***

Through their own statements, in fact, they both told lies, and belied
the prophets. If Allah was pleased with those deeds, how did He send
messengers to invite them to unity? Principally, the invitation of
prophets is itself the most important proof upon the freedom of man's
will and choice.

Then the Qur'an inquires that if you have any reason for your claim, why
do you not bring if forth? It adds:

***"... Say: Have you any knowledge with you to adduce for Us? ..."***

And, finally, the verse implies that you have certainly no proof for
your claim, and you follow merely your conjectures and your bare
imaginations. It says:

***"...You follow nothing but conjecture, and you are nothing but idle
talkers'."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 149
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ فَلِلّهِ الْحُجَّةُ الْبَالِغَةُ فَلَوْ شَاء لَهَدَاكُمْ
أَجْمَعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**149.** ***"Say: 'Then to*** ***Allah*** ***(alone) belongs the
conclusive argument. Had He wished, He would have surely guided you all
aright'."***

In order to nullify the pagan's claim, the Qur'an mentions another
proof. It implies that Allah has brought forth some clear and correct
proofs upon the subject of His Unity as well as the ordinances of lawful
and unlawful things.

They have been introduced by the means of both the prophets of Allah*,*
and through the way of intellect, so that there remains no excuse for
anyone. It says:

***"Say: ' Then to*** ***Allah*** ***(alone) belongs the conclusive
argument....."***

Therefore, they can never claim that Allah has approved their undue
deeds and beliefs by His silence. They also can not claim that they are
forced in doing their deeds, because if they were forced, bringing forth
those proofs, sending prophets, and their preaching and invitations
would entirely be in vain. Then, bringing forth those proofs is itself
an evidence for the existence of free will in man.

And, at the end of the verse, it says:

***"... Had He wished, He would have surely guided you all aright'."***

But, if such a thing happened, neither that kind of belief could be
worthy, nor the deeds which are performed under its shade. The virtue
and development of man is in this fact that he accomplishes paving the
path of guidance and felicity by himself and through his own free will.

It has been narrated from Imam Kazim (as) who said:

"*Allah* *has two proofs upon people: the outward proof and the inward
proof. The outward proof contains of prophets, messengers, and
Imamaculate Imams; and the inward proof consists of intellects (and
thoughts)."*[^1]

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 150
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هَلُمَّ شُهَدَاءكُمُ الَّذِينَ يَشْهَدُونَ أَنَّ اللّهَ حَرَّمَ
هَـذَا فَإِن شَهِدُواْ فَلاَ تَشْهَدْ مَعَهُمْ وَلاَ تَتَّبِعْ
أَهْوَاء الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُواْ بِآيَاتِنَا وَالَّذِينَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ
بِالآخِرَةِ وَهُم بِرَبِّهِمْ يَعْدِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**150.** ***"Say: 'Bring your witnesses who bear witness that***
***Allah*** ***has forbidden this.' So if they bear witness, do not
testify with them, and do not follow the desires of those who deny Our
Signs, and those who do not believe in the Hereafter, and they hold
(others) equal with their Lord. "***

In this verse, in order to make the falsity of their claims more clear,
and also that the proper principals of judgment be observed, the Qur'an
invites them to bring their reputable witnesses, if they have any,
proving that Allah has forbidden those animals and filths that they
claim are prohibited. So, addressing the Messenger of Allah (S), the
holy verse says:

***"Say: 'Bring your witnesses who bear witness that*** ***Allah***
***has forbidden this.' ..."***

After that, it adds the words to imply that if they cannot find any
reputable witnesses, whom they certainly may not find, and they suffice
only to their own testimony Prophet (S) should never follow them to
testify what they claim.

The verse says:

***"... So if they bear witness, do not testify with them....."***

The contexts indicate that these false ordinances of theirs have
originated from some low desires and blindly imitations, because they
have no evidence and proof neither from the divine prophets nor from the
heavenly Books upon the prohibition of these things.

That is why, in the continuation of the verse, it says:

***"... and do not follow the desires of those who deny Our Signs, and
those who do not believe in the Hereafter, and they hold (others) equal
with their Lord."***

That is, idolatry, denial of the Hereafter and Resurrection,
superstitions, and their sensualities are some alive witnesses that
these ordinances of theirs are also artificial, and their claim about
prohibition of these things from the side of Allah is groundless and
worthless.

[^1]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, Vol. 1, P. 776


