Section 17: Guiding Regulations of Life
=======================================

Duties to Allah, self and others – Allied laws in the scriptures given
to Moses (a.s)

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 151
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ تَعَالَوْاْ أَتْلُ مَا حَرَّمَ رَبُّكُمْ عَلَيْكُمْ أَلاَّ
تُشْرِكُواْ بِهِ شَيْئًا وَبِالْوَالِدَيْنِ إِحْسَانًا وَلاَ
تَقْتُلُواْ أَوْلاَدَكُم مِّنْ إمْلاَقٍ نَّحْنُ نَرْزُقُكُمْ
وَإِيَّاهُمْ وَلاَ تَقْرَبُواْ الْفَوَاحِشَ مَا ظَهَرَ مِنْهَا وَمَا
بَطَنَ وَلاَ تَقْتُلُواْ النَّفْسَ الَّتِي حَرَّمَ اللّهُ إِلاَّ
بِالْحَقِّ ذَلِكُمْ وَصَّاكُمْ بِهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**151.** ***"Say: 'Come, I will recite what your Lord has forbidden you
from: that you do not associate anything with Him, and show kindness to
your parents, and do not kill your children for poverty -We provide for
you and for them - and do not approach indecencies, the outward among
them and the inward ones, and do not kill the soul that*** ***Allah***
***has forbidden save for justice. This He has enjoined you with so that
you might understand."***

### Ten Commandments

After nullifying the artificial ordinances of pagans, which were
mentioned in the former verses, this current verse, and two verses next
to it, have pointed to the principals of prohibitions in Islam. Thereby,
the Qur'an refers to the first class capital sins in an expressive short
and interesting statement. These sins, which are prohibited in Islam,
are detailed through ten parts. At first, it says:

***"Say: 'Come, I will recite what your Lord has forbidden you from:
..."***

*1.* ***"... that you do not associate anything with Him....."***

*2.* ***"... and show kindness to your parents....."***

*3.* ***"... and do not kill your children for poverty. ...",*** because
your sustenance and theirs are totally with Allah (S.w.T.) and He gives
the sustenance of all.

***"... We provide for you and for them. ..."***

**4.** ***"... do not approach indecencies, the outward among them and
the inward, ..."***

That is, not only you must avoid doing them, but also you must not
approach them.

5. ***"... and do not kill the soul that Allah has forbidden save for
justice."***

This part of the verse means that you should not pollute your hands by
shedding the blood of the innocent persons. And you should not slay the
souls whom Allah has held in esteem and shedding their blood is not
permissible, unless the allowance of slaying them has been issued
according to the laws of Allah*,* for example, when the one is a
murderer.

Then, following these five items, in order to emphasize on it more, the
verse says:

***"….This He has enjoined you with so that you might understand."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 152
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَقْرَبُواْ مَالَ الْيَتِيمِ إِلاَّ بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ
حَتَّى يَبْلُغَ أَشُدَّهُ وَأَوْفُواْ الْكَيْلَ وَالْمِيزَانَ
بِالْقِسْطِ لاَ نُكَلِّفُ نَفْسًا إِلاَّ وُسْعَهَا وَإِذَا قُلْتُمْ
فَاعْدِلُواْ وَلَوْ كَانَ ذَا قُرْبَى وَبِعَهْدِ اللّهِ أَوْفُواْ
ذَلِكُمْ وَصَّاكُم بِهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَذَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**152. "*****And do not approach the orphan's property except in the
best manner until he reaches his maturity. And give full measure and
weight with justice. We do not impose upon anyone a duty but to the
extent of his ability. And when you speak, be just, though it be***
**(*****against) a relative; and fulfill*** ***Allah’s*** ***covenant.
This He has enjoined you with so that you might remember.*** **"**

This verse continues stating the Ten Commandments. It says:

6. ***"And do not approach the orphan's Property except in the best
manner until he reaches his maturity."***

7. ***"... And give full measure and weight with justice. We do not
impose upon anyone a duty but to the extent of his ability. ..."***

8. ***"... And when you speak, be just, though it be (against) a
relative....."***

*9.* ***"...and fulfilled Allah’s*** ***covenant. ...",*** and do not
breach it.

The objective meaning of ***"Allah’s*** ***covenant"*** is all of
Allah’s covenants, irrespective of genetic covenants and canonical
covenants, together with the Divine duties, and any kind of promise,
such as: vow and oath.

Again, for an emphasis, at the end of these four parts of commandments,
the verse says:

***"... This He has enjoined you with so that you might remember."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 153
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّ هَـذَا صِرَاطِي مُسْتَقِيمًا فَاتَّبِعُوهُ وَلاَ تَتَّبِعُواْ
السُّبُلَ فَتَفَرَّقَ بِكُمْ عَن سَبِيلِهِ ذَلِكُمْ وَصَّاكُم بِهِ
لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**153.** ***"And this (the mentioned commandments) indeed is My path,
straight, so follow it, and do not follow (other) ways, for they will
scatter you away from His path. This He has enjoined you with, so that
you may guard yourselves (against evil)."***

Then, as the tenth commandment, the Qur'an implies that Allah commands
that this is His Straight Path, which is the Path of Unity, the Path of
Truth and justice, the Path of piety and virtue. You should follow it
and never tread in the perverted and diverse ways that make you astray
and aloof from the path of Allah*.* It scatters the seed of hypocrisy
and discord among you. It says:

***"And this (the mentioned commandments) indeed is My path, straight,
so follow it, and do not follow (other) ways, for they will scatter you
away from His path. ..."***

And, for the third time, at the end of the holy verse, the Qur'an
emphasizes that:

***"... This He has enjoined you with, so that you may guard yourselves
(against evil)."***

### Explanations

#### The Importance of Showing Kindness to Parents

Mentioning 'kindness to parents' immediately after the subject of
struggling against polytheism and before some magnificent commandments,
such as: The prohibitions of killing a person, and the execution of the
principals of justice, are some evidences among the Islamic instructions
upon the extraordinary importance of the right of parents.

This matter will be made more clear when we note that instead of
prohibition of hurting parents, which parallel other prohibitions
mentioned in this verse, the subject of showing kindness to parents' has
been referred to.

This denotes that not only creating annoyance to them is unlawful, but,
besides that, showing kindness and benevolence unto them is also
necessary.

More interesting than this is that the Arabic word /ihsan/ (kindness)
has been changed into a transitive form by a preposition, and it has
said: ***"... and show kindness to your parents.....".***

Thus, the verse emphasizes that the question of 'showing kindness to
parents' should be taken so great and important by a person that the one
performs it directly by himself and without having an intermediary.

#### Slaying Children for Hunger

It is understood from these verses that during the Age of Ignorance,
Arabs not only used to bury their daughters alive because of their wrong
bigotries, but also killed their sons, who were considered as a great
capital in the society of their time, as a result of fear of poverty.

Unfortunately, this treatment of the Age of Ignorance is being repeated
in another form in our own age, too. Under the excuse of probable
deficiency of foodstuff on the earth, the innocent babies are
intentionally killed through abortion when they are in the state of
embryo.

It is true that some other reasons are also mentioned for such abortions
today, but the problem of poverty and deficiency of foodstuff is one of
its main reasons.

All of these facts, as well as some other affairs similar to them, show
that the evil manner of the Age of Ignorance is repeated in another form
in our time, so that we can say 'the Ignorance of today' is fulfilled in
an even wider and more terrible case than the ignorance of before Islam.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 154
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ آتَيْنَا مُوسَى الْكِتَابَ تَمَامًا عَلَى الَّذِيَ أَحْسَنَ
وَتَفْصِيلاً لِّكُلِّ شَيْءٍ وَهُدًى وَرَحْمَةً لَّعَلَّهُم بِلِقَاء
رَبِّهِمْ يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**154.** ***"Then We gave Moses the Book, to complete (Our blessing) on
him who would do good, and to explain all things, and as a guidance and
a mercy, so that they may believe in the meeting of their Lord."***

The discussion through a few former verses was upon the ten basical and
fundamental commandments of Allah*.* They have been enjoined not only in
Islam but also in all divine religions. Next to mentioning those
commandments, the Qur'an says:

***"Then We gave Moses the Book, to complete (Our blessing) on him who
would do good...."***

The verse implies that Allah (S.w.T.) has completed His blessing on
those who are good doers, and they obey the command of Allah*,* and
follow the fight.

Then the verse continues the statement that, in that Book, Allah
explained whatever was needed and what was effective alongside the way
of development of man.

***"... and to explain all things....."***

Also, that Book, which was sent down to Moses, was the source of divine
guidance and mercy.

***"... and as a guidance and a mercy....."***

All of these things were for the sake that they might believe in the
Resurrection Day and the meeting of the Lord, so that, by the belief in
Resurrection, their thoughts, statements, and manner become sincerely
pure and godly. It says:

***"... so that they may believe in the meeting of their Lord."***


