Section 18: Prayer, sacrifice, life and death to be only for Allah
==================================================================

The Quran was sent down for the guidance of mankind – The law of
requital – The object of life of mankind must be only to please Allah –
The believers in Allah will be the rulers of the earth

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 155 - 156
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهَـذَا كِتَابٌ أَنزَلْنَاهُ مُبَارَكٌ فَاتَّبِعُوهُ وَاتَّقُواْ
لَعَلَّكُمْ تُرْحَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَن تَقُولُواْ إِنَّمَا أُنزِلَ الْكِتَابُ عَلَى طَآئِفَتَيْنِ مِن
قَبْلِنَا وَإِن كُنَّا عَن دِرَاسَتِهِمْ لَغَافِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**155.** ***"And this (Qur'an) is a Book which we have sent down,
blessed, so follow it, and keep from evil so that mercy may be shown to
you."***  
**156.** ***"Lest you should say: The Book was sent down only to two
parties (the Jews and the Christians) before us, and we were truly
unaware of their studies."***

In order to complete the previous discussion upon the heavenly Book,
this holy verse points to the revelation of the Qur'an and it’s
teaching. It says:

***"And this (Qur'an) is a Book which we have sent down, blessed, so
follow it, and keep from evil so that mercy may be shown to you."***

In the second verse, mentioned in the above couple of verses, the Qur'an
has closed all the ways of flight and seeking excuses to the pagans.

It announces that Allah has sent this heavenly book down, with those
advantages, in order that the pagans do not say that the Book was sent
down only to the couple of former parties, the Jews and the Christians,
and that they were neglectful of studying, reviewing and discussing
them.

And, they should not say that they disobeyed the command of Allah
because His commandment was under the control of others and it was not
available for them.

The verse says:

***"Lest you should say: The Book was sent down only to two parties t
(the Jews and the Christians) before us, and we were truly unaware of
their studies."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 157
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْ تَقُولُواْ لَوْ أَنَّا أُنزِلَ عَلَيْنَا الْكِتَابُ لَكُنَّا
أَهْدَى مِنْهُمْ فَقَدْ جَاءكُم بَيِّنَةٌ مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ وَهُدًى
وَرَحْمَةٌ فَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّن كَذَّبَ بِآيَاتِ اللّهِ وَصَدَفَ
عَنْهَا سَنَجْزِي الَّذِينَ يَصْدِفُونَ عَنْ آيَاتِنَا سُوءَ
الْعَذَابِ بِمَا كَانُواْ يَصْدِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**157.** ***"Or (lest) you should say: 'If the Book had been sent down
to us, we would certainly have been better guided than them. 'So indeed
there has come to you clear proof from your Lord, and guidance and
mercy. Who then is more unjust than him who denies the Signs of***
***Allah, and turns away from them? Soon We will recompense those who
turn away from Our Signs with a terrible punishment for what they used
to turn away."***

The same excuse that was referred to in the previous verse is pointed
out more vastly and with some more claims and prides of theirs in this
verse.

The holy verse implies that if the Qur'an were not sent down upon them,
they might claim that they were so prepared and eager to fulfill the
commands of Allah that ho other nation could match them in that regard.
The verse says:

***"Or (lest) you should say : 'If the Book had been sent down to us, we
would certainly have been better guided than them.' ..."***

Standing before these claims, the Qur'an implies that Allah has shut the
gates of all ways of seeking excuses to them, because clear proofs and
meaningful verses, accompanied with guidance and mercy of Allah*,* have
come to them from the side of their Lord. It says:

***"So indeed there has come to you clear proof from your Lord, and
guidance and mercy…."***

Yet, is there anyone more unjust than those who belie the Signs of Allah
and turn away from them? This circumstance shows that they not only
turned away from the Sings of Allah*,* but also kept themselves terribly
far from them. The verse says:

***"…Who then is more unjust than him who denies the Signs of***
***Allah, and turns away from them? …"***

The painful punishment of such thoughtless and obstinate persons who,
without studying them, intensively deny the facts and run away from them
is stated in a short arid expressive sentence. These people even ban the
way of others, and this chastisement is the fruit of their own proofless
denial.

The verse says:

***"…Soon We will recompense those who turn away from Our Signs with a
terrible punishment for what they used to turn away."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 158
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَلْ يَنظُرُونَ إِلاَّ أَن تَأْتِيهُمُ الْمَلآئِكَةُ أَوْ يَأْتِيَ
رَبُّكَ أَوْ يَأْتِيَ بَعْضُ آيَاتِ رَبِّكَ يَوْمَ يَأْتِي بَعْضُ
آيَاتِ رَبِّكَ لاَ يَنفَعُ نَفْسًا إِيمَانُهَا لَمْ تَكُنْ آمَنَتْ مِن
قَبْلُ أَوْ كَسَبَتْ فِي إِيمَانِهَا خَيْرًا قُلِ انتَظِرُواْ إِنَّا
مُنتَظِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**158.** ***"Do they await anything but that the angels should come to
them, or your Lord should come, or some of your Lord's Signs should
come? On the day when some of the Signs of your Lord come, the faith
(and repentance) will not benefit anyone who had not believed beforehand
and had not earned goodness through his faith. Say: 'Wait! we too are
waiting'."***

This fact was pointed out in the former verses that Allah completed the
argument to the pagans and He sent the heavenly Book, i.e. the Qur'an,
for the guidance of all. Now, this verse indicates that these obstinate
persons are so arrogant in their affairs that these clear evidences do
not affect them.

It seems that they are waiting for their own annihilation, or losing
their last opportunity, or they are expecting some impossible affairs to
come forth.

At first, it says:

***"Do they await anything but that the angels should come to them, or
your Lord should come....."***

That is, do they expect that Allah comes to them and when they see Him
they believe in Him? In fact, they are waiting for an impossible thing
to happen.

Then, it adds that they may expect to see the occurrence of some of the
signs of Allah which will occur at the threshold of Resurrection, the
end of the world, whereupon the doors of repentance will be closed. The
verse says:

***"…or some of your Lord's Signs should come?..."***

Then, following this meaning, it adds:

***"... On the day when some of the Signs of your Lord come, the faith
(and repentance) will not benefit anyone who had not believed beforehand
and had not earned goodness through his faith. ..."***

Since, on that Day repentance and belief will gain a form that will be
obligatory, this kind of repentance and belief is not worthy, of course.
They are worthy and acceptable when they are arbitrary.

At the end of the verse, the Qur'an addresses these obstinate persons
and, with a threatening tone, says that now that they are waiting for
such a thing, they may remain in their waiting and We wait, too, for
their painful retribution. It says:

***"... Say: ' Wait! We too are waiting'."***

One of the interesting things that can be understood from this verse is
that the Qur'an introduces the way of felicity in Faith. This Faith is
the one under whose ray a goodness may be obtained and some good deeds
be fulfilled.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 159
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ فَرَّقُواْ دِينَهُمْ وَكَانُواْ شِيَعًا لَّسْتَ
مِنْهُمْ فِي شَيْءٍ إِنَّمَا أَمْرُهُمْ إِلَى اللّهِ ثُمَّ
يُنَبِّئُهُم بِمَا كَانُواْ يَفْعَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**159.** ***"Verily those who divided their religion and became parties,
you have no concern with them. Their affair is only with*** ***Allah,***
***then He will inform them of what they used to do."***

Following the explanation of 'Ten Commandments' that were discussed
through previous verses, this verse, indeed, can be counted as an
emphasis and a commentary upon the subject mentioned in the tenth
commandment.

Its content commands us to follow 'the Straight Path' and to struggle
against any hypocrisy and discord.

At first, it says:

***"Verily those who divided their religion and became parties, you have
no concern with them. ..."***

It means that, in no respect you have concern with them, and they have
no concern with your school of thought, because your school of thought
is the school of theism and Straight Path, and there is only one
'Straight Path' for all, not more than that.

Then, as a threat and reprimand against these dispersive persons, the
Qur'an says:

***"... Their affair is only with*** ***Allah, then He will inform them
of what they used to do."***

It is noteworthy that the content of this verse is a general and common
commandment about all those who cause discord among people. By creating
kinds of innovations, they scatter the seeds of hypocrisy and discord
amongst the servants of Allah*,* irrespective of those who were from the
former nations, or those who are in this nation.

With a full emphasis, this verse intensifies once more the fact that
Islam is a religion of Unity and Oneness. It hates any kind of
hypocrisy, discord and dispersion.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 160
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن جَاء بِالْحَسَنَةِ فَلَهُ عَشْرُ أَمْثَالِهَا وَمَن جَاء
بِالسَّيِّئَةِ فَلاَ يُجْزَى إِلاَّ مِثْلَهَا وَهُمْ لاَ يُظْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**160.** ***"Whoever brings a good (deed), he shall have ten times its
like, and whoever brings vice, he shall not be recompensed but with its
like, and they shall not be dealt with unjustly."***

In this holy verse the multifold reward given for good deeds is referred
to. Through previous verse, the wrong doers were threatened and
reprimanded upon their evil deeds, while here, in this verse, the Qur'an
clearly says:

***"Whoever brings a good (deed), he shall have ten times its
like....."***

But as for those who commit a sin, Allah will punish them equally as
much as their sin. As a result of the greatness of His grace and
generosity, Allah bestows the reward of a good action more than it's
due, and forgives the faults of the sinners. And, if he punishes one, He
punishes as much as the one deserves, not more than that. The verse
continues saying:

***"...and whoever brings vice, he shall not be recompensed but with
it's like....."***

Some of the commentators believe that the purpose of the Qur'anic word
/hasanah/ (a good deed) is 'Unity', and the purpose of the word
/sayyi'ah/ (a vice) is 'infidelity'. According to this meaning, the
essence of good deeds is Unity and the essence of vices is infidelity.

**"...** ***and they shall not be dealt with unjustly."***

There win not be done any unjust against anybody, because none will be
punished more than what one deserves.

Therefore, Allah treats with His grace when He gives reward, but He
treats with His justice when He punishes. The tenfold rewards that He
gives for a good action, only one part is the wage of it and the rest
nine parts are *'*Allah’s grace'. **Surah An-Nisa.** **No.4. Verse 173**
says:

***"... He will pay them their rewards fully and will bestow them more
out of His Grace."***

It is worthy to note that the tenfold reward is for all believers in
general, but some deeds which are done in some circumstances by some
qualified persons will be bestowed up to seven hundred times rewards,
and even without measure rewards either.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 161
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنَّنِي هَدَانِي رَبِّي إِلَى صِرَاطٍ مُّسْتَقِيمٍ دِينًا
قِيَمًا مِّلَّةَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ حَنِيفًا وَمَا كَانَ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**161.** ***"Say: Verily my Lord has guided me to a Straight Path, the
established religion, the creed of Abraham, the upright one, and he was
not of the polytheists."***

This verse, together with the next verses by which Surah Al-An'am ends,
is, in fact, a summary of the subjects discusses about the struggle
against paganism and Idolatry stated m this Surah.

At first, in order to stand against the illogical notions and claims of
pagans and idol worshippers, Allah orders His Messenger to tell them
that his Lord has guided him to the Straight Path, which is the nearest
path among all paths.

This 'Straight Path' is the same path of Unity and monotheism, and the
path of eradication of the creed of paganism and polytheism. It says:

***"Say: Verily my Lord has guided me to a straight path....."***

Thus, the Qur'an explains 'the Straight Path' in this verse and the next
two verses. First of all, it implies that it is a direct religion with
the utmost correctness and veracity, eternal, and subsisting to the
affairs of both religion and life, body and soul.

***".... the established religion....."***

And, since Arabs showed a special affection to Abraham, so that they
even introduced their creed as Abraham's creed, the Qur'an adds that he
true creed of Abraham is the very one toward which you have been
invited, not that which you have forged under his name.

***".... the creed of Abraham....."***

That very Abraham (as) is the one who turned away from the superstitious
creed of his time and environment, arid attached the Truth, i.e. the
monotheism.

***"... The upright one....."***

This meaning seems to be an answer to the expressions of polytheists who
blamed the opposition of the Prophet (S) with the creed of idolatry,
which was the creed of the ancestors of Arabs.

In answer to them, the Prophet (S) said that his manner of breaking
wrong customs and turning away from the superstitious notions of the
environment was not only his job, but Abraham (as), whom they wholly
respect, also did like that. Then, as an emphasis, it says:

***"... and he was not of the polytheists."***

Abraham (as) was a hero of breaking idols. He was an active and
steadfast challenger against idolatry.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verses 162 - 163
---------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنَّ صَلاَتِي وَنُسُكِي وَمَحْيَايَ وَمَمَاتِي لِلّهِ رَبِّ
الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ شَرِيكَ لَهُ وَبِذَلِكَ أُمِرْتُ وَأَنَاْ أَوَّلُ الْمُسْلِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**162.** ***"Say: ' Verily my prayer and my worship, my life and my
death are for*** ***Allah, the Lord of the Worlds."***

**163.** ***"No associate (there is) for Him, and this (submission) I
have been commanded to, and I am the first of the Muslims."***

In the first verse, mentioned here, it points to the matter that the
Prophet (S) should tell the pagans that not only from the point of
belief he is a Unitarian and a monotheist, hut also, from the point of
action, whatever good deed he does, including his prayer, all his
worships, and even his death and life, in all, are for the sake of the
Lord of the Worlds. The verse says:

***"Say: ' Verily my prayer and my worship, my life and death are for***
***Allah, the Lord of the Worlds."***

That is, I am alive for Him, and I die for His sake. I devote whatever I
have in His way. All my desires, the whole love of mine, and the entire
existence that I have is Allah’s *.*

In order to nullify all kinds of paganism and idolatry, in this verse,
it emphasizes that Allah (S.w.T.) is the One that there is no associate
and no compeer for Him. It says:

***"No associate (there is) for Him....."***

And, finally, the verse continues saying:

***"... and this (submission) I have been commanded to, and I am the
first of the Muslims."***

To be the first of the Muslims for the Prophet of Islam (S) is either
from the point of quality and importance of Islam, because the degree of
his submission and his Islam was higher than all prophets, or that he
was the first person of this community who accepted the religion of the
Qur'an and Islam.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 164
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَغَيْرَ اللّهِ أَبْغِي رَبًّا وَهُوَ رَبُّ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ وَلاَ
تَكْسِبُ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ إِلاَّ عَلَيْهَا وَلاَ تَزِرُ وَازِرَةٌ وِزْرَ
أُخْرَى ثُمَّ إِلَى رَبِّكُم مَّرْجِعُكُمْ فَيُنَبِّئُكُم بِمَا
كُنتُمْ فِيهِ تَخْتَلِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**164.** ***" Say: ' shall I seek a Lord other than*** ***Allah***
***while He is the Lord of all things? And no one earns anything but to
his own account; and no one bears the burden of another; then to your
Lord is your return, so He will inform you of what you used to differ
(about)."***

In this verse, the Qur'an criticizes the logic of the pagans in another
way. It tells the Prophet (S) to ask them whether it is appropriate to
take a lord except Allah as their Lord, while He is the owner, the
trainer, and the Lord of all things and His ordinance and His command is
current in the entire particles of the world. The verse says:

***"Say: ' shall I seek a Lord other than*** ***Allah*** ***while He is
the Lord of all things? "***

A group of the short-minded pagans came to the Prophet of Islam (S) and
said that he should follow their creed. They added that if their creed
was false, they might bear the burden of his sin.

This verse answers them by saying:

***"... And no one earns anything but to his own account; and no one
bears the burden of another....."***

Then the verse adds:

***"... then to your Lord is your return, so He will inform you of what
you used to differ (about)."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 165
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِي جَعَلَكُمْ خَلاَئِفَ الأَرْضِ وَرَفَعَ بَعْضَكُمْ
فَوْقَ بَعْضٍ دَرَجَاتٍ لِّيَبْلُوَكُمْ فِي مَا آتَاكُمْ إِنَّ رَبَّكَ
سَرِيعُ الْعِقَابِ وَإِنَّهُ لَغَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**165. "*****And He it is*** ***Who has made you successors in the
earth, and raised some of you above others in grades that He may try you
in respect to what He has given you. Verily your Lord is*** ***swift in
retribution, and indeed He is*** ***Forgiving, Merciful.*****"**

In this verse, which is the last verse of Surah Al-' An'am, in order to
complete the former discussions upon strengthening the foundation of
Unity and struggling against paganism, the Qur'an points to the rank of
man and his situation in the world of existence. So, firstly it says:

***"And He it is Who has made you successors in the earth....."***

Man is Allah’s vice-regent on the earth, and all the sources of the
world are set at his disposal. Allah *has* issued Man's command and
dominion over all these creatures. Such a man must not let himself fall
so low that he becomes more degraded than an inanimate thing and then he
prostrates before it.

Then the verse points to the difference of talents and the various
bodily and spiritual merits of human beings, and to the aim of this
difference and variation among men. The verse says:

***"... and raised some of you above others in grades that He may try
you in respect to what He has given you. ..."***

At the end of the verse, the Qur'an refers to man's freedom in; choosing
the path of happiness and wretchedness, stating the conclusion of these
trials, as follows:

***"…Verily your Lord is*** ***swift in retribution, and indeed He is***
***Forgiving, Merciful.*****"**

### The Difference of Men and the Principal of Justice

No doubt, there are a series of artificial differences among the
individuals of humankind which have been emerged as a result of the
transgressions and cruelties of some human beings performed upon some
other people.

For example: some persons are the owners of abundant wealth, but some
others are terribly poor. Or, a great deal of people is unsound and
sickly weak as a result of deficiency of nutrition and lack of hygiene,
while some other people are in the best condition of health, because all
possibilities of life are available for them.

These kinds of differences, such as: richness and poverty, knowledge and
ignorance, health and sickness, and so on, are often the consequences of
colonialism, exploitation, various forms of slavery, and apparent and
concealed transgressions.

Surely, these kinds of differences cannot be considered as the acts of
the system of creation. So, there is no reason for us, to defend the
existence of such unacceptable differences.

Humankind, all together, form also a society resembled to a great, tall
and fruitful tree. Every group, or even an individual, of them is
responsible for a particular mission in this huge body, which demands a
proportional construction peculiar to it.

That is why the Qur'an says that these differences are as a means of
your trial, and the term 'trial', in the divine statements is used in
the sense of 'training and education'.

### Man's Vicegerency on the Earth!

The Qur'an has repeatedly introduced Man as the 'vicegerent' and
'representative' of Allah on the earth. This introduction, in addition
to making clear the position of Man in creation, also explains this fact
that properties, wealth, talents, and the whole merits that Allah has
bestowed on Man are, in deed, in possession of Allah*.*

Man is merely His representative who has been given leave by Him. It is
evident, of course that no representative is independent in his
dominations, but his dominations ought to be limited to the leave and
permission of the main owner.

This explanation may make this fact clear that, for example, regarding
to the question of ownership, Islam keeps distance from both the camp of
communism and the camp of capitalism.


