Section 1: The Object of the Revelation of the Qur'an
=====================================================

Qur'an's revelation, its object-Every soul shall be judged and every
apostle will also be questioned -Deeds will be measured justly.

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verses 1-3
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المص
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كِتَابٌ أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكَ فَلاَ يَكُن فِي صَدْرِكَ حَرَجٌ مِّنْهُ
لِتُنذِرَ بِهِ وَذِكْرَى لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اتَّبِعُواْ مَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكُم مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ وَلاَ تَتَّبِعُواْ
مِن دُونِهِ أَوْلِيَاء قَلِيلاً مَّا تَذَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***  
**1.** ***"'Alif 'A', Lam 'L', Mim 'M', Sad ''S'."***  
**2.** ***"A Book sent down to you -so let there be no strait ness in
your breast about it -that you may warn (people) thereby (and it be) a
reminder to the believers."***  
***3. " Follow what has been sent down to you from your Lord, and do not
follow any guardians other than Him; how seldom do you remember!"***

The holy Surah Al-'An'am was concluded with statement about the Grace of
Allah*.* This Surah, Al-A'raf, begins with the name of the Qur'an and
also the ordinances of the religion and the wise sayings are stated
therein. It says:

***"'Alif 'A', Lam 'L', Mim 'M', Sad ''S'."***

The abbreviated letters, mentioned at the beginning of some Suras of the
Qur'an were discussed before.[^1] They are some secrets between Allah
and His Messenger (S)*.*

***"A Book sent down to you… "***

The Qur'an is a Book which has been sent down to you by the command of
Allah*.*

***"... so let there be no strait ness in your breast about it…"***

The verse, addressing the Prophet (S) implies that there should not be
any strait ness in his breast because of communicating the Qur'an to
people.

The Messenger of Allah (S) was afraid that the members of his tribe
would accuse him as a liar, and then turn away from his statements, and
hurt him. So, he was displeased from their injuries, and did not feel
happy about it.

Hence, Allah the Glorified, made him secured, and commanded him not to
consider their ill treatment important.

It should be noted that the aim of sending down this Book is to warn
people and frighten them from the evil consequence of their wrong
thoughts and deeds. It is also a reminder for the true believers. The
verse says:

***"... that you may warn (people) thereby (and it be) a reminder to the
believers"***

***"Follow what has been sent down to you from Your Lord....."***

This phrase is for the attention of those who are responsible and are
also fully capable; it means that they should follow that which Allah
has sent down to them. This 'act of following' concerns those affairs
which are either obligatory, or recommended, or legitimate.

In these affairs a believer should follow the command of Allah*,* and
the one must believe in them. One of its examples is that which says it
is obligatory to avoid from forbidden things.

***".... and do not follow any guardians other than Him...."***

The verse warns us not to follow anything other than the Qur'an so
otherwise we will become sinners. It is evident that whoever is not the
follower of the Qur'an is the follower of Satan and the idols. That is
why Allah commands us to follow the Qur'an and avoid following other
than it. To follow the Qur'an is the same as to follow Allah*.*

***".... how seldom do you remember!"***

This part of the verse addresses the pagans and those disbelieving
people who rarely remember the Truth and little they take advice. In
fact, the purpose of this phrase is to say that the style of their
manner is not agreeable. They ought to gradually adopt the admonishments
of the Qur'an and learn the affairs concerning of religion and life for
themselves.

The Qur'anic word 'tathakkur', here, means: ' to learn little by little
'.

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verses 4 - 5
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَم مِّن قَرْيَةٍ أَهْلَكْنَاهَا فَجَاءهَا بَأْسُنَا بَيَاتًا أَوْ
هُمْ قَآئِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَا كَانَ دَعْوَاهُمْ إِذْ جَاءهُمْ بَأْسُنَا إِلاَّ أَن قَالُواْ
إِنَّا كُنَّا ظَالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**4.** ***"And how many a town that We have destroyed, Our punishment
came unto them by night or while they slept at midday."***  
**5.** ***"So their cry, when Our punishment came unto them, was not
save that they said: 'Verily we were unjust '."***

In the previous verse, people were commanded to follow the Qur'an, and
to leave out following anything other than the Qur'an. Now, this verse
reminds them the fate of the past unjust nations so that they may fear
and not to repeat the manner of those nations. It says:

***"And how many a town that We have destroyed, Our punishment came unto
them by night or while they slept at midday."***

Allah says that He has destroyed many people of the towns, and the
Divine punishment was sent down over them by night or when they were
relaxing at noon. It is obvious that having chastisement in such times
is more dangerous for people than in some other times.

***"So their cry, when Our punishment came unto them, was not save that
they said: 'Verily we were unjust '."***

When Allah’s chastisement was sent down, the only matter they stated was
that they said that they were unjust. Thus, when they saw the punishment
of Allah with their own eyes, or when they were involved in the Divine
chastisement and were still rather alive, they began to confess their
faults.

This indicates that admission, confession of one's sins, and repentance
at the time of befalling calamities and wretchedness are not beneficial
for the one.

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verses 6 - 7
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَنَسْأَلَنَّ الَّذِينَ أُرْسِلَ إِلَيْهِمْ وَلَنَسْأَلَنَّ
الْمُرْسَلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَنَقُصَّنَّ عَلَيْهِم بِعِلْمٍ وَمَا كُنَّا غَآئِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**6.** ***"Then certainly We will question those to whom (Our
messengers) were sent, and certainly We will also question the
messengers."***

**7.** ***"Then certainly We will relate to them with knowledge for We
were not absent."***

The previous verse has referred to the worldly punishment. Here, in this
verse, the existence of punishment and reckoning in the Hereafter is
stated with several emphases. In these two verses, the certainty of the
existence of question on the Day of Judgment and that it is not
specialized to the sinners alone, is mentioned, too.

### Explanations

1. On the Day of Judgment, surely all people will be questioned,
including: both the leaders, the nations and followers, both the good
doers and the evildoers, and both the scholars and the imitators of
them.

***"Then certainly we will question those to whom (Our messengers) were
sent, and certainly we will also question the messengers."***

In the next verse, in order that no one considers that questioning from
communities and their concerning prophets can be an evidence that there
is some thing concealed from Allah’s knowledge, clearly and with an
emphasis strengthened with an oath, it implies that Allah will explain
all their deeds to them with His Knowledge, because He has never been
absent from them.

He (S.w.T.) has been with them everywhere and in all circumstances. The
verse says:

***"Then certainly We will relate to them with knowledge for We were not
absent."***

2. On that Day, questioning is a kind of calling to witness, making
confession and reprimand. But the fact is that there is nothing
concealed to Allah to be discovered by question.

### Note

There are some points upon this verse which should be noted, as follows:

1. What matter or matters will be questioned?

2. The bounties will be questioned:

***"Then on that Day you will surely be questioned about the bounties
(you enjoined)."*** **(Surah At- Takathur. No. 102 verse 8).**

It is recorded in some Islamic traditions that the objective meaning of
***'bounties',*** here, is the bounty of 'mastership' and 'leadership'.

3. The deeds of people will be questioned:

***"... we would most certainly question them all,"***

***"As to what they used to do."*** **(Surah Al-Hijr No.15.** **Verses
92-93)**

4. The limbs will be questioned of: ***"... surely the hearing and the
sight and the heart, all of these shall be questioned about that."***
**(Surah Al-Isra', No.17. verse 36)**

5. As the Islamic traditions indicate, the life-time, the youth, the
incomes, and the expenses will be questioned.

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 8
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْوَزْنُ يَوْمَئِذٍ الْحَقُّ فَمَن ثَقُلَتْ مَوَازِينُهُ
فَأُوْلَـئِكَ هُمُ الْمُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**8.** ***"And the measuring that Day will be just. Then whoever's a
scale be heavy, those are they who shall be prosperous."***

A 'scale' is the means of weighing. Each thing has a special means of
measuring. The scale of a wall is a plummet. The heat of weather is
measured by a thermometer. Fruits are measured in kilo. The length of
cloth, as well as many other things, is measured by meter.

The means of measuring an ordinary person, from the point of
spiritualities, is some particular complete persons who are accepted as
the example and symbol of justice.

Upon the commentary of the phrase:

***"And we will set up a just balance ..."***

mentioned in **verse 47 from Surah Al-Anbiya No. 21,** Imam, Sadiq (as)
said: "Prophets and saints are the scales."[^2]

In the supplication of Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as)*,* addressing him
*(as),* we recite:

*"Peace be upon the Scale of deeds."*

These immaculate persons, who are our leaders and our guides, are the
scales and the means of measuring others.

In Kifayat-ul-Muwahhideen, it is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) who said:

*"We are the scales."*

That is, Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) and all other immaculate Imams
are the scale of distinguishing between right and wrong.

So, the verse says:

***"And the measuring that Day will be just. Then whoever's a scale be
heavy, those are they who shall be prosperous."***

### Explanations

1. On the Day of Resurrection, the possession is with the right[^3], and
the Day is the day of right[^4], and the measuring is also just. (The
above verse)

2. On that Day, arrangements of the Hereafter are justly measured and
the reckoning, the judgment, the commandments, the rewards and
retributions are wholly based on justice.

***"And the measuring that Day will be just. ..."***

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 9
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ خَفَّتْ مَوَازِينُهُ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ الَّذِينَ خَسِرُواْ
أَنفُسَهُم بِمَا كَانُواْ بِآيَاتِنَا يِظْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**9.** ***"And whoever's a scale be light, those are they who have
ruined their selves for they used to be unjust unto Our Signs."***

Those persons, whose scales are light, will be involved in an eternal
punishment, because they have denied Allah’s Signs and reasoning in
their lives.

The Arabic term /xusran/ (loss), mentioned in this verse, means 'to lose
the capital'. The greatest capital of man is his self. When the self of
a man falls into perdition, he has incurred a loss. On the contrary,
those whose scales of good deeds are heavy on the Day of Judgment will
be prosperous.

***"And whoever's a scale be light, those are they who have ruined their
selves for they used to be unjust unto Our Signs."***

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 10
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ مَكَّنَّاكُمْ فِي الأَرْضِ وَجَعَلْنَا لَكُمْ فِيهَا
مَعَايِشَ قَلِيلاً مَّا تَشْكُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**10.** ***"And certainly We have given you power in the earth, and We
have made the means of livelihood for you in it, (but) little it is that
you give thanks."***

In the life of this world, everything is under the authority of man. The
verse says:

***"And certainly We have given you power in the earth....."***

The creation of the earth and its conditions, from the point of
rotation, heat, light, absorbing and warding off waters, receiving
offal, and yielding plants, vegetables, fruits etc. all are in a state
that man can take the earth as his own residence.

However, the laws of nature are in a form that man can control them and
take them under his authority. If Allah had not tamed it, man, by
himself, would not have had ability to bring it under subjugation and to
enjoy of it. ,

***"... and We have made the means of livelihood for you in it....."***

Thus, these bounties should be utilized alongside the path of gratitude
of man, not as a means of his negligence and gratifying his desires and
his unlawful passions. The Qur'an has frequently referred to the
ungratefulness, negligence and faithlessness of the majority of people.
The verse says:

***"... (but) little it is that you give thanks."***

[^1]: Part one, PP. 71-73. Surah Al-Baqarah, No.2, verse 1

[^2]: Al-Mizan, commentary

[^3]: "Here is protection only Allah's, the True One....." Surah
Al-Kahf, No.18, Verse 44.

[^4]: "That is the True (sure) Day ..." Surah An-Naba', No.78, Verse 39.


