Section 3: Mankind warned against its enemy, Satan
==================================================

Mankind was warned against Satan and his Tribe -Sincerity in prayer -
Justice in dealings enjoined.

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 26
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بَنِي آدَمَ قَدْ أَنزَلْنَا عَلَيْكُمْ لِبَاسًا يُوَارِي
سَوْءَاتِكُمْ وَرِيشًا وَلِبَاسُ التَّقْوَىَ ذَلِكَ خَيْرٌ ذَلِكَ مِنْ
آيَاتِ اللّهِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَذَّكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**26. "O'** ***children of Adam! We have indeed sent down to you
clothing to cover your shameful parts, and (for) adornment, and the
raiment of piety; that is the best. This is of the Signs of*** Allah
***so that they may take admonition.*****"**

### A Warning unto All the Children of Adam!

From this holy verse on, Allah states a series of constructive
commandments and recommendations for all the children of Adam, which, in
fact, are the continuations of Adam's affairs in Heaven.

At first, He points to the subject of clothing and covering the body,
which had an important function in the event of Adam. Allah says:

***"O' children of Adam! We have indeed sent down to you clothing to
cover your shameful parts....."***

The usage of the clothing that He has sent for us is not only for
covering the body and concealing its shameful parts, but it is also a
factor of adornment. Clothing is a splendor and an ornament which makes
one's stature seem more beautiful than what it really is.

***"... and (for) adornment....."***

Following this phrase, which refers to the outward clothing of people,
the Qur'an stretches the discussion to the spiritual clothing. As the
manner of the Qur'an is in many other instances, it combines these two
aspects together, and says that the clothing of piety is better than
that clothing. It says:

***"and the raiment of piety; that is the best. "***

The resemblance of piety and righteousness to 'raiment' is a very
explicit and expressive resemblance. Clothing both protects the body
from cold and heat, and is a fender against a great deal of dangers.

It both covers the vices of the body and is an ornament for persons. The
essence of piety and righteousness, besides covering the ugliness of
man's sins and protecting him from a lot of personal and social dangers,
is also considered a very great adornment for him. It is a notable
ornament which increases his personality.

The objective meaning of ***'the raiment of piety'*** is that very
spirit of piety which protects the soul of man, and, however, the sense
of 'shy', 'righteous deed.', and the like of them are assembled in it.

At the end of the verse, the Qur'an implies that these raiment that
Allah has assigned for you, irrespective of the material raiment and the
spiritual one, bodily raiment and the raiment of piety, are wholly from
the signs of Allah*,* so that the servants of Allah may remember the
Divine bounties. It says:

***"... This is of the signs of*** ***Allah*** ***so that they may take
admonition."***

### Raiment in the Past and Present

As far as the history of man indicates, human beings have always worn
clothes, but, in our time, the means of producing clothes have so vastly
varied and developed that it is not comparable with the past at all.

And, unfortunately, the secondary aspects of clothes, and even its
unpleasant and disgraceful instances, have so vastly spread that they
are being preceded the philosophy of clothing.

Clothing has been taken a factor of kinds of luxuries, expansion of
corruptions, excitation of lusts, gaudiness, haughtiness, prodigality,
extravagance and the like of them. Sometime there may be found some
surprising clothes among people, and particularly among those young ones
who imitate the western customs, that its aspect of madness precedes its
aspect of intellect.

The custom of following fashion in clothing, not only wastes a great
deal of wealth, but also squanders a great part of time and powers of
individuals.

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 27
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بَنِي آدَمَ لاَ يَفْتِنَنَّكُمُ الشَّيْطَانُ كَمَا أَخْرَجَ
أَبَوَيْكُم مِّنَ الْجَنَّةِ يَنزِعُ عَنْهُمَا لِبَاسَهُمَا
لِيُرِيَهُمَا سَوْءَاتِهِمَا إِنَّهُ يَرَاكُمْ هُوَ وَقَبِيلُهُ مِنْ
حَيْثُ لاَ تَرَوْنَهُمْ إِنَّا جَعَلْنَا الشَّيَاطِينَ أَوْلِيَاء
لِلَّذِينَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**27.** ***"O' children of Adam! Let not Satan seduce you as he expelled
your parents from the Garden, stripping them both of their clothing that
he might expose unto them their shameful parts. Surely he sees you, he
and his Tribe, from where you do not see them. We have made the Satans
the friends of those who do not believe."***

The previous verse referred to raiment as a divine bounty. Here, the
Qur'an warns us to be aware that Satan does not take away this raiment
and bounty from us.

Satan seduces the believing people either, and causes them to deviate
from the straight path. But he has not a full mastership and domination
over them, because a believing person can be saved by means of
repentance and refuging to Allah*.* Thus, his domination is over the
disbelievers.

***"O' children of Adam! Let not Satan seduce you he expelled your
parents from the Garden, stripping them both of their clothing that he
might expose unto them their shameful parts. Surely he sees you, he and
his Tribe, from where you do not see them. We have made the Satans the
friends of those who do not believe."***

### Explanations

1. Any kind of propaganda and preach, which ends to nakedness, is
Satanic.

2. Exposing the private parts is a preparation for the lack of belief
and domination of Satan.

3. Nakedness is a factor of banishment from the rank of nearness to
Allah*.*

4. Adam (as)*,* who was prostrated unto by the angels, was seduced by
Satan; therefore, you should be more careful.

5. Satan is not alone; He has some groups of assistances, too. They
watch you in all moments-

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 28
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا فَعَلُواْ فَاحِشَةً قَالُواْ وَجَدْنَا عَلَيْهَا آبَاءنَا
وَاللّهُ أَمَرَنَا بِهَا قُلْ إِنَّ اللّهَ لاَ يَأْمُرُ بِالْفَحْشَاء
أَتَقُولُونَ عَلَى اللّهِ مَا لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***28. "And whenever they commit an indecency, they say: 'We found our
fathers (acting) upon it, and Allah has enjoined it on us.' Say: 'Verily
Allah does not enjoin indecencies. Do you say against Allah what you do
not know? '."***

In this verse, the Qur'an points to one of the important temptations of
Satan, usually stated by the tongues of some persons who have satanic
qualities.

It is so that when they do a disgraceful action, and they are asked of
its reason, they will answer that it is the custom and tradition that
they have found with their ancestors upon it in addition that Allah has
enjoined them upon it, too. The verse says:

***"And whenever they commit an indecency, they say: 'We found our
fathers (acting) upon it, and*** ***Allah*** ***has enjoined it on us.'
..."***

It is interesting that, for answering them, the Qur'an does not pay
attention to the first reason, i.e. the blindly following their fathers.
It suffices to answer their second proof. It says:

***"... Say: ' Verily*** ***Allah*** ***does not enjoin indecencies.
..."***

The reason of this statement is that Allah’s commandment is not separate
from the command of intellect.

Then the verse ends with the following holy phrase:

***"... Do you say against*** ***Allah*** ***what you do not know?
'."***

The objective meaning of the Arabic word /fahisah/ (indecency), here, in
this verse, is any indecent and disgrace action, including 'naked
circumambulation. This action was performed by some ignorant people in
order to follow their unjust leaders, which is counted one of its clear
denotation expansions.

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 29
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَمَرَ رَبِّي بِالْقِسْطِ وَأَقِيمُواْ وُجُوهَكُمْ عِندَ كُلِّ
مَسْجِدٍ وَادْعُوهُ مُخْلِصِينَ لَهُ الدِّينَ كَمَا بَدَأَكُمْ
تَعُودُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**29.** ***Say: 'My Lord has enjoined justice, and set your faces
upright (toward Him) at every place of worship, and call upon Him being
sincere to Him in religion. As He brought you forth in the beginning, so
shall you also return."***

The verse begins as follows:

***"Say: ' My Lord has enjoined justice....."***

The Qur'an commands the Prophet (S) to say that his Lord has enjoined
him justice, and to what wisdom testifies that it is proper, right, and
good.

It has been said that the purpose of the Qur'anic term /qist/ (justice),
here, is 'Unity'.

***"... and set your faces upright (toward Him)...."***

It addresses the Prophet (S) and tells him to say that the servants
should intend to worship Allah while they are rightly stationed toward
the direction of the Ka'bah, not toward any other direction.

***"… at every place of worship,…"***

You should observe this divine ordinance at anytime and place of
prostration that you are. The purpose of this holy phrase is in the
state of 'prayer'.

***"…and call upon Him being sincere to Him in religion…"***

In this part of the verse, it commands that servants should worship
sincerely. That is, sincerity in worshipping Allah (S.w.T.) has been
enjoined. The verse concludes as follows:

***"... As He brought you forth in the beginning, so shall you also
return."***

There are some ideas stated upon the relation of this meaning to the
former circumstance, as follows:

The statement means that we should call upon Allah (S.w.T.) sincerely,
since, finally, we will be raised up again and we will be given our
rewards in Hereafter.

The Qur'an implies that if, from the point of intellect, it is difficult
for you to consider this fact in your mind, look upon your creation in
the beginning.

Then do know that, as Allah brought you forth from the infinite desert
of non-existence into the flower-garden of existence, once more, after
death He will give life to your earthly body, too, in the form of a new
creation, and He will raise you up again.

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 30
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَرِيقًا هَدَى وَفَرِيقًا حَقَّ عَلَيْهِمُ الضَّلاَلَةُ إِنَّهُمُ
اتَّخَذُوا الشَّيَاطِينَ أَوْلِيَاء مِن دُونِ اللّهِ وَيَحْسَبُونَ
أَنَّهُم مُّهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**30.** ***"A party He has guided aright while a party error is justly
their due (for) verily they took Satans for their guardians other
than*** ***Allah, and they think that they are the ones guided
aright."***

There are some groups of people who, as a result of receptivity and
accepting the invitation of the Truth, have been involved in the grace
of Allah and have gained the reward of guidance.

On the contrary, those who rejected the invitation of the Truth have
been deprived from the grace of Allah*,* and they have been left to
themselves. And, consequently, the light of guidance did not brighten
wide their breasts, nor it lightened their hearts, and they were
deserving of aberration.

***"A party He has guided aright while a party error is justly their
due....."***

In view of the point that this meaning has occurred after the statement
of raising up the dead, it makes clear that 'guidance' is in the sense
of 'leading', and 'aberration' is applied with the meaning of being
deprived from good rewards and Heaven',

***".... (for) verily they took Satans for their guardians other than***
***Allah....."***

This statement points out to this fact that their retribution is not
undue and without any cause. It is for this condition that they have
committed sins and have preferred the love of Satan to the love of Allah
Instead of obeying Allah*,* they have obeyed Satan.

***".... and they think that they are the ones guided aright."***

They disobey Allah*,* yet they think that they are on the path of right
and they are guided aright.

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 31
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بَنِي آدَمَ خُذُواْ زِينَتَكُمْ عِندَ كُلِّ مَسْجِدٍ وكُلُواْ
وَاشْرَبُواْ وَلاَ تُسْرِفُواْ إِنَّهُ لاَ يُحِبُّ الْمُسْرِفِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**31.** ***" O' children of Adam! wear your beautiful apparel at every
time and place of prayer, and eat and drink but do not act
extravagantly; verily He does not like the extravagant (ones)."***

The verse addresses all the children of Adam, saying to them that they
should take with themselves their clothing with which they ornament
themselves when they perform every prayer.

It has been narrated that whenever Imam Hasan Mujtaba (as) stood to keep
prayer, he used to wear his best clothes. In answer to the question why
he (as) used to do so, he said:

*"Allah* *if beautiful and He likes beauty. Therefore, I decorate myself
for Him."*

And after that, he recited the verse under discussion.

***"O' children of Adam! wear your beautiful apparel at every time and
place of prayer....."***

Some of the commentators have said that this verse enjoins Muslims to
wear their own clothes at the time of performing every prayer and
circumambulation. This is opposite the notion of the pagans who used to
circumambulate nakedly. They said that they would not worship the Lord
with the clothes in which they had committed sins.

Some other commentators have said that the purpose of 'wearing the
beautiful apparel' is targeted to combing the hair at the time of
establishing every prayer.

The verse continues saying:

***"... and eat and drink but do not act extravagantly; verily He does
not like the extravagant (ones)."***

It is narrated from Ibn-' Abbas who has said: "Eat whatever you desire,
and wear whatever you like, but beware that the two qualities of
extravagance and pride do not cause you to commit sin."


