Section 4: The Guidance through Messengers and Their Rejections
===============================================================

The messengers coming with the guidance -The fate of disbelievers -the
guilty ones shall accuse each other and shall themselves witness against
themselves.

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 32
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ مَنْ حَرَّمَ زِينَةَ اللّهِ الَّتِيَ أَخْرَجَ لِعِبَادِهِ
وَالْطَّيِّبَاتِ مِنَ الرِّزْقِ قُلْ هِي لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ فِي
الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا خَالِصَةً يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ كَذَلِكَ نُفَصِّلُ
الآيَاتِ لِقَوْمٍ يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**32.** ***"Say: 'Who has prohibited the ornament of*** ***Allah***
***and the good provision which He has brought forth for His servants?'
Say: 'These are for those who believe in the (short) life of this world
(to be) exclusively theirs on the Day of Resurrection.' Thus do We
explain the Signs for a people who know."***

The verse begins thus:

***"Say: 'Who has prohibited the ornament of*** ***Allah*** ***and the
good provision which He has brought forth for His servants?'..."***

The Prophet (S) is commanded to ask who has forbidden the clothing with
which people decorate themselves, and who has prohibited the pure and
good sustenance. These are the things Allah has created for His
servants. The verse continues saying:

***"... Say: 'These are for those who believe in the (short) life of
this world (to be) exclusively theirs on the Day of Resurrection.'
..."***

These bounties, in this present world, are for the believing people, yet
they are not peculiar to them, because disbelieving ones have also a
share in them. But, in the Hereafter, they are special to the believers
and none else will have a share in them.

The fact that in this statement Allah has not said that these are in the
world for both those who believe and those who do not believe, is in
order to attract the attentions to this matter that bounties have been
created for the benefit of the believing people, and, in the meantime,
the disbelieving ones enjoy these bounties, too.

***"... Thus do We explain the signs for a people who know."***

The Qur'an implies that as Allah introduces the hypocrites to you; and
admonishes the benefit of your religion to you, He explains the Signs
for the people who have knowledge, too.

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 33
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنَّمَا حَرَّمَ رَبِّيَ الْفَوَاحِشَ مَا ظَهَرَ مِنْهَا وَمَا
بَطَنَ وَالإِثْمَ وَالْبَغْيَ بِغَيْرِ الْحَقِّ وَأَن تُشْرِكُواْ
بِاللّهِ مَا لَمْ يُنَزِّلْ بِهِ سُلْطَانًا وَأَن تَقُولُواْ عَلَى
اللّهِ مَا لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**33.** ***"Say: 'My Lord has prohibited only indecencies, those
apparent of them and those concealed, and sin and unjust aggression
(against people's rights) and that you associate with*** ***Allah***
***that for which He has not sent down any authority, and that you say
against*** ***Allah*** ***what you do not know."***

***"Say: 'My Lord has prohibited only indecencies, those apparent of
them and those concealed....."***

The purpose of this first phrase of the verse is that Allah has
prohibited only the things that are indecent. The verses of the Surah,
up to here, have referred to the indecencies in brief. This verse,
following the subject in details, says:

***"... and sin and unjust aggression (against people's rights) ..."***

The indecencies are divided into four categories. They are:

l) Undue oppression and vice,

2) attributing partners to Allah and

3) forging a lie against Allah*.*

Of course, oppression is always undue, but in fact, this quality has
been added for emphasis.

Some commentators have said the objective meaning of 'indecencies' are
'hidden fornication' and 'to be naked in circumambulation'. The former
is called 'concealed', and the latter is counted 'apparent'.

***"... and that you associate with*** ***Allah*** ***that for which He
has not sent down any authority....."***

One of the other prohibited indecencies is attributing partners to
Allah*.* There is no proof or reason to justify the sin of polytheism.

***"... and that you say against*** ***Allah*** ***what you do not
know"***

Another forbidden indecency is saying something against Allah without
having any knowledge about it.

Now, in the next verse, the Qur'an pays to soothing the Holy Prophet.

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 34
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِكُلِّ أُمَّةٍ أَجَلٌ فَإِذَا جَاء أَجَلُهُمْ لاَ يَسْتَأْخِرُونَ
سَاعَةً وَلاَ يَسْتَقْدِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**34.** ***"And for every people there is (an appointed) term, so when
their term comes they cannot put it back the least while nor can they
advance it."***

The 'appointed term' is not assigned only for individuals. There have
been some communities, nations, and government that not only they
themselves but also their civilizations, cultures works and social
customs have been destroyed.

It is not peculiar to only life and death to have 'an appointed time'.
All glories, governments, properties, and the like of them, have also
appointed terms. When the appointed term reaches, all supports,
endeavors, and rivals are worthless to do anything in order to change
its time, sooner of later.

***"And for every people there is (an appointed) term, so when their
term comes they cannot put it back the least while nor can they advance
it."***

However, this holy verse threatens the pagans of Quraysh to the
chastisement which is with Allah*.* Their punishment will be sent down
upon them in an appointed time, the same as it was sent down upon the
former unjust nations.

### Explanations

1. In the world of existence, there happens nothing, nor a changing,
casually and outside of the control of Allah (S.w.T.)*.* The laws
governing over communities, similar to the laws governing over
individuals, also practically exist.

***"And for every people there is (an appointed) term....."***

2. The possibilities and powers that you have are perishable. Therefore
utilize them in the best form as far as you can.

3. Be not proud of the world and its titles.

4. The transgressors should not count the respite of Allah as a sign of
His grace upon them. Their term will come, too.

5. Always there comes a group in the scene of power to be tested and to
pass away.

***"...their term comes ..."***

6. The strugglers of the path of Allah will not despair when the
tyrannical persons overcome. They continue their effort, since tyrants
are perishable.

***"... for every people there is (an appointed) term....."***

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verses 35 - 36
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بَنِي آدَمَ إِمَّا يَأْتِيَنَّكُمْ رُسُلٌ مِّنكُمْ يَقُصُّونَ
عَلَيْكُمْ آيَاتِي فَمَنِ اتَّقَى وَأَصْلَحَ فَلاَ خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ
وَلاَ هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ كَذَّبُواْ بِآيَاتِنَا وَاسْتَكْبَرُواْ عَنْهَا
أُوْلَـَئِكَ أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**35.** ***"O children of Adam! When there come to you Messengers from
among you relating to you My signs, (follow them). Then whoever guards
(against evil) and amends (himself) - no fear shall be upon them nor
shall they grieve."***  
**36.** ***"And those who belie Our Signs and turn away from them with
arrogance -these are the inhabitants of the Fire, wherein shall they
abide forever."***

Addressing the children of Adam wholly, the verse describes that if some
prophets come to you, who are of the same creation as you, in order to
recite Allah’s revelations to you and to aware you of His commandments,
whoever keeps from evil and does not belie them, and improves his deeds
and characteristics, there will be no fear upon him in this world nor
any grief in the Hereafter. The verse says:

***"O children of Adam! When there come to you Messengers from among you
relating to you My signs, (follow them). Then whoever guards (against
evil) and amends (himself) - no fear shall be upon them nor shall they
grieve."***

Then, immediately after that, the Qur'an adds that the persons, who
belie Allah’s revelations and arrogantly do not accept them, will abide
in Hell Fire forever. The verse says:

***"And those who belie Our Signs and turn away from them with
arrogance- These are the inhabitants of the Fire, wherein shall they
abide forever."***

### Explanations

1. Coming prophets one after another, is Allah’s way of treatment, which
had been planned before. The secret of the effect and influence of their
speech is that they are from among people themselves.

2. The real believers in the prophets' invitations are those who are
virtuous and amend themselves.

3. Peacefulness comes forth under the light of Faith and piety.

4. The consequence of belying prophets arrogantly, and rejecting their
invitations, is the everlasting punishment and Hell.

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 37
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّنِ افْتَرَى عَلَى اللّهِ كَذِبًا أَوْ كَذَّبَ
بِآيَاتِهِ أُوْلَـئِكَ يَنَالُهُمْ نَصِيبُهُم مِّنَ الْكِتَابِ حَتَّى
إِذَا جَاءتْهُمْ رُسُلُنَا يَتَوَفَّوْنَهُمْ قَالُواْ أَيْنَ مَا
كُنتُمْ تَدْعُونَ مِن دُونِ اللّهِ قَالُواْ ضَلُّواْ عَنَّا
وَشَهِدُواْ عَلَى أَنفُسِهِمْ أَنَّهُمْ كَانُواْ كَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***37. "Who is then more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah
or belies His Signs? Those shall receive their share (of destiny) from
the Book (in the world) until when Our messengers come to them to take
them away, they would say: 'Where are those which you used to call upon
besides Allah?' They would say: 'They have departed from us;' and they
will bear witness against themselves that they were disbelievers."***

Now, in this verse, the Qur'an pays to threatening the rejecters, where
it says:

***"Who is then more unjust than he who forges a lie against***
***Allah*** ***or belies His Signs..."***

This question is to emphasize the mentioned matter, as well as the
reality of the information. It implies that none is more unjust than the
one who forges a lie against Allah*,* or the one who belies His
revelations. These signs are some clear evidences unto Unity and
prophecy.

The verse continues saying:

***"....Those shall receive their share (of destiny) from the Book (in
the world)…"***

Such persons will receive and taste their share from the divine
chastisement.

In this statement, the word 'Book' has been used instead of the sense of
the term 'chastisement', since it is the Book that informs them of their
punishment.

Some commentators have said that the objective meaning of it is that
they will enjoy the share of lifetime, sustenance, and whatever has been
recorded and decreed by Allah for them. These things will not be ceased
from them until death reaches them.

***"... until when Our messengers come to them to take them away, they
would say: "Where are those which you used to call upon besides***
***Allah?' ..."***

Then, after passing their lifetime, and that their days are numbered,
when the messengers of Allah*,* i.e. the angels, refer to them in order
to take their souls, they tell them where their idols, which they used
to worship, are.

The purpose of this question is to reprimand them. It addresses them and
asks them why those idols do not come and help them to save them from
the punishment.

Some commentators have said that the purpose of it is not their death,
but the purpose is the Day of Resurrection when the angels come to take
them into Hell.

***"... They would say: ' They have departed from us;' and they will
bear witness against themselves that they were disbelievers."***

In answer to the question of the angels, they say that the idols have
departed from them and can not defend them. They acknowledge that their
worshipping, that they performed for them, are totally nullified and
dissipated. They confess that they have been disbelievers.

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 38
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ ادْخُلُواْ فِي أُمَمٍ قَدْ خَلَتْ مِن قَبْلِكُم مِّن الْجِنِّ
وَالإِنسِ فِي النَّارِ كُلَّمَا دَخَلَتْ أُمَّةٌ لَّعَنَتْ أُخْتَهَا
حَتَّى إِذَا ادَّارَكُواْ فِيهَا جَمِيعًا قَالَتْ أُخْرَاهُمْ
لأُولاَهُمْ رَبَّنَا هَـؤُلاء أَضَلُّونَا فَآتِهِمْ عَذَابًا ضِعْفًا
مِّنَ النَّارِ قَالَ لِكُلٍّ ضِعْفٌ وَلَـكِن لاَّ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**38.** ***"He will say: 'Enter you into the (Hell) Fire among the
groups of people and jinn that have passed away before you. Whenever a
group enters (the Fire), it curses its sister-group; until when they
follow each other, all into the Fire, the last of them shall say with
regard to the foremost of them: 'Our Lord! These are they who led us
astray. Therefore give them a double chastisement of the Fire.' He will
say: 'For each one there is double (chastisement), but you do not
know'."***

One of the shaking scenes on the Day of Retribution is the gathering of
the people of Hell and their dispute with each other there. This dispute
occurs particularly between the sinners and their chiefs and those
leading ones who caused these sinners to be sent into Hell.

For this very reason, these evildoers, who had been friends with each
other before, here, become enemies to each other.

On That Day all friends become enemies except the virtuous ones whose
friendship is fixed with each other, both in this world and the coming
world. **Surah Az-Zukhruf, No.43. Verse 67** says:

***"The friends shall on That Day be enemies one to another, except the
pious ones."***

The verse begins as follows:

***"He will say: 'Enter you into the (Hell) Fire among the groups of
people and jinn that have passed away before you. ..."***

On the Resurrection Day, Allah will tell the disbelievers to enter into
the Hell Fire amongst those groups of people and jinn who had paved the
path of infidelity and were destroyed before them.

***"...Whenever a group enters (the Fire), it curses its
sister-group....."***

Every nation who enter the Hell Fire will curse the nation that have
entered the fire before them and who have the same form of thought.

The purpose of the Arabic term 'ukht' (sister), mentioned in this verse,
is not the sense of the word 'sister', but its objective meaning is 'of
the same ideology'.

Therefore, the communities who have followed their leaders in the world
very sincerely and affectionately will curse them and will tell them
that they have misled them and have brought them into Fire. Thus, they
demand that the curse of Allah may be upon them!

***"... until when they follow each other, all into the Fire, the last
of them shall say with regard to the foremost of them. 'Our Lord! These
are they who led us astray. Therefore give them a double chastisement of
the Fire.' He will say: 'For each one there is double (chastisement),
but you do not know '."***

At the time when all of them enter the Hell Fire and gather with
together therein, those who have entered later, compared with the
leaders of them who have entered formerly, will address their Lord, and
say that it was those leaders who caused them to be deprived from
worshipping Him.

They ask Him to increase double their punishment. That is, such leaders
invited them to go astray and prevented them to follow the truth.

Imam Sadiq (as) in this regard says:

*"The purpose is the Imams (leaders) of transgression."*

Some commentators have said that the purpose of this phrase is that they
deserve two kinds of punishment. The first is the punishment of
infidelity, and the second is the punishment of misleading others.

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 39
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَتْ أُولاَهُمْ لأُخْرَاهُمْ فَمَا كَانَ لَكُمْ عَلَيْنَا مِن
فَضْلٍ فَذُوقُواْ الْعَذَابَ بِمَا كُنتُمْ تَكْسِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**39.** ***"And the foremost of them will say to the last of them: 'So
there is no preference for you over us. Therefore, taste the
chastisement for what you used to earn."***

The verse begins as follows:

***"And the foremost of them will say to the last of them: 'So there is
no preference for you over us. ..."***

Some commentators have said that the verse means that, in Hell, a former
community will say to the latter community that they are not superior to
them from the point of attitude and intellect.

***"... Therefore, taste the chastisement for what you used to earn."***

They tell them that they themselves chose infidelity, and they have no
interference in that choice. Consequently, they should themselves
tolerate the punishment of Allah*.*


