Section 6: The Disappointment of the Wicked in Hell
===================================================

The fate of the wicked and their disappointment in Hell

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verses 48 - 49
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَادَى أَصْحَابُ الأَعْرَافِ رِجَالاً يَعْرِفُونَهُمْ بِسِيمَاهُمْ
قَالُواْ مَا أَغْنَى عَنكُمْ جَمْعُكُمْ وَمَا كُنتُمْ تَسْتَكْبِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَهَـؤُلاء الَّذِينَ أَقْسَمْتُمْ لاَ يَنَالُهُمُ اللّهُ بِرَحْمَةٍ
ادْخُلُواْ الْجَنَّةَ لاَ خَوْفٌ عَلَيْكُمْ وَلاَ أَنتُمْ تَحْزَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**48.** ***"And the occupant of A'raf (the heights) shall call to men
whom they will recognize by their marks, saying: Of no avail were to you
your amassing and what you used to act proudly'."***  
**49.** ***"Are these they whom you swore that*** ***Allah*** ***will
not bestow any mercy on them? (Whom*** ***Allah*** ***now says) Enter
you into Paradise; no fear shall be upon you, nor shall you grieve."***

The verse begins saying:

***"And the occupant of A'raf (the heights) shall call to men whom they
will recognize by their marks, saying: ' Of no avail were to you your
amassing and what you used to act proudly'."***

Upon the commentary of this verse, Imam Sadiq (as) says:

*"The people of' A'r'af mean divine prophets and their successors. They
will call to some persons of the inhabitants of Hell, and to the chiefs
of the disbelievers, and blaming them seriously, they say: 'Of no avail
were to you your amassing (wealth) and what you used to act proudly'."*

***"Are these they whom you swore that*** ***Allah*** ***will not bestow
any mercy on them?"***

This statement of the Qur'an refers to the dwellers of Heaven whom the
chiefs of disbelievers blamed and despised in the world. They used to
belittle them because of their poverty and showed arrogance upon them
with their worldly wealth. The disbelievers swore that Allah would not
let them enter into Paradise.

***"... (whom*** ***Allah*** ***now says) Enter you into Paradise; no
fear shall be upon you, nor shall you grieve."***

By Allah’s leave the people of 'A'raf will state this meaning to the
oppressive ones that they enter into Heaven while they are neither
frightened nor are they grievous.

Asbah-ibn-Nabatah has narrated from Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) who
said:

*'On the Day of Judgment' we will stand between Heaven and Hell. Then
whoever has helped us (in the world) we will recognize him by his
feature and will send him into Heaven; and whoever has been hostile to
us, we will recognize him, too, and will send him into Hell."*[^1]

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verses 50 - 51
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَادَى أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ أَصْحَابَ الْجَنَّةِ أَنْ أَفِيضُواْ
عَلَيْنَا مِنَ الْمَاء أَوْ مِمَّا رَزَقَكُمُ اللّهُ قَالُواْ إِنَّ
اللّهَ حَرَّمَهُمَا عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ اتَّخَذُواْ دِينَهُمْ لَهْوًا وَلَعِبًا وَغَرَّتْهُمُ
الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا فَالْيَوْمَ نَنسَاهُمْ كَمَا نَسُواْ لِقَاء
يَوْمِهِمْ هَـذَا وَمَا كَانُواْ بِآيَاتِنَا يَجْحَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**50.** ***"And the inhabitants of the (Hell) Fire shall call to the
inhabitants of Paradise saying: 'Cast on us of water or (and) of what***
***Allah*** ***has provided you with.' They shall say: 'Verily***
***Allah*** ***has forbidden them both to the disbelievers '. "***  
**51.** ***"(Those) who have taken their religion for pastime and a play
and the life of the world has deluded them; so today We forsake them as
they forgot the encounter of this their day, and that they denied Our
Signs."***

This verse of the Qur'an says that the inhabitants of the (Hell) Fire
shall call to the inhabitants of Heaven, saying:

***"...'Cast on us of water or (and) of what*** ***Allah*** ***has
Provided you with you…."***

This statement is an evidence for the sense that Heaven is located above
Hell, (because the meaning of the Arabic word / ifadah / is pouring
water from above). Then the phrase means that they ask the dwellers of
Heaven to pour over them from the water or the kinds of food and fruit
Allah has provided them with.

***"... They shall say: Verily Allah has forbidden them both to the
disbelievers'."***

This is the answer of the inhabitants of Heaven. They say that, Allah
has forbidden the drinks and foods of Heaven to the infidels. These
infidels are those who toyed with the religion of Allah*,* which He had
enjoined to follow, and made unlawful or made lawful whatever they
desired.

***"(Those) who have taken their religion for pastime and a play and the
life of the world has deluded them; so today We forsake them ..."***

Such people will be dealt with like the person who is forgotten while he
is in fire. Neither their request is accepted nor does their shedding
tear cause any mercy to be shown. The same as they forgot this day and
did not take it important.

***"... as they forgot the encounter of this their day, and that they
denied Our Signs."***

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 52
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ جِئْنَاهُم بِكِتَابٍ فَصَّلْنَاهُ عَلَى عِلْمٍ هُدًى
وَرَحْمَةً لِّقَوْمٍ يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**52.** ***"And verily We have brought them a Book which We have
explained with knowledge - a guidance and a mercy for a people who
believe."***

Allah has completed the argument, but being drowned in the amusing world
and forgetting the Hereafter, and denying the revelations of Allah*,* is
the consequence of man's shortcoming himself.

***"And verily We have brought them a Book…"***

There are many torches to lead people towards the right path, but some
groups go astray because they do not utilize them.

The Divine revelation is based upon reality and knowledge, And, the
greatest grace and mercy of Allah is that He has guided Man.

***".... which We have explained with knowledge...."***

However, religion is guidance for the believers, not for the obstinate
persons who seek only pretext.

***".... guidance and a mercy for a people who believe"***

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 53
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَلْ يَنظُرُونَ إِلاَّ تَأْوِيلَهُ يَوْمَ يَأْتِي تَأْوِيلُهُ يَقُولُ
الَّذِينَ نَسُوهُ مِن قَبْلُ قَدْ جَاءتْ رُسُلُ رَبِّنَا بِالْحَقِّ
فَهَل لَّنَا مِن شُفَعَاء فَيَشْفَعُواْ لَنَا أَوْ نُرَدُّ فَنَعْمَلَ
غَيْرَ الَّذِي كُنَّا نَعْمَلُ قَدْ خَسِرُواْ أَنفُسَهُمْ وَضَلَّ
عَنْهُم مَّا كَانُواْ يَفْتَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**53.** ***"Do they wait (for anything) but its interpretation? On the
day its interpretation comes, those who forgot it before (in the world)
will say: 'Indeed the messengers of our Lord brought the truth. Are
there for us then any intercessors that they intercede for us? Or could
we be sent back to do other than that we were doing?' Indeed they have
lost their souls and that which they were forging has gone away from
them. "***

The Qur'anic term /ta'wil/ (interpretation) is in the sense of
'referring to the past or future'. In the Qur'an, it has been applied
with the meaning of the truth, and the beginning or the end of an
action.'

In the current Surah, verse No.43, the word of the inhabitants of Heaven
was that they said:

***"Indeed our Lord's messengers came with the truth."***

Here, in this holy verse, the word of the inhabitants of Hell is the
same.

***"Do they wait (for anything) but its interpretation? On the day its
interpretation comes, those who forgot it before (in the world) will
say: ' Indeed the messengers of our Lord brought the truth. ..."***

In Hereafter, disbelievers will gain no vail of their hopes, moaning,
and protests. Therefore, they must take the divine threats seriously in
the present world.

In the meantime, this fact should be known that neglecting the school of
Islam and the Qur'an is a great loss.

Disbelievers think that their deeds are correct. On the Resurrection
Day, when they recognize their own error, they wish to return back to
the world. But this wish is of no avail. They say:

***"... Are there for us then any intercessors that they intercede for
us ? Or could we be sent back to do other than that we were doing?'
Indeed they have lost their souls and that which they were forging has
gone away from them."***

On the Day of Judgment, there will be no sign of worldly parades,
influence of false deities, idols, properties, and powers. Also, there
will not be found intercessions for everybody, either.

[^1]: Tafsir-ul-Burhan vol. 2 - Tafsir-us-Safi


