Section 7: Allah’s only is the Creation and the Command
=======================================================

Creation belongs only to Allah and Allah’s alone is the command - The
Resurrection of mankind

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 54
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ رَبَّكُمُ اللّهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضَ فِي
سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ ثُمَّ اسْتَوَى عَلَى الْعَرْشِ يُغْشِي اللَّيْلَ
النَّهَارَ يَطْلُبُهُ حَثِيثًا وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ وَالنُّجُومَ
مُسَخَّرَاتٍ بِأَمْرِهِ أَلاَ لَهُ الْخَلْقُ وَالأَمْرُ تَبَارَكَ
اللّهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**54.** ***"Verily your Lord is*** ***Allah, Who created the heavens and
the earth in six Days; then He mounted the Throne (of authority). He
covers the day with the night which pursues it urgently*** ***and (He
created) the sun and the moon and the stars submissive to His command.
Be it known! (that) His are the creation and the command. Blessed is***
Allah***, the Lord of the worlds."***

***"Verily your Lord is*** ***Allah, Who created the heavens and the
earth in six Days....."***

The reason why Allah says that He has created the heavens and the earth
in six days is that creating something after something else in order
mostly indicates that its creator is knowing and wise, and directs that
thing upon the requirement of wisdom.

Or, its reason is for the sake that He teaches deliberation and accuracy
in affairs to His servants.

***"... then He mounted the Throne (of authority). ..."***

This phrase metaphorically points to the absolute encompassment of
Allah*,* and His domination, upon the management of the affairs of the
heavens and the earth after their creation. However, after the creation
of heavens and the earth He held the reins of leading them. This
statement means that not only creation belongs to Him, but also running
and leading the world of existence are with Him.

This meaning is an answer to those who think the world needs the Lord
only in creation, and not in permanence and continuation of the
existence.

***"... He covers the day with the night which pursues it
urgently....."***

When the verse says that the night urgently pursues the day, it means
the night comes after the day and follows it; like that something
pursues another thing with the purpose of demanding it.

***"... and (He created) the sun and the moon and the stars submissive
to His command....."***

This phrase means that the Lord is He Who has created the sun and the
moon and the stars while all of them are rotating according to His
device.

As if, the sun, the moon and the stars are commissioned to this
rotation.

***"... Be it known! (that) His are the creation and the command.
..."***

It is the Lord who has created all things and runs them according to His
Will; i.e. both creation, and its device and management are under His
control.

***"... Blessed is*** ***Allah, the Lord of the worlds."***

The Lord eternally remains in His infinite Glory of Lordship, and He is
the Creator and Possessor of the worlds, as well as a source of blessing
for them.

Next to mentioning the statement of the creation of the heavens and the
earth, the night and the day, the sun, the moon and the stars, and the
device of the world of existence, this phrase, in fact, is a kind of
praising the Holy rank of Allah which has been stated as an instruction
to His servants.

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 55
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ادْعُواْ رَبَّكُمْ تَضَرُّعًا وَخُفْيَةً إِنَّهُ لاَ يُحِبُّ
الْمُعْتَدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**55.** ***"Call on your Lord humbly and secretly verily He does not
like the transgressors."***

### The Conditions of Supplication

Through clear reasons, the previous verse proved this fact that it is
only Allah (S.w.T.) Who is deserved of being worshipped. Next to that,
in this verse, the Qur'an instructs that supplication and calling to
Him, which is the soul and essence of worship, should be performed
before Allah*.* At first, it says:

**"*****Call on your Lord humbly and secretly....."***

This instruction in the verse, which says to call on the Lord
'secretly', is for that this action may be performed far from any
dissimulation so that it becomes nearer to sincerity. It must be done
with concentration of contemplation, and attention.

And, at the end of the verse, it says:

***"... verily He does not like the transgressors."***

This phrase has a vast meaning which includes any transgression,
irrespective of shouting aloud when supplicating, or acting
hypocritically, or inclining to other than Allah in supplication.

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 56
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تُفْسِدُواْ فِي الأَرْضِ بَعْدَ إِصْلاَحِهَا وَادْعُوهُ خَوْفًا
وَطَمَعًا إِنَّ رَحْمَتَ اللّهِ قَرِيبٌ مِّنَ الْمُحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**56.** ***"And do not make mischief in the earth after its improvement
and call on Him in fear and hope; surely the mercy of*** ***Allah***
***is nigh to the good-doers."***

The previous verse referred to the relation of the servants of Allah
with their Lord, and here, the relation of people is pointed out.

Between the previous verse and this verse, there has come the phrase:
***"And do not make mischief in the earth ..."***in order to point out
that oral supplication should be accompanied with practical effort for
the social improvement. Then, offering a bare supplication by tongue and
making mischief in practice, is not effective.

This verse and the former-one have pointed to the conditions of the
perfection of supplication, before Allah (S.w.T.)*,* as well as its
rites and the necessary circumstances of its acceptance. Some of them
are as follows:

A supplication is better to be accompanied with humiliation.

A supplication should be done hidden and aloof from any hypocrisy and
dissimulation.

It must be performed with both fear and hope, and without violating the
boundaries of truth.

There must not be any form of making mischief in it.

***"And do not make mischief in the earth ..."***

### Explanations

1. An improved society may be exposed to danger:

***"...after its improvement ..."***

2. Those revolutionists who want to reform are not free from applying
gnosis, supplication, and close communion.

***"... and call on Him in fear and hope....."***

3. If there be not- a moderate fear and hope in supplication, it will
tend towards mischief.

4. A believer should always he between the states of fear and hope. This
moderation is called 'goodness' by Allah*.* Goodness is a preparation
and cause of receiving the mercy of Allah*.*

Therefore, without having goodness, the expectation of a person for
receiving the mercy of Allah is undue. The verse says:

***"... surely the mercy of*** ***Allah*** ***is nigh to the
good-doers."***

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 57
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِي يُرْسِلُ الرِّيَاحَ بُشْرًا بَيْنَ يَدَيْ رَحْمَتِهِ
حَتَّى إِذَا أَقَلَّتْ سَحَابًا ثِقَالاً سُقْنَاهُ لِبَلَدٍ مَّيِّتٍ
فَأَنزَلْنَا بِهِ الْمَاء فَأَخْرَجْنَا بِهِ مِن كُلِّ الثَّمَرَاتِ
كَذَلِكَ نُخْرِجُ الْموْتَى لَعَلَّكُمْ تَذَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**57.** ***"And it is He Who sends the winds as good tidings heralding
His mercy, till when they carry the heavy-laden clouds, We drive them to
a dead land, and therewith We send down water, and with it We bring
forth fruits of every kind. Thus shall We bring forth the dead, so that
you might remember."***

In former verses, he words were upon theology. In this verse,
Resurrection is referred to. In the discussions of concerning each of
'origin' and 'end', they have been reasoned through natural affairs and
the order of creation.

Nature, of course, with all the elaboration and order that it has, is
under the authority and Will of Allah*,* and it must not cause man to
become heedless of the origin of existence.

We must be careful not to lose ourselves when we are dealing with
scientific formulas and material laws. The movement of winds, the
descent of different rains, and the growth of plants are certainly
performed with the device of Allah (S.w.T.)*.*

***"And it is He Who sends the winds as good tidings heralding His
mercy, till when they carry the heavy-laden clouds, We drive them to a
dead land, and therewith We send down water, and with it We bring forth
fruits of every kind..."***

The deniers of Resurrection have no proof. They only consider it far
away.

The examples of life are found in nature. Gathering the atoms of a pear,
an apple, and a pomegranate, which are scattered in the soil, is like
the gathering of the atoms of the dead. These examples are sufficient to
remove that consideration of theirs.

The verse says:

***"... Thus shall We bring forth the dead so that you might
remember."***

Death does not happen in the sense of perfect non-existence, but it is a
change of state. The same as the dead land (in the winter) does not mean
the lack of land.

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 58
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْبَلَدُ الطَّيِّبُ يَخْرُجُ نَبَاتُهُ بِإِذْنِ رَبِّهِ وَالَّذِي
خَبُثَ لاَ يَخْرُجُ إِلاَّ نَكِدًا كَذَلِكَ نُصَرِّفُ الآيَاتِ
لِقَوْمٍ يَشْكُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**58.** ***"And the good land -its vegetation comes forth (in abundance)
by the leave of its Lord while that which is bad springs up nothing but
(something useless) scantily. Thus do We repeat the Signs for a people
who give thanks."***

The verses of the Qur'an are like the rains of mercy. When they are
recited unto the receptive persons, they bring acknowledgement, love,
faith and effort afterward. But they do not increase anything in the
unbelievers save obstinacy and enmity. The Qur'an says:

***"And we send down (stage by stage) of the Qur'an that which is a
healing and a mercy to those who believe, but it adds not to the unjust
but perdition."***[^1]

Yet, it should be said that, the family nobility, is one of the factors
of heritage and personality.

***"And the good land -its vegetation comes forth (in abundance) ..."***

For this reason, only the descent of the rain of mercy is not enough,
but the fitness and eligibility of the place, and also the leave of
Allah*,* are necessary.

***"... by the leave of its Lord....."***

The Qur'an is the source of guidance and statement for all, but only the
pious ones, and those who are thankful, can enjoy its contents.

***"... while that which is bad springs up nothing but (something
useless) scantily. Thus do We repeat the Signs for a people who give
thanks."***

[^1]: Surah Al-'Isra', No.17, Verse 82


