Section 9: The Ministry of Messenger of Hud
===========================================

Messenger Hud only exhosting his people to serve only Allah and none –
The people challenging Hud against the threats of the wrath of Allah –
The punishment they suffered

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 65
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِلَى عَادٍ أَخَاهُمْ هُوداً قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ اعْبُدُواْ اللّهَ مَا
لَكُم مِّنْ إِلَـهٍ غَيْرُهُ أَفَلاَ تَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**65.** ***"And unto (the people on 'Ad (We sent) their brother Hud. He
said: ' O' my people! Serve*** ***Allah*** ***(alone), you have no god
other than Him, will you not keep from evil?"***

This second story, the prophet hood of Hud has been told in this Surah.
The detailed story of Prophet Hud has been referred to in Surah
Ash-Shu'ara' and Surah Hud.

The people of 'Ad had been living in a zone in the south of Arabia by
the name of' Ahghaf. Physically they were very strong and, from the
point of agriculture and raising cattle, they were a powerful people.
This group of people was involved in idolatry and corruption.

Hud was one of the relatives of these people. He was appointed to
prophet hood among them. He invited his people to Unity, as Noah did.

### Explanations

1. Invitation to Unity is at the top of the mission of prophets.

***"... He said: ' O' my people! Serve*** ***Allah***
***(alone)....."***

2. The most sympathetic and compassionate leaders unto people were the
divine prophets.

***"And unto (the people of) 'Ad (We sent) their brother Hud. ..."***

3. Preachers should treat as a brother with people. They ought to love
them.

***"... (We sent) their brother Hud. ..."***

4. The Wrath of Allah upon the former disbelievers should be taken as a
warner by the later generations to be aware and to take example so that
they be afraid of rejecting the Divine religion.

***"... you have no god other than Him, will you not keep from evil?"***

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verses 66 - 68
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ الْمَلأُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ مِن قَوْمِهِ إِنَّا لَنَرَاكَ فِي
سَفَاهَةٍ وِإِنَّا لَنَظُنُّكَ مِنَ الْكَاذِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ لَيْسَ بِي سَفَاهَةٌ وَلَكِنِّي رَسُولٌ مِّن رَّبِّ
الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُبَلِّغُكُمْ رِسَالاتِ رَبِّي وَأَنَاْ لَكُمْ نَاصِحٌ أَمِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**66. "*****The chiefs of those who disbelieved from among his people
said: 'Verily we see you in folly, and verily we do think you to be of
the liars'."***

**67.** ***"He said:*** **' O'** ***my people! There is no folly in me,
but I am a Messenger from the Lord of the worlds*** **'."**

**68. "*****I deliver to you the Messages of my Lord, and I am a
faithful adviser for you."***

A group of disbelieving people, or a party of the rich, told Hud that
they had distinguished him as a foolish, ignorant, and silly person.
They added that - they thought his words were thoroughly lies. The holy
verse says:

***"The chiefs of those who disbelieved from among his people said:***

***'Verily we see you in folly, and verily we do think you to be of the
liars'."***

In Answer to them, Hud said that they would be sure that he did not told
them that matter foolishly. He added that he was a messenger from the
side of the Lord of the worlds. The verse says:

***"He said: 'O' my people! There is no folly in me, but I am a
Messenger from the Lord of the worlds '."***

Thus, the Lord, the Exalted, teaches us that no one should face the
ignorant people with a disgrace word, nor the one should answer their
unagreeable word with a disgrace statement. But, he should only negate
whatever wrong they have attributed him with. The same as Hud did not
say anything obscene to them in answer to that undue attribution.

Hud continued his statement and added that he was to deliver them the
information that his Lord gave him, and he advised them not to abandon
the obedience of Allah*.* He told them they should be certain that he
(Hud) was faithful in conveying the message of Allah to them and he
never told a lie, nor he changed anything. The verse says:

***"I deliver to you the Messages of my Lord, and I am a faithful
adviser for you."***

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 69
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَعَجِبْتُمْ أَن جَاءكُمْ ذِكْرٌ مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ عَلَى رَجُلٍ
مِّنكُمْ لِيُنذِرَكُمْ وَاذكُرُواْ إِذْ جَعَلَكُمْ خُلَفَاء مِن بَعْدِ
قَوْمِ نُوحٍ وَزَادَكُمْ فِي الْخَلْقِ بَسْطَةً فَاذْكُرُواْ آلاء
اللّهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**69. "*****What! do you wonder that an admonition has come to you from
your Lord through a man from among you, that he might warn you*****?**
***And remember when He made you successors after Noah's people, and
increased you in stature. Therefore, remember the bounties of***
***Allah*** ***so that you may be prosperous."***

There is no wonder that the prophecy, or in other word, the miracle and
revelation has allocated to a man who is from among themselves and has
grown up with them, His aim is to threaten them not to do vice.

However, the Qur'an asks them why they wonder from the messenger ship of
a man who is from among them, but they do not wonder, that they worship
a stone. The verse says:

***"What! do you wonder that an admonition has come to you from your
Lord through a man from among you, that he might warn you?..."***

Then, they should remember the favours of Allah and that, after the
destruction of the people of Noah as a result of their committing sins,
He, settled them on the earth and increased them in stature and
strength.

***".... And remember when He made you successors after Noah's people,
and increased you in stature....."***

When the servants of Allah do remember the bounties of Allah
practically, they will consequently be prosperous both in this world and
in the Hereafter.

***".... Therefore, remember the bounties of*** ***Allah*** ***so that
you may be prosperous."***

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 70
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُواْ أَجِئْتَنَا لِنَعْبُدَ اللّهَ وَحْدَهُ وَنَذَرَ مَا كَانَ
يَعْبُدُ آبَاؤُنَا فَأْتِنَا بِمَا تَعِدُنَا إِن كُنتَ مِنَ
الصَّادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**70. "*****They said:*** **'*****Have you come to us that we should
serve*** ***Allah*** ***alone and give up what our fathers used to
serve? Then bring us what you promise us to, if you are of the truthful
ones*** **'."**

The pepple of 'Ad told Hud whether he had come to them in order that he
would make them worship Allah*,* the One, and restrain them from
worshipping their gods which their ancestors had been worshipping.

They told him if he was truthful, that he was a messenger of Allah*,* he
would bring upon them down the punishment he had threatened them to for
worshipping idols. The verse says:

***"They said: 'Have you come to us that we should serve*** ***Allah***
***alone and give up what our fathers used to serve? Then bring us what
you promise us to, if you are of the truthful ones'."***

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 71
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ قَدْ وَقَعَ عَلَيْكُم مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ رِجْسٌ وَغَضَبٌ
أَتُجَادِلُونَنِي فِي أَسْمَاء سَمَّيْتُمُوهَا أَنتُمْ وَآبَآؤكُم مَّا
نَزَّلَ اللّهُ بِهَا مِن سُلْطَانٍ فَانتَظِرُواْ إِنِّي مَعَكُم مِّنَ
الْمُنتَظِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**71.** ***"He (Hud) said: "There have already fallen you punishment and
wrath from your Lord. Do you dispute with me about names which you and
your fathers have named (your idols), for which*** ***Allah*** ***has
not sent any authority? Wait then, and verily I, also with you, will be
of those who wait."***

The verse begins thus:

***"He (Hud) said: "There have already fallen you punishment an wrath
from your Lord. ..."***

In answer to them, Hud (as) said to them that the punishment was certain
to be fallen on them. They had done something that they deserved the
wrath of Allah*.* The Wrath of Allah is in the manner that He wills
punishment or evil-doers.

The verse continues saying:

***"... Do you dispute with me about names which you and your fathers
have named (your idols), for which*** ***Allah*** ***has not sent any
authority Wait then, and verily I, also with you, will be of those who
wait."***

Hud asked them whether they hostilely disputed with him about the idols
that their fathers had invented and named them with divinity, while
those idols had no attribute or sign of divinity and also there had come
down no proof for their divinity from the side of Allah*.*

It is evident that such a great claim needed a sharp and firm proof that
should be offered by them, not by Hud. He said that he should bring
evidences that One God was their real deity, and that there is no god
but He, from Whom Hud was sent as a messenger.

Some commentators have said that they had named each of their idols in a
different form. Hud said that those names were from their own wishes.
Therefore, they must wait for the punishment that he (as) was waiting
for, too.

Surah Al-‘A’raf, Verse 72
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَنجَيْنَاهُ وَالَّذِينَ مَعَهُ بِرَحْمَةٍ مِّنَّا وَقَطَعْنَا
دَابِرَ الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُواْ بِآيَاتِنَا وَمَا كَانُواْ مُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**72.** ***"So We delivered him and those who were with him by a mercy
from Us, and We cut away the roots of those who belied Our Signs and
were not believers."***

The verse implies that Allah brought Hud and those who had believed from
among the disbelievers and delivered them from His punishment by His
mercy, and He involved those who rejected Allah’s signs and did not
believe in His messenger in chastisement so that He cut away the roots
of them.

***"So We delivered him and those with him by a mercy from Us and We cut
away the roots of those belied Our signs and were not believers."***

The occurrence of the phrase: ***"(They) were not believers"*** in the
verse is with the purpose of showing that it was known from their status
that they would not have believed if they had remained more.

It is understood from this verse that the people of Hud were caught by
the punishment of Allah*,* and they were destroyed.


