Section 15: Covetousness of this worldly life
=============================================

Jesus only an apostle of Allah -The disciples of Jesus demanding Jesus
to get food for them descended from heaven -Their coveting of this
worldly provision.

Surah Al-Ma’idah, Verse 109
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ يَجْمَعُ اللّهُ الرُّسُلَ فَيَقُولُ مَاذَا أُجِبْتُمْ قَالُواْ
لاَ عِلْمَ لَنَا إِنَّكَ أَنتَ عَلاَّمُ الْغُيُوبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**109.** ***"(Remember) the Day*** ***Allah*** ***will gather the
messengers, and say: 'What response were you given?' They will say: We
have no knowledge, verily You are the All-Knowing of the Unseen'."***

This verse, in fact, is a complement for the previous verses. At the end
of those verses, where the words were about bearing witness upon right
or wrong, the Qur'an enjoins people to piety and being afraid of
offending the command of Allah*.*

In this verse, it warns people of the Day Allah gathers the prophets and
asks them about their messenger ship and responsibility, and tells them
what the people responded when they invited those people to the Truth.
The verse says:

***"(Remember) the Day*** ***Allah*** ***will gather the messengers, and
say: ' What response were you given? ' ..."***

The messengers will negate of having any knowledge from their own
selves, and they will depend the whole facts to the knowledge of Allah
(S.w.T.) Who knows all the Unseen and the concealed affairs of the world
of existence.

Here is the rest of the verse:

***"... They will say: 'We have no knowledge, verily You are the
All-Knowing of the Unseen'."***

Thus, the verse, addressing the concerning people, implies that they are
confronted with such a Lord Who is All-Knowing and Who is the, Judge of
such a court. Therefore, they must be careful of right and justice in
their bearing witnesses, too.

In the concluding phrase of the verse, the Qur'an remarks that the real
knowledge belongs to Allah*,* and whatever knowledge is found in any
person bas been obtained from Him. It is similar to the fact that only
He knows the Unseen, and He gives a part of its knowledge to whomever He
desires.

Surah Al-Ma’idah, Verse 110
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ قَالَ اللّهُ يَا عِيسى ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ اذْكُرْ نِعْمَتِي عَلَيْكَ
وَعَلَى وَالِدَتِكَ إِذْ أَيَّدتُّكَ بِرُوحِ الْقُدُسِ تُكَلِّمُ
النَّاسَ فِي الْمَهْدِ وَكَهْلاً وَإِذْ عَلَّمْتُكَ الْكِتَابَ
وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَالتَّوْرَاةَ وَالإِنجِيلَ وَإِذْ تَخْلُقُ مِنَ
الطِّينِ كَهَيْئَةِ الطَّيْرِ بِإِذْنِي فَتَنفُخُ فِيهَا فَتَكُونُ
طَيْرًا بِإِذْنِي وَتُبْرِئُ الأَكْمَهَ وَالأَبْرَصَ بِإِذْنِي وَإِذْ
تُخْرِجُ الْمَوتَى بِإِذْنِي وَإِذْ كَفَفْتُ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ عَنكَ
إِذْ جِئْتَهُمْ بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ فَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ مِنْهُمْ
إِنْ هَـذَا إِلاَّ سِحْرٌ مُّبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**110** ***"(Remember) when*** ***Allah*** ***said: 'O' Jesus, son of
Mary! Remember My blessing on you and on your mother, when I
strengthened you with the Holy Spirit*****,** ***you spoke to the people
(both) in the cradle (through miracle) and in adulthood (through
revelation) and when I taught you the Book and the Wisdom and the Torah
and the Evangel*****,** ***and when you did make of clay a thing like
the shape of a bird, by My leave and then did breathe into it and it
became a bird, by My leave; and you did heal the blind and the leprous,
by My leave, and you did raise the dead (from their graves), by My leave
and (remember) when I withheld the Children of Israel from you when you
brought them manifest proofs, but those who disbelieved among them
said:'This is nothing but clear magic*****'."**

From the above verse on, up to the end of Surah Al-Ma’idah, the contents
of the verses are about Jesus (as).

In this verse speaking about Messiah (as), sorts of divine favors, and
at the top of all, strengthening him with the Holy Spirit, have been
stated.

The purpose of blessing on Messiah's mother may be the glad tidings
about Jesus to her and the talk between Mary and the angels, referred to
in verses 45 to 50 from Surah 'Ale-'Imran, No 3, where it says:

***"(Remember) when the angels said: ' O' Mary ! ..."***

Thus, even prophets should not neglect the remembrance of the blessings
of Allah*.* Allah’s graces and blessings of Allah*.* Allah’s graces and
blessings bestowed to His saints, cause encouragement in the followers
of Truth.

There are some matters stated in this verse which will be referred to as
follows:

1. A woman can be promoted so high in the rank that she may be spoken
about together with a prophet.

***"(Remember) when*** ***Allah*** ***said: 'O' Jesus, son of Mary!
Remember My blessing on you and on your mother, when I strengthened you
with the Holy Spirit....."***

2. By a single statement in the cradle, Jesus confirmed both his own
prophet hood and his mother's chastity and inerrancy.

***"... you spoke to the people (both) in the cradle (through miracle)
and in adulthood (through revelation)....."***

3. Prophets should have both knowledge and awareness; and also they
should know the words of the former prophets and have a new message
both.

***"... and when I taught you the Book and the Wisdom and the Torah and
the Evangel....."***

4. The miraculous breath of Christ caused an inanimate thing to fly. But
the hearts of the Children of Israel were not moved by it.

***"... and when you did make of clay a thing like the shape of a bird,
by My leave....."***

5. When Allah gives prophets the ability of restoring to life and
healing the sick, people's supplicating and imploring for help must also
be permissible. (We question the opponents of this idea whether it can
be considered that Allah gives an ability to a person but prohibits
people from paying attention to it. )

***"... and then did breathe into it and it became a bird, by My leave;
and you did heal the blind and the leprous, by My leave, and you did
raise the dead (from their graves), by My leave....."***

6. The Children of Isreal attempted the life of Jesus (as), but that
malice was warded off by Allah*.*

***"...and (remember) when I withheld the Children of Israel from you
when you brought them manifest proofs, but those who disbelieved among
them said: 'This is nothing but clear magic'."***

Imam Rida (as) said:

*"There were two phrases carved on the ring of Jesus* (as) *which were
recited: " Happy is the servant by whom* *Allah* *is remembered; and woe
on the servant because of whom* *Allah* *be forgotten."*[^1] .

Jesus (as) said:

*"Whatever bad word that you utter, you will receive its response in
Hereafter."*[^2]

Imam Sajjad (as) said that Jesus (as) told the disciples:

*"Verily the world is a bridge to pass through, so do not try to furnish
and maintain it."*[^3]

Surah Al-Ma’idah, Verse 111
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ أَوْحَيْتُ إِلَى الْحَوَارِيِّينَ أَنْ آمِنُواْ بِي
وَبِرَسُولِي قَالُوَاْ آمَنَّا وَاشْهَدْ بِأَنَّنَا مُسْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**111.** ***"And (remember) when I revealed unto the disciples: 'Believe
in Me and in My Messenger,' they said: 'We believe, and bear You witness
that we are Muslims (who submit ourselves) '."***

The objective meaning of 'revealing unto the disciples', mentioned in
the verse, is either inspiring unto their own hearts, or conveying the
Message by the way of revealing it unto Jesus (as).

Thus, sometimes Allah may inspire some inspiration unto the receptive
hearts.

The Divine inspirations unto people are alongside the path of confirming
the Divine Prophets, inspirations, not against them. Therefore believing
in Allah is not aloof from believing in His Messenger.

The verse says:

***"And (remember) when I revealed unto the disciples: 'Believe in Me
and in My Messenger,' they said: 'We believe, and bear You witness that
we are Muslims (who submit ourselves) '."***

Surah Al-Ma’idah, Verses 112 - 113
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ قَالَ الْحَوَارِيُّونَ يَا عِيسَى ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ هَلْ يَسْتَطِيعُ
رَبُّكَ أَن يُنَزِّلَ عَلَيْنَا مَآئِدَةً مِّنَ السَّمَاء قَالَ
اتَّقُواْ اللّهَ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُواْ نُرِيدُ أَن نَّأْكُلَ مِنْهَا وَتَطْمَئِنَّ قُلُوبُنَا
وَنَعْلَمَ أَن قَدْ صَدَقْتَنَا وَنَكُونَ عَلَيْهَا مِنَ الشَّاهِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**112.** ***"(Remember) when the disciples said: 'O'Jesus son of Mary!
is your Lord able to send down to us a table from the sky? ' (Jesus)
said: 'Be in awe of*** ***Allah*** ***if you are believers'."***  
**113.** ***"They said: 'We desire to eat from it, and our hearts would
be at rest, and we would know that you have told us the truth, and that
we may be of the witnesses upon it'."***

This holy verse points the well-known process of 'The table of Food'
sent from the sky. It says:

***"(Remember) when the disciples said: 'O' Jesus son of Mary! is your
Lord able to send down to us a table from the sky? ..."***

Messiah became uneasy of this question of theirs, their statement
contained the smell of doubt, because he had brought plenty of verses
and signs for them. So, as a warning, he admonished them:

***"…(Jesus) said: 'Be in awe of*** ***Allah*** ***if you are
believers'."***

But, soon after that, they informed Jesus that they had not an evil aim
by that suggestion. They said that they did not intend obstinacy, but
they wanted to eat from that 'Table of Food' in order to obtain not only
the luminosity created by that nutrition in their souls (because
nutrition certainly affects in man's soul), but also their hearts would
be at rest.

So, by observing that great miracle, they might reach the bound of
certainty of sight and knew that whatever he had told them was true, and
that they could bear witness over it.

The verse says:

***"They said: 'We desire to eat from it, and our hearts would be at
rest, and we would know that you have told us the truth, and that we may
be of the witnesses upon it'."***

### Explanations

1. The reason that the Surah has been nominated by the appellation of
'Al-Ma'idah' is because of the very desire of 'Table of Food' that they
demanded to come from the sky.

2. The Arabic word 'Al-Ma'idah ' means both 'food' and 'the table
wherein there is food'.

Surah Al-Ma’idah, Verse 114
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ عِيسَى ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ اللَّهُمَّ رَبَّنَا أَنزِلْ عَلَيْنَا
مَآئِدَةً مِّنَ السَّمَاء تَكُونُ لَنَا عِيداً لِّأَوَّلِنَا
وَآخِرِنَا وَآيَةً مِّنكَ وَارْزُقْنَا وَأَنتَ خَيْرُ الرَّازِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**114.** ***"Jesus, son of Mary, said: 'O'*** ***Allah,*** ***our Lord!
send down to us a table from the sky, to be a festival for us, for the
first of us and for the last of us and a sign from You; and provide us
(with our) sustenance, for You are the best of sustainers."***

All supplications mentioned in the Qur'an begin with /rabbana/ 'O' our
Lord'!, but in this verse it has begun with two words 'O' Allah*,* our
Lord !'. This difference may be for the importance of this miraculous
happening and the concerning consequences.

Supplication, imploring for help and asking a boon from the side of the
friends of Allah*,* is permissible. The supplication of Jesus in this
verse is as follows:

***"Jesus, son of Mary, said: 'O'*** ***Allah,*** ***our Lord! send down
to us a table from the sky, to be a festival for us, for the first of us
and for the last of us and a sign from You; and provide us (with our)
sustenance, for You are the best of sustainers."***

There have been prophets sent for all human beings and generations in
the history of man.

To celebrate a festival is a proper action from the point of the Qur'an.
The birth of the friends of Allah and the mission of the 'Messenger of
Allah (S) is not less than the descent of the table of food from the
sky. So, we must always learn things from the Signs of Allah and His
Power.

Surah Al-Ma’idah, Verse 115
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ اللّهُ إِنِّي مُنَزِّلُهَا عَلَيْكُمْ فَمَن يَكْفُرْ بَعْدُ
مِنكُمْ فَإِنِّي أُعَذِّبُهُ عَذَابًا لاَّ أُعَذِّبُهُ أَحَدًا مِّنَ
الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**115.** ***"Allah*** ***said: ' Verily I will send it unto you, but
whoever shall disbelieve thereafter among you, surely will I punish him
with a punishment such as I do not punish anyone in the worlds (with the
like of it)'."***

From the point of threat, this verse is at the top in the Qur'an for
warning people.

***"Allah*** ***said: 'Verily I will send it unto you, but whoever shall
disbelieve thereafter among you, surely will I punish him with a
punishment such as I do not punish anyone in the worlds (with the like
of it)'."***

It is evident that the more a person expects (i.e. the Table of Food
from the sky) the more he should undertake. A high summit has a
dangerous deep valley.

However, it should be noted that although the table of food was
descended from the sky for the companions of Jesus (as)*,* according to
some traditions, there descended fruits from Heaven for the Holy Prophet
(S), too, and the essence of Fatimah (as) was formed from those heavenly
fruits.

[^1]: Bihar-ul-'Anwar, vol. 14, p. 247

[^2]: Bihar-ul-'Anwar, vol. 14, p. 314

[^3]: Bihar-ul-'Anwar, vol. 14, p. 319


