Section 16: Teachings of Jesus corrupted after his departure
============================================================

Teachings of Jesus -Jesus was deified after his departure -Reward for
the Faithful

Surah Al-Ma’idah, Verse 116
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قَالَ اللّهُ يَا عِيسَى ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ أَأَنتَ قُلتَ لِلنَّاسِ
اتَّخِذُونِي وَأُمِّيَ إِلَـهَيْنِ مِن دُونِ اللّهِ قَالَ سُبْحَانَكَ
مَا يَكُونُ لِي أَنْ أَقُولَ مَا لَيْسَ لِي بِحَقٍّ إِن كُنتُ قُلْتُهُ
فَقَدْ عَلِمْتَهُ تَعْلَمُ مَا فِي نَفْسِي وَلاَ أَعْلَمُ مَا فِي
نَفْسِكَ إِنَّكَ أَنتَ عَلاَّمُ الْغُيُوبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**116.** ***"And when*** ***Allah*** ***says: ' O' Jesus son of Mary!
did you say to the people: 'Take me and my mother for two gods
besides*** ***Allah*** ***?' He (Jesus) says: 'Glory be to You! It was
not mine to utter what I had no right to (say). Had I said it, then You
would have known it. You know whatever is in my self and I do not know
what is in Your Self. Verily You are the Knower of all the unseen'."***

### Disgust of Jesus from His Followers' Idolatry!

This verse and a couple of verses next to it discuss about the word of
Allah with Jesus (as) on the Day of Judgment. It says:

***"And when Allah says: ' O' Jesus son of Mary! did you say to the
people: 'Take me and my mother for two gods besides Allah?' ..."***

With a high respect, Jesus replies a few sentences in answer to this
question.

1. At first he begins his expression with glorification of Allah from
any partner and compeer, and says:

***He (Jesus) says: ' Glory be to Your ..."***

2. Then he continues saying that how he could say what was not
appropriate to him.

***"... It was not mine to utter what I had no right to say ..."***

In fact, not only he negates this meaning from himself, but also he says
that basically he has not such a right, and a statement like that does
not apt to his rank and his situation at all.

3. Then he refers to the infinite knowledge of Allah*,* and, as his
evidence, he says:

***Had I said it, You would have known it. You know whatever is in my
self; and I do not know what is in Your Self: Verily You are the Knower
of all the unseen'."***

Surah Al-Ma’idah, Verses 117 - 118
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا قُلْتُ لَهُمْ إِلاَّ مَا أَمَرْتَنِي بِهِ أَنِ اعْبُدُواْ اللّهَ
رَبِّي وَرَبَّكُمْ وَكُنتُ عَلَيْهِمْ شَهِيدًا مَّا دُمْتُ فِيهِمْ
فَلَمَّا تَوَفَّيْتَنِي كُنتَ أَنتَ الرَّقِيبَ عَلَيْهِمْ وَأَنتَ
عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ شَهِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِن تُعَذِّبْهُمْ فَإِنَّهُمْ عِبَادُكَ وَإِن تَغْفِرْ لَهُمْ
فَإِنَّكَ أَنتَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**117.** ***"I did not say to them (anything) except what you commanded
me with; (saying): 'That worship*** Allah***, my Lord and your Lord.'
And I was a witness to them so long as I was among them. But when You
took me up, You were the Watcher over them, and You are witness to all
things."***

**118.** ***" If You punish them, then surely they are Your servants;
and if You forgive them, then You are indeed the Mighty, the Wise."***

Prophets are infallible and do not do anything but the command of
Allah*.* They cause no change in the Divine revelation.

Prophet Jesus (as) considered himself as other people and trained by
Allah*.* However, prophets are witnesses to the deeds of people. The
verse says:

***"I did not say to them (anything) except what you commanded me with;
(saying): 'That worship*** ***Allah, my Lord and your Lord.' And I was a
witness to them so long as I was among them. But when You took me up,
You were the Watcher over them, and You are witness to all things."***

In the above-mentioned second holy verse, Jesus (as) introduces himself
as a good-for-nothing one, and, depending the acts of punishment and
forgiveness on Allah*,* he confesses that he has no ability or
effectiveness in this regard.

It is only He (S.w.T.) Who has authority over His Own servants. He may
punish them or forgive them as He pleases. Neither His forgiveness is a
sign of weakness, nor His punishment is undue and unwise.

The verse says:

***"If You punish them, then surely they are Your servants; and if You
forgive them, then You are indeed the Mightly, the Wise."***

As Abuthar has narrated, one night the Holy Prophet (S) repeated this
verse again and again until morning. He (S) recited it in his prayers
when he bowed down and prostrated. He asked for forgiveness so much so
that it was bestowed to him[^1].

Surah Al-Ma’idah, Verses 119 - 120
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ اللّهُ هَذَا يَوْمُ يَنفَعُ الصَّادِقِينَ صِدْقُهُمْ لَهُمْ
جَنَّاتٌ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا أَبَدًا
رَّضِيَ اللّهُ عَنْهُمْ وَرَضُواْ عَنْهُ ذَلِكَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلّهِ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ وَمَا فِيهِنَّ وَهُوَ عَلَى
كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**119.** ***"Allah*** ***said: 'This is the day when shall benefit the
truthful ones their truth. For them there are gardens beneath which
rivers flow wherein shall they abide forever.*** ***Allah*** ***is
well-pleased with them and they are well-pleased with Him. This is the
great success."***  
**120.** ***"To*** ***Allah*** ***belongs the sovereignty of the heavens
and the earth and whatever is in them, and He is All-Powerful over all
things."***

Following the explanation mentioned about the talk of Allah *with*
Jesus, the content of this verse refers to the words of *Allah* after
that talk and it says:

***"Allah*** ***said: ' This is the day when shall benefit the truthful
ones their truth. ..."***

Then, concerning the reward of the truthful ones, the Qur'an says as
follows:

***"... For them there are gardens beneath which rivers flow wherein
shall they abide forever....."***

More significant than that blessing, which is of the material examples,
there is this blessing that:

***"...*** ***Allah*** ***is well-pleased with them and they are
well-pleased with Him....."***

And, there is no doubt that this great merit, which is inclusive of
material and spiritual merits, is counted the great salvation. The verse
continues saying:

***"... This is the great success."***

In the second verse, it points to the possession and sovereignty of
Allah*,* when it says:

***"To*** ***Allah*** ***belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the
earth and whatever is in them, and He is All-Powerful over all
things."***

[^1]: Tafsir-i-Maraqi; Vol. 7, P. 66


