Surah Al-‘An’am, Chapter 6, Introduction
========================================

### Introduction to the Surah

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**In The Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful**

This Surah is the sixty-ninth Surah that was revealed to the Prophet (S)
in Mecca. As the Traditions of Ahlul-Bayt (as) indicate, all the verses
of this Surah were revealed at the same time.

Similar to other Meccan Suras, the basic aim of this Surah is inviting
people to the triple principals of unity of Allah*,* Prophecy, and
Resurrection, but most of all, it emphasizes on monotheism and opposing
paganism and idolatry.

Paying attention carefully to the contents of the verses of this Surah
can remove the soul of hypocrisy and disperse from among Muslims, and
cause the ears to be hearing, the eyes to be clear-sighted, and the
hearts (minds) to be knowledgeable.

About the virtue of this Surah, in the Islamic traditions, it is cited
that when this Surah was revealed, seventy thousand angels were taking
after it. And that every believer who recites it, (because of its light,
his soul and self may be satiated from the spring of monotheism and) all
those angels will ask forgiveness for that person.[^1]

Also, 'Ayyashi himself has narrated from 'Abi-Basir that Imam Sadiq (as)
said: "Surah Al-'An'am was revealed at the same time while seventy
thousand angels were respectfully accompanying it, because there has
mentioned the name of Allah in seventy occurrences of it. If people knew
how much virtue there lies in its recitation, they would never leave it
out."

Then Imam (as) continued saying: "Whoever is in want of a requirement
from Allah and he desires it to be granted, he should establish four
units (rak'at) of prayer consisting of At-Fatihat-ul-Kitab and Surah
Al-'An'am. Then when he finishes the recitation of the Surah, he should
recite the following supplication:

O' The Generous! O' The Generous! O' The Generous!

O' The Great! O' The Great O' The Great!

O' Greater than any great!

O' The Hearer of supplications!

O' He Whom nights and days do not change!

Blessing and peace be upon Muhammad and his descendents!

May You have mercy upon my weakness, my poverty, my neediness, and my
wretchedness!

O' He Who had mercy upon Jacob, the elder, while He returned Yusef, his
dear one, to him!

O' He Who had mercy on Job after his long trial (of affliction)!

O' He Who had mercy upon Muhammad and Who sheltered him, the orphan!

And Who assisted him against tyrants of Quraysh and their false deities,
and gave him authority upon them!

O' Helper! O' Helper! O' Helper!

"By Allah*!* If you recite this supplication and ask Allah for your
whole needs, He will bestow (them to) you." [^2]

Ali-ibn-'Ibrahim has narrated from Hadrat Rida (as)*,* the eighth Imam,
who said

*"Surah Al-'An'am was sent down at the same time and seventy thousand
angels accompanied it with the sound of glorification, exaltation and
proclamation of His greatness. Whoever recites this Surah, angels will
give glory (unto* *Allah) for him until the Resurrection Day."*[^3]

[^1]: Bihar-ul-'Anwar, Vol. 91, P. 348

[^2]: Tafsir by 'Ayyashi, Vol. 1, P. 353 - Tafsir-ul-Burhan, Vol. 1, P.
514

[^3]: Tafsir by Ali-ibn-'Ibrahim


