Section 3: Polytheists shall themselves confess their guilt
===========================================================

The greatness of the guilt of being polytheist – The polytheist shall
themselves deny polytheism which they had themselves held as their
conviction – They shall desire to be returned to this life

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 21
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّنِ افْتَرَى عَلَى اللّهِ كَذِبًا أَوْ كَذَّبَ
بِآيَاتِهِ إِنَّهُ لاَ يُفْلِحُ الظَّالِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**21.** ***"And who is more unjust than him who forges a lie against***
***Allah*** ***or denies His Signs; Verily the unjust will not succeed.
"***

The Qur'anic expression /wa man azlamu/ ***(and who is more unjust)***
has occurred in the Qur'an about fifteen times. This phrase has been
used with the senses of calumny against Allah *,* barring people from
going into the mosques, and concealing the testimony of the Truth.

This denotes that cultural injustice and barring people from rectitude
and comprehension, is the worst injustice upon the society.

Setting a stone and a piece of wood equal to the Lord is an injustice
toward Him, and worshipping them is an injustice toward humanity.
Therefore, the unjust people will never meet the true salvation. The
above-mentioned verse says:

***"And who is more unjust than him who forges a lie against Allah or
denies His Signs; verily the unjust will not succeed."***

The more, an oppressed person is dear and holy, the more intense is the
danger of transgression against him. That is why being unjust toward the
Lord and the Sacred House, and belying against Divine Holy Essence, are
the worst injustice:

***"And who is more unjust ..."***

Transgression upon the thought and culture of nations is one of the
worst transgressions. Polytheism, forging a lie against Allah*,* a false
claim of being the divine prophet, innovation, interpretation of the
Qur'an by personal opinion, concealing the Truth, and the like, are all
kinds of this sort of injustice.

The following couple of traditions are recorded in Qurar-ul-Hikam, vol.
1, p. 149.

Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) said:

*"Avoid transgression. It is the greatest sin. Verily every transgressor
will be punished for his transgression."*

Again, he *(as)* said:

*"Avoid cruelty. Whoever commits it, his life will become dark."*

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 22
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ نَحْشُرُهُمْ جَمِيعًا ثُمَّ نَقُولُ لِلَّذِينَ أَشْرَكُواْ
أَيْنَ شُرَكَآؤُكُمُ الَّذِينَ كُنتُمْ تَزْعُمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**22.** ***"And on the Day We will muster them all together, then We
will say to those who associated partners (to*** ***Allah): 'Where are
your associate-gods whom you were asserting?'"***

In the previous verse, it was said that the oppressors, who apparently
gain some social ranks by calumny, rejection and concealing the Truth,
will not meet salvation. A prosperous person is one who has some
positive matters for answering the questions in the Hereafter, because
all the polytheistic imaginations will be effaced therein.

***"And on the Day We will muster them all together, then We will say to
those who associated partners (to*** ***Allah): 'Where are your
associate-gods whom you were asserting?'"***

The objective meaning of the Arabic word /jami'an/ mentioned in the
verse, is either 'all human beings', or the polytheists and the idols.
The evidence for this idea is the content of another verse that targets
men end their wives, and what they were worshipping. That verse says:

***"Gather together those who were unjust and their mates, and what they
used to worship."***[^1]

It is true that the verse under discussion refers to polytheists, but
those who accept the leadership of other than Allah’s saints, and oppose
the friends of Allah*,* are rather a kind of polytheists.

In Jami'ah Supplication, we recite: "And he who opposes you is a
disbeliever."

An Islamic tradition, narrated from the immaculate ones, says: "The
person who refuses us (our way) is similar to the person who refuses
(the word of) Allah and such a person is as a disbeliever."

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verses 23 - 24
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ لَمْ تَكُن فِتْنَتُهُمْ إِلاَّ أَن قَالُواْ وَاللّهِ رَبِّنَا
مَا كُنَّا مُشْرِكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انظُرْ كَيْفَ كَذَبُواْ عَلَى أَنفُسِهِمْ وَضَلَّ عَنْهُم مَّا
كَانُواْ يَفْتَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**23.** ***"Then their excuse would be nothing but that they would say:
'By*** ***Allah, our Lord! we were not polytheists'. "***

**24.** ***"See how they (the polytheists) lie against their own selves,
and that which they were forging has passed away from them."***

The Arabic term /fitnah/, here, has been rendered into 'intimidated to
idols and paganism'; or, it means 'excuse'.

***"Then their excuse would be nothing but that they would say: 'By***
***Allah, our Lord! We were not polytheists'. "***

As their quality requires, liars tell lies on the Day of Judgment, too.
In this regard the Qur'an says:

***"On the day that*** ***Allah*** ***will raise them up all, then they
will swear to Him as they swear to you, and they think that they have
something; now surely they are the liars."***[^2]

Regarding this holy verse, Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) in a
tradition has said that after this lie, their lips will be sealed and
their other limbs will tell the truth.

Thus, in the court of Allah*,* neither telling a lie is helpful, nor an
oath.

***"See how they (the polytheists) lie against their own selves, and
that which they were forging has passed away from them."***

Hence, the polytheists will dislike their own thoughts and creeds on the
Hereafter Day, when they will say:

***"... we were not polytheists '. "***

However, on the Hereafter Day, surely hating polytheism will not be
helpful.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 25
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْهُم مَّن يَسْتَمِعُ إِلَيْكَ وَجَعَلْنَا عَلَى قُلُوبِهِمْ
أَكِنَّةً أَن يَفْقَهُوهُ وَفِي آذَانِهِمْ وَقْرًا وَإِن يَرَوْاْ
كُلَّ آيَةٍ لاَّ يُؤْمِنُواْ بِهَا حَتَّى إِذَا جَآؤُوكَ
يُجَادِلُونَكَ يَقُولُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ إِنْ هَذَا إِلاَّ
أَسَاطِيرُ الأَوَّلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**25.** ***"And of them there are some who hearken to you, and We have
laid veils upon their hearts lest they understand it, and in their ears
a heaviness; and (even) if they see every sign they will not believe in
it, so that when they come to you they dispute with you, those who
disbelieve say: 'This is naught but the legends of the ancients'."***

In this verse, the psychological conditions of some of the pagans are
hinted to. They do not usually show the least inclination from
themselves when they are told the facts.

They not only do not show inclination, but also oppose these facts
hostilely, and, by means of calumny, they keep themselves and others
aloof from them. Concerning these people, the Qur'an says:

***"And of them there are some who hearken to you, and We have laid
veils upon their hearts lest they understand it, and in their ears a
heaviness....."***

Indeed, attributing such matters to Allah relates to 'the law of
causation' and the property of 'action'. That is, the result of
continuation in doing wrong and insisting on obstinacy is that it turns
the soul and self of the person into its own nature.

Experience has proved this fact that, at first, evil-doers feel
inconvenience with their own evil action. But little by little, they
will be accustomed to it, so that there may come some day that they
count doing their evil actions obligatory.

So, the verse indicates that their circumstance has changed to a state
that if they see all the signs and revelations of Allah they will not
believe in them.

The verse says:

***"... and (even) if they see every sign they will not believe in
it....."***

The verse informs the Prophet (S) implying that beyond their disbelief,
when they come to you they have no aim but disputing and quarrelling
with you. The verse says:

***"... So that when they come to you they dispute with you....."***

Instead of hearkening to you heartily and, at least, in the form of a
seeker of the truth that they should corn template upon it to probably
find it; they stand against it with a negative soul and thought.

When they hear your statements, which have originated from the source of
revelation, they cannot afford it but using the strike of calumny. The
verse continues saying:

***"...those who disbelieve say: ' This is naught but the legends of the
ancients '."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 26
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُمْ يَنْهَوْنَ عَنْهُ وَيَنْأَوْنَ عَنْهُ وَإِن يُهْلِكُونَ إِلاَّ
أَنفُسَهُمْ وَمَا يَشْعُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**26.** ***"And they prohibit people from it, and themselves they keep
afar from it, and they destroy none save themselves, while they are not
aware."***

The Arabic term /yan'aun/, mentioned in the verse, is derived from
/na'ya/ with the sense of 'to avoid'.

Some of the commentators of the Sunnite schooled have considered this
verse about Abu-talib. They have said that he prohibited people from
hurting Muhammad while he himself did not believe in Islam and avoided
becoming Muslim.

They similarly have considered some other verses of the Qur'an
concerning this matter, such as **Surah At- Taubah.** **No.9.** **verse
115,** and **Surah Al-Qasas, No. 25. Verse 57**

But, from the view Point of Shi'ah School, Abutalib was one of the best
Muslims whose belief has been reflected in his poems.

Moreover, a Muslim believing woman like Fatimah Bent-i-Asad lived as a
wife with him until the end of his life. This is also another evidence
for this idea[^3].

However, pagans and polytheists always try to hinder people and keep
them afar from the path of benevolence and good deeds.

***"And they prohibit people from it, and themselves they keep afar from
it, and they destroy none save themselves, while they are not aware."***

Keeping afar from the acceptance of truth by a person is paving the way
of annihilation upon his own self.

The real awareness is finding the path of truth, while losing the path
of truth and leader of truth, from whoever it maybe, is foolishness.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 27
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ تَرَىَ إِذْ وُقِفُواْ عَلَى النَّارِ فَقَالُواْ يَا لَيْتَنَا
نُرَدُّ وَلاَ نُكَذِّبَ بِآيَاتِ رَبِّنَا وَنَكُونَ مِنَ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**27.** ***"And if you could see when they are stationed before the
(Hell) Fire, then they say: 'Would that we might be returned, and we
would not belie the Signs of our Lord, and we would be of the
believers."***

According to the verses of the Qur'an, the desire of returning to this
world in human beings is found both at the moment of death, and in the
grave, and in Hereafter. Surah Al-Muminun. No.23. verses 99 and 100 say:

***"Until when death overtakes one of them, he says: 'My Lord! send me
back again (into the world)'."***

***"That I may do good ...".***

And, again, the same Surah, verse 107 says:

***"O' our Lord! Take us out of it; then if we return (to evil) we shall
be unjust."***

We must believe in the truth as long as we have been respited in this
world, because it will be too late in the Hereafter.

***"And if you could see when they are stationed before the (Hell) Fire,
then they say: 'Would that we might be returned, and we would not belie
the Signs of our Lord, and we would be of the believers'."***

As the philosophers and wiser men have said, this world is the place of
movement and the coming world is the world of actuality. As far as an
apple is with the tree, it has some movement towards development. But,
when it separates from the tree, that movement will end and no more
growth is expected from it.

Therefore, if a person wishes to be among the dwellers of Paradise, he
must prepare the concerning means of development in this life, which is
the world of movement.

Otherwise, he will be involved with punishment.

By the way, the consequence of rejecting the Signs of Allah *will* be
remorse in the Hereafter, and being entangled with the Hell-Fire.

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 28
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ بَدَا لَهُم مَّا كَانُواْ يُخْفُونَ مِن قَبْلُ وَلَوْ رُدُّواْ
لَعَادُواْ لِمَا نُهُواْ عَنْهُ وَإِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**28.** ***"Rather, what they used to hide before has (now) appeared to
them; and even if they were returned, they would revert to what they
were prohibited, and most certainly they are liars."***

The Resurrection Day is the day of manifestation of people's hidden
secrets. The Qur'an has frequently pointed out this fact. A few of these
Qur'anic occurrences are as follows:

***"And the evil (consequences) of what they did shall become manifest
to them ..."*** ***(Surah Al Jathiyah, No.45. verse 33).***

***"And the evil (consequences) of what they wrought shall become
manifest to them....."*** ***(Surah Az-Zumar.*** ***No.39. verse 48).***

On the Day of Judgment, all the secrets will be uncovered.

***"Rather, what they used to hide before has (now) appeared to
them....."***

It is impossible for the mortals to return from the coming world back to
this world. The verse continues saying:

***"... and even if they were returned....."***

There are some vicious persons that we cannot expect them to become well
again. They will not change even with the respite they will ask for.

Sometimes it happens that a person is confronted with difficulties,
calamities and bitter circumstances. When such a person is in that
condition, the one may make some good decisions, but later, when he
reaches to ease and welfare, he forgets all of them.

***"... and even if they were returned, they would revert to what they
were prohibited....."***

So, when telling lies becomes a quality in a person, he will tell a lie
in the Hereafter, too, and will bring some false claims there.

***"... and most certainly they are liars."***

Surah Al-‘An’am, Verse 29 - 30
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُواْ إِنْ هِيَ إِلاَّ حَيَاتُنَا الدُّنْيَا وَمَا نَحْنُ
بِمَبْعُوثِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ تَرَى إِذْ وُقِفُواْ عَلَى رَبِّهِمْ قَالَ أَلَيْسَ هَذَا
بِالْحَقِّ قَالُواْ بَلَى وَرَبِّنَا قَالَ فَذُوقُواْ العَذَابَ بِمَا
كُنتُمْ تَكْفُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**29.** ***"And they say: ' There is nothing save our life of the world
and we shall not be resurrected'."***  
***30. And if you could see when they are stationed before their Lord He
will say: 'Is this not the truth? 'They will say: 'Yes, by our Lord I'
He will say: 'Taste you then the chastisement for what you used to
disbelieve'."***

This verse is the continuation of the statements of the arrogant and
stubborn pagans who, by seeing the scenes of Resurrection, desire to
return back to this world once more in order to compensate.

But the Qur'an implies that if these people return to the world, they
not only will not compensate their evils, but also will continue
committing their vicious deeds, and, basically, they deny the
Resurrection and Hereafter, too. Surprisingly, they will say that the
life is only the life of this world and they will not be raised again.
The verse says:

***"And they say:-'There is nothing save our life of the world and we
shall not be resurrected '."***

In this holy verse, the Qur'an hints to these people's fate on the
Resurrection Day, and says:

***"And if you could see when they are stationed before their Lord He
will say: 'Is this not the truth?' They will say: 'Yes, by our Lord!'
..."***

They are told once more that they should taste the punishment for that
they used to reject that punishment, and they disbelieved. The Qur'an
says:

***"... He will say: 'Taste you then the chastisement for what you used
to disbelieve'."***

It is sure that the purpose of 'standing before the Lord' is not that
Allah (S.w.T.) has a place. It means to stand before the scenes of His
punishments. This status is the same as the state of establishing the
canonical prayer for which a servant says he is standing before Allah*.*

[^1]: Surah As-Safat, No.37, Verse 22

[^2]: Surah Al-Mujadilah, No 58, Verse 18

[^3]: refer to al-Qadir, vols. 7 and 8


