2. Muslims Ethos Through the Centuries
======================================

In my last lecture, I invited your attention to what Islamic thinkers
and reformers had often pointed out in the recent centuries. I said that
Muslims today have come to view Islam in a manner characteristic of
diseased minds. They failed to perceive the intrinsic vitality of Islam,
which continued to exist unaffected. The adverse change in the typical
way of thinking, or ethos, of Muslims has deep-rooted causes.

The deterioration in Muslim ethos set in when Islam, or one's faith,
and actual practice of the same came to be regarded as separable. This
theoretical approach to Islam ignored the fact that it is a religion of
action. For, no human happiness and wellbeing could be achieved on any
unrealistic and theoretical bases. By virtually discarding action as the
means of achieving human progress, the Muslim ethos became
unrealistic.

Islamic teachings regard appropriate efforts as capable of shaping
every human destiny. This approach is realistic, sensible and in harmony
with Nature. That any human achievement depends on the propriety and
effectiveness of the relevant efforts has been frequently stressed in
the Qur'an:

"... man has only that for which he makes effort." (The Qur'an, 53:39)
"That day (when the earthquake will shake the earth) mankind (after
resurrection) shall issue forth in scattered groups to be shown their
(good/evil) deeds.

"Then, whoever had done an atom-weight of good shall see it; "And
whoever had done an atom-weight of evil shall see it." (The Qur'an,
99:6/7/8)

The above verses emphasize the crucial significance of rectitude in
human action for shaping individual and societal destinies. No doubt,
these and similar other Qur'anic teachings are relevant to all
individuals and nations alike. These principles had been deeply upheld
by the early Muslims whose faith and action showed no contradiction.
They never desisted from actively pursuing what they believed in.

Their positive and comprehensive efforts underlined their awareness of
the futility of approaching problems or situations in a one-sided,
theoretical manner. Their deep, thorough and active commitment to Islam,
as reflected in their individual and collective efforts, enabled than to
achieve meaningful dynamism and self-reliance, as well as astounding
success.

The positive elan achieved by the early Muslims lost its dynamism in
the second century of the Hejira. By then Muslims had begun to spurn
action and take their faith for granted. This negative trend was
encouraged by the corrupt, incompetent and worldly rulers. It began as
early as the Ummayad caliphates.

The Ummayads aimed at overcoming any effective criticism of their
worldly and almost secular ways. Accordingly, they propagated the
misleading notion that, given the basic faith (in Islam), one's action
is of no importance. With their vast power and wealth, they could unduly
influence the ethos of the people, even through their patronization of
pseudo-intellectual groups like the Murjites.20

20. The Murjites advocated that when a believer is seen to be indulging
in sinful behaviour, one should be left to God's Last Judgment.
Therefore, all those who profess to be Muslims should be-even
tentatively-regarded as true Muslims. Thus. they implied that even the
deviationist Ummayads were to be tolerated. (see John B. Noss: "Man's
Religions", the Macmillan Company, New York. Third Ed., 7th Printing,
1967, p. 748) -Ed.

Shi'a Muslims, inspired and guided by their pious Imams (a.s.), firmly
believed in acting according to one's faith. The Imams always reiterated
that faith is verified or confirmed by three things: verbal assertion,
heart-felt conviction and physical action. They were averse to the
theory that faith is independent of action. After all, when the Qur'an
praises devout believers, it endorses not only one's belief but the
conformity of his actions.

What the Murjites among the Sunni Muslims did in the past is noticeable
today among the Shi'a Muslims. The latter have come to scorn action,
while upholding their allegiance to the guidelines set by Hadrat Ali
(a.s.) and the other Imams. They participate in the mourning sessions
for Imam Husain (a.s.), as if - God forbid - the Imam believed in an
attitude of partisanship. On the contrary, the philosophy underlying
Imam Husain's martyrdom showed that he wanted to reorient Islam to
action. In other words, he died to render Islam dynamic in actual
practice. Yet, many seem to think that he died in trying to establish
Islamic order of a theoretical kind!

Reverting to the Ummayad period, it will be interesting to recall what
Abul Faraj Isfahani mentioned in his book: "Aghani" (Melodies"). Though
an Ummayad himself, Abu Faraj has been considered by the Shi'ite clergy
to be an impartial historian, specially for his authentic account of his
martyrdoms of the descendents of Abi-Taleb.

In his book: "Aghani", Abul Faraj describes the pleasure-loving and
decadent amusements of the caliphs in the words of the minstrels,
musicians and artists of their courts. One of the anecdotes concern s a
dispute between a Shi'a Muslim and a Murjite as to the pros and cons of
faith and action. The former upheld both faith and action as
inseparable, while the latter claimed that the basic thing is faith
irrespective of action. Neither of them was able to convince the other.
Then, they agreed to arbitration by whoever joined them first. The first
person to join them was a musician, so that the Murjite was glad in the
expectation that the arbitrator will endorse his view.

The musician gave his verdict by saying: "I'm a Shi'a from my head to
my waist, and a Murjite from my waist downward". What he meant was that
he thought like a Shi'a, but 'acted' like a Murjite! Today, we find the
Shi'a Muslims practically Murjite from head to foot! We often take
recourse to protexts, ev'en to make for paradise with them. Hadrat Ali
(2), speaking about paradise emphasizes that it is granted as a prize
won by accomplishments, and not pretexts or excuses. Our negative
attitude is tantamount to turning away from reality to wishful thinking.
A nation that bases its pursuit of happiness on imagination is to be
much pitied.

In the above context, the Qur'an has condemned the Jewish notion that a
people could regard themselves as privileged and condemned the Jewish
notion that a people could regard themselves as privileged and
condonable before God, assuming that wicked deeds were ignored by Him
and good deeds were recompensed all the more. The Jews had believed that
their sins and evil deeds would not cause them to go to hell, it was
only a formality before their release after a few days, so that they
could go to heaven to which they rightfully belonged!

In a tradition we are told that Jews, Christians and Muslims of Madina
were all claiming moral superiority over one another. The Qur'an
corrected them by saying: "It is not as you and others of the Book hoped
and believed. God will punish whoever commits a wicked deed." A notion
of Superiority came to prevail among the Shi'a Muslims, too, even during
the time of the Imams. However, the Imams rejected it and counteracted
the same. Two instances can be cited in this regard.

Caliph Ma'moon offered his successorship to Imam Reza (a.s.). The
latter declined it politely and took no part in the state affairs.
Subsequently, the Imam was addressing a religious session in which his
brother, Zeid bin Musa bin Ja'far, who had risen at Madina against the
Caliphate and was suppressed and pardoned by Ma'moon, was present.

Imam Reza (a.s.) noticed his brother referring to himself and the Imam
as "We of the Prophet's household..." and giving an impression to the
listeners that God will treat them as privileged persons. The Imam
(a.s.) interrupted his discourse to tell his brother: "What is this
nonsense that you are uttering? Do you think that every wrong done by us
will be forgiven by God because of some immunity granted by Him to the
Prophet's family? If it were true, you would have been superior to your
father, Musa bin Ja'far, and heaven would be guaranteed to you, in spite
of an idle life. Actually, your father deserved heaven as a result of a
lifetime of effort, study and devotion to God."

Then, Imam Reza (a.s.) turned to Vesha, who was a learned narrator of
Kufa, and asked him how the Kufa people understood the verse of the
Qur'an concerning Noah and his son. Vesha understood the Imam's purpose
and replied: "Some people in Kufa understood it to the effect that when
Noah (a.s.) begged God to forgive his son and allow him to be taken o n
board the "Ark", the divine response was in the negative as if Noah's
son was not a member of the prophet's family". Then, Vesha continued:
"Others in Kufa interpreted it wrongly to mean that God told Noah that
the one he regarded as his son was not really his - as if it were that
Noah's wife had begotten an illegitimate son!"

The Imam (a.s.) agreed by saying: "Yes, the second group of people in
Kufa misunderstood the true meaning of the verse. The correct position
is that Noah's son was corrupt, although he was the prophet's own child.
No wonder, then, God did not accept Noah's intercession for his wicked
son. And it is said in the narrative that Noah regretted his mistake in
this regard."

Then, the Imam (a.s.) turned to his brother and asked: "Was Noah's son
not a prophet's son?" If mere blood relationship was the consideration,
'Why God did not accede to the Prophet's request?" "What better response
than the divine aversion to t he corruptness and impiety of Noah's son
can be found?".

In another narration concerning Imam Sadidq (a.s.), a tendency towards
crooked thinking has been corrected in the past. A man came to the Imam
and asked: "A saying has been attributed to you. I wish to know whether
or not it is correct and authentic. Is it true that you have said that
when one is properly enlightened by following the Imams one can act as
one wishes?" The Imam indicated that he had said to that effect. Then,
the man enquired: "Does it mean that enlightenment allows a man to do
just anything he wishes, even if it is theft or adultery?"

The Imam replied in astonishment: "How distressing it is to hear an
absurd interpretation of my words! When I said that once you did
understand the Imams' teachings you would be free to act. I never meant
it to be applied to immoral acts. Understanding the Imams can only be in
the context of moral rectitude, so that you are able to distinguish
between what is right and what is wrong." Obviously, when we refer to
the Qur'an, the Sunnat and the Imams' narrations, we learn about the
need for righteous action, and understand that human happiness is
dependent on it.

Today, when we reflect on our characteristic way of thinking, we are
likely to discern that action is scorned in many ways. When we extend
our analysis to our own society, we will probably find that our people
ignore the need for genuine and righteous action altogether. For
example, it is a common tendency to think that if one could get himself
space for one's burial within the premises of the shrine of Imam Reza
(a.s.), then, it will compensate for one's deficiencies in life. What an
idea and how remote from Islam! Do such people really find happiness
when, after a life of wickedness, they think that burial at the feet of
an Imam will absolve them of every sin? They seem to forget that even
Harun al-Rashid is buried in the premises of the shrine of Imam Reza
(a.s.) and pilgrims there curse him and his son Ma'mun. This
contradiction typifies a degenerate or "dead" thinking among people.

When we speak of reviving the original Islamic ethos, we mean basically
the popularisation of the idea of a Muslim's working out his own
salvation through righteous self-exertion- and not any wishful thinking
or dependence on others. In this context, we may recall the former
custom of an influential person granting private sanctuary to an
ordinary member of the public. This custom, fortunately, is no longer
allowed to continue. It had meant that when an offender wanted to evade
arrest, he sought refuge of an influential clergyman and, if granted, no
agent of the authorities could remove him from there. This was against
both secular and religious laws. Yet, some ancient people had wrongly
supposed that private sanctuary existed in the divine system. The Imam
never accepted any idea of private sanctuary.

In Nahjul Balagha, Hadrat Ali (a.s.) is reported to have always
emphasized two qualities of a Muslim: chastity and action. However, we
seem to shut our eyes to these requirements, and then ask in our will to
be buried in Najaf - as if this final wish will put everything right!

According to the Prophet's Tradition, the Bani Hashem and Bani Mutalleb
tribes were told by him: "Let me not witness on Resurrection Day that
other people come before God, the Just, relying on their
well-accumulated good deeds, while you come depending on me, pleading
that 'the Prophet is one of us'; for, this will be of no avail to you."
This was on the occasion of the revelation of the Qur'anic verses
mentioned below;

"So, invoke not with God another god, Lest you be one of the doomed.

"And warn thy tribe of near kindred." (The Qur'an, 26;213,214)

In another tradition the Prophet (s.a.w.) is to have told his dear and
pious daughter, Hadrat Fatima (a.s.), who he called "a portion of my
heart", as follows; "My dear, act on your own, for your kinship with me
will be of no avail; follow my teachings and never say that your father
is Prophet. It is of no use to you."

Neither Hadrat Ali (a.s.) nor Hadrat Fatima (a.s.) ever took recourse
to their kinship with the Prophet (s.a.w.). They relied on their own
will and power to act and act in the righteous way of God, as taught by
the Prophet (s.a.w.). They were deeply imbued with the fear of God,
which was particularly evident in their regular and nightly prayers and
constant devotion to Him. Didn't Imam Ali (a.s.) sometimes faint in the
middle of his nightly prayers? Was it not due to his deeply felt fear of
God? Why couldn't he assure himself otherwise, even as a first believer
in Islam, or as the Prophet's first cousin and his beloved son-in-law?
The Prophet's daughter, Hadrat Fatima (a.s.), too, was so devoted to God
as to render her prayers a deeply moving experience for her, specialty
on Thursday nights spent in tearful concentration on Him. Indeed, they
exemplified a deep assimilation of the Islamic teachings.

The early Muslims showed self-reliance, in that they depended on their
own individual worth and power. This characteristic way of their
thinking began to suffer damage at the hands of speculative thinkers,
whose adverse social impact was insignificant at first. but in time
spread like leprosy among the Shi'as and a majority of Sunnis. The
vicious thinkers took undue advantage of the ill-trained, credulous and
impressionable people, in that they could use even the seemingly
innocuous dreams to achieve their ulterior motives of damaging the
originally positive Islamic ethos. This is typified notably in one case
after the death of the renowned Islamic thinker, Muhaqiq Ardebili, who
had personified a thoroughly dynamic Muslim in his lifetime.

At that time, someone spread a story about his dream involving a
deceased Mulla or Faqih (sometimes referred to as Muhaqiqi, implying, as
Shaikh Ansari subsequently pointed out, the venerable Muhaqiq Ardebili).
In that dream, the departed soul was asked as to how God had treated
him, and the dreamer got the reply that He was Gracious indeed. When
further asked as to what saved him, the reply was: "My realization that
prospects for good deeds are dull!", It is strange that while the Qur'an
tells us that the prospects for good deeds are bright (in the
hereafter), a dream suggests to the contrary. The story indicates the
kind of damaging effect of a person's diseased thinking.

Imam Baqar (a.s.) once told his followers: "Inform the Shi'as that a
Shi'a is no longer one when he discards virtue, chastity and positive
efforts." In Nahjul Balagha, Hadrat Ali's advice is recorded as: "Be not
of those who are hopeful of salvation in the next world, but without
good deeds." Further, one is advised not to 'repent' in a manner of
postponing the same while continuing to nurture all kinds of desire, and
not to pretend aversion to the materialistic things while actually
demonstrating that one is captivated by the world.


