3. To Be "alive" and To Be "dead" in Thinking
=============================================

One of the matters described in the Qur'an is the question of life and
death, which is mentioned in all its phases for various reasons. It
speaks of the life of plants, animals and human beings. But as our
discussion is not about life in general but only a particular life, that
is, human life, we will pay special attention to it.

Many of us think that as long as a man's heart beats, and the nerves
are active and he walks about, he is alive. When can he be said to be
dead? When the physician listens to his heart and declares that it has
stopped functioning. This is to some extent true, but this kind of life
is not a really human life; it is his biological life. In this respect
he has a common bond with animals. A dog, too, has a heart, nerves,
veins (in which blood flows) , organs and limbs. But a human being has
another kind of life, as well. It means, according to the Qur'an that a
man's heart, nerves and limbs may be active, but he may be 'dead'.

The Qur'an refers to people as dead and alive, and then says it affects
those who show a trace of life, while it has no effect on the dead ones.
What is meant by being dead or alive? The Qur'an says elsewhere that
whoever is born comes into the world with a divine-endowed nature, which
seeks truth. But in some people this light of inquiry is extinguished,
and thus he "dies," though he is biologically alive.

The Qur'an gives another example and says that those who show a trace
of life blossom forth in spirit when they assimilate the Qur'an, since
they become susceptible to the same, like a land prepared for the growth
of plants and trees.

The Qur'an says:

"Is he who was dead and We revived him (through the Qur'an) and gave
him a light by which he walks among people, like one who remains in
utter darkness and without access to the world beyond him?..."(6:123)

Another verse of the Qur'an in which the people are divided into two
groups of "dead" and "alive", is the one with which I began my
discourse. How explicitly and beautifully it (8:24) exhorts to the
effect that God and the Prophet invite us to accept Islam for its
life-giving quality, since it will revive us.

Islam speaks persistently of life, and says the Prophet has brought
"life" for you. You are dead now but you do not know it. Come and submit
to this spiritual physician to see how he offers you life.

What does life mean? It means clear-sightedness and ability. The
difference between life and death lies in these two. The greater the
measure of these two, the livelier is life. Why do we call God alive?
Does it mean having a beating heart and blood flow? This meaning does
not apply to God; in His case heart and blood do not exist.

Does life mean breathing and letting breath in and out? No, this is not
the meaning of life. These are conditions of life for us, not life
itself. Life itself is awareness and ability, we call God alive because
He represents Absolute Wisdom and Ability, and because an excellent
human life reflects qualities of His Essence, including kindness, mercy,
compassion and beneficence. Islam, too, promotes wisdom and ability in
actual practice, as it did for many centuries. Therefore, when human
thought does not reflect the divine-endowed wisdom and ability, and
instead, leads only to aggravation of ignorance and inactivity, it no
longer represents Islam.

Islam is the religion of life which is incompatible with ignorance and
inability. You can accept this as a general criterion of understanding
Islam. In the last session I mentioned action as an element of life in
Islamic thought. Islam tries in its teachings to predicate human destiny
on action, so as to make man rely on his own will. Islam says that your
unhappiness is the result of your own misdeeds.

A human being must rely on his own conduct and personal initiative.
What is more explicit than the phrase of the Quran which says: "There is
not for man save what he strives for." (53:39). No doubt, it involves
human dynamism, alertness, insight and ability.

To-day, educators try hard to awaken the sense of self-reliance in man,
and rightly do so. The kind of self-reliance that Islam awakens in man
is that it puts an end to the hope of relying on everything outside
himself, and if there is a hope it must be centered on oneself.
Similarly every connection with other things or persons is through
action. You cannot be connected with the Prophet (s.a.w.) or Imam Ali
(a.s.) or the latter's chaste Fatima (a.s.) except through deeds.

I remember a narration from eighteen years ago which affected me
deeply. It was an anecdote from the life of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.),
so fine and meaningful, and peerless in the biography of all human
beings. It is amazing how a man in a desert environment, such as that of
the Prophet's could act in an extraordinarily thoughtful manner.

The Prophet in one of his travels with his companions ordered the
caravan to stop and dismount. Then he dismounted and started walking in
a certain direction. Soon he returned, and his companions supposed that
he was looking for a suitable place for camping before he could decide
about moving to another spot.

They saw him approach his camel, take a knee-band from the sack, tie
the camel's knees and walk on as before. They wondered why the Prophet
(s.a.w.) had walked so far and back for such a trifling task, and asked
him why he did not order them to do it. The Prophet said: "Never seek
help from others even for a small piece of work. Try to do it
yourself."

If the Prophet (s.a.w.) had said this from the pulpit it would not have
had such a deep effect, but he said it when it was combined with action.
My purpose is to show that one of the principles of Islamic teachings
which revives Islamic thought is action and reliance on action.

I want to explain two other points of Islamic morals and educational
principles, which are very significant, like a double-edged sword. If
they are taught properly the result would be excellent, but if diverted
from their course, they will have opposite effects. In my experience
many of the moral and educational ideas in Islam have become perverted
in the minds of Muslims.

The dynamic concept of reliance on God has an ethical and educational
meaning in Islam. The Qur'an conveys an extraordinarily harmonious and
heroic sense in endorsing absolute adherence to, and trust in. God. The
Qur'an brings man into action and removes all fear from him. It teaches
us not to fear, but rely on God and go ahead. It instructs us to tell
the truth without fearing any might of an enemy.

When you seek to find this kind of reliance in the minds and hearts of
people to-day, you see that it is absent or dead. When we want to be
idle, and tend to neglect our duty, we resort to "reliance on God," and
use it in a sense quite the reverse of what the Qur'an teaches.


