4-islamic Position Concerning Asceticism and Renunciation of the World
======================================================================

Another aspect that I wish to discuss concerns the word: (asceticism).
In the Qur'an we do not come across the word in the sense used now. It
has been mentioned in the Prophet's tradition and in the narrations
attributed to the pious Imams. However, the meaning of the word as used
in the Qur'an is not obscure, specially as explained in Imam Ali's
sayings.

Asceticism is very prevalent amongst us in the sense in which it was
used formerly in traditions and annals, which is different from its
current sense. We hear of people, we find that their asceticism is
negative, meaning that they are content with a little. But this is not
the right meaning.

One of the qualities of an ascetic is to be able in his personal life
to be content with a little, which is of great philosophical importance.
But not everyone who is content with a little may be called all ascetic.
Let me explain it further.

Asceticism is related to worldly goods and riches and even to
positions. If you ask whether worldly goods and wealth and position are
good or bad, the answer depends on their use or purpose? These things
are a form of power, but the question is: what do you want them for? You
may be a slave of your lust, and intend to satisfy them by means of
these powers. If you are such a person whatever you use to attain your
carnal desires (whether it is position, wealth, knowledge, religion or
even devoutness) will be bad.

However, if you purify yourself, and do not lust, avoid
self-centredness, and have a divinely worthy social objective, then the
wealth, or position which you employ in this way, is used properly. This
is worship and devotion, since you are using them for your spiritual
goals. This is emphasized by Imam Sadiq (a.s.).

A number of ascetics of his time discussed asceticism with him . The
Imam (a.s.) said: "If what you say were true, then, how is it that after
Prophet Yusuf (Joseph) was proved innocent and released from prison, he
sought from the Egyptian ruler a position of crucial importance to the
whole wealth of the country? Why does the Qur'an mention this without
accusing Yusuf (a.s.) of being worldly? Because Yusuf (a.s.) was devoted
to God. He wanted that position for divine and spiritual goals, and so
his action is not worldly but spiritually motivated.

Islamic men of learning say that accepting position from a tyrannical
government is illegitimate, but if his goal in doing so is service, or
to help the oppressed, it is not only not a sin, but according to
religious verdicts, it is sometimes recommended, and sometimes even
obligatory. This applies to wealth, too. Why do you gather wealth? If
you have good morals and gave a spiritual goal, then you must use this
power to that end, and if you do not, you are sinful.

Islam is a supporter of two kinds of power, spiritual and economic. It
believes in spiritual power in the sense that it says you should be
morally so strong that you do not pay undue attention to the world and
what is in it, so as not to be enslaved by it. Imam Ali (a.s.) says that
Good has declared in the Qur'an that you are an ascetic when you attain
a stage where power over the whole world does not please or enslave you,
and even if the world is taken away from you, it does not defeat your
spirit.

As for economic power, we should try to gain legitimate wealth in order
to use it in the right way. When we realize that Islam supports both
spiritual and economic powers, then we find that we are "ascetics" in
the sense of harbouring weakness, or remaining actually weak in both
spiritual and economic matters.

If we are ascetics who have avoided wealth and economic power, we have
chosen weakness. Those who lack riches obviously can do nothing
economically and are obliged to stretch their hands before others. We
are also spiritually weak when we are brought up to think ourselves
ascetic by keeping away from wealth.

Asceticism in Islam signifies spiritual strength, and having this
spiritual strength enables one to make good use of wealth. Those who
asked Imam Sadiq (a.s.) about asceticism were ignorant of the philosophy
of it. They had heard that Imam Ali (a.s.) had been ascetic, and had
supposed that an ascetic must, under all conditions, wear worn-out
garments and eat barley bread. They were ignorant of the reason for
eating barley bread. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) explained it for them, and told
them that Ali (a.s.) just wanted to be human. He was not an ascetic of a
type who would choose seclusion.

Ali (a.s.) was more sociable than anyone and was most active socially
and economically, and. yet, he did not accumulate wealth. He was engaged
in commerce, agriculture, gardening, planting trees, irrigation and in
military expeditions. But he remained an ascetic with all these varied
activities. Sometimes he went into the orchards of Madina which belonged
to non-Muslims who belonged to the Book, and worked there for a wage.
Then he bought wheat or barley which his wife turned into dough and
bread. And when they came across a poor or needy person or an orphan or
a captive, they served him in preference to themselves. This was Ali's
asceticism.

The asceticism of Ali (a.s.) was based on sympathy, and sympathy is
human. He did not even make full use of his legitimate earning. He gave
himself only the wage of a soldier out of the public fund and he was not
willing to sleep with a square meal. Why? Because his heart and
conscience did not allow him. He said: "There are many hungry ones
around me. How can I sleep with a full stomach?

He was not referring only to his neighbours. He was thinking of the
Islamic lands as a whole in which someone might be in dire want of a
loaf of bread. If you find such an example of asceticism, he deserves
being honoured by the whole humanity. But we seem to call our
incapability, immobility and deadness asceticism. But Ali (a.s.) said:
"Should I be one of those about whom they say; 'it is enough pain for
you to sleep in satiety while others are hungry around you?'

The Prophet (s.a.w.) in his old age was exerting himself with a
self-sacrificing spirit so much that he was inspired in a Qur'anic verse
to observe moderation. Once the Prophet's companions noticed that the
Prophet (s.a.w.) did not arrive in time for prayer. It was found later
that an ill-clad man had come to his house at that hour, and the Prophet
had nothing to offer him except his own clothes and this delayed his
prayer. The Prophet had sent someone to buy the man a robe. The man
bought a fine one for twelve Dirhams.

The Prophet (s.a.w.) on seeing the robe said: "I can do with a cheaper
one." The Prophet (s.a.w.) went out and obtained refund, and on the way
back he met a slave girl who was weeping. Asked why, she said that she
had lost four Dirhams of her master. He gave her four Dirhams out of the
twelve and bought two robes with the remainder, giving one of them to
the ill-clad man. Later the Prophet (s.a.w.) came across the same girl
who was again found crying. He asked her the reason, and she said; "If I
go back I will be beaten (because I took your money)

." The Prophet (s.a.w.) offered to accompany her. On reaching her house
he shouted his customary greetings from outside. He repeated his
greetings three times as was his habit. The inmate were now sure that
the Prophet (s.a.w.) was there. So they invited him to come in. The
Prophet asked why they did not answer his first greeting. They said: "We
loved to hear your voice since it brings us blessings, and if we had
acknowledged your first greeting, we would have been deprived of the
second and the third." The Prophet silently entered and said: "I have
come to intercede for this slave girl. If she is late, do not trouble
her." They said: "In honour of your presence here, we will set her
free." The Prophet (s.a.w.) expressed his thanks to God that with twelve
Dirhams he has clothed an ill-clad or underclothed man and freed a
slave. This indicates real asceticism, piety, sympathy and humanity.

This verse (8:24) shows that Islamic teaching's are capable of
enlivening every aspect of life, when they penetrate one's heart and
produce a renewed spirit, insight and activity. Therefore any other
teaching which causes human stagnation or "deadness" is not of Islam.
The history of Islam confirms the lively position indicated by the verse
through several centuries.

To-day we often see that the ideas that we have "derived" from Islam
lack life-giving property. Therefore it is necessary to revise them
after finding out if we are possibly mistaken about them. This is the
meaning of the revival of Islamic thought. The spectacles we are wearing
are not right, so they must be changed for the better.

In the last session I discussed some ethical ideas of Islam, such as
asceticism and trust in God. I realized that the discussion was
incomplete. So, to night I will give further explanations since the
subject is of fundamental importance.

The current idea of asceticism is related to worldly matters, love of
the world and its renunciation, which sense is not conveyed in the
Qur'an. As used in Islamic traditions, specially in the sayings of the
Prophet (s.a.w.) and Imam Ali (a.s.) and other Imams (a.s.), there is no
doubt that it has a sublime significance. In Islamic literature, both in
poetry and prose, and in Persian and Arabic literatures, asceticism is
often mentioned. Now we must see what our way of thinking about it
should be in connection with the evidence and teachings offered by the
Holy Qur'an.

The word 'asceticism' originally meant 'disinclination'. But it has
assumed a different meaning in Islamic, Christian and other non-Islamic
teaching's. An ascetic is not a person who is naturally disinclined to
things, such as a patient who has no desire. for food, or someone who
dislikes sweetmeats, or an impotent man becoming disinclined to sexual
intercourse. It is not an instinctive lack of desire for worldly things,
but a moral aversion. In ascetic is instinctively inclined towards
material pleasures, but because of special or non-material goals and
purposes his conduct shows disinclination to them, so that he forsakes
them. In other words, spiritual or intellectual attention to something,
so as to make it the goal of an activity, is one thing, and a natural
instinct is another thing.

Now we must see what that goal is and what Islam thinks of it. Is there
such a thing in Islam, either obligatory or recommended, that a person
should forsake material pleasures, which accord with his nature, for the
sake of a goal? Or does Islam recommend no such renunciation, no matter
what the goal may be?


