5-the Spirtual Goal and Wordly Aversions
========================================

If we admit that Islam favours asceticism, then what is the goal
recommended for it? Some people suppose that the function of a religion
is something apart from other activities, such as commerce, agriculture
and industry, and that it belongs to a different world. They think the
task of a religion is simply worship, and that of commerce, agriculture,
industry and management are worldly, and for them asceticism is turning
away from worldly matters to other-worldly tasks. This is, of course,
wrong; for, the affairs which are called worldly are recommended by
Islam, and asceticism in the Islamic sense does not reject them.

There are two kinds of asceticism which explicit Islamic texts deny,
but they exist in non-Islamic ways. One of them is that the tasks of
both worlds are separate from each other. Every activity that is related
to the worldly life belongs to this world and has no connection with the
other world, and those tasks which are not connected with this world,
irrespective of having a useful or harmful effect on the worldly life,
are called worship. Where worship means praying, fasting and
self-denial, asceticism could mean abandoning worldly affairs so as to
concentrate on other-worldly tasks.

The Arabic dictionary 'Al-Munjad' has defined 'asceticism' exactly in
this way which corresponds with its Christian definition. It says:
'Leaving the affairs of the world to have time for worship'. It implies
that the tasks of the two worlds are separate, without any connection
between, or benefit for, one another. Thus, to be an ascetic meant
retirement from society and choosing seclusion in a monastery, a convent
or a cave, or to lead a monastic life.

Does Islam accept such a definition fur asceticism? No, obviously not.
In my book: "Mas'aleh Hejab" ("The Question of Veil"), I have said that
according to some people the philosophy of veil is related to
self-denial and monasticism, but Islam has rejected this idea and is
wholly opposed to isolation from society.

The Prophet (s.a.w.) himself said explicitly: "There is no monasticism
in Islam." He said that the kind of asceticism his followers practised
was as good as Jehad, or purposeful endeavour. Moreover, Islam
recommends as devotion what other religions regard as secular or
worldly.

Asceticism as understood in the secular sense does not exist in the
Qur'anâ€¦ In any case what Christian asceticism considers worldly is
accepted by Islam as a part of other-worldly things on one condition,
that is to be abstemious in the way of God.

Islam does not differentiate between the two worlds in which Muslims
believe. In Islam commerce or agriculture has both the worldly and
other-worldly significance, depending on the objective. If your trading
is legitimate, and not based on usury or unfairness, but intended to
gain incomes to avoid beggary and to serve your society and augment its
economic strength, Islam considers this as part of one's devoutness. So
are agriculture and animal husbandry, if they have a similar goal. All
these are included in devotions to God on part of those who are aware of
Islamic goals and pursue them.

In the same way whatever other schools of thought consider as worship
are regarded by Islam as a part of worldly life, so that praying and
fasting are not only beneficial for the next world, but also for this
one.

Thus, we cannot consider asceticism as belonging to one world. Islam
has described both legitimate and illegitimate things. It has said that
drinking, gambling and usury are forbidden and harmful for both worlds.
Islam does not agree with Christian asceticism, and it is unfortunate
that many of us understand it in its Christian or secular sense.

There is another meaning attached to asceticism which must be
explained. It is not a question of separating the two worlds and their
tasks, and forsaking the pleasures of one of them for the other. Such
people do not recommend leaving aside the tasks of life. They say it is
a duty which must be fulfilled that we must try to avoid pleasures in
this world to prevent a decrease of enjoyment in the next!

Abu Ali Ibn Sina (Avicenna) says (in his book: Namat Nahume Isharat)
that an ascetic is one whose aversion to the worldly enjoyments is
geared to attainment of the other-worldly satisfactions. This does not
mean, however, one can properly or legitimately exchange pleasures of
this world for those of the next. Islam does not teach that if one
enjoyed this world, he will be deprived of the next.

Man is not granted enjoyment in the Hereafter because of abandoning it
here. Also, it does not mean that each being is allotted a certain
amount of pleasure that must be secured here, while leaving other
enjoyments for the hereafter. There is no apportionment of pleasures to
make up there for a deficit here. Other-worldly pleasures are not the
result of deliberate deprivation in this world, but a consequence of
other factors.

Imam Ali (a.s.) says in Nahjul-Balagha: There are virtuous people who
deserve the blessings of both worlds. They enjoy the best food and
living here and receive blessings of the next world, too. Islam
considers certain pleasures unlawful, and indulgence in them does not
only deprive us of the next world's satisfactions, but, on the contrary,
results in punishment there. Adultery is one of these. So are drinking,
gambling, usury, slander, and lying.

But legitimate deeds are not so. The Qur'an has affirmed that
enjoyments which are pure and bring no misfortune for man are lawful.
The Qur'an forbids what is not a genuine pleasure. Drinking wine
produces evil consequences for the mind, body and society. So does
adultery.

The Qur'an says:

"Those who follow the Apostle, the Prophet, the Ummi, whom they find
written down in the Tavrat and the Injeel, (Who) commends them (what is)
good and prohibits impure things, and removes from them their burden and
the yokes which were upon them,...?" (7:152)

"Say: (O' Our Apostle Muhammad!) Who has prohibited the adornment
(granted) of God which He has brought forth for His servants....?"
(7:32)

Accordingly a pleasure which is not momentary and transient and has not
undesirable results for the body, spirit and society is lawful, as God's
Graces granted to human beings? Thus, we are encouraged to benefit from
clean and pure livelihoods. Nevertheless, these provisions are not
exchangeable as between the two worlds.

Asceticism in Islam is not obligatory, but an attainment towards
perfection with a spiritual goal different from the two worldly goals
mentioned earlier. It has been recommended to avoid worshipping
pleasures and sinking in them, even in lawful ones, which are not
forbidden, when abstention would be conducive to achievement of a
goal.

There are several goals which Islam accepts for asceticism in the sense
of forsaking legitimate pleasures. A person may be placed in a situation
where others are in greater need than him. What should he do? He shows
generosity and self-sacrifice and offers his own lawful satisfaction to
others. If he wastes it, he is foolish. But ha offers food, clothing,
and comfort in order to bring ease to the life of others. This is
self-sacrifice and one of the noblest of human qualities. This is an
exalted, correct, human asceticism, in the sense conveyed by Ali (a.s.).
That is, one abstains but does not waste, and, at the same time helps
others.

Does Islam accept this kind of asceticism? Of course, it does. What
intellect and sentiment can reject it if it is understood? A religion
that does not recommend such an asceticism is no religion. A school of
thought which does not recommend it is not humane.

The Qur'an speaking of a number of the Prophet's companions and
followers in Madina, says: "And those who had made their abode in the
city (Madina) and are (firm) in their faith (and) love those who have
fled to them and do not find in their hearts a need of what has been
given to them (the Muhajirs) and prefer them over their own selves,
though their own lot be poverty and whoever is saved from the
niggardliness of his self, these it is who are the successful ones."
(59:9)

Imam Zeynal-Abedin (a.s.) observed fast, and ordered preparation of a
dish, usually of meat, for him. When it was time to break his fast, he
came to the kitchen and served several bowls to be taken to the poor and
needy, and at the end he kept a small share for himself. Of course in
Islam the family has priority over others in partaking of meals, but
sometimes when a poor man came to his door, he offered him his own
share. This is what is meant by humane asceticism.

Sympathy is another goal of Islamic asceticism. One should be as
generous as one can. But sometimes this is of no avail, as when there
are so many without food and clothes that one does not have the means of
satisfying them all. It used to be said about the people of Sistan that
sometime in the past they left their children in the fields like animals
for eating grass.

Again, Ali (a.s.) as an ascetic of the first order considers it the
duty of leaders to show fellow-feeling and sympathy at least when they
cannot provide material assistance. No wonder, he abstained from eating
so as to be on the same footing as those who may have remained
helpless.

Ali (a.s.) says: "God has made me a leader with the special obligation
of living like the weakest of my followers in matters of food, clothes
and other aspects of life, so that the poor are encouraged, and the rich
seeing me as leader are not deviated by wealth."

There is a story about a great Shi'a clergyman, the late Vahid
Behbahani, whose religious class in Karbala was always crowded. He had
two sons named Muhammad Ali and Muhammad Isma'il. One day he saw the
wife of the second son wearing a fine dress. He admonished his son as to
why he bought such clothes for her. His son answered: "Are such things
forbidden?" He said: "My son, I am not saying they are forbidden. I have
a different reason for my question. I am a teacher and guide for people
who are both poor and rich. Some of them can afford such fine clothes,
but many of them cannot. We cannot provide them all with the kind of
clothes your wife wore, but there is one thing we can do, and that is to
sympathize with them so that a poor man can say to his wife she should
follow our example. So if we dress ourselves like a rich person, we are
robbing the poor of their only consolation. Ours ought to be an ascetic
life. Any day that others can afford fine garments, we, too, may give
ourselves that luxury." This duty of sympathy is recommended for all,
but especially for leaders and guides of people.

The following story is from Nahjul -Balagha; When Ali (a.s.) entered
Basra after the victory at the Battle of Jamal, he alighted at the house
of Ala-bin-Ziad who lived in a magnificent house. The Imam asked him
rebukingly: "What do you want such a house for? You can live in a
smaller dwelling. You need a large home in the next world, so you can
use this house for that purpose by bringing in guests and serving
people."

Later, Ala said: "I have a complaint to make about my brother, Assem."
Ali (a.s.) asked what it was. Ala said: "My brother has retired as an
ascetic, eats bad food, dresses in coarse garments and has renounced the
world." Ali (a.s.) asked to summon him and when he came said seriously
to him: "You, who oppress yourself, has the devil misled you? You are
too insignificant to suppose that God will rebuke you for benefiting
from His gifts. He has created them for His creatures." Assem answered:
"O, Imam, you yourself are living like me. My garment is not less poor
than yours." Ali (a.s.) said: "You are mistaken. I am a leader, and have
a special duty. God has made it incumbent upon us to place our living at
the level of the lowest individuals, for, they look to us for sympathy
and consolation, when we are unable to help them materially."

Asceticism does not involve separations of the affairs of this world,
and the next. It is not because of an incompatibility between the
satisfactions of the two worlds, but because of a general or particular
necessity, one of which is self-sacrifice when others are in need. One
offers help by depriving himself. This is one of the most desirable
human qualities, i.e. to sacrifice one's own joy for the sake of others.
The Qur'an has praised this quality most eloquently, showing it as a
sign of the liveliness of the human spirit. But the other two ideas of
asceticism are devoid of life, since they are based on two wrong
assumptions. The first is to consider that devoutness is beneficial for
both this world and the next. An ascetic who abandons all activity in
this world and retires to a cave or convent hoping to attain the next
world, loses the blessings of this world, too. He virtually turns
himself into a useless creature. This is a dead idea.

Another supposition is that God does not grant worldly enjoyment to him
who deserves other-worldly joy, or vice versa. According to this belief
it is not possible to have a happy life in both worlds, so we must
forsake this world for the sake of the next one. This is another dead
idea.

But he who understands God's Grace and believes in kindness,
benevolence and serving others, and thus deprives himself of something
in order to give to another, becomes a living creature and attains a
higher quality of life.

Sympathy is another basis of asceticism in order to attain a fair
condition for human beings in the means of living. It is wrong to have
one class of people having all blessings, and another class having all
sufferings. I do not mean that all individuals must be at the same
level, or that a worker and an idle person should enjoy the same
benefits. Individuals vary in their aptitude, ability, work and
ingenuity. Life is competition, and he who is more active, should
naturally get more benefits. But the stagnation of wealth is through
injustice and tyranny and not through effort, ingenuity and competence.
And poverty which is not due to laziness, but caused by uncontrollable
conditions, should not be allowed.

Imam Ali (a.s.) speaking of why he accepted the caliphate late says
that under the previous conditions he was by no means willing to
undertake that responsibility. When they insisted on his acceptance he
asked them to leave him alone as they had done before, and offer it to
someone else, for, he could foresee the mishaps which would occur. But
he thought his duty compelled him to accept it. What duty? One of them
was that God had made it incumbent upon the wise followers of Islam to
accept the duty of checking excess in wealth and poverty. Was that the
only reason? No, fellow-feeling and humane considerations were also
involved.

In the time of Imam Sadiq (a.s.) a famine occurred in Madina with great
severity. At such a time people lose their wits and begin to hoard
provisions twice as much as they need. The Imam asked his housekeeper if
there was any reserve provisions in the house, and he said that there
was enough reserve for one year. But the Imam told him to take all the
wheat to the market and sell it. The housekeeper said: "You know that we
can't buy back any." The Imam asked: "What do all the people do?" He
answered: "They buy their bread, which is a mixture of barley and wheat
daily from the market, or only barley bread." The Imam said: "Sell the
whole wheat and buy us bread from the market as from to morrow, for,
other people cannot obtain wheat bread, so we can bring ourselves down
to their level to show our sympathy and solidarity with our
neighbours."

Another philosophical reason for asceticism lies in availing what one
is free to do. The Qur'an has never forbidden legitimate satisfaction to
man. At the same time, human beings who long to live freely always try
to break their chains and fetters. It never says that whatever
satisfaction is obtained in a legitimate way should be deferred for the
hereafter.

In this world we have certain needs which we cannot do without,
according to the law of creation, we need food and we cannot free
ourselves from it. We cannot do without air, and to some extent we
cannot do without clothes. These are limitations imposed on us by
nature. But there are certain other bonds adopted by man himself which
impose limitations on him and deprive him of freedom of action. For
example, some people have addictions to something, such as drinking tea,
or smoking, without which they feel uncomfortable, and others are
addicted to dangerous and forbidden things, such as opium or worse than
that.

The more one gets into a habit, the greater will be his attachment and
enslavement, and the less free he will be. It is not only tea or
cigarettes. One may always want a soft mattress or pillow, and he cannot
sleep if he is compelled to lie down on a carpet or bare ground. Thus he
is handicapped.

On the other hand, there are people who live a simple life without
abandoning the tasks of life. They wish to live simply, have simple
food, simple clothes and a simple home. Why? Because they do not want to
sell their freedom for anything. The more they are fettered, the more
they cannot act freely and without encumbrance. The life of great
prophets and social leaders has always been simple, for, if they sought
luxury, they had to abandon leadership. A luxurious life is incompatible
with an unencumbered activity, liberty and liberality. The first thing
that attracts us in the character of the Prophet (s.a.w.) is simplicity
in his way of living and interacting with others.

These fetters and luxuries that man creates for himself check his
progress immensely, and bend his back with a heavy burden. Let me choose
myself as an example. Suppose I am a well-known clergyman. Should I go
on a pilgrimage to Mashad or not? It is not a simple matter. How should
I receive people? What should be the other condition? Thus, the simplest
and the most necessary travel becomes a complex problem and so full of
limitations that I cannot undertake it readily and conveniently. The
Prophet (s.a.w.) had a simple life, for, otherwise, he could not lead
his society.

In breaking his fast, there was no difference with other ordinary days;
and he came home an hour and a half later after completing his evening
and night prayers. His servant, Anis Bin Malik, says that his supper
consisted of a bowl of milk and a little bread. Then he began to work.
As he ate little, a couple of hours of sleep rested him adequately. Then
he spent two-thirds of the night in worship. The Qur'an was revealed to
him on these occasions and these places. A Persian poet, Assiruddin,
expresses this unencumbered state beautifully in the following
couplet:

"Plunge suitably clad in the river of events; For, an unencumbered
state is a pre-requisite for swimming."

If a person wants to swim with his clothes on, he is likely to be
drowned. One who does not want to enter social events and desires
seclusion, can act as he pleases. But diving into the sea of society
requires an unencumbered state. How did Imam Ali (a.s.) live? He
described the great Prophets as follows: "They lived simply; even David
and Solomon who were kings did so. David made chain-armour and sold it
and lived on its proceeds." He said that Jesus Christ lived so simply
that his legs were his means of travel and his hands were his tools and
his light was the moon. In this way the Prophets were able to lead men.
Such an asceticism is still alive, since it is based on a proper
philosophy.

For example, Mahatma Gandhi wished to lead India and liberate millions
of Indians from the clutches of imperialism. He had no alternative but
to adopt the way of prophets, live a simple life, throw a piece of cloth
on his shoulder, and tie another one round hiss loins, and have a goat
as his only belonging, and be content with it.

What was his philosophy? On the one hand lie is a member of a society
and wants to save it from imperialism, and on the other hand, his
belongings consist of two pieces of cloth and a goat. He tells the
Indian people, if they wish to liberate themselves, they should live
simply and free themselves from fetters and limitations.

Another notable point about asceticism has to do with exigencies of
circumstances. Times vary. Sometimes it is a duty to live ascetically,
and at other times it is not. For example, the lives of the Prophet
(s.a.w.) and Imam Ali (a.s.) were different from those of their
descendants: Imam Baqar (a.s.), Imam Sadiq (a.s.), Imam Jaffar (a.s.),
Imam Reza (a.s.), and even Imam Hassan (a.s.). They all lived more
simply and ascetically. The reason for this is explained by Imam Sadiq
(a.s.).

A Sufi came to Imam Sadiq in the first half of the second century of
the Hejira and saw the latter dressed in a fine and beautiful garment.
He asked why the descendant of a prophet should wear such fine clothes.
The Imam asked him to sit down and listen, if he really wanted to know
the reason and not to be demagogical. The Imam gave some explanations
which he could not refute. He went out and came back with some of his
friends.

The Imam (a.s.) said: "I suppose you wonder why the Prophet (s.a.w.)
and Ali (a.s.) did not wear fine clothes, if wearing such clothes is
good, and why I wear them if it is bad." They answered that was what
they thought. The Imam said: "You disregard the exigencies of time. It
is not a sin to wear fine clothes. God has granted his gifts to mankind
to benefit from, and not to waste them. But sometimes conditions make it
necessary to forsake them. One of. them is that the conditions of life
may be hard for all people. In such a society even if our private means
allow us to live comfortably, we should not do so, because in doing so
we are not showing sympathy to our brothers and other human beings. But
when we live under good conditions, there is no reason to forsake fine
clothes."

He then explained that the Prophet (s.a.w.) and Imam Ali (a.s.) lived
in hard times. The Prophet lived in Madina which was full of poor people
and in a state of war, which naturally created severe economic pressure.
Some of his followers were strangers to that town and had no dwellings.
The Prophet (s.a.w.) let them stay in the mosque at first, and then
outside of it. They were so poor that they had no clothes to take part
in congregational prayers, and sometimes they joined prayers in borrowed
clothes.

It is under adverse socioeconomic conditions that the Prophet, on
entering his daughter's house and finding her wearing a silver bracelet
and hanging a colourful curtain, he objected to these. Fatima (a.s.) who
knew her father's character well, took off the bracelet and took down
the curtain, and sent them to her father, asking him to do what he liked
with them. The Prophet (a.s.) at once ordered several shirts or trousers
to be made for the poor. That is why Imam Sadiq (a.s.) told the Sufis
that if he lived under the conditions of his great grandfather, he would
follow his example. Yet another reason for asceticism is that if one
indulges in material pleasures he will be deprived of spiritual ones.

There are some spiritual pleasures which increase and exalt our
spirituality. For a person who loves wakefulness in night prayers, being
awake and praying are enjoyable. A man who overindulges in carnal
pleasures can never feel the depth of joy that a devout person secures.
But if we stay awake and spend hours joking and laughing and eating
heartily, we only tire ourselves and fall asleep like a dead man. Can we
then rise at dawn and pray to God? Even if we wake up, we stagger like a
drunken man.

Therefore, in order to secure spiritual joys, one should diminish
material and physical pleasures. When like Imam Ali one wakes up and
glances at God's starry sky, and recites the verses of the Qur'an which
are the voice of life and rise from the heart, one feels it to be the
equivalent of a full life's enjoyment in this world. Such a man has no
desire to eat like a glutton who becomes dead in spirit, and cannot
enjoy worship.

Devout people ignore material pleasures. Let me say a few words about
my father. I remember he never went to bed late, and he was always awake
two hours before sunrise, and each night he read one-thirtieth of the
Qur'an and prayed in all tranquility. As a centenarian, he never spent
an unquiet night. It is a spiritual joy that has kept him up like this.
He always prayed for his parents. He had a step-mother who was very kind
to him and he always prayed for her and for all his kith and kin. Such a
man must diminish material pleasures in order to secure deeper spiritual
enjoyments. Ibn Sina (Avicenna) says the asceticism of a gnostic is
different from that of a non-gnostic.

The former nurtures and trains his power of imagination and sensitivity
anticipating that whenever his turn comes to stand before God, his
spirit is not weighed down or encumbered in matching with that of the
celestial ones. This, too, is another reason for asceticism. Thus,
asceticism is to be cherished for the sake of self-sacrifice, or
sympathy, or for bringing oneself down to the level of the less
fortunate, or for remaining unencumbered and free in society, or to be
free-minded and candid in praying to God, or simply to be alive.
Obviously, it enlivens man as it did in the case of Hadrat Ali (a.s.)
who consequently possessed moral courage, and was a just leader of his
society. So the kind of ascetics who are sequestered, and have no
contact with people, and retire for worship are "dead" ascetics, and
Islam does not endorse such asceticism.


