Discourse 1: Tawhid In The Actions (Of Allah) And Benefits Of Belief In This
============================================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ إِبْنِ عَبَّاسِ قَالَ: قَالَ رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ: مَنِ انْقَطَعَ
إِلـى اللٌّهِ، كَفَاهُ كُلَّ مَؤُونَـةٍ، وَ مَنِ انْـقَطَعَ إِلـى
الدُّنْـيَا وَكَلَّهُ اللٌّهُ إِلَيْهَا، وَ مَنْ حَاوَلَ أَمْراً
بِمَعْصِيَةِ اللٌّهِ كَانَ أَبْعَدَ لَهُ مِمَّا رَجَا وَ أَقْرَبَ
مِمَّا اتَّقى، وَ مَنْ طَلَبَ مَحَامِدَ النَّاسِ بِمَعَاصِي اللٌّهِ،
عَادَ حَامِدُهُ مِنْهُمْ ذَامًّا، وَ مَنْ أَرَضى النَّاسَ بِسَخَطِ
اللٌّهِ وَكَّلَهُ اللٌّهُ إِلَيْهِمْ، وَ مَنْ أَرَضى اللٌّهَ بِسَخَطِ
النَّاسِ كَفَاهُ اللٌّهُ شَرَّهُمْ، وَ مَنْ أَحْسَنَ مَا بَـيْـنَهُ وَ
بَيْنَ اللٌّهِ كَفَاهُ اللٌّهُ مَا بَيْـنَهُ و بَيْنَ النَّاسِ، و مَنْ
أَحْسَنَ سَرِيرَتَهُ أَصْلَحَ اللٌّهُ عَلاَنِـيَتَهُ، وَ مَنْ عَمِلَ
لأَخِرَتِهِ كَفى اللٌّهُ أَمْرَ دُنْـيَاهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been narrated from Ibne ‘Abbas that the Messenger of Allah (S)
said: “One who keeps his hopes solely upon Allah, He will be sufficient
for that person in all affairs (of his life); one who keeps his hopes on
the material world, Allah will leave him (with the world); one who
wishes to reach his goals through disobeying Allah will be the furthest
away from that which he wishes (to achieve) and will be the closest to
difficulties; one who seeks to please the people through the
disobedience of Allah, He will change the pleasure (of the people)
towards him to be his disgrace (amongst the people).

One who seeks to please the people while earning the displeasure of
Allah, Allah will appoint those people to be above him (to rule him);
one who seeks to please Allah while making others displeased with him
(through not obeying them), Allah will be sufficient for him from the
evil of the people; one who acts properly with that which is between him
and Allah, Allah will make sufficient that which is between him and the
people; one who makes right that which he performs in secret, Allah will
correct that which he performs in the open. Allah will make sufficient
the affair of the one who works for his next life in all of his affairs
of this world.”[^1]

One of the important issues in the discussion of Tawhid (monotheism) is
in relation to Tawhid-e-Af’ali (belief in the unity of the actions of
Allah (SwT)) and if one possesses the correct understanding of this
issue, then it would have a profound impact on one's life.

The belief in 'Unity of the actions of Allah (SwT)' informs us that
everything and everyone which exists in the entire universe - even the
leaves of a tree which move with the passing breeze - originate from
Allah (SwT). Nothing can take place without His command - the cutting
which the sword performs, the burning which a fire produces and all
other actions stem from His order. To sum this belief up in one
sentence, we refer to the tradition mentioned in Bihar al-Anwar that
reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ مُؤَثِّرَ فِي الْوُجُودِ إِلاَّ اللٌّهَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There is no one effector in the creation except Allah.”[^2]

Even our own freedom and the choices we make in life all originate from
Allah (SwT), since if He had not given us the power of choice, then we
would not be able to do a single thing! However at the same time, we
understand that He has given us freedom in our life and has not
compelled us to perform acts.

When one has the deep-rooted belief of 'Unity of the actions of Allah
(SwT)' and understands that the only independent power of decision and
will belongs to Allah (SwT) and that the power of choice which Allah
(SwT) has given us is merely a test (for the life of this world), then
one would definitely not submit himself to others merely to seek
closeness to them!

One would also realize that the true source of attaining goodness in the
material world does not lie in the hands of the people. With this belief
in mind, one would not look seek to covet what others have! In addition,
with such a belief, one would not obey and try to please others if this
meant transgressing the laws of Allah (SwT). Also, one would not appeal
to others to help solve his problems since that person knows that the
true meaning of “There is no effector in the creation except for Allah”
goes against all of these issues!

If we were to have true faith in the verse of the Qur\`an which states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا أَمْرُهُ إِذَا أَرَادَ شَيْئاً أَنْ يَقُولَ لَهُ كُنْ
فَيَكُونُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely His command when He intends to do something is the mere saying
of 'Be' and it is.”[^3]

Then these paths which have the potential of leading us astray would
definitely not have any effect on us. It is for this reason that the
source of all reformations goes back to a correction of the theological
beliefs.

When the various Prophets of Allah (as) were appointed, the first thing
they sought to do was instill the correct set of beliefs within the
hearts and minds of the people. Once the beliefs and faith are set
straight, then the roots and branches (of the faith) will also become
correct.

The tradition we quoted at the beginning of the discussion shows us that
all of our actions must return back to the issue of 'Unity of the
actions of Allah (SwT).'

The meaning of “…keeping one's hopes solely upon Allah” is that we cut
off hope from all others and attach ourselves solely to Him; we close
our eyes to everyone else and focus only on Allah (SwT). If one were to
reach this station, then Allah (SwT) would be sufficient during times of
difficulty!

The tradition then mentions that “…however if a person keeps his hopes
on the transient world, then Allah leaves him to the world…”  Therefore,
if a person was to stop relying upon Allah (SwT) and put all of his
trust in the material world and assumed that respect and disgrace come
directly from the people, or assumed this his sustenance comes from the
physical Earth through his hard work alone, then Allah (SwT) would leave
this indivudal to the whims of the material world!

Of course, we are not opposed to the world of cause and effect; however,
we must remember that behind the material world lies the hand of the One
who induces things to happen (the actual Cause). In order for humanity
not to forget that there is a Causer for everything, sometimes people
create reasons and rationale for things which happen around them. For
example, sometimes people say that, “All the doors (of prosperity) were
closed to me, and then all of a sudden, I found a way out!” while
sometimes, the exact opposite of this is also said![^4]

If one was to lose the Causer for everything that happens and was to
rely solely on the frail spider's web known as the material world, then
Allah (SwT) would leave the person alone within this weak web, as it has
been stated in the Qur\`an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَثَلُ الَّذِينَ اتَّخَذُوا مِنْ دُونِ اللٌّهِ أَوْلِـــيَآءَ كَمَثَلِ
الْعَنْكَبُوتِ اتَّخَذَتْ بَيْتاً وَ إِنَّ أَوْهَنَ الْبُـيُوتِ
لَبَيْتُ الْعَنْكَبُوتِ لَوْ كَانُوا يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The similitude of those who take other than Allah as their guardian is
as the example of the spider who takes his (frail) web as a house. And
surely the weakest of houses is the house of the spider, if only the
people had knowledge of this (fact).”[^5]

The intelligent person is one who does not rely upon the frail house of
the spider - the material world. Rather, the intelligent one relies
solely upon the chief Causer of all actions (Allah (SwT)) and through
this, becomes needless of everything else.  
 It is mentioned in a tradition that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ لاٌ تَكِلْـنِــي إِلـى نَفْسِي طَرْفَةَ عَيْنَ أَبَدًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O' Allah! Do not ever leave me to myself for even the period of the
blinking of the eye!”

This tradition points to the same fact previously stated which is that
we must always petition Him that, “O' Allah! I appeal to you to be my
Protector; I beg to You that You alone be my Guardian…”  
 The tradition under discussion continues and we are told that, “…the
person who wishes to reach his goals through disobeying Allah…' and in
this segment, another aspect of the same issue which was mentioned above
has been explained.

Sometimes we see that one wants to reach a specific goal, however to
reach his aims, must make use of the forbidden means. Such a person must
know that he will never reach his ultimate aim. Rather, that which he
fears will actually come back to haunt him! Thus, it must be said to
such an individual that, “You very well know that the only will which
exists is the will of Allah (SwT) and He (SwT)s the sole Sovereign over
all things! Thus, why do you still resort to making use of the
impermitted means (to attain the objective) in your life?”

The next line reads “…the person who seeks to earn the pleasure of the
people…” and this is an allusion by the Messenger (S) to the act of
seeking the support of other than Allah (SwT).

Without doubt, in order for the sacred principles of the faith, society,
politics, etc… to advance, it is important to take the opinions of the
general public into account. Thus, the people must help one another so
that everyone can reach to the desired goals of the society. However, we
must not confuse ourselves and think that these issues only concern the
people. Granted, we want people to come forward and assist to help
fulfill the sacred aims of the building of the society, however they
must come forward to help for the sake of Allah (SwT)!

We do not want to please Allah (SwT) for the sake of the people and it
should not be that one day we see that in order to attract the people,
we end up displeasing Allah (SwT)!

In this part of the tradition, the Messenger of Allah (S) has stated
that the outcome of the one who seeks to earn the praise of the people
through disobeying and sinning against Allah (SwT) is that the same
people who are praising him will one day end up condemning him and
instead of this person having any sort of impact or influence on the
society, he will end up being detested by the people! This is the
absolute truth since the one who tries to please the people by
circumventing the pleasure of Allah (SwT) will be left to the whims of
the people and will lose the hand of His grace.

At this point, it is important to note that on one's own, the human
being is weak, and as long as the assistance of Allah (SwT) is not
there, he can not do a thing. Because of this fact, everything we do
must be for Allah (SwT) - even if the people are not pleased and become
upset with us!

If we act in this manner, then surely Allah (SwT) will prevent the evil
of the people from reaching us.

The true believer must pay attention to the verse of the Qur\`an which
states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُــؤْتِـي الْمُلْكَ مَنْ تَشَآءُ و تَـنْـزِعُ الْمُلْكَ مِمَّنْ
تَشَآءُ وَ تُعِزُّ مَنْ تَشَآءُ وَ تُذِلُّ مَنْ تَشَآءُ بِـيَدِكَ
الْخَيْرُ إِنَّكَ عَلى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“You bestow the kingdom to whom You desire and You take away the kingdom
from whom You desire; You grant honour and dignity to whom You desire
and You disgrace whom You desire. In Your hands is all goodness and
surely You (Allah) have power over all things.”[^6]

In addition, the true believer must state that, “O' Allah! Everything
lies in Your hands. Even if we go towards the world of causes, we do so
through Your permission and with complete trust and reliance upon You.” 

We must never be like those who say, “In the name of Allah and in the
name of the heroes of humanity” as this is a form of worship of two
entities and we are not people of this type as we are believers who,
although want the best for the creations, however we seek this solely
from Allah (SwT).  
 In the Qur\`an we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ يَنْصُرْكُمُ اللٌّهُ فَلاَ غَالِبَ لَكُمْ وَ إِنْ يَخْذُلْكُمْ
فَمَنْ ذَا الَّذِي يَنْصُرُكُمْ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ وَ عَلى اللٌّهِ
فَلْيَتَوَكَّلِ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“If Allah were to assist you, then there would be none who could
overcome you; and if He were to leave you alone, then who is there that
could assist you after Him, and upon Allah do the true believers solely
rely upon.”[^7]

If everyone in the world was to gather together (to do something), but
He did not want this to happen, then not a single action could take
place! The opposite of this is also true that if the entire world was to
gather together to humiliate or attack an individual, but Allah (SwT)
did not want that to happen, then it would not be fulfilled!

Thus, we must believe in the 'Unity of the actions of Allah (SwT)' as it
has been explained in this discussion and we must be sure to perform our
actions with this belief in mind.

One of the important things for the believer to remember is that anytime
an issue comes up, he must first ponder upon it and think to himself,
“What would Allah (SwT) want from me in this situation?”  Truly, once we
correct the relationship between ourselves and Allah (SwT), then
everything else will fall into place!

We should not be like others who, in order to please the people, end up
earning the wrath of Allah (SwT). Therefore, in order to save ourselves
from difficulties in life, we must not put forth truth as falsehood and
falsehood as truth since if this is done, then a person's friends (and
those whom he is trying to please) would end up becoming his idols of
worship! These sort of idols are even worse than the idols which the
polytheists worship as atleast they worship their false gods in order to
achieve proximity to Allah (SwT)! In the Qur\`an we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مٌا نَعْـبُدُهُمْ إِلاَّ لِيُقَرِّبُونَا إِلـى اللٌّهِ زُلْفى
  </p>
</blockquote>

“We do not serve them (the idols) except for the desire that they may
make us nearer to Allah.”[^8]

However, this is not present in relation to the worship of and following
of our friends!

The tradition under review continues and we read, “…the person who does
right with that which is between him and Allah, Allah will make
sufficient that which is between him and the people.”  This means that
the person who corrects the relationship between himself and Allah (SwT)
will see that Allah (SwT) will correct his relationship with the people.

The Prophet (S) then tells us, “…the person who strives to perfect (and
purify) his hidden thoughts and beliefs will see that Allah (SwT) will
perfect his outer thoughts and beliefs. The person who seeks to work for
his next life will see that Allah (SwT) will be sufficient for him for
his worldly matters.”

As was previously mentioned, more than all other things, that which the
Prophets strived to instill in their followers was the correct set of
theological beliefs. If these are not correct, then one can not expect
righteous actions to come forth from an individual!

Truthfully, this is the exact situation we see in the world today! Many
people today have no affinity to religion and issues of the faith;
mankind has made laws which state that people must not perform certain
acts nor are they allowed to question how to carry out a specific act
(if they wanted to perform it)! However, in regards to the invitation of
the Prophets, we see the direct opposite, as they called humanity to
both the inner and outer aspects of actions.

There is a very remarkable expression that used to be quoted in regards
to the Usul (Principles) and Furu’ (Branches) of the faith. This
expression stated that complete faith (of Islam) could be compared to a
tree made up of three parts: the roots, branches and the fruits. The
roots of the tree are the theological beliefs (Usul); the branches
(Furu’) are the actions of the person while the fruits of the tree are
the complete and perfect human being!

Some people think that actions and beliefs can be separated from one
another; however, this is not the case. A person is not able to - from
the point of view of his inner belief - remain healthy and safe, however
have incorrectness in his actions, nor can the opposite of this be true.
It is not possible for a person to reach perfection in his level of
humanity and ethical traits and attain to the highest pinnacles of
greatness however does not reach to such levels in his theological
beliefs.

Keeping this in mind, the meaning of the tradition under discussion is:
“When a person's inner self is corrected, at this point in time would
Allah (SwT) correct that person's outer being.”  Thus we see that Allah
(SwT) places a cause and effect between the outer and the inner being of
a person.

It is from this belief and because we know that a relationship exists
between the cause and effect, that Allah (SwT) is placed “in between”
and is attributed with the performance of certain tasks.

For example, we state **“أضله اللٌّه”** or “Allah deluded him”, however
Allah (SwT) has placed this outcome or effect in the performance of a
wicked and despicable act. Thus, it is the performance of that incorrect
action which actually led to the misguidance of the individual - not
that Allah (SwT) initiated the misguidance!

Therefore, the conclusion which we can draw is that if our actions are
not correct, then this will result in our inner-self becoming polluted;
we must start by correcting our belief in the Oneness of Allah (SwT) and
must destroy all internal idols.  
 In the Noble Qur\`an we read that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَرَأَيْتَ مَنِ اتَّخَذَ إِلٌهَهُ هَوٌيهُ أَفَأَنْتَ تَكُونُ عَلَيْهِ
وَكِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Have you seen the person who takes his lower desires to be his god? Do
you have any authority to guide such a person?”[^9]

There are people who outwardly worship Allah (SwT), however in reality
they are polytheists since their object of worship is not Allah (SwT) -
rather it is their own soul and inner desires and from this we can
understand that polytheism actually has many branches to it.  
 In Bihar al-Anwar it has been mentioned that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلشِّرْكُ أَخْفى فِي الْعَمَلِ مِنْ دَبِـيبِ النَّمْلَةِ السَّوْدٌاءِ
عَلى الصَّخْرَةِ الصَمٌّاءِ فِي اللَّيْلَةِ الظَّلْمَاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Polytheism is more hidden in actions than the footprints of a black ant
on a dark rock walking in the dark of the night.”[^10]

In addition, we see that Allah (SwT) has taken a promise from humanity
that they must not worship Satan, and in the Qur\`an we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ أَعْهَدْ إِلَيْكُمْ يَا بَـنِي آدَمَ أَنْ لاَ تَعْـبُدُوا
الشَّيْطَانَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Did I not take a pledge from you, O' children of Adam, that you must
not worship Satan?”[^11]

However, it does not seem that those being spoken to in this verse are
the (official) Satan worshippers, who are very small in number in the
world. Rather, those addressed in this verse are humanity on a whole!
From this, it becomes clear that the worship of Satan is a tribulation
which a great number of people can fall into.

Some people may read the last line of the tradition under discussion
which reads, “Whoever works for the next life, Allah will make the life
of this world easy for him” and assume that if a person does not exert
any efforts in the life of this world and rather, focuses all of his
attention on performing actions for the next life, that the life of this
world will be put in order - however this is definitely not the case!
Rather, we must also put forth an effort for the life of this world.

The summary of our discussion is this: If we wish to correct our actions
and etiquette, we must start with reforming our theological beliefs.

Thus, if everyone was to become a true believer in the Oneness of Allah
(SwT) and become Muslims (in the true sense of the word), then all types
of atrocities and corruption would be removed from the Earth! If we see
that day by day, the world is becoming more and more corrupt, then it is
due to a lack of belief in the true religion or little belief in the
true faith.

Therefore, in order for our actions to be correct, we must ensure that
we have the correct theological beliefs since every action - good or
bad - is a mere reflection of our beliefs!  
  

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 74, pg. 178

[^2]: Ibid., vol. 5, pg. 151

[^3]: Surah Yasin (36), verse 82

[^4]: In the words of Mawlana Rumi: از قضا سر كنگبين صفرا
فزود                                                                          
روغن بادام خشكى مى نمود از هليله قبض شد اطلاق
رفت                                                                      
آبْ آتش را مدد شد همچو نفت

[^5]: Surat al-Ankabut (29), verse 41

[^6]: Surat Ale Imran (3), verse 160

[^7]: Ibid., verse 26

[^8]: Surat al-Zumur (39), verse 3

[^9]: Surat al-Furqan (25), verse 43

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 61, pg. 244

[^11]: Surat Yasin (36), verse 60


