Discourse 10: Taqwa (Consciousness of Allah)
============================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَنَسِ بْنِ مَالِكٍ قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ رَسُولَ اللٌّهِ يَقُولُ:
أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ! إِتَّقُوا اللٌّهَ حَقَّ تُقَاتِهِ، وَ اسْعَوا فِي
مَرْضَاتِهِ، وَ أَيْـقِنُوا مِنَ الدُّنْـيَا بِالْفَنَآءِ وَ مِنَ
الآخِرَةِ بِالْبَقَاءِ وَ اعْمَلُوا لِمَا بَعْدَ الْمَوْتِ.
فَكَأَنَّكُمْ بِالدُّنْـيَا لَمْ تَكُنْ، وَ بِالآخِرَةِ لَمْ تَزَلْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ، إِنَّ مَنْ فِي الدُّنْـيَا ضَيْفٌ، وَ مَا فِي
أَيْدِيهِمْ عَارِيَةٌ، وَ إِنَّ الضَّيْفَ مُرْتَحِلٌ، وَ الْعَارِيَةُ
مَرْدُودَةٌ. أَلاَّ وَ إِنَّ  الدُّنْـيَا عَرَضٌ حَاضِرٌ يَأْكُلُ
مِنْهُ البَرُّ وَ الْفَاجِرُ، وَ الآخِرَةُ وَعْدٌ صَادِقٌ، يَحْكُمُ
فِيهَا مَلِكُ عَادِلٌ قَادِرٌ، فَرَحِمَ اللٌّهُ امْرَءاً يَنْظُـرُ
لِـنَفْسِهِ وَ مَهَّدَ لِرَمْسِـهِ مَا دَامَ رَسَنُهُ مُرْخِياً وَ
حَبْلُهُ عَلى غَارِبِهِ مُلْقِياً قَبْلَ أَنْ يَنْفَذَ الآجَلُهُ، وَ
يَنْقَطِعَ عَمَلُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been narrated by Anas b. Malik that he said, “I heard the
Messenger of Allah (S) say, 'O' People! Have Taqwa of Allah as is worthy
of Him; strive in gaining His pleasure; have certainty that the world is
temporal and that the Next Life is everlasting; strive for the life
after death such that it could be said about you that it is as if you
were never in this world and so that it could be said about you that it
is as if you have been in the next life for time memorial.

O' people! Surely everyone in the world are guests (of this world); all
that they possess are simply trusts (given to them) and these guests
shall (one day) leave and the trusts that were with them shall return
back to their owners. You must know that this world is a merchandise
which both the righteous and wicked person make use of, while the next
life is the true promise (of Allah) which is ruled by the Just, Powerful
One.

So then may the mercy of Allah be upon the person who looks at his soul
and prepares his grave before death comes to him during this time that
his halters are loosened from around him and before he arrives at his
appointed time of death, as then (at that time), the ability to perform
(good) actions will be removed from him.”[^1]

This is a tradition in which there is both a summarized and detailed
explanation given within the tradition itself. In the beginning, we see
that we have been commanded to observe Taqwa and give it its due right,
while later on we see that this issue has been explained in greater
detail.

Much has been said in regards to the definition of Taqwa, however we can
explain this comprehensive trait by saying: 'Taqwa is the inner
protection and internal lock which prevents a person from committing
sins.'

Of course, Taqwa has various levels to it - sometimes we see that it is
at the level of ‘Adalah or 'justice' (with others); sometimes Taqwa goes
even higher than mere 'justice' such that we reach to the level of
‘Ismah or 'infallibility' as ‘Ismah is nothing more than the highest
level of Taqwa.

Thus, the sense of responsibility (to Allah (SwT)) which is inside the
spirit of a person and the state of Wiqayah (inner protection), is
nothing other than Taqwa!

The right which is owed to Taqwa is that it is nurtured to its highest
level and that one does not become satisfied with merely the lower
forms.

This is best understood by the following example that when a flood is
approaching, the person would rush to shut all the doors and windows of
his house - whether they are small and weak or powerful and large.
Therefore, the more powerful and larger the doors of Taqwa become, the
less damage will come about!

The lower desires, passions and following of the lower soul are just
like a flood of water, while Taqwa is like the door or gate (which acts
as protection) from the tumultuous waves and if one is able to control
the flood waters, then he would be able to convert the power and force
of the water into electricity (for positive usage)!

In continuation, the Noble Prophet (S) has stated that we must obey the
following commandments.  
 First and foremost, we must struggle to earn the pleasure of Allah
(SwT) and as we know, there are three forms of pleasure which are
attainable (in this world):

1.       The pleasure of Allah (SwT).

2.       The pleasure of the people.

3.       The pleasure of our own soul.

The person who possesses Taqwa would always place the pleasure of Allah
(SwT) above the pleasure of others and while acting in this way, the
people around him must be pleased and content with what the person of
Taqwa decides.

If others become pleased with that person then what could be better;
however if they are not pleased, then at least that person knows that he
has done the right thing (and earned Allah's (SwT) pleasure).

If we can reach to this station, then we would have reached to the
highest level of Taqwa and when this occurs, anytime anything comes up
in our life, we would first seek to gain the pleasure of Allah (SwT)
which would result in the creations of Allah (SwT) being pleased with
us. This would culminate in our own personal pleasure - and this is the
order we must follow in life.

If we want to see how this plays out in the real world, then anytime an
issue comes up, we should see if that which we wish to follow would be
in our own personal benefit or not and what it is that Allah (SwT) would
like for us to do.

However, if we see what Allah (SwT) wants (us to do) and at the same
time we see if this is also what the people want from us and what we
want for ourselves, then this would be classified as Shirk (polytheism)
in our actions as the pure form of Tawhid (monotheism) is something
other than this!

Thus, in order to reach to pure Tawhid, anytime anything comes up in our
lives, we must first see what it is that Allah (SwT) would want of us
and then after this, we must see what the people and our own soul
desires.

It has been mentioned in the tradition that: “The one who corrects the
relationship between himself and Allah, Allah will correct the relations
between that person and the people.”

Therefore, if we are looking to earn the pleasure of Allah (SwT), then
we must be ready to supplicate just as the Du’a of Prophet Ibrahim (as)
in relation to his wife Hajar I and son, Isma\`il (as):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاجْعَلْ أَفْئِدَةً مِنَ النَّاسِ تَهْوى إِلَيْهِمْ وَ ارْزُقْهُمْ
مِنَ الثَّمَرَاتِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…therefore make the hearts of some people yearn towards them and
provide them with blessings…”[^2]

Through this, Allah (SwT) would also make the hearts of the people
gravitate towards us!

With complete clarity, the Noble Qur\`an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَ عَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ سَيَجْعَلُ لَهُمُ
الرَّحْمٌنُ وُدًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely (as for) those who possess true faith and perform righteous
deeds, the Most Merciful (Allah) will bring about love for them (in the
hearts of others).”[^3]

However first off, we must set the record straight between ourselves and
Allah (SwT) and then the record of deeds performed by us in relation to
others will be cleared and set straight!

The second commandment tells us that we must have certainty that this
world will end while the next life is perpetual.

Before we can discuss this issue, we must first see what stage of
certainty the tradition is speaking about. Is the meaning of certainty
the level of actions or deep pondering and thinking?

From the point of view of our intelligence, we have certainty that this
world will end. However, at the level of our actions, we act in the way
of a person who believes that this world will last forever while the
next life will come to an end!

If we have firm conviction that this world is temporal and will end,
then why do we expend all of our efforts for the life of this world
rather than the next world!?

We speak the words of one who is an ascetic in relation to this world,
however our actions are of the person who is actively seeking the life
of this world:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَقُولُ فِي الدُّنْـيَا بِقَوْلِ الزَّاهِدينَ وَ يَعْمَلُ فِيهَا
عَمَلَ الرَّاغِـبِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He speaks about the life of this world as one who is an ascetic,
however he acts in this world as if he is actively persuing the material
life!”

The third point mentioned in the tradition is actually a look at the
state of the transient world. Various phrases are used in the Islamic
narrations in relation to the state of the world. In this section of the
tradition, we see that humanity is addressed and has been told that in
regards to the material world, both the believers and unbelievers are
the same and that there is no difference between them!

We read, “O' people! Everyone in this world are merely guests and
whatever they possess are things borrowed from others. When they die,
these things will return back to their rightful owners!”

Point of Interest: This is a very expressive and eloquent analogy that
has been used. If we imagine that we have been invited to a friend's
house and when we enter we see his house is full of beautiful, expensive
silk carpets and a table full of various types of foods served on dishes
of jewels and other such things, however we then realize that all of
these things have been lent to the person by someone else to use (and
then give back), we would not have even the slightest attraction to
them!

Therefore, if we were to have the same feeling for the life of this
world (in all of its aspects), then without doubt, we would not have
even the slightest attraction to the material world.

Problem: There are some self-proclaimed intellectuals and those who are
outright opposed to the faith of Islam who state: “These sorts of
teachings are actually a type of drug which lead the people to becoming
lazy! Through these sorts of teachings, the Muslim society has been left
behind and is a totally backward nation!” 

Others state that, “These sorts of traditions have been made up by the
rich class of people who would like to see the common people break off
all attraction to the material pleasures so that they (the rich) would
be able to hoard the luxuries for themselves!”

Answer: Islam has actually commanded all of us to struggle and has
warned people about being lazy and reliant upon the society for
financial assistance:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَلْعُونٌ مَنْ أَلْقى كَلَّهُ عَلى النَّاسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allah's mercy is removed from the person who becomes a burden upon
others.”[^4]

Once, a young man was with the Noble Prophet (S) and the Messenger asked
some other people, “What does this young man do for a living?”  The
people replied, “He (SwT)s unemployed.”  To this, the Prophet (S)
replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَقَطَ مِنْ عَيْنِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He has fallen out of my sight (I have no regard for him)!”

In addition, Islam has brought with it such a set of teachings that even
the great Prophet of Islam (S) used kiss the hand of people who would go
out and work for a living!

With this said, we see that the Prophet (S) and A\`immah (as) spoke
about the lowliness of the material world since they wanted to bring a
balance in life:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي لاَ أُوصِيكُمْ بِدَارِ الدُّنْـيَا فَإِنَّكُمْ بِهَا
مُسْتَوْثِقُونَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I do not advise you towards the life of the material world since
without doubt all of you have a strong attraction to it. [Rather, I
advise you to prepare yourselves for the life of the next world.]”

Thus, we see that we have not been admonished towards the life of the
material world. Rather, we are told to keep the next life in view so
that through this, we can strike a balance between the two. Definitely,
all of the tragedies that afflict the people of the material world come
about due to the worship of this temporal life!

At the end of the tradition, the temporary world and the next life have
been compared to one another and we are told that the life of this world
is something which has been loaned to us.

One of the other characteristics of the life of this world is that,
although from one point of view, it is a place of trial and examination
in which both the good and the bad doer profit, however conversely, the
next life is that which has been promised to us - and that too a
truthful promise. This material world is lowly and shall dissipate,
whereas the next life is a trust - a truthful trust.

In that world (the next life), the ruler shall be an authority who is
not only Just, but also All-Powerful and there shall not be a single
person who will be able to run away from His authority:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لاَ يُمْكِنُ الْفِرَارُ مِنْ حُكُومَتِكَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“It is not possible to flee from Your authority.” (Du’a Kumayl)

Therefore, we see that we are placed in the presence of three things:

1.  The temporal environment (the life of this world);

2.  A truthful promise (the life of the Next world);

3.  An authority to which there is no way to escape. His is an authority
which the Qur\`an describes as being:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…وَ إِنْ كَانَ مِثْقَالَ حَبَّةٍ مِنْ خَرْدَلٍ أَتَيْـنَا بِهَا وَكَفى
بِنَا حَاسِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

…and though there be the weight of a grain of mustard seed (any deed -
good or bad), (yet) We will bring it forth, and sufficient are We to
take account.”[^5]

In another verse of the Qur\`an, we are told:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ يَعْمَلْ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ خَيْراً يَرَهُ وَ مَنْ يَعْمَلْ
مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ شَرًّا يَرَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whoever has done an atom's weight of good shall see it; and whoever has
done an atom's weight of evil shall see it.”[^6]

Thus, there is not a single thing which is hidden from the sight of
Allah (SwT), and all things will be taken account of!

However, in relation to the next life, the Noble Qur\`an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ امْـتَازُوا الْيَوْمَ أَيُّهَا الْمُجْرِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

”(To the group of sinners, it shall be said): Get aside today, O' guilty
ones!”[^7]

At this time, the masses of people will be divided, and Allah (SwT) will
shower His mercy upon those who had prepared themselves for the next
life.

In the tradition under discussion, the word **'رمس'** has been used
which refers to the grave as when a person's grave was made smooth and
flat, the ‘Arabs would use this word.

Thus, when a person has been given the time and his hands are free (just
as an animal whose ropes are taken off, permitting it to freely graze in
the pasture), he must make use of the opportunity to perform righteous
deeds before death comes to him!

There is an important issue that must be mentioned in regards to this
tradition which is that this world, with all of its problems and
difficulties is actually a great thing, while the next life with all of
the good things promised therein has one problem with it. The good thing
about the life of this world is that while we are here, our deed of
records is open and thus, a person is able to wipe out all of the bad
deeds he performs. However with the coming of death (and the next life),
the person's deed of records is sealed.

In speech number 230 in Nahj al-Balagha, the Commander of the Faithful,
‘Ali b. Abi Talib (as) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاٌ عَنْ قَبِيحَ يَسْتَطِيعُونَ إِنْتِقَالاً وَ لاٌ فِي حَسَنِ
يَسْتَطِيعُونَ إِزْدِيَاداً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

”(In the next life) neither shall you be able to remove the bad deeds
and sins, nor shall you have able to add to the good and righteous deeds
(on your record).”

Sometimes while in this world, a person would shed one tear or let out a
single cry and repent from deep within his soul and through this, would
extinguish an entire ocean of fire which he had ignited through his
sins!

The belief in Ma’ad - the next life, is an issue which the Noble Qur\`an
has placed a great deal of emphasis on and we see that there are
actually two things which form the fundamentals of the training of a
person:

1.       Keeping our origin in perspective.

2.       The accountability for our actions and the resurrection (our
eventul outcome).

If a person was to keep both of these two issues in mind, then without
doubt, they would stay on the right course. However, the weaker our
faith becomes in these two issues, the more we see our actions becoming
corrupt and impure.

Thus, we pray to Allah (SwT) that we are able to keep these two issues
in our mind day and night.  
 In addition, we see that in our daily Salat, we repeat the following
line a minimum of ten times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَالِكِ يَوْمِ الدِّينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Master of the Day of Judgment.”

As is it commonly known, half of Suratul hamd is reserved for praise and
extolling the characteristics of Allah (SwT) while the other half is a
description of the Resurrection Day. Therefore, it is with this Surah
that a person can spiritually build himself. It is a Surah in which the
second half contains the prayer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِهْدِنَا الصِّرَاطَ الْمُسْتَقِيمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Keep us upon the straight path.”

Thus, after attesting to true faith in our beginning (creation) and
eventual end (death), we request guidance onto the Straight Path.

The more we pay attention to the contents of this Surah, the better we
understand why this Surah has been chosen for the daily prayers and why
it **must** be read in each of the daily prayers. In some traditions we
are told that one of the main reasons why it must be read in every
prayer is due to the secrets related to the beginnings of humanity, our
eventual end and the nurturing of humanity.

We must make sure that especially while in the state of Salat, we do not
drift towards thinking about the material world as any form of worship
in which there is no deep thought and presence of heart is like the
outer shell of a fruit with no fruit inside it!

At this point, a question may arise that how we can develop presence of
heart in our Salat? The discussion on presence of heart in the Salat is
extensive, however in brief we state: A person gives the most importance
to that thing which occupies his thoughts the most. Therefore, if the
material word is important to him, then during the Salat, he will
constantly be thinking about it. However, if the next life is what is
most important to him, then even when he is not in a state of Salat, he
will be thinking about the next life - let alone while he is in prayer!

In summary, we state that presence of heart follows and is under the
direct influence of those things which we are attracted to.

It is for this reason that we must seriously think about those things
which we are attracted to and work such that our heart is always being
pulled towards Allah (SwT).[^8]

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 74, pg. 177

[^2]: Surat Ibrahim (14), verse 37

[^3]: Surat Mariam (19), verse 36

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 75, pg. 142

[^5]: Surat al-Anbiya (21), verse 47

[^6]: Surat al-Zilzal (99), verses 7 and 8

[^7]: Surat Yasin (36), verse 59

[^8]: In order to achieve presence of the heart in the salat and in
other acts of worship, the following points have been recommended to be
followed: 1) We must acquire a deep insight (into the faith of Islam)
such that through this, one would be able to realize that the material
world is something insignificant, while Allah (SwT) is something grand.
Through this, the worshipper would be able to reach to a level that not
a single act of this material world would be able to distract him while
in a state of begging his needs from the One whom he worships. 2) By
paying attention to the various scattered things which need to be done
in our daily life (and other such thoughts about various issues), a
person is usually prevented from being able to focus his thoughts and
senses. Thus, the more a person is able to reduce his uneasiness and
scattered thoughts, the more this will help him in developing presence
of heart. 3) The person must choose a special place to offer his salat
and other acts of worship as this has a great impact on the presence of
heart. It is because of this fact that to perform our salat in front of
certain things and especially in front of those things which would
distract a person is discouraged (makruh). In addition, it has been
discouraged to perform our salat in front of the door which is open;
anywhere that people are passing by or where there is a lot of activity;
in front of a mirror; in front of a picture and other such places. Thus,
the simpler the place of worship is for the Muslim and empty of lustre,
pizzazz and formalities, the better it is as this also assists one in
attaining presence of heart. 4) Keeping away from all sins is also very
effective in achieving presence of the heart since sinning makes the
heart distanced from Allah (SwT) and destroys any presence of heart. 5)
Becoming acquainted with the meanings of the salat, the philosophy of
each of the actions in the prayer and the recitations. 6) Performing all
of the recommended (mustahab) acts of the salat by following their
specific etiquette - both in relation to the preliminary actions which
lead up to the salat and the actual salat. 7) In addition to all of the
points which have been mentioned, just as in all other acts, one needs
to pay close attention and exercise vigilance, practice, continuity and
diligence. Many times it has been seen that in the beginning of the
struggle, a person would be able to focus all of this thoughts and
energies on the salat for a short period of time, however through
continuing in this way and through following this pattern and staying
firm on it, the soul would be able to develop such a power that at the
time of the salat, one's entire presence of thought would be shut off to
everything other than the One whom he is worshipping. [Pay attention to
this point] (Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 14, pg. 204)


