Discourse 13: How To Gain The Love Of Allah And The People
==========================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي سَعِيدِ الْخُدْرِيِّ قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ رَسُولَ اللٌّهِ
يَقُولُ لِرَجُلٍ يَعِظُهُ: إِرْغَبْ فِيمَا عِنْدَ اللٌّهِ يُحِبُّكَ
اللٌّهُ، وَ ازْهَدْ مَا فِي أَيْدِي النَّاسِ يُحِبُّكَ النَّاسُ. إِنَّ
الزَّاهِدَ فِي الدُّنْـيَا يُرِيحُ، وَ يُرِيحُ قَلْبَهُ وَ بَدَنَهُ
فِي الدُّنْـيَا وَ الآخِرَةِ، وَ الرَّاغِبَ فِيهَا يُتْعِبُ قَلْبَهُ
وَ بَدَنَهُ فِي الدُّنْـيَا وَ الآخِرَة. لَيَجِيئَنَّ أَقْوامٌ يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ لَهُمْ حَسَنَاتٌ كَأَمْثَالِ الْجِبَالِ فَـيُأْمَرُ
بِهِمْ إِلـى النَّارِ! فَقِيلَ: يَا نَبِيَّ اللٌّهِ، أَمُصَلُّونَ
كَانُوا؟ قَالَ: نَعَمْ، كَانُوا يُصَلُّونَ وَ يَصُومُونَ وَ
يَأْخُذُونَ وَهْناً مِنَ اللَّيْلِ، لٌكِنَّهُمْ إِذَا لاَحَ لَهُمْ
شَيْءٌ مِنْ أَمْرِ الدُّنْـيَا وَثَـبُوا عَلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been narrated from Abu Sa’id al-Khudri that he said, “I heard the
Messenger of Allah (S) say the following to a person whom he was
advising: 'Actively seek that which is in the presence of Allah so that
Allah will love you; keep away from that which is in the hands of the
people so that the people will have love for you.

The one who is an ascetic in the transient world is at ease and his
heart and body are at ease, both in the world and the next life.
However, the one who seeks that which is in the world (the material
pleasures) - his heart and body will be fatigued and put through toil -
both in the world and the next life.

On the Day of Resurrection, a nation shall be brought forth whose good
deeds shall resemble mountains (in size), however they will be commanded
to go to the Hell Fire.'  It was said, 'O' Prophet of Allah! Did these
people offer the Salat?' 

The Prophet replied, 'Yes, they used to offer the Salat and they used to
fast and they even used to stay up a portion of the night (in prayer)!
However when anything of the material world was brought in front of
these people, they followed it (and took it without regarding if it was
permissible or impermissible).'”[^1]

In this tradition, the Noble Prophet (S) gave admonition to a man and at
the end of his warning, brought forth the issue of the material world
and its dangers.

1. If we want Allah (SwT) to love us, then we must seek that which is
with Him. If we want the people to love us, then we must not look at
what the people have - we must not look at the wealth of the people nor
seek it!

What does the phrase, “…that which is with Allah” refer to?

The meaning of “…that which is with Allah” is His Divine Reward; close
proximity to Him, and His blessings. Without doubt, if we request these
from Him, then Allah (SwT) will definitely love us.

However, we are told that when a person begins to show affection for
another person due to the material pleasures which the person has (and
that this person wants), then he should not pay any attention to such a
person. Without doubt, the stingy person lives his life by being miserly
and this negative trait would lead such a person to develop closeness to
people who are not interested in the material world (to take what they
have).

Without doubt, if a person wishes to protect his position, status and
worth, then he must disregard that which the people have in their
possession! Throughout the course of history, amazing events have taken
place in these regards. We read stories of rulers who killed those close
to them and have even heard of people who have killed their own brothers
just to protect their reign!

For example when Sultan Muhammad Fatih, one of the ‘Uthmani (Ottoman)
rulers became the emperor, he ordered all his brothers to be killed
since he feared that they would be a threat to his rule! After the reign
of Sultan Muhammad Fatih, it became the norm amongst the ‘Uthmani rulers
to begin their reign by killing all of their brothers!

In relation to one of the Parthian kings, it is mentioned that when he
reached to kingship, he first killed his father and thirty of his
brothers! He then married his mother and although he spared the progeny
that came forth from this union, he ended up killing his mother! This is
the way the world is for those who worship it…

2. The person who does not pay attention to the material world will
experience peace and comfort for himself, his body and soul, and those
around him.

Having an intense attachment to the world will definitely lead to pain,
suffering and toils, and as such, a person would, for example, not be
able to have a peaceful sleep.

There are many people who, when they reach home in the evening from
work, see all of the events which took place in the day and all of the
transactions which they carried out marching in front of their very
eyes. If they are able to sleep, they do not gain satisfaction from
their sleep and if they can not sleep, then it is a night full of grief
and sorrow - such people must take sleeping pills just to rest however
still, their soul is continuously tormented!

However, one who does not give importance to the world is guaranteed to
have a body and soul which are at rest and tranquil.

These Divine commandments are not simply points that have importance in
the next life, rather, their rewards and punishments will be physically
manifested while in this world as well.

Even if, may Allah (SwT) protect us from such thoughts, there was no
after-life, then it still would have been necessary to think about the
implementation of these commandments for the life of this world and for
the ease and comfort of our body and soul.

It is said that with the advancements in medicine, the number of
physical sicknesses has been reduced. However the number of spiritual
and psychological ailments are increasing day by day. Perhaps we will
reach a day when the world, in our words, will reach to becoming a great
big place of “دار المجانين” or the “Abode of the Insane Ones” and across
the entire Earth, we may not be able to find one person at ease and free
from any spiritual sicknesses!

The mental and psychological illnesses are increasing day by day and are
all related to external factors. A person who has a strong affinity to
the material world will see his soul being continuously tortured.
Therefore, we must keep the following verse of the Qur\`an in mind in
relation to the issues of this material world:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِكَيْلاَ تَأْسَوْا عَلى مَا فَاتَكُمْ وَ لاَ تَفْرَحُوا بِمَا
آتٌيكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“So that you may not grieve over what has escaped you (from the material
word), nor be exultant at what He has given you…”[^2]

We must have firm faith and act according to this verse if we wish to be
in spiritual bliss. Truthfully this verse of the Qur\`an is the
prescription for the health of our soul, and the asceticism which has
been mentioned in these two lines of the tradition under review have
actually been summarized in the verse of the Qur\`an mentioned above.

The material life of the people of true faith is very good since they do
not gain tranquility through wealth, nor do they consider status in the
society as that which brings them happiness.

As can be seen, there are people who have all of the material
possessions of this life, however they are the worst off! They are
constantly in anxiety and stress, and hope that no one takes what they
have, nor tries to pull the wool over their eyes! Thus, these types of
people are continuously in mental punishment and torture.

On the opposite side of the spectrum are those who do not possess much
from this material world, however are the richest people in the entire
universe! In this, the true meaning of Zuhd or asceticism is shown as
this word does not mean that a person do not possess anything, rather,
it means that they do not have an attachment to the material world.

After stating all of this, Abu Sa’id al-Khudri then noted that the Noble
Prophet (S) said that on the Day of Judgment, a nation shall be brought
forth and will be ordered to proceed to the hell fire, where as they had
good deeds on their record equivalent to the size of mountains!

The narrator of the tradition asked the Prophet (S), “Did these people
offer their Salat?”  The Prophet (S) replied, “Yes, they offered their
Salat, fasted and in addition, they performed the recommended acts! They
even stayed up in the night and performed the night Salat.”

Obviously, the companions were shocked as what could have led these
people to the fire of hell? Their problem was, as the Prophet (S) put
it, when any issues dealing with the transient world came up, they did
not pay any attention to the halal and haram (permissible and
forbidden), and took whatever came to them!

The phrase used, “وَ تعبوا عليه” is a very meaningful expression. This
phrase means that they were just like animals! When an animal sees food
in front of it, it pounces on top of it, and these people were the same
in relation to the affairs of this world!

When a person reads and reflects upon the verses of the Qur\`an and the
traditions and looks at them from the point of view of his own life and
the history of humanity, he would see the truthfulness of the Prophetic
tradition which tells us:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُبُّ الدُّنْـيَا رَأْسُ كُلِّ خَطِيـئَةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Love of the material world is the precursor to all sins.”

and through this, he would definitely seek to become better acquainted
with this issue.

The phrase “love of the material world” has a very deep meaning as the
material world is not just limited to money and wealth! Sometimes for
the love of status, love of a woman, and thousands of other “loves”, a
person would submit himself (to his lower desires)! It is for this
reason that the spring of all pillaging and plundering is the love of
this material world.

These days, this issue has become such that we see that people no longer
try to hide their bad actions. Rather, when they are asked, “Why are you
committing all of these crimes,” the reply comes, “This is where our
(material) benefit lies!”  Thus, in order to for them to reach to their
own personal benefit, they commit thousands of crimes!

However, if we were to ask those who are committing these atrocious acts
and are referred to as superficial holy-people, spiritually rock-hard,
devoid of Taqwa individuals why they are performing such deeds they
would justify it through religious reasonings. However if they were to,
just like the others say that, “We too have some benefit in this issue”
then they would be much more honourable as in this instance, in addition
to having love of the material world, there is also a show of pride and
arrogance in them.

However when the self-proclaimed religious and holy people are asked
about how a particular person is (who has this love of the world) he
would reply to you, “Do not talk about these things, as the Islamic
legislations have prevented us from speaking about other people in this
way.”

However it would have been better for that person to tell others about
the sins of the other person since by hiding this information, a
person's imagination would begin to wander and he would begin to think
of what kind of sins that person must have performed for it not to be
permissible to speak about!

It is it this point that the great teacher of Akhlaq (the Noble Prophet
Muhammad (S)) has told us that, “This person thinks that he has not
committed a sin, however in addition to backbiting he has also performed
the sin of showing off!” !

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 74, pg. 186

[^2]: Surat al-hadid (57), verse 23


