Discourse 15: The Psychological Effects Of Loving The Transient World
=====================================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ إِبْنِ عَـبَّاسِ قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ رَسُولَ اللٌّهِ يَقُولُ: إِنَّهُ
مَا سَكَنَ حُبُّ الدُّنْـيَا قَلْبَ عَبْدٍ إِلاَّ إِلْـتَاطَ فِيهَا
بِثَلاَثِ: شُغْلُ لاَ يَنْفَدُ عَنَاؤُهُ وَ فَقْرُ لاَ يُدْرِكُ
غِـنَاهُ وَ أَمَلُ لاَ يَـنَالُ مُنْـتَهَاهُ. أَلاَ إِنَّ الدُّنْـيَا
وَ الآخِرَةَ طَالِـبَتَانِ وَ مَطْـلُوبَتَانِ، فَطَالِبُ الآخِرَةِ
تَطْـلُـبُهُ الدُّنْـيَا حَتَّى يَسْتَكْمِلَ رِزْقَهُ وَ طَالِبُ
الدُّنْـيَا تَطْـلُـبُهُ الآخِرَةُ حَتَّى يَأْخُذَهُ الْمَوْتُ
بَغْـتَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been narrated from Ibne ‘Abbas that he said: “I heard the
Messenger of Allah (S) say: 'The one who is plagued with love of the
transient world within his heart will be overcome with three trials:
Continuous thoughts about the transient world will tire him and they
will never stop; (one will develop a) poverty which will never be
satiated; the long desires and wishes (which one possesses) will never
be fulfilled.

Be aware! The transient world and the next life are both searchers and
things which are being sought after (by others). So then, the person
searching for the next life is being sought after by the transient world
so that it (the transient world) can complete its granting of sustenance
(to that person), and the one searching for the transient world is being
sought after by the next life so that it can take him through a sudden
death, gratifying itself!”[^1]

In the traditions, we see that the topic of 'love of the transient
world' usually refers to 'worshipping the transient world' and not mere
affection for it, governed by a balance. In this regards, there are
various expressions used in the traditions such as, 'Love of the
material world is the precursor to all sins.' 

In addition, there are various sub-divisions within the traditions which
explain the effects that love of the material world exert on the
psychology of a person.

The traditions tell us, “The person who is plagued with love of the
transient world will be overcome with three tribulations and in reality,
these are three spiritual inconveniences.”[^2]

Almost the same phrase is mentioned in Nahj al-Balagha where it is
mentioned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ لَهِجَ قَلْـبُهُ بِحُبِّ الدُّنْـيَا، إِلْتَاطَ قَلْـبُهُ مِنْهَا
بِثَلاَثٍ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The one whose heart is taken over by love of the transient world will
have his heart overcome by three things…”[^3]

1. One's mind will continuously be preoccupied and due to this, he will
always feel tired and this exhaustion will never go away.

2. One will be plagued with perpetual poverty, which is actually
spiritual poverty, from which there is no way to become prosperous! The
more “things” which a person attains from the transient world, the more
he will feel that he does not have enough as in reality, being needless
is not something which is based on the outer, material aspects of a
person; rather, it has it roots in the inner recesses of the soul. The
one who worships the transient world will always be hungry for more and
will never be satiated with what he has.

3. One will also entertain long desires which have no end to them. The
long desires will also not give up enticing the person, and anytime one
of the material desires is fulfilled, another desire will take its
place - in this way, the desires would have no end to them!

Such a person (who has these continuous desires) would never be able to
find tranquility since he has lost control of his soul and whatever
tranquility and ease he had would be taken away from him. Even during
the state of Salat, one's mind would be focused on the transient world
such that he would be oblivious to what he was saying; while eating
food, his thoughts would be on the material world, making him unaware of
what he has eaten!

At this point, it is necessary to mention the following:

1. People give importance to those things which, in reality, have no
value to them - but why is this? The answer to this lies in the fact
that people feel it is important to have peace of mind during the short
life in the transient world.

However today, we see that even though people's lives are much better
and organized, still the various psychological and mental pressures are
present - rather, they have increased! In other words, the physical
difficulties that existed in the past do not exist today, however the
spiritual challenges have increased! A prime example is that long
journeys are now made in a short period of time. In the past it used to
be said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّفَرُ قِطْعَةٌ مِنَ السَّقَرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Traveling is a fragment of the hell.”

However with all of the ease in life today, we see spiritual problems on
the increase since the mental tranquility of the people has decreased!

Therefore, we must ask ourselves why it is that the people's mental
tranquility has decreased. According to the traditions, there are two
reasons for this phenomenon:

1.       People do not possess true faith.

2.       People are busy worshipping the transient world.

We see that worship of the transient world takes place in some of the
best centres of worship such as the hajj, and this is merely one place
where this issue grabs hold of a person! It is amazing to see what the
servants of Allah (SwT) perform at the hajj time! While in Makkah, the
people are transported into another (spiritual) world, however when
worship of the transient world takes over a person, then even while in
the city of Makkah, such a person would run after the temporal world!

The person performing the hajj would run from here to there trying to
acquire the ethereal world, whereas perhaps these same people would not
chase after these material things while in their home country!

Various Branches of Worship of the Transient World
--------------------------------------------------

The worship of the temporal world is not limited to the worship of money
alone. Rather, it is possible that the desire to attain a specific
status, position or any sort of other worldly ranking may also make up
worship of the temporal world.

For example, when a person enters a gathering and is forced to sit at
the back of the hall since there is no other room left, he may not be
able to sleep that evening. He would be upset and question why he was
insulted in such a way. Slowly, this issue would build up and the
negative thoughts he conjures in his head may perhaps be extended and he
may begin to level insults against Islam and even against things held
sacred in Islam! It is for this reason that we are told in a tradition
that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آخِرُ مَا يَخْرُجُ مِنْ قُلُوبِ الصِّدِّيقِينَ حُبُّ الْجَاهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The final thing to leave the heart of the truthful people (as-Siddiqin)
is the love of status and position.”

In one section of the tradition under review, the Prophet (S) has
brought a new phrase in which he has shown the fraudulence of the
material world, and what an interesting phrase he has used! The Prophet
(S) stated that, “Both the material world and the next life are in
search of something and also are things which others are searching for.”

Whatever direction we place ourselves, we see that these two things (the
material world and the next life) are at the opposite side! When we aim
to seek the next life, we see the material world coming after us and we
become that which the material world is looking for!

Allah (SwT) has promised that whatever sustenance He has decreed for us
will definitely reach us, thus even though we seek the next life (and
seek to distance ourselves from the transient world), the material world
still comes after us and is in search of us!

The opposite of this theorem is also applicable that if we go in search
of the material world, the next life will come looking for us! It will
come in search of us to pull us closer to death. We would be so engulfed
in the material world, that death would come upon us and we would not
even realize it!

We must not think that if one goes in search of the next world that he
must deprive himself of the transient world - not at all! If we struggle
to achieve the next life, this does not mean we have deprived ourselves
of the material world.

I have thought about this issue numerous times and have come to the
conclusion that if we desire the material world, then we must be people
of the material world AND people of the next life since if we wish to
live in this world then we must faith in both of these realities. If we
do not have reliance on both the material world and the next life then
it is not possible to live a societal life. If millions of bricks were
placed in random order on top of one another, they would never make a
building. However if we were to follow a methodical manner, then we
would be able to build a great structure!

If we are people of the material world, then we must also be people of
the next life and must have faith in the theological beliefs so that we
would be able to, by putting them all together in an orderly manner,
reach to tranquility and peace in the life of this world.

If the entire society were to become true believers, then humanity would
definitely be optimistic and act cheerful with one another. In addition,
they would have full trust in one other and through this, an atmosphere
of sincerity, intimacy and honesty would be brought about.

In the traditions, we are told that the Prophet (S) was:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طَبِيبٌ دَوَّارٌ بِطِبِّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A (spiritual) doctor, treating patients with his medication.”

He knew where our pains were and thus, was able to pinpoint our
illnesses and was able to show us the medication to take.

If today, one look at the cases in the court systems, he would notice
that none of the arguments are of a spiritual type. All of the cases are
in relation to the material, transient world! For a small amount of
possessions of the material world, people are fighting with one another;
being treacherous with one another; and acting criminally with one
another!

It may even reach to an extreme in which two brothers would stand
opposite of one another in the court fighting against one another!
Without doubt, the source of all these sins is love of the material
world. In these regards, the Noble Qur\`an has told us that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زُيِّنَ لِلنَّاسِ حُبُّ الشَّهَوَاتِ مِنَ النِّسَآءِ وَ الْبَنِينَ وَ
الْقَنَاطِيرِ الْمُقَنْطَرَةِ مِنَ الذَّهَبِ وَ الْفِضَّةِ وَ
الْخَـيْلِ الْمُسَوَّمَةِ وَ الأََنْعَامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The love of desires, women, sons, hoarded treasures of gold and silver,
well bred horses, cattle and tilth is made to seem fair to people…”[^4]

Women, children, money, gold - all of these things are simply a beauty
for the life of this world!

In this verse, the verb used (زُيِّنَ) is the passive tense and the
importance of employing this form of the verb is that the people should
realize who it is that has made these things an attraction. Is it Satan
who has made these things fair seeming; is it one's friends; is it one's
own lower desires and passions or is it Allah (SwT) who has done this to
test us??

All of these forms of beauty and attraction prevent us from moving in
any spiritual direction and it is for this reason that Islam has
repeatedly advised us to abandon these distractions so that we can build
a wall of defense around us to protect us from our lower desires.

Without doubt, the things in the material world which try to allure and
distract us are many! !

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 74, pg. 188

[^2]: The meaning of heart in this tradition is one's soul.

[^3]: Nahj al-Balagha, Short saying 228

[^4]: Surat ale Imran (3), verse 14


