Discourse 19: Showing Thanks For The Divine Blessings
=====================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنِ الصَّادِقِ مَكْتُوبٌ فِي التَّوْرَاةِ: لاَزَوَالَ لِلْنَعَمَآءِ
إِذَا شُكِرَتْ وَلاَ بَقَآءِ لَـهَا إِذَا كُفِرَتْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been narrated from [Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad] as-Sadiq (as) that,
“It has been written in the Tawrah [Thus, in reality this is what is
known as a hadith-e-Qudsi] that, 'There is no end to the Divine
blessings if thanks are given (for that blessing) and there is no
longevity for it (that blessing) if ingratitude is shown (to it).'”[^1]

Many of the Divine bounties that a person has at his disposal actually
go from hand to hand through a complex series of intermediaries and
agents until it reaches the person. Therefore, in reality, we only see
the outcome of all of these agents and what part of the Divine plan they
are responsible for!

For example, the shirt which a person wears is a blessing from the many
(combined) blessings of Allah (SwT). Many people and various items have
been put together so that this blessing would reach the person. There is
a person who plows the land and grows the cotton; another harvests the
cotton; a factory processes the cotton and makes thread and yarn from
it; yet another factory takes the thread and makes the cloth; others
extract iron from the ground and make the machinery needed to make the
shirt and…  

Thus, there are thousands and thousands of people who were responsible
for making one shirt! In addition to this, there is also the knowledge
and experience which has gone in to making all of these factories which
has come about through thousands of years of human trial and experiment.

The Theological Seminaries (hawzatul ‘Ilmiyyah) which the Muslims have
access to is also the result of the struggles of countless people. Many
people became martyrs (Shahid) so that this blessing would reach us. If
we were to sit and calculate the time it took those who laid the
foundation stones for the hawzah and the great scholars who went through
great difficulties to expand and develop the hawzah to where it is
today, we would see that it is the outcome of more than a thousand years
of hard work!

If we think upon this issue mentioned, then the inner feeling of showing
thanks would definitely be stimulated within us and we will arrive to
the station of being able to thank Him. At the same time, we also ask
Allah (SwT) for the Divine success to be conferred upon us. However it
must be noted that the preliminary steps to achieving Divinely granted
success are in our hands.

Showing thanks is not merely a verbal declaration - rather we must show
thanks through our actions and the way to do this is to use the bounties
given to us in the correct way.

Throughout history, we see people who were not thankful for the
blessings which they were given and ended up wasting away their life. In
the end, the Divinely granted blessings was taken away from them and
they were plagued with problems, not being able to reach to any station
in life.

Therefore, we must show thanks for the Divine blessings such that we can
be considered as soldiers of Imam al-Zaman (as) and be defenders of
Islam!

[^1]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, pg. 94


