Discourse 2: Characteristics Of The True Believer – Part 11
===========================================================

In continuation of the tradition which noted the characteristics of the
true believer, we examine six more qualities the believer must possess:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…إِنْ سَلَكَ مَعَ أَهْلِ الدُّنْـيَا كَانَ أَكْيَسَهُمْ، وَ إِنْ
سَلَكَ مَعَ أَهْلِ الآخِرَةِ كَانَ أَوْرَعَهُمْ لاَ يَرْضى فِي
كَسْبِهِ بِشُبْهَةٍ وَلاَ يَعْمَلُ فِي دِيـنِهِ بِرُخْصَةٍ يَعْطِفُ
عَلى أَخِيهِ بِزَلَّتِهِ وَ يَرعى مَا مَضى مَنْ قَدِيـمٌ صُحْـبَتِهِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…if he (the true believer) is in the company of those (attached to the)
material world, then he is the most alert and attentive (to the next
world); if he is in the company of those (who love the) next life, then
he is the one who possesses the most consciousness (of Allah). He does
not entertain any form of doubt in relation to his earnings (they are
all from the permitted) and he does not allow any leave or departure
from his beliefs. If his brother in faith makes a mistake, he forgives
it, however he does not forget the good deeds which have been done in
the past by his close friends.”[^1]

The majority - or close to all of the scholars from amongst the Shi’a
and Ahlus Sunnah believe that the text of the Noble Qur\`an has not been
altered (Tahrif) in any way. However, there are a minority of scholars
of the Ahlus Sunah and even some Shi’a scholars who accept that there
has been alteration of the Qur\`an. The logical proofs, narrated proofs
and historical evidence pointing to the protection of the Qur\`an have
been explained in detail in our book, Anwar al-Usul, while a summarized
discussion of this has been presented in our work, Tafsir-e-Namuna.

It must be noted that there are some amongst the Ahlus Sunnah
(particularly the head-strong Wahhabis) who are adamant that the Shi’a
believe in the alteration (of the Qur\`an)! However, we see that the
Qur\`an printed in Iran and those printed in their country are no
different from one another, however they still incessantly believe state
that, “You Shi’a have a separate Qur\`an!”

It is these sorts of people who wish to see the Shi’a taken out of the
fold of Islam and thus, are unyielding in their false claims! However,
through using their own reference books, we have proven to them that it
is actually they who have the belief in the alteration of the Qur\`an!

Alteration of the meaning of the verses is one of the branches of tahrif
of the Qur\`an and this is something alluded to in the Qur\`an itself.
The alteration of the meaning (of a sacred scripture) is something that
has always been present in the faiths of Judaism, Christianity and even
Islam and the most basic form of alteration of the meaning of a
scripture is to choose those verses and passages which suit a person and
his ideology.

Thus, in such a method of corruption of the text, only one portion of a
verse that benefits a person is quoted while the rest of the verses on
that topic or section are ignored whereas we know that the verses of the
Qur\`an explain and elucidate upon one another.

One instance in which an alteration in the meaning of the Qur\`an and
the traditions has taken place is in relation to the topic of the
material world. While discussing this topic, every group has tried to
explain the transient world through their own biases and
predispositions.

One group of people who are materialistically deprived and do not have
the energy to work have chosen a life of asceticism and abstinence from
the material world.  
 Another group of people live by the tradition which states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلدُّنْـيَا مَزْرِعَةٌ الآخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The world is the planting ground for the next life.”

These people have attached themselves firmly to the life of this world
and worship the transient world!

However, both of these extremes are unacceptable and therefore, we must
refer to the Noble Prophet (S) and see what he has mentioned in relation
to the world and how the complete believer should view it.

According to the Prophet (S), the forty-eighth characteristic of the
believer is, “If the believer is in a gathering in which people are
paying attention to the material world, then he is more aware and alert
of Allah (SwT) than the others.”

The forty-ninth characteristic of the believer is that, “He (SwT)s one
who, while in the presence of those who are working for the next life,
possesses the most consciousness (Taqwa) of Allah (SwT) and does not
seek the material world for pleasure, luxury and enjoyment. Rather, he
seeks the material world solely for the honour and esteem of the Muslim
nation and for its progress.”

Honour and esteem are not manifest through mere slogans and chants;
rather they are seen through being independent and needless of others!
If the needs are reciprocal, then it is not a problem however if we are
in need of what the others have while they have no need for us or our
products, then this is of no benefit!

If we do not want to have political relations with other people or
countries, then we must also not have economic relations with them; and
if we do not want economic relations with them, then we must not have
intellectual relations with them! However, if we wish to have relations
with others, then no matter what slogans in defense of freedom and
independence we cry out, they will have no impact since within the
products which foreign countries produce and sell, we see that they have
infused their culture and tradition into them!

The fiftieth characteristic states, “…the believer is one who not only
fulfills the obligatory acts which are upon him and refrains from the
prohibited, rather, he also stays away from the doubtful issues in
life.”  Thus, the true believer would not participate in vain and
useless gatherings, which is one of the areas of doubt.

In the Du’a of Abu Hamza al-Thumali which is recited in the Month of
Ramazhan and has been taught to us by Imam ‘Ali b. Husayn al-Sajjad
(as), we read that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْ رَأَيْـتَـنِــي فِي مَجَالِسِ الْبَطَّالِـينَ فَحَرَمْـتَـنِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Or maybe You saw me in a gathering of those who were indulging in vain
(acts) and thus, you rejected me.”

Thus, we have been told that doubtful acts are like the edge of a cliff
and if a person falls into negligence in relation to these deeds, then
most definitely, he will fall head first into the valley of sins.

The fifty-first characteristic is that “…the true believer is one who
does not permit himself any sort of departure or separation from his
faith.”  The meaning of separation of the faith is best summarized in
the following saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ مَكْرُوهٍ جَايِزُ الْعَمَلِ وَ كُلُّ مَسْتَحَبٍّ جَايِزُ
الْتَرْكِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“All reprehensible acts are permissible to perform, and all recommended
acts are permissible to neglect.”

The true believer is one who stays away from doubtful things and
anything which serves to separate him from his faith.

The fifty-second characteristic is that the true believer is one who
“…forgives the slips and errors of his brother in faith.”

Other than the Infallibles (as), who else is there in the world that
does not have errors or faults on their record? If we were to remember
all the mistakes and faults that others perform, then it would not be
possible to live in this world any longer!

The fifth-third characteristic tells us that the true believer is one
who, “…does not forget the good things which his friends have done for
him in the past.”

We ask Allah (SwT) that He grant us the ability to enliven these
characteristics within ourselves!

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 64, pg. 311


