Discourse 20: Attaching Worth To One’s Self
===========================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَمِيرُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ عَلِيُّ بْنُ أَبِي طَالِبٍ: مَنْ هَانَتِ
عَلَيْهِ نَفْسَهُ فَلاَ تَأْمَنَ شَرُّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been narrated from the Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali b. Abi
Talib (as) that, “Do not consider yourself safe from the evil of one who
does not consider himself as having any worth.”[^1]

One of the important issues in life is that of the worth or value of
people within the society as has been mentioned in the Divinely revealed
teachings.

In the material and spiritual world, everything has a value to it. There
are things that are cheap and things that are valuable, and naturally,
if something has little value then one would give it up easily. However,
something that is valuable would not be given up with ease!

For example, a small child who has a very expensive jewel in his hand
would use it as a toy as in his opinion, it has no value, and he would
easily give this thing up when the time comes. The valuable jewels that
we have this world all have particular names and worths to them and it
is possible that if a group of children were playing with one of them
saw a person passing by, they would give it to him as in their
estimation, it has no material value! The character of a person is the
same - if he considers himself as having worth, then he would not sell
himself so easily.

In relation to this fact, the Qur\`an tells us that in the world of
existence, after the pure essence of Allah (SwT), there is nothing worth
more than the human being and the proof of this is that all things which
exist in the universe have been created for mankind. Allah (SwT) has
said:

خَلَقْتُ الأَشْـيَآءَ لِأَجَلِكَ وَ خَلَقْـتُكَ لِأَجَلِـــي.

“I created all the things in the universe for you and I created you for
Me.”

In addition, we see that the highest creations of Allah (SwT) - the
Angels - were ordered to prostrate towards Adam:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَسَجَدَ الْمَلاَئِكَةُُ كُلُّهُمْ أَجْمَعُونَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“So then the Angels bowed down in prostration to him (Adam) - all of
them…”

From this, the value of the human being is clear.

In addition, everything in the universe has been placed at the disposal
of the human being. Therefore, everything in creation works for and is
subservient to the human being, and this too shows the status of
humanity!

Thus, if we were to understand the worth of our soul then we would
definitely not sell it for the lower desires that shall quickly pass,
nor for the worthless positions of the transient world.

However, if we do not recognize our self-worth, then we will definitely
sell ourselves cheap.

In addition, we must be cautious of the person who does not know his own
worth since he could even resort to killing another human beings for a
meagre price since he does not consider himself to be worth anything!

However what about the one who considers himself to be worth something?
The answer to this question has been provided by our master, ‘Ali b. Abi
Talib (as) in three sentences where he has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ كَرَمَتْ عَلَيْهِ نَفْسَهُ لَمْ يُهِنُهَا بِالشَّهَوَاتِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The one who considers himself to be worth something will not weaken
himself through his lower desires…”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ كَرَمَتْ عَلَيْهِ نَفْسَهُ هَانَتْ عَلَيْهِ شَهْوَتُهُ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The one who considers himself to be worth something will consider his
lower desires as something of no value…”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ كَرَمَتْ عَلَيْهِ نَفْسَهُ صَغُرَتِ الدُّنْـيَا فِي عَيْنِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The one who considers himself to be worth something will consider the
transient world as something insignificant.”[^2]

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 75, pg. 365

[^2]: Mizan al-hikmah, Under the letters of “نفس”


