Discourse 22: Misguidedness
===========================

> قِيلَ لَهُ أَلإِمَامُ السَجَّادِ يَوْماً: إِنَّ الْحَسَنَ الْبَصْرِي
> قَالَ: لَيْسَ الْعَجَبُ مِمَّنْ هَلَكَ كَيْفَ هَلَكَ؟ وَ إِنَّمَا
> الْعَجَبُ مِمَّنْ نَجَا كَيْفَ نَجَا. فَقَالَ: أَنَا أَقُولُ: لَيْسَ
> الْعَجَبُ مِمَّنْ نَجَا كَيْفَ نَجَا وَ أَمَّا الْعَجَبُ مِمَّنْ
> هَلَكَ كَيْفَ هَلَكَ مَعَ سَعَةِ رَحْمَةِ اللٌّهِ!؟s

One day, it was said to Imam as-Sajjad (as): 'Hasan al-Basri has said,
'I am not amazed how the person who is destroyed (by Allah) is
destroyed; rather what is truly amazing to me is the one who is saved
(by Allah) and how he is saved!

[I am not surprised how a person deviates from the straight path (as
this is quite easy); rather, I am surprised how a person attains true
guidance]. The Imam (as) retorted, 'Rather, I say that it is not amazing
how the one who is saved (by Allah) is saved, rather that which is
amazing for me is the one who is destroyed (by Allah) and how he is
destroyed with the vast mercy of Allah being present!'”[^1]

This tradition points to a very important topic as there are some people
who have developed a habit of pessimism and negativity in their lives.
In today's terminology, they see everything as being dark and gloomy.
They state that by keeping in mind the ever presence of Satan - the one
who is seeking to misguide everyone - and the lower desires, passions
and the corruption of the time we are living in, it is an amazing feat
for a person to be saved from all of these things. In essence they are
saying that our original state is that of corruption and pollution by
sins and that true guidance is that which goes against the 'natural
state' of life and if this develops, then it is something amazing!

In our opinion, people who think in this way actually have Satanic
thoughts running through them, and thus Hasan al-Basri is also one of
those people who had Satanic thoughts in his mind!

The story of him and his encounters with Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (as) are
well know. On one occasion, Imam ‘Ali (as) had said to him: “Why did you
not take part in the Battle of Jamal?” 

Hasan al-Basri replied, “I went forth to take part in the Battle of
Jamal, however I saw a person yelling that both the killer and the one
who is killed will be in the hell fire.” 

In reply, the Imam told him, “Definitely it is Satan, your brother, who
made this claim so as to misguide you!”

During the time of Imam ‘Ali (as), one of the things which led to others
being misled was Hasan al-Basri himself - a man whom the Ahluls Sunnah
consider as one of the Jurisprudents and commentators of the Qur’an!

The intimate friends of Allah (SwT) do not think in this way and without
doubt, the Muslim scholars too must not think that people are destined
for perdition! Rather, they must let everyone know that all people are
worthy and deserving of salvation since the grand and expansive Mercy of
Allah (SwT) is that which led to 124,000 Prophets being sent and was the
reason for the Divine Heavenly Books coming to us - especially the
Qur’an. In addition to this, Allah (SwT) has given humanity, brains and
if they were to use this asset, then they would definitely take control
over their soul.

Humanity has also been granted the pure nature (Fitrah) which is
something else that contributes to one's guidance. The person has also
been granted a conscience which is the best authority and judge over
himself. In addition to all of this, Allah (SwT) has also given humanity
lessons to learn from which everyone can see and understand. The signs
of Monotheism and the greatness of the Heavens and the Earth are full of
His Signs. With all of this, what else is needed for guidance?

If we were to put a single hair under the lens of a microscope and
analyze it in, we would see that one strand of hair is enough to
recognize Allah (SwT) - thus, what can we say about the eye, heart and
brain and the great way in which they have been designed! In addition,
what about the plants and the over 15,000 different types of animals
which live in the oceans, rivers and seas - all of these things point to
Allah (SwT) and are a way for us to gain guidance.

Imam Musa b. Ja’far al-Kadhim (as) once told Harun al-Rashid:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ مَا تَرَاهُ فَهُوَ لَكَ عِظَةٌ     
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Everything that you see around you is a lesson (which you can learn
from).”

The mercy of Allah (SwT) dictates that the signs of guidance must be
present in the world for everyone. Therefore, it should not be a
surprise that one attains salvation, as our original state is that of
salvation and not destruction!

One of the forms of the evil whispering of Satan that affects young and
old and even affects some of the religious scholars is when one says
that this present time has become corrupt. Such people give up all hope
and feel that they have no responsibility left as they cannot do
anything to change the time they are in. In reality, thinking in this
way is merely the act of 'passing the buck' - removing the
responsibility from one's own shoulders and placing it on someone elses
and looking at the world in the eyes of Hasan al-Basri by stating that
it is not possible for mankind to attain salvation which is incorrect!

The true believer must be just like Imam ‘Ali b. al-Husayn as-Sajjad
(as) and must say that it should could as no surprise that people are
saved (from destruction), rather the true surprise is when a person
becomes misled. Therefore, we must always be looking forward to
salvation and work hard for this.

We should think about the period of the Bani Umayyah since their era was
actually better than the period in which we are living today. It was a
period full of spiritual darkness, however at the same time, the Imam
still said that it should not be surprising if one attains salvation
(even in such a difficult time).

We pray that we are able to understand this lesson from Imam ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn as-Sajjad (as) and that we do not seek to remove ourselves
from the responsibility which Allah (SwT) has placed over us!

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 75, pg. 153


