Discourse 23: Jihad Against The Soul
====================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ الصَّادِقُ: إِحْذَرُوا أَهْوَائَكُمْ كَمَا تَحْذَرُونَ
أَعْدَائَكُمْ فَلَـيْسَ شَيْءٌ أَعْدى لِلرِّجَالِ مِنْ إِتِّـبَاعِ
أَهْوَائَهُمْ وَ حَصَائِدَ أَلْسِنَتَهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has said: “Be aware of your lower
desires just as you keep aware of your enemies since there is nothing
which is a greater enemy to a person than following his lower desires
and that which the tongue reaps.”[^1]

The month of Ramazan has many specific programs contained within it -
one of which is the fasting. Some people think that if they are sick or
traveling and are not permitted to fast, then there is nothing left to
the Month of Ramazan, however there are other aspects to this month
other than fasting! One such program is the combat against the lower
desires, and this responsibility shines greater than all other acts
contained within this month.

The tradition quoted is in relation to this fact and it tells us that we
must be aware of our lower desires just as we keep aware and distance
ourselves from our (physical) enemies. One's greatest enemy is to listen
to and follow the lower desires and to speak inappropriate things.

The lower passions, having desires and the act of rebellion are some of
the aspects that make up a person's character. If the lower passions are
placed under the control of the intellect, then there is no danger;
however if they are left without control and parameters to work within
and are left to the whims of the desires of the heart, then without
doubt the laws of Allah (SwT) and the ethical conscience will not be
recognized. Thus, this rebellious character that resides within the
person is his lower passions - and this is the greatest enemy a person
has.

When a person realizes he is in the presence of his enemy, then he would
definitely make sure he is not in the vicinity of his strike and would
ensure that he does not fall prey to his plots.

Unfortunately however, many people do not put up a fight in the face of
their enemies, and in the same way, are actually friends of their lower
passions and desires! What is even more amazing than this is when people
take their lower passions to be their leader!

Definitely, there are many people who take their lower passions to be
their object of worship:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَرَأَيْتَ مَنِ اتَّخَذَ إِلٌهَهُ هَوَاهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Have you seen the person who takes his lower desires as his lord?”[^2]

Therefore, sometimes it is possible that a person would humble himself
in front of his own lower desires!

One of the branches of monotheism (Tawhid) is Tawhid in obedience to
Allah (SwT). The person who is a Muwahhid (believer in Monotheism) is
the one who obeys none other than Allah (SwT) (the obedience to the
Prophet (S), the Imam (as), one's father and mother and Marja’ Taqlid
are all done through the command of Allah (SwT)). Thus, if we obey
others along side Allah (SwT), then we have transformed our actions into
polytheism (shirk) in worship.

Sometimes, the lower desires actually transform our heart into the house
of idol worship! The heart in which only Allah (SwT) must be present is
sometimes contaminated with various idols such as the love of wealth,
status, our children and other things:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بت ساخته اى در دل و خنديدى   بر كيش بد برهمن و بودا را
  </p>
</blockquote>

One of the poets stated that sometimes, people sit and talk about others
who worship idols in the traditional houses of idol worship whereas if
they were to look within their own souls, they would see that it is the
house of idols and that numerous false gods of worship reside in it!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَصْغى إِلـى نَاطِقٍ فَقَدْ عَبَدَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A tradition tells us that the person who listens to one who tells him
something has actually worshipped that person! If the person speaking is
extolling the words of Allah (SwT) then in essence, he has ended up
worshipping Allah (SwT); however if the person speaking extols the words
of Satan, then he has ended up worshipping Satan! Thus, if we listen to
what our lower desire tells us to do, then in reality, we have
worshipped it.

The actions during the Month of Ramazan are in place for this reason -
so that we are able to recognize our enemies (and remove them) and to
purify the society.

The number of sins we commit should come down significantly during the
Month of Ramazan even if we can not fast, since fasting is only one way
to fight against the lower passions and desires.

At this point, there are some issues mentioned in the tradition which
must be noted:

1. The tradition uses the phrase “إحذروا” or “to be aware” and does not
say, “do not obey (the lower desires).”  When one is aware of something,
it means that he is always alert and conscious of what he is doing such
that he does not fall prey to the lower desires, and this is a much
higher level than just saying not to follow something.

2. The tradition also uses the phrase “أعداء للرجال” or “…an even
greater enemy to a person…” and in our opinion this 'person' refers to
the one who possesses character and true faith. Thus, this part of the
tradition means that the greatest enemy for the true believer is his
lower desires and passions and he must fear this enemy more than all
others.

There is a well-known tradition which may also relate to this tradition
under discussion which states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلنَّاسُ كُلُّهُمْ هَالِكُونَ إِلاَّ الْعَالِمُونَ وَ الْعَالِمُونَ
كُلُّهُمْ هَالِكُونَ إِلاَّ الْعَامِلُونَ وَ الْعَامِلُونَ كُلُّهُمْ
هَالِكُونَ إِلاَّ الْمُخْلِصُونَ وَ الْمُخْلِصُونَ فِي خَطَرٍ عَظِيمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“All people shall be destroyed except for those with knowledge; and all
of those who are endowed with knowledge shall be destroyed except for
the ones who act according to their knowledge; and all of those who act
according to their knowledge shall also be destroyed except the ones
with sincerity and the ones who possess sincerity are in the greatest
danger.”

and it is possible that this refers to the following of the lower
desires.

3. The word “حصائد” is the plural of the word “حصيدة” and refers to
something used to reap crops (such as a sickle that is used in the field
to clear the crops). In the tradition under discussion, the tongue is
compared to a sickle that is used to reap the crops. The sins which the
tongue performs fall under the category of following the lower desires,
however why it is that they have been mentioned separately in this
tradition? This has been done so as to show the importance of this
issue.

The sins which the tongue performs do not require any special tool to
perform them, can be done night and day and in any state a person is in.
Thus, the dangers which come from the tongue are much greater than any
other organ of the body. In addition, the scholars have stated that
there are approximately thirty major sins which can be done by the
tongue!

There is no sin greater in the eyes of the people than those which the
tongue performs as these are the most dangerous. In addition, the tongue
is always at the disposal of the person (ready to work) and is ready to
show its indecency when instructed to do so! This is the reason why Imam
Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has mentioned the sin performed by the
tongue in this way.

The Noble Prophet (S) was once speaking to a desert ‘Arab and was
describing the spiritual effects of the tongue and the dangers
associated with speaking. The ‘Arab asked the Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَنُؤَاخِذُ بِمَا نَقُولُ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Shall we be taken to account for what we say?”  
 The Noble Prophet (S) replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ هَلْ تَكُبُّ النَّاسَ عَلى مَنَاخِرَهُمْ فِي النَّارِ إِلاَّ
حَصَائِدِ أَلْسِنَتَهُمْ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Shall mankind be thrown into the hell fire for any reason other than
that which their tongues have earned?”

Therefore, the proof of the gravity of the sins committed by the tongue
can be summarized as follows:

1. The number of sins committed with this organ is greater than any
other part of the body, and according to the scholars, there are
approximately thirty major sins that the tongue can perform!

2. The tongue, which everyone has access to is the easiest of means of
committing these sins.

3. The despicability of the sins of the tongue is known to all!

[^1]: Ibid., vol. 67, pg. 82

[^2]: Suratul Furqan (25), Verse 43


