Discourse 26: The Angel Of Death Visits Every House Five Times A Day
====================================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنِ الزُّهَرِي عَنْ أَنَسِ ابْنِ مَالِكِ قَالَ قَالَ رَسُولُ اللٌّه :
مَا مِنْ بَيْتٍ إِلاَّ وَ مَلَكُ الْمَوْتِ يَقِفُ عَلى بَابِهِ كُلَّ
يَوْمٍ خَمْسَ مَرَّاتٍ. فَإِذَا وَجَدَ الإِنْسَانَ قَدْ نَفَدَ
أَجَلُهُ، وَ انْـقَطَعَ أُكُلُهُ أَلْقى عَلَيْهِ الْمَوْتَ
فَغَشِيَتْهُ كُرُبَاتُهُ وَ غَمَرَتْهُ غَمَرَاتُهُ. فَمِنْ أَهْلِ
بَـيْتِهِ النَّاشِرَةُ شَعْرَهَا، وَ الضَّارِبَةُ وَجْهَهَا،
الصَّارِخَةُ بِوَيْلِهَا، البَاكِيَةُ بِشَجْوِهَا فَيَقُولُ مَلَكُ
الْمَوْتِ: وَيْلَكُمْ! مِمَّ الْجَزَعُ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَ فِيمَ الْفَزَعُ؟  وَ اللٌّهِ مَا أَذْهَـبْتُ لاَِحَدٍ مِنْكُمْ
مَالاً، وَ لاَ قَرَّبْتُ لَهُ أَجَلاً، وَ لاَ أَتَـيْـتُهُ حَتّى
أُمِرْتُ، وَ لاَ قَبَضْتُ رُوحَهُ حَتَّى اسْـتَأْمَرْتُ. وَ إِنَّ لِي
إِلَيْكُمْ عَوْدَةً، ثُمَّ عَوْدَةً، حَتّى لاَ أُبْقِيَ مِنْكُمْ
أَحَداً. ثُمَّ قَالَ رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ: وَ الَّذِي نَفْسِي بِـيَدِهِ،
لَوْ يَرَوْنَ مَكَانَهُ وَ يَسْمَعُونَ كَلاَمَهُ، لَذَهَلُوا عَنْ
مَيِّتِهِمْ، وَ بَكَوْا عَلى نُفُوسِهِمْ، حَتّى إِذَا حُمِلَ
الْمَيِّتُ عَلى نَعْشِهِ، رَفْرَفَ رُوحُـهُ فَوْقَ النَّعْشِ وَ هُوَ
يُنَادِي: يَا أَهْلِـي وَ وُلْدِي، لاَ تَلْعَبَنَّ بِكُمُ الدُّنـيَا
كَمَا لَعِبَتْ بِي. جَمَعْتُهُ مِنْ حِلِّهِ وَ مِنْ غَيْرِ حِلِّهِ وَ
خَلَّفْـتُهُ لِغَيْرِي، وَ الْمُهَنَّأُ لَهُ وَ التَّبَعَاتُ عَلَيَّ،
فَاحْذَرُوا مِنْ مِثْلِ مَا نُزِّلَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Zuhri has narrated from Anas b. Malik that he said “I heard the
Messenger of Allah (S) say, 'There is not a single house which exists
except that the Angel of Death visits it five times a day. If the lives
of any of the people who live in the house or those who are within the
house are written to come to an end, then he brings death upon that
person.

When the agonies and tribulations of death clothe the entire presence of
the person; the screams of the people of the house increase; the people
start to pull their hair and start to hit their head and face, and cry,
it is at this time that the Angel of Death says, 'Fie be upon you! Why
are you showing anger and fear?

I swear by Allah! I have not taken anyone's wealth; I have not brought
the appointed time (of death) any closer and I have not come towards you
without permission (from Allah). Rather, I am taking the soul by the
permission of someone else (Allah). I will continue to come to this
house until not a single person remains.”

At this point the Prophet (S) said, “I swear by the One who holds my
life and soul in His hands, if you were to see the station where the
Angel of Death is standing in the house and were to hear his words, you
would surely forget the one who has passed away! Rather, you would shed
tears for yourself!

As the deceased is being carried in his casket, his spirit stays above
the casket, crying out, 'O' my family! O' my children! Do not let the
transient world play with you as it played with me in which I collected
the wealth both from the permissible and impermissible means and then
left it for others behind me (to inherit). May felicity and delight be
for those who have inherited that wealth, however, a responsibility
remains on my shoulders. Be careful since that which has come upon me
shall also come upon you.” [^1] and [^2]

In this tradition, the advice given by the Angel of Death and the words
of guidance given by the deceased to those who remain after him has been
mentioned.

Truly, the most fortunate and the one with intelligence is he who
constantly remembers death and if we were to keep death in mind, a
majority of our troubles would be alleviated, since 99% of our grief is
related to issues of the transient world.

We never show grief when we do not wake up for Salatul Lail, when we are
not successful in following the laws of Allah (SwT) or when we performed
sins! We never have grief over things such as this!

However, when one remembers death, he realizes that everyone's eventual
outcome is the same - death - and that thing whose eventual outcome is
death should have absolutely no grief attached to it!

We must study the last days of those who came before us. Sometimes when
we pass by the alleys and walk through the markets, we see weak, old men
and old women walking with a cane. Some are on their own walking with
great difficulty; others are holding on to someone and walking around.

This will also be our eventual end! There was once a time when these
people were young and full of energy, however look at them now and see
how they are - see what the new day has brought them!

When I first moved to Qum, I remember seeing one of the great scholars
of Yazd who had migrated here. Even in those days, he was a very well
known scholar of the hawzah. Just recently, I met him again in one of
the alleyways in Qum and asked him how he was doing. His reply was
amazing, “What can I do - I am neither dead and out of this world, nor
am I alive and in this world. I am stuck between this world and the
next. My intellectual capacity is drained and it is even difficult for
me to move on my own. I am waiting for death to come and take me away!”

Of course, he was not always like this, and truthfully, this sort of an
outcome is not limited to this individual! Rather death is as a beast,
lying in wait at the door of every house.

There are some people who die in their old age; others leave this world
in their youth, however it is through remembering death that a person
can become spiritually trained. If there was no death, then it would be
very difficult to live. Thus, death is actually one of the grand Divine
Blessings from Allah (SwT).

In these few days that we live in the transient world, we see what kinds
of tumult and clamour people raise! Imagine if a person was to live for
eternity, what state this world would be in?!!

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 74, pg. 188

[^2]: It has been related that during the time of the Children of Israel
(Bani Israaf1il), one of the Prophets passed by a graveyard. His
companions said to him, “O' Prophet of Allah! We want Allah (SwT) to
raise one of these dead people back to life so that we can ask him about
how his life was taken and also to inform us of the questions asked by
the two Angels - Nakir and Munkar.” The Prophet of Allah rose his hands
up in supplication and after his prayer, his entire body turned black
(as if he had been burnt)! A person came out of the grave and in a clear
and eloquent voice said, “O' people of this transient world! I died 90
years ago and still the bitterness of the experience of death has not
left me! Therefore you who are still alive, do not fall into a state of
negligence and keep aware of the permissible and the impermissible; know
the truth and the falsehood since at this point (when you are dead),
having grief (over these things) will be of no benefit to you! Work day
and night for your next life and prepare your supplies for the next life
since no one will come after you to give these things to you. You should
know that all of you shall taste the drink of death.” The Prophet of
Allah said to this man, “O' dead man! How were your actions while in
this world?”  The man replied, “O' Messenger of Allah! I was a person of
the transient world (I worshipped this world), had love for the world
and was voraciously busy in amassing wealth although I also heard that
in the next life that there will be such and such punishments. Satan the
accursed, took me away from the right path and made the material world
beautiful in my eyes. Whatever I managed to collect, I left for those
who inherited from me and thus, I came into this next world with empty
hands! The wealth which I had in the world, became a source of trouble
now while today, my inheritors are enjoying the wealth and do not
remembering me at all. Thus since today you still have the opportunity,
you should not fall into a state of negligence, ask forgiveness for your
sins and remove the love of station and rank of the transient world from
your hearts, since when you reach to that life (the next life), the
remorse and regret will be of no value. The Angel of Death takes the
life of those people who have a love for this transient world in such a
way that it feels as if all of the veins of the body become disconnected
from one another and this pain is felt in all parts of the body. At this
point in time, the sinner will cry out from the depths of his soul and
will say: يَا حَسْرَتِي عَلى مَا فَرَّطْتُ فِي جَنْبِ اللٌّهِ! “O woe to
me! for what I fell short of my duty to Allah…”[85] (Kuliyat-e-Jami
al-Tamthil, pg. 222)


