Discourse27: Warnings And Preparedness
======================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ إِبْنِ عَبَّاسِ قَالَ: قَالَ رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ فِي بَعْضِ خُطَـبِهِ
أَوْ مَوَاعِظِهِ: أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ، لاَ يَشْغَلَنَّكُمْ دُنْـيَاكُمْ
عَنْ آخِرَتِكُم، فَلاَ تُؤْثِرُوا هُوَاكُمْ عَلى طَاعَةِ رَبِّكُمْ، وَ
لاَ تَجْعَلُوا إِيْمَانَكُمْ ذَرِيعَةً إِلـى مَعَاصِيكُمْ، وَ
حَاسِبُوا أَنْـفُسَكُمْ قَبْلَ أَنْ تُحَاسَـبُوا، وَ مَهِّدُوا لَهَا
قَبْلَ أَنْ تُعَذَّبُوا، وَ تَزَوَّدُوا لِلرَّحِيلِ قَبْلَ أَنْ
تُزْعَجُوا…
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been narrated from Ibne ‘Abbas that he said, “The Messenger of
Allah (S) said the following in one of his speeches or words of
admonition, 'O people! Do not let this, your transient world keep you
busy from your next life; do not let your lower desires and passions
take control over you over the obedience to your Lord; do not let your
faith be that which leads you to committing sins; take account of
yourself before your actions are taken to account (by someone else);
prepare yourself before you end up punishing (yourself); prepare
yourself for the journey (of the next life) before you are forced to
make the journey… ”[^1]

In this tradition, the Noble Prophet of Islam (S) has told the people to
be careful that the transient world does not keep them pre-occupied and
negligent of the next life. This is a warning from the greatest leader
of humanity - the Prophet Muhammad b. ‘Abdullah (S) - who understood the
transient world and its true nature.  
 It is mentioned in Suratul Hadid (57), verse 20, that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِعْلَمُوا أَنَّمَا الْحَيٌوةُ الدُّنْـيَا لَعِبٌ و لَهْوٌ وَ زِيـنَةٌ
وَ تَفَاخُرٌ بَيْـنَكُمْ وَ تَكَاثُرٌ فِي الأََمْوَالِ وَ الأَوْلاَدِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Know that surely the life of this world is (nothing but) a plaything
and game and an ornament of beauty and a means of competition between
yourselves and the (competition) in the multiplication in wealth and
children…”

Around us, there are people whose intellectual level is like that of a
child. They are always busy playing in the sand-box of life and have
hearts which are attracted to the transient world. However, the one
whose intellect is complete would never fall for the temptations and the
gold and glitter of the world.

We see that young children sometimes play “house” - one child is the
police officer, another child plays the head of the house while the
other children play other roles. Even older people enjoy watching these
children play this game, laugh at them and lovingly say to themselves,
“What are these young children doing!?” 

At the same time, other people look at us and what we do and laugh at
us! What do they say in regards to us: “What, do these people think they
are doing?! Do they think that they are going to live in this world
forever [that they are carrying on in this fashion]?”

After this warning, the Noble Prophet (S) presents five commandments,
each of which he has mentioned at other occasions. In reality, each of
these sayings forms an independent plan of action for our life:

1. The first part of the tradition tells us, “Do not prefer your lower
desires over the obedience to your Lord.”

The vigilant and spiritually awake person is one who places the
obedience of Allah (SwT) over the obedience of the passions of his soul.
When such a person is at the crossroads of life, it is made clear who is
the Muslim and who is not, just as it has been mentioned in verse 20 of
Suratul Nisa in which we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ يَقُولُونَ نُؤْمِنُ بِبَعْضٍ وَ نَكْفُرُ بِبَعْضٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And they say, we believe in a part of it, and we disbelieve in a part
of it…”

In regards to these types of people, it is clear that they have not yet
become Muslims - those who have truly submitted!

The true believer (Mo\`min) and one who has truly submitted (Muslim) do
not place their lower desires and wishes above the wishes of Allah
(SwT). The true believer (Mo\`min) and one who has truly submitted
(Muslim) are not the sort of people who would do whatever their lower
desires and wishes want them to do, throwing the rulings of Allah (SwT)
under their feet and trampling upon them!

Those who follow their lower desires instead of Allah (SwT) state,
“Whenever I want something and realize that it is according to what my
lower self desires, however at the same time it is also exactly the same
as the rulings and commandments of Allah (SwT), I say to myself, 'That
which Allah (SwT) wants is contained in this ruling, and thus, I will
follow it. However when it comes to the rulings of Allah (SwT) which go
against my own lower desires and passions, then I state, 'This ruling of
His is difficult to follow' and this action is a matter of necessity (to
perform) and since it is stated that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلضَّرُورَاتُ تُبِيحُ الْمَحْذُورَاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thus, it is not a problem if I perform this act.'”

2. The second part of the tradition tells us, “Do not make your faith as
the spring-board to perform sins.”

How do people use their faith to commit sins? They say things like: “If
we are already corrupt and polluted with sins, then Allah (SwT) is the
All-Generous (al-Karim). With faith in the generousness of Allah (SwT),
we will commit sins, as He will forgive us.”

There is a sentence which is commonly heard amongst the people that, “We
are all drowning in our sins, however we have Husayn.”  It is here that
such people use the Wilayah of the Ahlul Bait (as) as the means through
which they can sin even more! In reality, this is not faith, rather,
this is a precursor to the disobedience of Allah (SwT)!

One who speaks like this is actually lying to himself as if he had
complete reliance (Tawakkul) upon Allah (SwT), then he would obey Him
and he would not use his supposed belief in complete reliance to commit
more sins!

This discussion has also been mentioned in relation to intercession
(Shafa’at) in our commentary of the Qur’an, Tafsir-e-Namuna.

A poet once uttered the following poem in “praise” of the Commander of
the Faithful, ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (as):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حاجب، اگر معامله حشر با على است   من ضامنم كه هرچه بخواهى گناه كن
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O' hajib (Gatekeeper of Paradise), if the negotiation on the plain of
Resurrection (in regards to one's sins and good deeds) is done with
‘Ali; then I am guaranteed that I can do whatever I want to do, even
sin!”

That night in his sleep, he saw the Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali b.
Abi Talib (as) who said to him, “You has composed a very bad poem and
must change it.”   
 The man said, “What should I change it to?”  The Imam (as) replied to
him: “Say the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حاجب، اگر معامله حشر با على است   شرم از رخ على كن و كمتر گناه كن
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O' hajib (Gatekeeper of Paradise), if the negotiation on the plain of
Resurrection (in regards to one's sins and good deeds) is done with
‘Ali; then (I must) have modesty in the face of Allah, and sin less.”

The person who has firm belief in the Wilayah or guardianship of the
Ahlu'l Bayt (as) knows that atleast once or twice every week, all of his
actions are presented to Imam Sahibul Zaman (as).  
 In the 105th verse of Suratul Tawbah we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلِ اعْمَلُوا فَسَيَرَى اللٌّهُ عَمَلَكُمْ وَ رَسُولُهُ وَ
الْمُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And say: Work! Allah will surely see your actions and so will His
Messenger and the true believers.”

Since Allah (SwT), the Prophet (S) and the Imam (as) see our actions, we
should have some humility in their presence - especially the Imam of our
time (as), and not perform any sins. If the record of our actions was to
be given to the Imam of our time, would he see anything other than sins
in it?! Sins such as lying, false accusations, backbiting, cursing,
using foul language, and many other actions…

If we are true believers, then we must not do anything that would hurt
our Imam nor anything which would earn the condemnation of the Imam of
our time! In addition to our own personal issues, there are also many
societal issues which we are plagued with and which lead to the
discomfort and torture of Imam al-Hujjah (as).

3. The third point mentioned is that we must take account of own souls
before are actions are taken to account (by someone else).

How spiritually awake a person truly is who takes account of his actions
before someone else does this for him!

If we truly believe in the Day of Resurrection and the accountability
for all of our deeds, then why do we not sit and account for our
actions?

If on the Day of Judgment, we were told to judge ourselves and were
instructed, “Each one of you come forward and judge your own actions
instead of having Allah (SwT) or anyone else sit in judgment over you,
this is your deed of actions which lists everything which you performed
in the world and now it is up to you to judge for yourselves whether you
should be of the people of Paradise or of the Hell fire”, what would we
say? Did we actually perform pure and sincere actions in the world?
Really, what positive actions have we done that Allah (SwT) would find
us worthy of Paradise?

4. The forth point mentioned in this tradition is that we must prepare
ourselves for the next life before we end up punishing ourselves.

Before one prepares his own punishment (in the hell) and is plagued with
having to put up with that, one must prepare the tools necessary for
prosperity and happiness through obedience and worship of Allah (SwT)
and by purchasing the happiness of both worlds.

5. The fifth point mentioned in this tradition is that we must prepare
ourselves for the journey before we are forced to make the trip.

For this (final) trip, one must prepare the goods needed before he is
forcefully taken, as the transient world is like a temporary stop upon
which the traveler dismounts and gather some provisions for the long
journey ahead.

At this temporary stop, if one becomes busy with playing games and all
of a sudden the call is made that the next part of the journey is
underway and that one must get up and continue on with the rest of the
trip, however the person has not prepared anything for the rest of the
journey, then it shall be his own loss! !

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 74, pg. 181


