Discourse 30: The Signs of a Person With Character
==================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنِ الصَّادِقِ: ثَلاَثَةٌ تَدُلُّ عَلـى كَرْمِ الْـمَرْءِ: حُسْنُ
الْخُلْقِ وَ كَظْمُ الْغَيْظِ وَ غَضُّ الْبَصَرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad] as-Sadiq (as) has said: “There are three
things which show the character of a person: good etiquette; swallowing
one's anger and lowering the eyes [to that which one is not permitted to
look at].”[^1]

The word “كرم” in sometimes used in the ‘Arabic language to refer to the
traits of munificence, charity, and generosity. In the verses of the
Qur\`an and the traditions, it refers to the character or temperament
and the spiritual worth of a person. For example it has been mentioned
in the Qur\`an that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللٌّهِ أَتْقٌكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely the one with the most character, worth, noblest of traits and
ethical values amongst you in the sight of Allah is the one who is the
most Allah-Conscious (one with Taqwa).”

According to the tradition we started our discussion with, the person
with character is the one who possesses the following three traits:

1. A good demeanour: Having pleasant encounters with others, enjoyable
to be around and observing the proper etiquette are all things that come
under the heading of a good demeanour. In addition, these are things
which have been emphasized in the verses of the Qur\`an and the
traditions, and one of the miracles of the Prophet (S) was his good
demeanour and etiquette.

If a person with character is given something or has something taken
away from him, he does not let this get to him and is able to control
himself. However, as can be seen in a person who has no character or has
a negative disposition, even if a small amount of difficulties abound
him, he becomes childlike and immature and begins to argue with
everyone!

2. Swallowing the Anger: The word “كظم” refers to closing the mouth, as
anger is like a fire raging inside a person which is manifest when one
speaks. It engulfs the one who is in his presence and is at the
receiving end of the anger and it is for this reason that the word “كظم”
has been used for 'anger' and the act of swallowing one's anger is one
of the traits of a person with character. Of course there is also a form
of 'sacred anger' and this is necessary to have.

3. Lowering the Eyes [to that which a person should not be looking at].
The word “غمص” refers to closing one's eyes, however the word “غضّ” is
in the meaning of lowering the gaze and look.

What must we lower our eyes from? The meaning of lower one's eyes or
refraining from looking at certain things has a very wide meaning to it:

1.       Refraining from staring at people whom one is not related to by
blood or marriage (Maharim);

2.       Turning a blind eye to the shortcomings of the people;

3.       Turning a blind eye to the minor mistakes of the people;

4.       Abd refraining from staring and desiring the gold and glitter
of the transient world.

We pray that we can all struggle to enliven these characteristics within
ourselves and pray that Allah (SwT) gives us the Divine providence to be
able to possess these traits!

[^1]: Ibid., vol. 75, pg. 232


