Discourse 31: The Effects of Sins
=================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنِ الْبَاقِرِ: مَا مِنْ عَـبْدٍ يَمْـتَنِعُ مِنْ مَعُونَةِ أَخِيهِ
الْمُسْلِمِ وَ السَعى لَهُ فِي حَاجَتِهِ قُضِـيَتْ أَوْلَمْ تَقْضِ
إِلاَّ أَبْتَلى بِالسَّعى فِي حَاجَةِ فِيمَا يَأْثِمُ عَلَيْهِ وَ لاَ
يُوْجَرُ. وَ مَا مِنْ عَبْدٍ يَبْخَلُ بِنَفَقَةِ يَنْفَقُهَا فِيمَا
يَرْضى اللٌّهُ إِلاَّ أَبْتَلى بِأَنَّ يُنْفِقُ أَضْعَافَهَا فِيمَا
أَسْخَطَ اللٌّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[Imam Muhammad b. ‘Ali] al-Baqir (as) has said: “There is no servant who
sees his Muslim brother in need, however does not help him or tries to
alleviate his difficulties, except that he will face a tribulation in
that his energies will be expended in an area in which there is no
reward for the next life and no reward for the transient world.

There is not a single servant (of Allah) who is miserly in spending his
wealth in that which pleases Allah except that his wealth will end up
being spent in the forbidden and prohibited channels where in lies
Allah's anger.”[^1]

Both the acts of obedience and sinning against Allah (SwT) have two
effects to them:

1. Effects within the physical world;

2. Effects within the spiritual world.

Taking interest (from the banks or other institutions) has a spiritual
effect which is the punishment on the Day of Resurrection and the
squeezing in the grave; as for the effects in the physical world, the
person who takes interest will be accursed and hated by others!

The effects within the physical world are broken up into two categories:

1. Some of them have a logical reasoning which we can understand with
logical proofs. For example, we read in the Qur’an that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لاَ تَنَازَعُوا فَتَفْشَلُوا وَ تَذْهَبُ رِيـحَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…and do not quarrel with one another for then you will be weak, and
your power will depart…”[^2]

Thus, the effects in the physical world include arguments and
differences amongst the people. We are able to understand the logic of
this outcome since when there is an argument between people, naturally
their power is dissipated. Instead of fighting the enemy, one would end
up fighting with those of the same faith and close to the person!

In addition, the Qur\`an also tells us (as another example of this
phenomena):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِدْفَعْ بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ فَإِذَا الَّذِي بَيْنَكَ وَ بَيْنَهُ
عَدَاوَةٌ كَــأَنَّهُ وَلِيُّ حَمِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…repel (evil) with what is best. [If you do so,] behold, between you
and the person for which there was enmity will be as though he were a
sympathetic friend.”[^3]

Therefore, we must respond in a nice way to one who says something bad
as this goodness would lead to the stubborn enemy having a change of
heart and inclining such that he would become a close, loving friend!
The A\`immah (as) and the Noble Prophet (S) were the embodiment of this
verse and it is through their love that they were able to humble the
enemies.

2. Another effect in the physical world is a relationship which,
although may not be exactly clear to us and which we cannot understand,
nonetheless does exist. For example, it is mentioned in the traditions
that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صِلَّةُ الرَحْمِ تُعْمَرُ الدَيَّارَ وَ تَزِيدُ فِي الأَعْمَارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Silatul Rahm (the act of the keeping the family bonds strong) enable
the cities to be fortified and increases the life span.”

This is another physical act related to the world, however it is not
clear how the life span increases through maintaining family ties.  
 In addition we read in the Qur\`an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَنْ يَـتَّقِ اللٌّهَ يَجْعَلْ لَهُ مَخْرَجاً وَ يَرْزُقْهُ مِنْ
حَيْثُ لاَ يَحْتَسِبُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…and whoever is careful of (his duty to) Allah, He will make for him a
means out (of his difficulties) and will grant him sustenance from where
he imagines not (that it would come)…”[^4]

What is the relationship between Taqwa of Allah (SwT) and sustenance
coming from places where one cannot even imagine? Truly, this is
something we cannot understand!

It is important to keep in mind that all types of worship and acts of
transgression carry these forms of effects with them.

It is possible that after committing a sin, a person would repent and
Allah (SwT) would accept his forgiveness, however the effect of that sin
remains with the person in the physical world. Thus, the repentance for
a sin merely takes away the effect of the act in the spiritual realm,
however its spiritual effects remain for a time period. This is similar
to poison which enters into a person's body and is not immediately taken
out of the body forcing the person to ingest an antibody so that the
effects of the poison do not stay with the person.

In the tradition quoted, we see that it refers to two effects of one's
actions in the physical realm. If the society were to pay attention to
these effects, then they would definitely correct themselves much
quicker than the current pace of reformation.

We pray that Allah (SwT) grants all of us the opportunity to be able to
pay close attention to the various educational programs and injunctions
that Islam has blessed us with!

[^1]: Tuhafatul Uqul under the short sayings of the 5th Imam and also
Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 75, pg. 173

[^2]: Surat al-Anfal (8), verse 46

[^3]: Surat al-Fussilat (41), verse 34

[^4]: Surat al-talaq (65), verses 2 and 3


