Discourse 32: Swallowing The Anger
==================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللٌّه يَا عَلِيُّ أُوصِيكَ بِوَصِيَّةِ فَاحْفَظْهَا
فَلاَ تَزَالُ بِخَيْرٍ مَا حَفِظْتَ وَصِيَّتِـي. يَا عَلِيُّ مَنْ
كَظُمَ غَيْظاً وَ هُوَ يَقْدِرُ عَلى إِمْضَائِهِ أَعْقَبَهُ اللٌّهُ
يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ أَمْناً وَإِيْمَاناً يَجِدُ طَعْمَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Messenger of Allah (S) has said, “O' ‘Ali! I advise you (in regards
to something) with a piece of advice, so then safe-guard this as you
shall never be devoid of goodness as long as you have safe-guarded my
recommendation. O' ‘Ali! Allah will grant the one who swallows his
anger - while he is able to act out his rage - with protection and faith
on the Day of Judgment whose pleasure the person will taste.”[^1]

In this piece of advice from the Messenger of Allah (S), there is only
one thing which he advised us. In this tradition, he stated that if a
person has the ability to do something (take revenge) and refrains from
it, Allah (SwT) will grant that person a blessing in the transient world
and the next life. The blessing of the next life is the protection from
the hell-fire, while the blessing in this world is that of true faith
which the person shall be able to taste.

The word “كظم” which has been mentioned in this tradition has numerous
meanings, however its original meaning is to tightly seal the top of a
flask.  It is also used in the meaning of swallowing one's anger since
when a person becomes upset, it is said that his anger 'spills out of
him.'

At this point, we must explain some issues:

1. Anger is one of the things which leads to sin
------------------------------------------------

The sins that one commits in a state of anger are many, for example:
insulting and harming a fellow believer; polluting the tongue with
speaking impermissible things, and many other sins. In addition,
sometimes a person performs such a sin that he is not able to control
himself, or due to his anger, performs something that he would never be
able to compensate for during the course of his entire life!

It is for this reason that most of the decisions which are taken in a
state of anger are always followed by regret and remorse.

Thus, a person must remind himself that he should only make decisions in
his life after coming out of the state of anger since while angry, a
person's thoughts are not balanced and do not work properly. In
addition, in such a state, one does not have the ability to discern his
best interests and it is for this reason that the scholars have stated
that, “While in a state of anger, no decision can be made, nothing can
be ordered (to be done), nor can any punishment given.”  In other words,
in such a mental state, no important action can be undertaken.

Rather, what is important is that a person does not make any decision
and in this time period, tries to control himself. Of course, to control
ones' self while in a state of anger is also difficult to do, however
one of the things which is beneficial is to bring about the agents
within the self which would result in a change in the mental state.

For example, the person should leave that area where he is, in order to
control his emotions; if he has become upset while inside his house,
then he should step outside. It has even been stated that if a person is
standing then he should sit down or if he is sitting down then he should
stand up or even drink some water to change his mood and control
himself!

Thus in whatever way possible, one must change the state one is in and
even if one is able to change the state for a brief period of time, this
too would be beneficial. To accomplish this, one could for example,
sprinkle some water on one's face or recite a Surah from the Qur\`an.

Sometimes a person goes into such a fit of anger that in order for it to
subside, he has no other choice but to punch the wall so as to remove
the pressure building up in him, thus preventing his anger from
manifesting itself on others!

Truthfully, anger is a flame from the fire of Satan and is one of the
most important tools which he makes use of.

The key point to note is that anger takes a person out of his natural
state of mind. We have seen people who, while in their 'regular mental
state', are very good and down to earth people. However, when they enter
into a state of anger, then everything around them begins to fly around
the house (whatever they see they begin to throw!) 

In this state, they can not be considered as a normal human being since
many changes come about within them.  The most important thing which can
be stated in regards to the preson in such a stae is that he does not
have any religious excuse which he can use such that he could, for
example, say that “I was in a state of anger and thus I did so and so…”

We also see that, perhaps a majority of people murdered, are killed when
the killer was in a fit of anger and rage since no one would take a
knife and slit someone's throat when he is cool and collected!

2. Anger is one of the most dangerous tools as Satan is able to use it to make people commit sins
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Anger is one of the gifts from Allah (SwT) which can also be used in
incorrect and inappropriate places. As we know, the power of anger
actually refers to the gathering of a person's physical energy in the
face of a difficulty. Therefore, Allah (SwT) is the one who has created
the power of anger so that a person would be able to defend himself from
an attack, as if a person was to remain indifferent in such situations
and did not gather his inner-energy, then he would not be able to defend
himself.

There are some people who have stated that when a person is in his
regular state, he has approximately 1/10th of his power ready to use.
However, when he gets into a state of anger, then his power becomes ten
fold - meaning that all of their energy is mustered!

With this point in mind, we see that in a regular state, some people are
very relaxed, however when they enter into a stage of anger, then even
five people would not be able to take charge over them and control them
as all of their inner energy and power has been gathered together!

Therefore, the power of anger which Allah (SwT) has created within
everyone is actually one of His blessings, however it must be used in
the proper way.

With this said, we understand that anger is of two types: the
unbefitting form of anger and the praiseworthy and obligatory anger.

In the face of those who openly perform sins and transgress the laws of
Allah (SwT), the true believer must show his Islamic zeal and enthusiasm
in opposing the impermissible acts and must not be indifferent to sins
happening around him.

There is a well-known tradition which states that once, Allah (SwT) sent
a group of Angels to destroy a particular nation, however they did not
fulfill the responsibility given to them by Allah (SwT) and returned
back, appealing to Him, saying: “O' Allah! Within this group (whom we
are commanded to destroy) we saw a very old man who worships You in the
darkness of the night. He was awake in Your worship and we did not want
to destroy this nation since this man was amongst them.” 

It was revealed to this group of Angels that, “Return back to that
nation and destroy the entire community as well as the old man!”  Once
they were given this command, they were told the reason why this was to
be done:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمْ يَحْمَرَّ وَجْهُهُ لِغَضَبِ قَطُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The same old man you see awake in the dark hours of the night in
worship is the same person whose face never turned red in anger at
seeing the sins being committed around him!”

Therefore, when a person must command others to righteous deeds and
forbid them from the evil (Amr bil Ma’ruf and Nahi ‘anil Munkar), become
angry at sins being committed, leaving that area where sins are being
performed and in summary, fulfilling his responsibility in these
regards, he must do this.

Again, it is this form of anger which is praiseworthy and is actually
obligatory!

From the point of view of the faith of Islam, the person who is
indifferent to sins and sinning has absolutely no value!

Of course it goes without saying that anger which is not warranted is
something which is not liked by Allah (SwT).

3. The Reward for those who swallow their Anger
-----------------------------------------------

### a) The first reward granted to those who swallow their anger is that they shall have protection on the Day of Resurrection.

If Allah (SwT) was to grant a person protection on the Day of
Resurrection, which is also the day known as: The Day of Grief; The Day
of Everything in the Open; The Day of Trepidation; The Day of the Great
Fear; and The Day of the Distress, then is there any greater blessing or
gift?!

In the same way, if a person was to possess the entire transient world,
however did not possess tranquility and peace in his heart, then all of
his material possessions would mean nothing! Thus, if one has peace of
heart and mind, however has nothing from the material aspect of this
world, then in reality, he has everything!

### b) The second reward is that such a person shall be granted true faith in Allah (SwT) while in this world.

It has been mentioned that if a person was to refrain from certain sins,
then Allah (SwT) would grant that person true faith that he could
“taste” - this means that his faith would not be something dry and
monotonous in theory. Rather, there would be a sweetness in his faith
which he could actually sense! This is not something granted to all
people - it is only bestowed upon those who stand firm in the face of
their lower desires.

In the introductory chaper on 'Looking at others' in the compilation of
traditions, Wasa\`il ash-Shi’a, we have traditions which state if a
person's eyes fall upon a beautiful woman who is not his mahram and he
immediately turns his eyes away from her, then Allah (SwT) would grant
that person such a level of faith that the person would actually be able
to taste it (the true faith)!

Anger in the Islamic Narrations
-------------------------------

1. Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has stated that “Anger spoils
faith just as vinegar spoils honey.”[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ الإِمَامُ جَعْفَرُ بْنُ مُحَمَّدٍ الصَّادِقُ أَلْغَضَبُ يُفْسِدُ
الإِيـمَانَ كَمَا يُفْسِدُ الْخَلُّ الْعَسَلَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2. Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (as) has said, “I advise you in regards to
anger since the beginning stage of it is insanity while the final stage
of it is remorse.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ عَلِيُّ بْنُ أَبِي طَالِبٍ: إِيَّاكَ وَالْغَضَبَ، فَأَوَّلُهُ
جُنُونٌ وَآخِرُهُ نَدَمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3. The Prophet of Islam (S) has said, “The strong person is not the one
who can lift heavy weights. Rather, the strong person is the one who is
in control of his soul while in a state of anger.”[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللٌّهُ: لَيْسَ الشَّدِيدُ بِالصُّرْعَةِ، إِنَّما
الشَّدِيدُ الَّذِي يَمْلِكُ نَفْسَهُ عِنْدَ الْغَضَبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4. Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (as) has said, “Anger is a fire which is
burning away. The one who is able to swallow it is the one who has
extinguished it, while the person who permits his anger to be free is
the first person who shall be burnt by it.”[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ الإِمَامُ عَلِيُّ بْنُ أَبِي طَالِبٍ: أَلْغَضَبُ نَارٌ
مُوقَدَةٌ. مَنْ كَظَمَهُ أَطْفَأْهَا، وَ مَنْ أَطْلَقَهُ كَانَ أَوَّلَ
مُحْتَرَقٌ بِهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

5. Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as): “Anger is the key to all
evil.”[^5]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ الإِمَامُ جَعْفَرُ بْنُ مُحَمَّدٍ الصَّادِقُ: أَلْغَضَبُ
مِفْتَاحُ كُلِّ شَرٍّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

6. Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (as) has said, “A strong feeling of anger
changes the way a person speaks; destroys the pillars of logic and makes
a person's comprehension scattered and disturbed.”[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ الإِمَامُ عَلِيُّ بْنُ أَبِي طَالِبِ: شِدَّةُ الْغَضَبِ
تُغَيِّرُ الْمَنْطِقَ، وَ تَقْطَعُ مَادَّةَ الْحُجَّةِ، وَتُفَرِّقُ
الْفَهْمَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

7. Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (as) has said, “The staunchest of enemies for
a person are his anger and lower desires. The person who is able to take
control of these two shall have the greatest rank and shall be able to
reach to the pinnacles of humanity.”[^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ الإِمَامُ عَلِيُّ بْنُ أَبِي طَالِبٍ: أَعْدى عَدُوٍّ لِلْمَرْءِ
غَضَـبُهُ وَشَهْوَتُهُ، فَمَنْ مَلَكَهُمَا عَظُمَتْ دَرَجَتُهُ
وَبَلَتْ غَايَـتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

8. The Prophet of Allah (S) has said, “Anytime you get angry, keep
quiet.”[^8]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللٌّهُ: إِذَا غَضِبْتَ فَاسْكُتْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

9. Imam Musa b. Ja’far al-Kadhim (as) said, “The one who controls his
anger over the people, Allah shall control His anger over that person on
the Day of Judgement.”[^9]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ الإِمَامُ مُوسَـى بْنِ جَعْفَرٍ أَلْكَــاظِمُ: مَنْ كَفَّ
غَضَـبَهُ عَنِ النَّاسِ، كَفَّ اللٌّهُ عَنْهُ غَضَبَهُ يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

10. The Noble Prophet (S) has said, “Anytime one of you gets angery, he
should wash his face with cold water since surely anger is from the hell
fire.”[^10]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ: إِذَا غَضِبَ أَحَدُكُمْ، فَيَتَوَضَّأْ
بِالْمَآءِ الْبَارِدِ، فَإِنَّ الْغَضَبَ مِنَ النَّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 74, pg. 46

[^2]: Ibid., vol. 73, pg. 267

[^3]: Majmuatul Warram, vol. 2, pg. 122

[^4]: Ghurur al-hikm, pg. 292

[^5]: Ibid., pg. 49

[^6]: Safinat al-Bihar, vol., pg. 220

[^7]: Ghurur al-hikm, pg. 498

[^8]: al-Mahajjat al-Baydaaf1, vol. 5, pg. 308

[^9]: Wasail al-Shia, vol. 11, pg. 298

[^10]: al-Mahajjat al-Baydaaf1, vol. 5, pg. 305


