Discourse 33: The Worst Of People
=================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ: يَا عَلِيُّ، مَنْ خَافَ النَّاسُ لِسَانَهُ
فَهُوَ مِنْ أَهْلِ النَّارِ. يَا عَلِيُّ، شَرُّ النَّاسِ مَنْ
أَكْرَمَهُ النَّاسِ إِتِّقَاءَ شَرِّهِ. يَا عَلِيُّ، شَرُّ النَّاسِ
مَنْ بَاعَ آخِرَتَهُ بِدُنْـيَاهُ، وَشَرٌّ مِنْ ذٌالِك مَنْ بَاعَ
آخِرَتَهُ بِدُنْـيَا غَيْرِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet Muhammad (S) has said, “O' ‘Ali! The person whom, others are
scared of his tongue (what he says), shall be of the people of the hell
fire. O' ‘Ali! The worst of people is the one whom others show respect
to out of fear of his wickedness.

O' ‘Ali! The worst of people is the one who sells his next life for his
life of the transient world and one who is even worse than this is the
one who sells his next life for the life of the transient world of other
people!”[^1]

Without doubt, the points mentioned in this tradition are very moving
and if we did not have even a single proof for the truthfulness of the
status (of Prophethood) of the Prophet Muhammad (S), then this saying
would be sufficient for an individual to realize the great status and
rank of this individual!

As the historians narrate, the Prophet Muhammad (S) grew up within a
society steeped in ignorance, never went to school and never wrote
anything, however such words which grant wisdom to others have been
heard flowing from his blessed lips! All of this points to his greatness
and station of Prophethood and through such sayings, a person is guided
to understand that everything he has spoken are indeed miracles.

In the saying quoted above, we see that he has explained the transient
world in great detail.

In the first sentence, he has pointed us to issues in regards to a
person's tongue and what he says with it.

The scholars of etiquette tell us that whatever is said about the tongue
and the sins and evils which stem from is never enough. A great number
of difficulties, tribulations, bad states - and even good states we find
ourselves in, our victories and defeats all come through reforming our
tongue and what we speak - and how difficult it is to reform the tongue!

The Noble Prophet (S) has stated, “O' ‘Ali! The person whom others are
scared of his tongue and what he says shall definitely be of the people
of the hell fire.”

The following example best illustrates this line of the tradition.
Sometimes, we see a person enter into a gathering and immediately,
everyone present falls into a state of fear lest the person should begin
to speak, since they have all felt the bite of his tongue and his harsh
words.

The tongue is something very dangerous - of course however, we must
realize that the importance of the pen and what it writes is no less
than what the tongue speaks, and it actually may even be more
dangerous![^2]

In the second sentence, the Prophet (S) stated, “O' ‘Ali! The worst of
people is the one whom people show respect to out of fear of his
evilness.”

As we know, people generally show respect to people for two reasons:

1) The individual's moral character and worthy traits and since they
benefit from being in the company of such people.

2) They want to repel the dangers and threats which these people can
cause. Truthfully, others are scared that if they do not show respect to
a particular person, then that person shall do something bad to them!

There is a story which has been related about a person who had stated,
“I will give the wealth in the public treasury to two groups of people:
one group are those who who follow and respect me only because they
benefit materialistically from me, while the other group are those who
respect me since they want to repel the evil which I can cause them!”

Question: Why is such a person as mentioned in the tradition the worst
person?

Answer: His sins are actually much greater in number compared to others
since he is harming others by compelling them to act contrary to their
own desires by forcing them to show respect.

If such a person was to gain wealth from his actions, then without
doubt, this wealth would be forbidden and he would not be permitted to
use of it! If such a person was to give an amount of money from the
public treasury to a person so that the he would not embarrass him in
public (out of fear) then that money would be similar to eating the
flesh of the swine!

In the third sentence in the tradition, the Prophet (S) has stated, “O'
‘Ali! The worst of people is the one who sells his next life for his
life of the transient world…”

In this part of the saying, the Prophet (S) means to say that such a
person sells the true life which is in the next world for the transient
and short-lived life on Earth, even though:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ الدَّارَ الأَخِرَةَ لَهِيَ الْحَيَوَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And the life of the next world that is the (true) life…”[^3]

In reality, the transient world which we are in is a form of slow death
and how bad it is that one would trade the ever-lasting life of the next
world for the temporary, fleeting, base pleasures of the life of this
transient world - which is, as mentioned, a life of slow death!

A person who does this is one who, from the point of view of his
intellect, is a bad person since he himself is thinking bad thoughts (of
the life of this world). From the point of view of his actions, he is
also a bad person since he does bad deeds for the life of this world. In
addition, from the point of view of his ambitions and aspirations, he is
also bad since he has degraded his ambitions and goals!

Even worse than the one mentioned is the person who sells the life of
the next world for the life of the transient world - however for other
people! These sorts of people are not few in number and are people who
say, “I am ready to sell my life of this world and the next world and
everything which I possess (both materialistically and spiritually) in
order to ensure that another person is comfortable in this life.” 
Truly, this is the pinnacle of stupidity and is the greatest loss for a
person!

Sometimes a person will fall into the trap (mentioned in this tradition)
and will open his eyes and see that he is now the physical manifestation
of the first part of this tradition (that he has sold the life of the
next life for the pleasures of this world).

Slowly, he would realize that he has also become a manifestation of the
second part of the tradition (that he has also sold the life of the next
world for others around him and for them to be comfortable in this
world)! Do not think that a person is forewarned of this or that some
signs are given to a person to make him aware of this - no this is not
the case! All of a sudden he would notice what has occurred and at that
time, he would realize that he is drowning and his hands and feet are
tied and that he has no way to get out!

The Dangers of the Tongue in the Islamic Narrations
---------------------------------------------------

1. The Noble Prophet of Islam (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَجَاتُ الْمؤْمِنِ حَفْظُ لِسَانِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The salvation of the true believer lies in protecting his tongue.”[^4]

2. Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has said, “Luqman said to his
son:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بُنَيَّ إِنْ كُنْتَ زَعَمْتَ أَنَّ الْكَلاَمَ مِنْ فِضَّةِ،
فَإِنَّ السُّكُوتَ مِنْ ذَهَبٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O' my son! If you think that speaking is silver, then you must know
that silence is golden.”[^5]

3. The Noble Prophet of Islam (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلاَءُ الإِِنْسَانِ مِنَ اللِّسَانِ، وَ سَلاَمَةُ الإِنْسَانِ فِي
حِفْظِ اللِّسَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The tribulation of a person lies in his tongue and the protection of a
person is in safe-guarding his tongue.”[^6]

4. The final Prophet of Allah (S) said to Ibne Mas’ud:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيْكَ بِحِفْظِ لِسَانِك، فَإِنَّ اللٌّهَ تَعَالـى يَقُولُ
أَلْيَوْمَ نَخْـتِمُ عَلى أَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَتُكَلِّمُنَا أَيْدِيهِمْ
وَتَشْهَدُ أَرْجُلُهُمْ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I advise you to protect your tongue since surely Allah, the Most High
has said, (On that day, We shall seal their mouths and their hands will
speak to us and their feet shall bear witness as to what they had
earned.)”[^7]

5. The Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طُوبـى لِمَنْ أَنْـفَقَ الْفَضْلَ مِنْ مَالِهِ وَ أَمْسَكَ الْفَضْلَ
مِنْ كَلاَمِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Glad tidings to that person who gives out goodness from his excess
wealth and prevents himself from speaking excess words.”[^8]

6. It has been narrated from Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) from
his fore-fathers (as) that the Messenger of Allah (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زِيـنَةُ الْحَدِيثِ الصِّدْقُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The beauty of speaking is truthfulness (in speech).”[^9]

7. The Messenger of Allah (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِـتْـنَةُ اللِّسَانِ أَشَدُّ مِنْ ضَرْبِ السَّيْفِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The tribulation of the tongue (what is spoken) is greater than the
striking of the sword.”[^10]

8. It has been narrated from ‘Abdullah b. Sanan from Imam Ja’far b.
Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) that the Messenger of Allah (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلاَ أُنَـبِّئُكُمْ بِشِـرَارِكُمْ؟  قَالَ أَلْمَشَّاؤُونَ
بِالنَّمِيمَةِ، أَلْمُفَرِّقُونَ بَيْنَ الأََحِبَّةِ، أَلْبَاغُونَ
لَلْبِرَآءِ الْمَعَايِبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Shall I not inform you of the worst amongst you?”  The people replied,
“O' Prophet of Allah! Go ahead!”  The Prophet said, “It is those who: go
forth as tale-bearers (those who indulge in gossip); cause separation
amongst people who love one another; and make excuses for sins (which
they commit).”[^11]

9. Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِيَّاكُمْ وَالْمِزَاحَ فَإِنَّهُ يَذْهَبُ بِمَآءِ الْوَجْهِ
وَمَهَابَةِ الرِّجَالِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I advise you to stay away from joking with others since this act
removes a persons's worth and honour.”[^12]

10. Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَبْغَضَ خَلْقِ اللٌّهِ عَبْدٌ اتَّقِيِ النَّاسُ لِسَانَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely the worst of creations of Allah is the servant whom other people
are afraid of his tongue (what he says).”[^13]

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 74, pg. 46

[^2]: A short discussion about the pen and its importance - The role of
the pen in the life of human beings: The movement of the pen on paper
records the outcomes of humanity. The victories and defeats of the
society of humanity is contained and preserved in the tips of the pens;
the pen is the protector and safe-guarder of the sciences and knowledge;
it is the assistant to the thoughts of the scholars and researchers; it
is the link of the thoughts of the scholars and the bridge for humanity
which links the past to the present; even the heavens and the earth are
linked through the Divine Tablet and the Pen! The pen is the instrument
which unites people who have been separated by time and space and just
as it is said that all of the great scholars and thinkers of the world
of humanity throughout the entire course of history and in all areas
around the world are gathered in one large library (their thoughts and
beliefs which have been preserved on paper and then published in books
which are then gathered and collected in libraries)! The pen is the
confidant of a person; it is the treasurer of the sciences and the
collector of all the experiments and research of the centuries and ages.
If we see that the Quran has taken an oath by the pen, then it is for
all of these reasons since the Quran only swears and takes an oath by
things which are very great and valuable! The leaders of the faith of
Islam, in various traditions (Wasaaf1il ash-Shia, vol. 18, pg. 56, no.
14 to 20) have emphasized to their companions and close associates to
not rely upon their memory. Rather, they were always instructed to write
down and record the Islamic narrations and Divine sciences and teachings
and to preserve these for the future generations. In Tafsir Majma
al-Bayan (vol. 1, pg. 332) it has been mentioned that some of the
scholars have stated: أَلْبَيَانُ بَيَانَانِ: بَيَانُ اللِّسَانِ، وَ
بَيَانُ الْبَنَانِ و بَيَانُ اللِّسَانِ تَدْرُسُهُ الأََعْوَامِ، وَ
بَيَانُ الأَقْلاَمِ بَاقَ عَلى مُّرِ الأََيَامِ. “Communcation is of two
types: communication with the tongue and communication with the pen. The
communication carried out with the tongue becomes old with the passing
of time and are eventually removed from memory, however the
communication carried out with the pen (that which is written and
recorded) remains for eternity.” Tafsir-e-Namuna (summarized), vol. 24,
pg. 373-376

[^3]: Surat al-Ankabut (29), verse 64

[^4]: Wasail ash-Shia, vol. 8, pg. 533

[^5]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 71, pg. 297

[^6]: Ibid, vol. 71, pg. 286

[^7]: Ibid., vol. 77, pg. 109

[^8]: Ibid., vol. 71, pg. 238

[^9]: Ibid., vol. 71, pg. 17

[^10]: Ibid., vol. 71, pg. 286

[^11]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, pg. 369

[^12]: Ibid., vol. 2, pg. 665

[^13]: Ibid., vol. 2, pg. 323


