Discourse 37: Three Things Which The Muslim Nation Does Not Have The Strength To Bear
=====================================================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ: يَا عَلِيُّ، ثَلاَثٌ لاَ تُطِيقُهَا هٌذِهِ
الأُمَّةِ: أَلْمُوَاسَاتُ لِلأَخِ فِي مَالِهِ وَ إِنْصَافُ النَّاسِ
مِنْ نَفْسِهِ وَذِكْرُ اللٌّهِ عَلى كُلِّ حَالِهِ وَ لَيْسَ هُوَ:
«سُبْحَانَ اللٌّهِ وَ الْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ وَلاَ إِِلٌهَ إِلاَّ اللٌّهُ
وَاللٌّهُ أََكْبَرُ» وَلٌكِنْ إِذَا وَرَدَ عَلى مَا يَحْرُمُ عَلَيْهِ
خَافَ اللٌّهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ عِنْدَهُ وَ تَرْكِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet Muhammad (S) has said, “O' ‘Ali! There are three things
which this nation shall not be able to bear: equality with their brother
in regards to their wealth; giving people their rights; and remembering
Allah (SwT) in any state - and this does not mean saying “Glory be to
Allah and all Praise belongs to Allah and there is no creature worthy of
worship except for Allah.” Rather, whenever they encounter something
which they are prohibited from, they fear Allah, the Noble and Grand, in
regards to that thing and refrain from it.”

This is one of the well-known and very meaningful traditions from the
Prophet (S).

According to this tradition, there are three things which this nation
(the Muslim nation) does not have the strength to bear - in other words,
these are difficult things which not everyone will be able to perform.

1) “Equality” with their brother (or sister)
--------------------------------------------

A person may be able to help others by giving some of their wealth in
the way of Allah (SwT); they may offer Sadaqah; they may give another
person a loan, etc. however to show true equality means that a person
divides his wealth with others, and this is definitely something
difficult!

From this sentence we can deduce that sometimes a person should give out
a portion of his wealth, food, and clothing to others around him in the
way and for the pleasure of Allah (SwT).

One must not be conceited and think that by giving to others, he has
done something very great and important! Rather, even after giving we
must still consider ourselves as being culpable since the station of
“equality and fairness with our brother” is a much higher station and
even higher than self-sacrifice («thar) which we have yet to reach to !

If we have not reached to the level of “equality with our
brother/sister” then at least this theory should have some impact on us
and whatever we are currently offering in help to others should
continue. However still after this, we should feel some sense of
culpability.

In addition, we must not expect anything in return since this form of
help is the smallest action we can do for another Muslim!

The Self-Sacrifice for a Guest
------------------------------

The following tradition has been narrated in Majma’ al-Bayan[^1] that:
“A person came to the Prophet (S) and said to him, 'I am hungry.'  The
Prophet (S) asked a companion to go to his house and bring the man some
food. However, upon checking, those in the house of the Prophet (S)
informed the person that there was no food in the Prophet's house.

The Prophet (S) asked, 'Which of you will keep this man as a guest in
his house (and thus, feed him)?'  A man from amongst the Ansar (those
who had welcomed the Prophet (S) and the companions into Madinah) stood
up and said that he would take care of the man. Thus, the hungry man
made his way to the companion's house.

Upon arriving home, the companion realized that he too had no food
except for a few paltry things that were only enough for his young
children to eat. The companion asked his wife to bring him the food
which they had rserved for their guest and to turn off the oil-lamp. The
man quietly told his wife that, 'Keep the children busy with something
until they go to sleep (keep their mind off of the food and thus, let
them go to sleep without any food).' 

The woman and her husband then sat down on the floor with their guest
and pretended to eat by moving their mouth, however, they actually did
not eat any of the food! The guest thought that they too were eating
(from what he could see and the sound of them chewing food) and thus, he
ate whatever he needed and became satiated.

The family went to bed hungry that night, however the next morning, the
husband and wife came to the Prophet (S). The Prophet (S) looked at them
and without saying a word, smiled and read the following verse of the
Qur\`an (from Suratul Hashr, verse 80):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ يُؤْثَرُونَ عَلى أَنْفُسِهِمْ وَ لَوْ كَانَ بِهِمْ خَصَاصَــةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And they (the Ansar) prefer them (the Muhajirun) over themselves even
if they are in an state of abject poverty!”[^2]

Division of One's Wealth in the Islamic Narrations
--------------------------------------------------

1. It has been narrated from Abu Dharr that he has said, “I heard the
Prophet (S) say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا هُمْ إِخَوَانُكُمْ فَاكْسُوهُمْ مِــــمَّا تَكِسُونَ، وَ
أَطْعِمُوهُمْ مِمَّا تُطْعِمُونَ، فَمَا رَوَى عَبْدَهُ بَعْدَ ذٌلِكَ
إِلاَّ وَ رِدَائُهُ رِدَائَهُ، وَإِزَارُهُ إِزارَهُ، مِنْ غَيْرِ
تَفَاوُتٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2. In the Tafsir of ‘Ali b. Ibrahim we read a tradition in regards to
verses 70 to 72 of Suratul Nahl (16):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَجُوزُ لِلرَّجُلِ أَنْ يَخُصَّ نَفْسَهُ بِشَيْءٍ مِنَ
الْمَأْكُولِ دُونَ عَيَالِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“It is not permissible for a person to prefer some food for himself (and
eat that) and not to feed the  
 same thing to his family.”[^3]

2) Giving People their Rights
-----------------------------

In our previous discussions, we had mentioned the fact that the Islamic
society is one in which rights are given to others, however they are not
taken from others.

By this we mean that if a person owes another person money, then the one
who has taken the loan should go in search of the person whom he owes
the money to (to pay him back). Anytime he finds the person whom he owes
something to, he should fulfill his obligation to that person and thank
Allah (SwT) that He has freed him from being under the obligation of
another human being (through paying back the debt, he has cleared up his
responsibility).

3) The Dhikr of Allah (SwT) in All States
-----------------------------------------

Of the things which all people are responsible for enacting, however not
all are able to, is to remember Allah (SwT) in all states. The
remembering of Allah (SwT) should only be done for one reason which is
to remember Allah (SwT) and this act should have no other incentives
associated with it.

The word Dhikr has three meanings to it: verbal, spiritual and the
applied or practical Dhikr.

The verbal Dhikr is something easy; the Dhikr in the heart which makes
up the spiritual Dhikr is somewhat more difficult; while the Dhikr which
is manifest in one's actions is the most difficult of all!

The Dhikr in one's actions means that in a person's actions in his life,
he recognizes that Allah (SwT) is present and watching - his actions
truly show that he realizes that Allah (SwT) is present all the time.

The Prophet (S) has then said, “And this Dhikr is not in the meaning
of…”

Seeing as how this form of remembrance of Allah (SwT) is the most
important verbal declaration mentioned in the various traditions and has
been emphasized a great deal, the Prophet (S) has stated, “The Dhikr is
not limited to only this (the verbal remembrance of Allah (SwT)).
Rather, the reality of Dhikr is that when a person enters into a
situation where he has the ability to perform a forbidden act, he fears
Allah (SwT) to such an extent that he immediately refrains from
performing the deed that would be transformed into a sin in his
records.”

Therefore, the Dhikr of Allah (SwT) is actually a very valuable
treasure! No matter how much we speak about it, it is still not enough
and in principle, the spirit of the Salat and worship is all contained
within the Dhikr of Allah (SwT)!

By this we mean that in that amount that our attention and focus is in
the Salat and in that amount that we have the presence of heart (hudhur
al-qalb), only that amount is considered as the Salat while the rest of
the prayers (where there is no presence of heart) is just like the skin
of the fruit without the actual fruit!

The main purpose of all forms of worship (‘Ibadat) is the remembrance of
Allah (SwT) as this is the most important factor in protecting the
person who is put face to face with sins.

One who has soiled himself with crimes, transgressions and errors
against his soul and brings disgrace onto himself (through these acts)
is definitely not of those who remembers Allah (SwT).

Truthfully, if he was a person of remembrance of Allah (SwT), then at
the time of coming face to face with a sin, he would fall into the
remembrance of Allah (SwT). Through this remembrance, he would not
become such a person of disgrace and he would not fall into such
misfortunes and these states of dishonour would have been a lesson for
him.

Therefore, if we wish to protect ourselves in the face of committing
sins, then we must constantly be in a state of Dhikr of Allah (SwT) - we
must be one who has developed the habit of ensuring that we do not
forget Allah (SwT).

When one enters into a gathering, he must be sure to remember Allah
(SwT) and this Dhikr of Allah (SwT) would actually be the source of
tranquility and serenity of the person in this world as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلاَ بِذِكْرِ اللٌّهِ تَطْمَئِنَّ الْقُلُوبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Now surely with the remembrance (Dhikr) of Allah are the hearts put at
rest and ease.”[^4]

Short Discussion Regarding Dhikr
--------------------------------

1. What is the Dhikr of Allah and how does it materialize?

Just as Raghib has mentioned in his book, al-Mufradat, the word Dhikr
may sometimes refer to memorizing some information and facts with this
stark difference that the word “حفظ” or hifz (which is also used in the
meaning of memorization) refess to the beginning period of memorization
of something while the word “ذكر” or dhikr is used in reference to the
continuation of this act.

Sometimes, this word is used in the meaning of remembering something -
either a verbal recollection or a remembrance in the heart.

We read in the traditions[^5] that Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلذِّكْرُ ذِكْرَانِ: ذِكْرُ اللٌّهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ عِنْدَ الْمُصيِبَةِ
وَأَفْضَلُ مِنْ ذٌلِكَ ذِكْرُ اللٌّهِ عِنْدَ مَا حَرَمَ اللٌّهُ
عَلَيْكَ فَيَكُونَ حَاجِزاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Dhikr is of two types: the remembrance of Allah, the Noble and Grand,
at the time of tribulations and even greater than this is the
remembrance of Allah (SwT) in regards to that thing which Allah has made
prohibited for you so then this (this form of Dhikr) acts as a barrier
(between the person and that forbidden act).”[^6]

It is because of this reason that in some of the traditions the
remembrance of Allah (SwT) is referred to as the shield and means of
protection (from sins)!

In a tradition from Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) we read that
one day the Prophet (S) turned towards his companions and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِتَّخَذُوا جِئْنَا! فَقَالُوا: يَا رَسُولَ اللٌّهِ، أَمْنَ عَدُوٌّ
قَدْ أَظَلَّنَا؟ قَالَ لاَ، وَلٌكِنَّ مِنَ النَّارِ! قُولُوا سُبْحَانَ
اللٌّهِ وَ الْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ وَ لاَ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ اللٌّهُ وَ اللٌّهُ
أَكْبَرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Take a shield for yourselves.”  The companions said, “O' Messenger of
Allah! (Should we take up this shield) in the face of our enemies who
have surrounded us and who are looking over us (to attack us at any
time?)“  The Prophet replied, “No. Rather, take this shield as a
protection from the hell fire - say: 'Glory be to Allah and all praise
belongs to Allah and there is no creature worthy of worship except for
Allah and Allah is greater than can be described.'”[^7]

A Person who was Constantly in the Dhikr of Allah (SwT)
-------------------------------------------------------

The following example of Prophet Musa (as) is one which we must pay
extra careful attention to, as he was one who was constantly in the
remembrance of Allah (SwT). He had focused his entire attention on His
Presence and called upon Him alone to remove all difficulties and
challenges.

When this Prophet of Allah killed a Coptic man - which was an act
referred to as a “Tark-e-Awla” (leaving a more preferable option) - we
see that he immediately asked Allah (SwT) forgiveness and pardon and
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ إِنِّي ظَلَمْتُ نَفْسِي فَاغْفِرْلِـــــي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He (Musa) said: Surely I have wronged myself, so forgive me.”[^8]

In addition, when he was leaving Egypt, he stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبِّ نَجَّنِي مِنَ الْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He (Musa) said: My Lord save me from the oppressive people.”[^9]

When he reached the city of Madyan, he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ عَسى رَبِّي أَنْ يَهْدِيَنِي سَوَاءَ السَّبِيلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He (Musa) said: Perhaps my Lord may guide me to the straight path…”

When the sheep of (Prophet) Shu’aib (as) were fed, became satiated and
made their way towards the shade, Musa (as) he stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبِّ إِنِّي لِمَا أَنْزَلْتَ إِلـيَّ مِنْ خَيْرِ فَقِيرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He (Musa) said: O' my Lord! I am in need of whatever goodness you can
send to me.”[^10]

Most notably in this last supplication which was read in one of the most
critical junctions in the life of this Prophet, we see that with great
reverence and manners, tempered with tranquility and serenity, he did
not say “O' Allah! I am in need of You removing my difficulties…“ 
Rather, all he asked Allah (SwT) was, “I am in need of Your goodness and
kindness.” [He did not ask for something in specific, rather, he left it
to Allah (SwT) to fulfill whatever He destined for His servant.]

Of course, we should not assume that Prophet Musa (as) only remembered
Allah (SwT) during times of difficulty, as it has been mentioned in the
Tafsir Nur al-Thaqalain[^11] that, “Even when he lived in the palace of
the Pharaoh and was surrounded by all of the material treasures and
blessings, he still did not forget Allah (SwT).”

Thus, in the traditions we read that, “One day, Musa (as) sneezed while
in the presence of the Pharaoh and immediately said, 'All Praise belongs
to Allah, the Lord of the Universe' [أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ رَبِّ
الْعَالَمِينَ].” 

When the Pharaoh heard these words, he became extremely upset and
slapped Musa (as)! Musa (as) grabbed the Pharaoh by his hair and pulled
it at which time, the Pharaoh became even more upset and decided to kill
him, however the wife of Pharaoh convinced Pharaoh that Musa (as) was
only a young child and did not know what he was doing and thus, she was
able to save him from death.[^12]

Remembering Allah (SwT) in All States
-------------------------------------

Whenever the name of Allah (SwT) is taken, an entire universe of
greatness, power, knowledge, and wisdom becomes manifest in the heart of
the human being since He (SwT) is the holder of all of the most
beautiful Names, the highest characteristics, the possessor of all of
perfections and is free from any sort of defect or imperfection.

The constant focus and attention on such a reality (of Allah (SwT)) who
possesses such characteristics and traits guides the soul of a person
towards goodness and purity and helps him keep away from all despicable
acts. In other words, His characteristics seek to become manifest within
the life of the person.

Focusing one's attention on such a worthy Creator brings a sense of
awareness of constantly being within His presence. With this feeling,
the distance between a person and the sins and spiritual pollution is
made great.

Remembering Him (SwT) is a remembrance of vigilance; remembering Him
(SwT) is the remembrance of accountability and reward/retribution;
remembering Him (SwT) is to remember His court of Justice, Paradise and
Hell Fire and such a remembrance is what gives purity to the life and
graces the soul with the Celestial Illumination of Allah (SwT) and
existence.

It is due to this fact that within the Islamic traditions it has
mentioned that everything has a limit to it - except the rememberance of
Allah (SwT) as there is no limit to it!

According to the tradition mentioned in Usul al-Kafi, Imam Ja’far b.
Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا مِنْ شَيْءٍِ إِلاَّ وَلَهُ حَدٌّ يُنْتَهى إِلَيْهِ، إِلاَّ
الذِّكْرُ، فَلَيْسَ لَهُ حَدٌّ يُنْتَهى إِلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There is not a single thing (in the faith of Islam) except that there
is a limit set for it so then when that limit is met, then that act is
complete except for the Dhikr (of Allah) since for this there is no
limit and no end to it.”[^13]

The Imam then said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَرَضَ اللٌّهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ الْفَرَائِضَ، فَمَنْ أَدَّاهُنَّ فَهُوَ
حَدُّهُنَّ، وَشَهْرُ رَمَضَانِ فَمَنْ صَامَهُ فَهُوَ حَدُّهُ،
وَالْحَجُّ فَمَنْ حُجَّ حَدُّهُ، إِلاَّ الذِّكْرَ، فَاِنَّ اللٌّهَ
عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لَمْ يَرْضِ مِنْهُ بِالْقَلِيلِ وَلَمْ يَجْعَلْ لَهُ
حدّاً يُنْتَهى إِلَيْه، ثُمَّ تَلاَ: يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
اذْكُرُوا اللٌّهَ ذِكْراً كَثِيراً وَسَبِّحُوهُ بُكْرَةً وَأََصِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allah, the Glorious and Noble, has obligated the Salat, so then whoever
fulfills this act has fulfilled it to its prescribed amount; the month
of Ramazan too (has a limit) so then whoever fasts the month has
fulfilled the limit; hajj too (has a limit) so then whoever performs the
hajj has fulfilled its limit; however there is no limit set for the
remembrance (dhikr) of Allah.

Surely Allah, the Glorious and Noble, is not content with a small amount
of Dhikr and has not set an end limit for it.”  Then, the Imam (as) read
the verse of the Qur’an which states, {O' you who possess true faith!
Remember Allah an abundantly remembrance (Dhikran Kathiran) and glorify
Him in the morning and at night.}”[^14]

In this same tradition, Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) narrates
from his father, Imam Muhammad b. ‘Ali al-Baqir (as) that he (the 5th
Imam) was one who performed much Dhikr of Allah (SwT) and that anytime
he walked with him, he would be in the Dhikr of Allah (SwT); when he
ate, he would remember Allah (SwT); even when he was speaking to people,
he would not be negligent of the Dhikr of Allah (SwT)…

The 6th Imam ends this tradition by stating the following very
meaningful sentence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْبَيْتُ الَّذِي يَقْرَأُ فِيهِ الْقُرْآنَ، وَيَذْكُرُ اللٌّهَ
عَزَّ وَجَلَّ فِيهِ تَكْثُرُ بَرَكَتُه، وَ تَحْضُرُهُ الْمَلاَئِكَةُ،
وَتَهَرْ مِنْهُ الشَّيَاطِينَ، وَيَضِيءُ لِأَََهْلِ السَّمَآءِ كَمَا
يُضِيءُ الْكَوْكَبُ الدُّرىُّ لِأََِهْلِ الأََرْضِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The house in which the Qur’an is read and in which Allah, the Glorious
and Noble, is remembered will have its blessings multiplied, the Angels
will be present in that house, the Satans will flee from that house and
that house will shine for the people of the heavens just as the stars
sparkle for the people on Earth.”[^15]

This issue is of such importance that in the tradition, the remembrance
of Allah (SwT) has been equated with the collection of all goodness of
this life and the next life just as the Prophet of Allah (S) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَعْطَى لِساناً ذَاكراً فَقَدْ أَُعْطِيَ خَيْرَ الدُّنْـيَا وَ
الأَخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The person who has been given (by Allah) a remembering tongue (to extol
His greatness) has been given goodness of both this life and the
next.”[^16]

The traditions in regards to the importance of the remembrance of Allah
(SwT) are such in number that if we wish to bring them all forth here in
this discussion, it would call for an independent book to be written!

Thus, we close this part of the discussion with a short tradition from
Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) as narrated in Usul al-Kafi:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَكْثَرَ ذِكْرَ اللٌّهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ أَحَبَهُ اللٌّهُ فِي
جَنَّتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The person who remembers Allah, the Glorious and Noble much, Allah will
cover Him with the grace of His shadow in His Paradise.”[^17]

It goes without saying that all of the blessings and goodness which are
accompanied by the remembrance of Allah (SwT) are not related to the
mere verbal attestation and remembrance of Allah (SwT) and the empty
movements of the tongue with no thought, pondering (upon what is being
said) and action (to what is being said). Rather, the purpose of this
remembrance should be to stir the springs of thought and contemplation -
that same thought which would become manifest within the actions of the
person. This has clearly been mentioned in the meaningful tradition (on
this topic).[^18]

The Stages to Traverse in the Dhikr of Allah (SwT)
--------------------------------------------------

In regards to the stages which one must traverse in the Dhikr of Allah
(SwT), one of the commentators of the Qur\`an[^19] has stated:

1. The first stage is the Dhikr of His name, just as has been mentioned
in the Qur\`an in the verse of Suratul Muzammil:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اذْكُرْ إِِسْمَ رَبِّكَ وَ تَبَتَّلْ إِلَيْهِ تَبْتِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And remember the name of your Lord and devote yourself completely to
Him.”[^20]

2. The second stage is that of remembering the Sacred Essence of Allah
(SwT) in the heart, just as we are told:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاذْكُرْ رَبَّكَ فِي نَفْسِكَ تَضَرُّعاً وَخِيفَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And remember your Lord within yourself humbly and fearing…”[^21]

3. The third stage - which is the ultimate level - is one in which a
person ascends higher than just performing the Dhikr of Allah (SwT) and
remembering the status of Lordship which He possesses. Rather, the
person arrives at the state of the Dhikr of all of the characteristics
of Beauty and Munificence of Allah (SwT) which are all present in His
essence, just as we are told:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اذْكُرُوا اللٌّهَ ذِكْراً كَثِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O' you who have true faith, remember Allah, a great deal of
remembering…”[^22]

Thus, we see that the Dhikr of Allah (SwT) continues, traversing one
stage after the other and through this, the person performing this Dhikr
of Allah (SwT) would reach to the pinnacles of perfection.[^23]

The Various Forms of Dhikr
--------------------------

Dhikr is divided up into the Dhikr of the tongue (verbal); Dhikr of the
heart (spiritual); and the Dhikr through one's actions. Thus, whenever
we speak about the Dhikr of Allah (SwT) - which is such a great act - we
must never think that it simply refers to the Dhikr of the tongue (the
verbal form).

Rather, in the Islamic narrations, it is has been clearly mentioned that
in addition to the verbal Dhikr, there is also the Dhikr in the heart
and the Dhikr through one's actions. Thus, when a person is about to
perform a forbidden act, he must fall into the remembrance of Allah
(SwT) and through this, refrain from that act which he is not permitted
to perform.

The ultimate purpose of what we have mentioned is that Allah (SwT) must
be present in all aspects of a person's life and the Celestial
Illumination of Allah (SwT) must take over and encompass a person's
entire life; he must think and reason with this Celestial Illumination
and must put into practice all of His commandments.

A gathering of remembering Allah (SwT) is not a gathering in which a
group of unaware people sit around in a circle and go forth in a mode of
pleasure and recreation while at the same time recite some made-up
incantations and make such an innovation (Bid’ah) in gatherings famous
and well-known (amongst the people). If we read in the traditions that
the Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَادِرُوا إِلـى رِيَاضِ الْجَنَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Make your way towards the gardens of Paradise.”  
 When he was asked:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَا رِيَاضُ الْجَنَّةِ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And what are the gardens of Paradise?”  
 The Prophet (S) replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَلْقُ الذِّكْرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Gatherings of the remembrance (of Allah).”[^24]

His meaning of 'gatherings of remembrance (of Allah (SwT))' [lit. a
gathering where people sit in a circle to remember Allah (SwT)] are
those in which the teachings of Islam are kept alive and ones in which
the instructive discussions and lessons of training (of the person) are
mentioned and talked about in.

In such a gathering, a human is transformed into the true sense of the
word a human and those people who are sinners are purified of their sins
and are put back onto the path of Allah (SwT).[^25]

The Best Forms of Remembrance
-----------------------------

1. The Dhikr of the Morning and Evening
---------------------------------------

In Tafsir Qurtubi[^26] and the Tafsir of Abu'l Futuh Razi[^27] in
regards to verse 64 of Suratul Zumur, there is a tradition from the
Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (as) in which he asked the
Prophet (S) in regards to the meaning of “keys” mentioned in this verse
to which the Prophet (S) replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا عَلِيُّ! لَقَدْ سَئَلْتَ عَنْ عَظِيمِ الْمَقَالِيدِ، هُوَ أَنْ
تَقُولَ عَشْراً إِذَا أَصْـبَحْتَ، وَعَشراً إِذَا أَمْسَيْتَ، لاَ
إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ اللٌّهُ وَاللٌّهُ أَكْبَرُ، وَسُبْحَانَ اللٌّهِ
وَالْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ، وَأَسْتَغْفِرُ اللٌّهَ وَلاَ قُوَّةَ إِلاَّ
بِاللٌّهِ (هُوَ) الأَوَّلُ وَالآخِرَ وَالظَّاهِرُ وَالْبَاطِنُ لَهُ
اَلْمُلْكُ وَلَهُ الْحَمْدُ (يُحْيِي وَيُمِيتُ) بِيَدِهِ الْخَيْرُ
وَهُوَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ. مَنَ كَرَّرَ هٌذِهِ الْكَلِمَاتِ
كُلِّ صَبَاحٍ وَ مَسَاءٍ عَشْرَ مَرَّاتٍ أَعْطَاهُ اللٌّهُ سِـتًّا،
أَحَدَهَا أَنْ يَحْفُظَهُ اللٌّهُ مِنْ شَرِّ الشَّيْطَانِ و
أَتْبَاعِهِ حَتَّى لاَيُسَلِّطُ عَلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O' ‘Ali! Surely you have asked about the greatest of keys! This great
key which you have asked about is that even morning and evening you say
the following ten times: 'There is no creature worthy of worship except
for Allah; Allah is greater than anything which can describe him; all
Glory belongs to Allah and all Praise belongs to Allah and I seek
forgiveness from Allah and there is no power except with Allah and He is
the First and the Last and the Apparent and the Hidden.

To Him is the Dominion and to Him belongs the Praise (He gives life and
death) in His hands is all goodness and He has power over all things.'
The Prophet continued and said, 'Whoever reads this every morning and
night, Allah will grant this person six rewards, one of which is that
Allah will protect him from Satan and the army of Satan so that he
(Satan) is not able to rule over him.”

It goes without saying that merely saying these words and paying lip
service to them is not what will gain the reward. Rather, true faith in
its contents and applying this sentence to one's life is necessary!

It is possible that this tradition may be a subtle reference to some of
the words which make up the most beautiful names of Allah (SwT) and
which make up the Sovereignty and Dominion of Allah (SwT) above the
entire world of creation. [Pay attention to this point][^28]

2. The Dhikr of Allah - “Ya Fattah” [يَا فَتَّاحُ]

In some of the traditions, there has been emphasis placed on the
remembrance through the recitiation of “Ya Fattah” to alleviate
difficulties. This great characteristic of Allah (SwT) which is the
'exaggerative form' of the word “فتح” refers to the power of Allah (SwT)
to remove any difficulty and the ability of Allah (SwT) to remove the
grief and sorrow which a person may have.

In addition, this name also conveys the power of Allah (SwT) to put
forth the means through which victory and success are achieved.

In reality, there is no other who can be referred to as “الفتاح” and the
Key (مفتاح) of all closed doors are in His hands and Power!

Raghib has mentioned the following in his work al-Mufradat in regards to
the word “فتح” that: “Originally, this word meant to remove any sort of
difficulty and tribulation and this is of two types: sometimes it refers
to difficulties which are seen by the eyes such as opening a lock, and
sometimes these difficulties are perceived by the mind such as opening
(and alleviating) the difficulties of grief and sorrow or opening and
discovering the secrets of various forms of science.

In addition, it refers to the arbitration between two individuals and
removing the difficulties of strife and anger which may be between two
individuals.”[^29]

3. Dhikr-e-Yunusiyyah (The Dhikr of Prophet Yunus (as))

Propht Yunus (as) became aware of the situation he was in very quickly
and with his entire presence, turned towards the presence of Allah (SwT)
and sought repentance and asked forgiveness from his “Tark-e-Awla”, in
the presence of the Most Sacred.

At this point, the well-known and meaningful dhikr from the mouth of
Yunus (as) was stated which has been narrated in the Qur\`an in Suratul
Anbiya, Verse 87. Amongst the people of ‘Irfan, it is well known as the
'Dhikr-e-Yunusiyyah':

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَنَادَى فِي الظُّلُمَاتِ أَنْ لاَ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ أَنْتَ سُبْحَانَكَ
إِنِّي كُنْتُ مِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“So then he cried out in the darkness that 'There is no creature worthy
of worship except for You, glory be to You, surely I was of the
oppressors and unjust to my own self.'”  
 This sincere confession tempered with his glorification, along with
grief and remorse was accepted and just as we read in verse 88 of
Suratul Anbiya that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاسْتَجَبْنَا لَهُ وَنَجَّيْنَاهُ مِنَ الْغَمِّ وَكَذٌلِكَ نُـنْجِي
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“So then We answered him (Yunus) and We saved him from the grief and
thus do We always rescue the true believers.”[^30]

4. The Dhikr of “There is no power or strength save with Allah” (لا حول
وَ لا قوة إلا بالله)

In the Tafsir, Majma’ al-Bayan[^31], it has been mentioned that the son
one of the companions of the Prophet (S) - ‘Awf b. Malik - was captured
by the enemies of Islam. The companion went to see the Prophet (S) and
informed him of what had happened and also of his abject state of
poverty and destitution.

The Prophet (S) said to him, “Exhibit your Taqwa (consciousness of Allah
(SwT)), be patient and recite the Dhikr of “لاَ حَوْلَ وَ لاَ قُوَّةَ
إِلاَّ باللٌّهِِ” frequently.”

The companion did as he was told and one day, while he was sitting in
his house, his son came to the door - surprising his father!

The son proceeded to tell his father how at one point, the enemies
forgot about him and thus, he was able to make the best of the
opportunity and run away - not only this, but he was even able to bring
one of the camels of the enemy with him![^32]

The Status of the Dhikr in the Words of Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq
(as)

Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has stated the following in
regards to Dhikr:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ كَانَ ذَاكِراً لِلٌّهِ تَعَالـى عَلى الْحَقِيقَةِ فَهُوَ مُطِيعٌ
وَ مَنْ كَانَ غَافِلاً عَنْهُ فَهُوَ عَاصٍ، وَ الطَّاعَةُ عَلاَمَةُ
الْهِدَايَةِ، وَ الْمَعْصِيَةُ عَلاَمَةُ الضَّلاَلِةِ، وَ أَصْلُهُمَا
مِنْ الذِكْرِ وَ الْغَفْلَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The person who remembers Allah, the Most High in the true sense (of the
word), is (truly) His obedient servant and the one who is negligent of
Him is a sinner. Obedience (to Allah) is a sign of guidance and
disobedience (to Allah) is a sign of misguidance and the source of these
two (states) is the remembrance and negligence (of Allah).”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاجْعَلْ قَلْبَكَ قِبْلَةَ لِسَانِكَ، لاَ تُحَرِّكَهُ إِلاَّ
بِإِشَارَةِ الْقَلْبِ وَ مَوَافِقَةِ الْعَقْلِِ وَ رضى الإِيْمَانَ
فَإِنَّ اللٌّهَ عَالِمٌ بِسِرِّكَ وَ جَهْرِكَ وَكُنْ كَالنَّازِعِ
رُوحَهُ أَوْ كَالْوَاقِفِ فِي الْعَرْضِ الأَكْبَرِ، غَيرَ شَاغِلٍ
نَفْسَكَ عَمَّا عَنَّاكَ مِمَّا كَلَّفَكَ بِهِ رَبُّكَ فِي أَمْرِهِ وَ
نَهْيِهِ وَ وَعْدِهِ وَ وَعِيدِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“So then make your heart the focus of your tongue - do not move it
except at the suggestion of your heart and (do not move it except) with
the approval of your intellect and that pleasure of your faith since
surely Allah is the Knower of that which you hide and that which you
manifest.

Thus, be as the person who is on his death bed and one whose soul is
about to come out of him or like the person who is waiting on the wide
plains (of the Day of Resurrection) for the account of all of his deeds.
Waver between what Allah the High has obligated you to perform from the
commands and the prohibitions and the promises (of reward) and the
warnings (of retribution).”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لاَ تَشْغَلَهَا بِدُونِ مَا كَلَّفَكَ، وَ اغْسُلْ قَلْبَكَ بِمَآءِ
الْحُزْنِ، وَ اجْعَلْ ذِكْرَ اللٌّهِ مِنْ أَجَّلِ ذِكْرِهِ لَكَ
ذَكْرَكَ وَ هُوَ غَنِيُّ عَنْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And do not busy yourselves with things other than what He has ordered
you to perform and wash your heart with the (spiritual) water of grief
and make the remembrance of Allah just like His remembrance of you while
He has no need for you.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَذِكْرُهُ لَكَ أَجَلُّ وَ أَشْهى وَ أَتَمَّ مِنْ ذِكْرِكََ لَهُ وَ
أَسْبَقُ، وَ مَعْرِفَتِكَ بِذِكْرِه لَكَ يُورِثُكَ الْخُضُوعَ و
الإِسْتِحْيَاءُ وَ الإِنْكِسَارُ، وَ يَتَوَلَّدُ مِنْ ذٌلِكَ رُؤْيَةُ
كَرَمِهِ وَ فَضْلِهِ السَّابِقِ، وَ تَصْغَرُ عِنْدَ ذٌلِكَ طَاعَاتِكَ،
وَ إِنْ كَثُرَتْ فِي جَنْبِ مِنَنِهِ، فَتُخَلِّصُ لِوَجْهِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Thus, His Dhikr of you is much more important, greater, more perfect,
clearer and more needed for you than You remembering Him, and it also
has a precendence to it. In addition, your cognizance of His remembrance
of You would grant you humility, shame and humbleness.

Through this knowledge, you would be able to see His previous greatness
and magnitude over you and at this time, all of your worship of Him
would seem trivial and insignificant in the face of the bounties and
greatness of Him over you even if your obedience to Him (up until this
point) was great and even if your actions for Him (up until this point)
were done with sincerity.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ رُؤيَتُكَ ذِكْرُكَ لَهُ تُورِثُكَ: الرِيَاءَ وَ الْعُجْبَ و
السَّفَهَ و الْغَلْظَةَ فِي خَلْقِهِ، وَ إِسْتِكْثَارُ الطَّاعَةِ، وَ
نِسْيَانُ فَضْلِهِ وَ كَرَمِهِ، وَ مَا يَزْدَادُ بِذٌلِكَ مِنَ اللٌّهِ
إِلاَّ بُعْداً وَ لاَ تَسْتَجْلِبُ بِهِ عَلى مَضَيّ الأَيَّامِ إِلاَّ
وَ حَضَّةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“However as for your turning your attention to your Dhikr of Him
(Allah), this will lead you to developing the traits of: pride, conceit,
arrogance and harshness amongst His creations and you would consider
(your) obedience to Him to be great in amount (even though it is
nothing) and would lead you to forget His grace (over you) and His
munificence upon you and this would not increase anything within you
except for (spiritual) distancing from Allah and you would not gain
anything with the passing of time from this except the fear and terror.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ الذِّكْرُ ذِكْرَانِ: ذِكْرٌ خَالِصٌ يُوَافِقُهُ الْقَلْبُ، وَ
ذِكْرٌ صَارِفٌ لَكَ يَنْفَى ذِكْرَ غَيْرِهِ، كَمَا قَالَ رَسُولُ
اللٌّهِ: إِنِّي لاَ أُحْصِي ثَنَاءِ عَلَيْكَ، أَنْتَ كَمَا أَثْنَيْتَ
عَلى نَفْسِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The Dhikr is of two types: the sincere Dhikr of Allah the Most High
which takes place through the approval of the heart and the Dhikr which
flows from you which negates all other forms of Remembrance of other
than Him, just as the Noble Messenger (S) has said that, 'I am not able
to speak Your praise (in the way which You deserve), rather, You are
praised just as You Yourself have praised Yourself.'”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَرَسُولُ اللٌّهِ لَمْ يَجْعَلْ لِذِكْرِهِ لِلٌّهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
مِقْدَاراً، عِنْدَ عِلْمِهِ بِحَقِيقَةِ سَابِقَةِ ذِكْرِ اللٌّهِ عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ لَهُ مِنْ قَبْلِ ذِكْرِهِ لَهُ، فَمِنْ دُونِهِ أَوْلـى، فَمَنْ
أَرَادَ أَنْ يَذْكُرَ اللٌّهَ تَعَالـى فَلْيَعْلَمْ أَنَّهُ عَالِمٌ
يَذْكُرُ اللٌّهُ الْعَبْدَ بِالتَّوْفِيقِ لِذِكْرِهِ، لاَيَقْدِرُ
الْعَبْدُ عَلى ذِكْرِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“So then the Messenger of Allah (S) did not think that his sincere Dhikr
of Allah was of any worth due to his knowledge of the past reality of
the remembrance of Allah, the Noble and Grand, for him (the Prophet)
which took form before his (the Prophet's) remembrance of Him (Allah
(SwT)). Therefore, in those areas where the Messenger of Allah has
negated his own Dhikr of Allah and confirms the Dhikr which has been
carried out by Allah, he is referring to supremacy of the Dhikr.

Thus, whosoever then desires to remember Allah, the Most High, should
truly know that Surely He is the All-Knowing and that Allah remembers
the servants through the Divinely granted success of them remembering
Him and had it not been for this, the servant would never have been able
to remember Him.”[^33]

Explanation: The person who has been in the state of remembrance of
Allah (SwT) and who, in his day to day affairs, does not forget Allah
(SwT), will gradually, become firm and unwavering on the path of true
guidance, obedience and servitude of Allah (SwT) and will keep away from
going against the laws of Allah (SwT).

The minimum level which this remembrance will take form is that the
person's tongue will move and recite the name of Allah (SwT); at the
second stage of the Dhikr of Allah (SwT), the person would protect his
tongue and without the permission of his heart, intellect and faith,
would not speak anything.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذكر حق پاكست و چون پاكى رسيد                      رخت بر بندد برون آيد
پليد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مى گريزد ضدّها از ضدّها                            شب گريزد چون بر
افروزد ضياء
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Reality of Dhikr
--------------------

The true meaning of Dhikr is to remember Allah (SwT) and in one's steps,
movements and actions, to endlessly be in a state of remembrance of
Allah (SwT). The eventual outcome of this form of Dhikr is obedience to
the Lord and to not digress from the path of the intellect and faith.

Another effect is that one fulfills the Divine Responsibilities which
rest upon himself in relation to the commanded and prohibited actions.
The peson also keeps in mind the promises and punishments, the rewards
and chastisements of Allah (SwT). Such a person would also keep away
from sinning and taking the path of rebellion against Allah (SwT)!

Yes, the responsibility of the person who is spiritually travelling
towards Allah (SwT) is that he must always be aware of his mistakes,
transgressions, bad acts and all of the things which result in his own
spiritual weakness and shortcomings. In summary, this can be
accomplished through the two following ways:

One: By paying attention to the particularities and distinctiveness of
one's actions and deeds in the presence of Allah (SwT) and by paying
attention to one's responsibilities. If this is enacted, then the person
would see that all of his actions are actually deficient and imperfect
when compared to the perfect qualities of Allah (SwT).

Two: By paying attention to the grace, kindness, generosity, love,
compassion, blessing and forgiveness of Allah (SwT) since in the face of
these never-ending traits, we see that whatever we bring forth and
perform is still imperfect and with little to no value to it.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و اندرين صورت شمارى بس حقير                   طاعت خود گر چه بنمايد
كثير
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كى بود لايق زما كار حسن                                در بر الطاف
وفضل ذو المنن
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yes, it is through a person being mindful of these two ways that his
humility, love, modesty, servitude, cognizance, shame, and humbleness
would all increase.

The meaning of Allah, the Most High speaking the praise refers to His
Divine Lordship over the Universe and thus the Dhikr  - whether it be
the Divine Lordship over the Universe, a verbal declaration and verbal
praise and other than this, fall into this same category (His Divine
Lordship over the Universe).

Thus, praise which Allah (SwT) makes refers to the: creation,
maintenance, organization, regulation, mercy and all of His other
actions - each of which is a perfect denotation of His great status and
of which the verbal praise of His servants can never reach to.

Thus, in this sentence, the Noble Prophet (S) has even negated his own
Dhikr of Allah (SwT) (لا أحصــى ثناء) which is a pure and sincere
remembrance! He only believes in the worth and value and truthfulness of
the remembrance which Allah (SwT) Himself performs (أثنيت علـى نفسك).

Yes, even though this form of remembrance, at the first stage is
manifest in the Divine Lordship of Allah (SwT) over the entire Universe
and this is the most complete form of remembrance which comes forth from
Allah, the Most High which He himself has introduced as taking shape
through His characteristics of His actions, however at the next level
(of this Dhikr), it is one in which the servants of Allah (SwT) realize
the station which He has and develop knowledge of this. Thus, this then
takes on the form of the remembrance of the heart and by turning their
inner focus to Him and His actions or through the verbal
attestation.[^34]

[^1]: As narrated in Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 9, pg. 260

[^2]: Ibid., vol. 23, pg. 519

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 9, pg. 221

[^4]: Surat al-Rad (13), verse 28

[^5]: Safinat al-Bihar, vol. 1, pg. 484

[^6]: Ibid.

[^7]: Tafsir-e-Namuna (Summarized), vol. 1, pg. 216-217

[^8]: Surat al-Qasas (28), verse 16

[^9]: Ibid., verse 21

[^10]: Ibid., verse 24

[^11]: vol. 4, pg. 117

[^12]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 16, pg. 61 to 62

[^13]: Vol. 2, Book of Supplication, Section on the Dhikr of Allah.

[^14]: Ibid.

[^15]: Ibid.

[^16]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 82, pg. 145

[^17]: Ibid., vol. 66, pg. 324

[^18]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 18, pg. 355 to 358

[^19]: Fakhrud Din al-Razi, vol. 3, pg. 177

[^20]: Surat al-Muzammil (73), verse 8

[^21]: Surat al-Araf (7), verse 205

[^22]: Surat al-Ahzab (33), verse 41

[^23]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 25, pg. 177 to 188

[^24]: Safinat al-Bihar, vol. 1, pg. 486

[^25]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 17, pg. 266 to 267

[^26]: Ibid., vol. 8, pg. 571

[^27]: Ibid., vol. 9, pg. 417

[^28]: Ibid., vol. 19, pg. 424 to 425

[^29]: Ibid., vol. 18, pg. 85

[^30]: Ibid., vol. 19, pg. 156 to 157

[^31]: Ibid., vol. 10, pg. 306

[^32]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 24, pg. 237

[^33]: Mustadrak al-Wasaaf1il, vol. 5, pg. 397, no. 43

[^34]: Misbahul Shariah wa Miftahul haqiqah, (The Lantern on the Path),
pp. 20 to 25


