Discourse 4: Good Of This World And The Next Life
=================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ الصَّادِقُ: حَدَّثَنِي أَبِي عَنْ أَبِـيهِ أَنَّ رَجُلاً مِنْ
أَهْلِ الْكُوفَةِ كَـتَبَ إِلـى الْحُسَينِ بْنِ عَلِيٍّ: يَا سَيِّدِي
أَخْـبِرْنِي بِخَيْرِ الدُّنْـيَا وَ الآخِرَةِ. فَكَتَبَ: بِسْمِ
اللٌّهِ الرَّحْمٌنِ الرَّحِيمِ. أَمَّا بَعْدُ فَإِنَّ مَنْ طَلَبَ رِضى
اللٌّهَ بِسَخَطِ النَّاسِ كَفَّاهُ اللٌّهُ أُمُورُ النَّاسِ وَ مَنْ
طَلَبَ رِضى النَّاسَ بِسَخَطِ اللٌّهِ وَكَلَّهُ اللٌّهُ إِلـى
النَّاسِ، وَ السَّلاَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has said, “My father narrated to
me from his father (as) that a man from Kufah wrote a letter to Husayn
b. ‘Ali (as) which stated: “O' my master! Inform me of a program (to
follow) which would contain the goodness of the world and the next
life.”  The Imam (as) wrote back to the man, 'In the name of Allah, the
Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. Whoever seeks to please Allah by
displeasing the people, surely Allah will be sufficient for him in his
affairs with the people; the person who seeks to please the people
through displeasing Allah, Allah will leave him to the whims of the
people. And peace (be upon you).'”[^1]

In many instances, we see that the pleasure of the Creator and the
creations are at opposite ends of the spectrum. If we seek to earn the
pleasure of the creations, then we end up distancing ourselves from the
pleasure of Allah (SwT); if we seek the pleasure of the Creator, then we
must distance ourselves from the pleasure of the creations. In this
instance, what must one do?

The Imam has stated that, “Hasten towards the pleasure of Allah and do
not sell the anger of Allah for the meagre price of earning the pleasure
of the people. If you truly seek His pleasure, then He will pull the
hearts of the people towards you and will repair the problems that the
people may encounter with you. However, if you seek the pleasure of the
creations, then Allah will leave you at the whims of the people such
that you will have to ask them for whatever you need. You will need to
ask from people who:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَمْلِكُونَ لِأَنْفُسِهِمْ نَـفْعاً وَلاَ ضَرًّا…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“They neither possess the ability to bring any profit nor harm to their
selves…”[^2]

These are people who do not have the power to do anything in this world
of the next.”

The issue mentioned can sometimes be seen within a person's life, and at
other times within the countries of the world. For example, sometimes
there are two friends and one of them requests the other to lie on his
behalf and in this instance, we see that a person is placed in the
dilemma of either pleasing the Creator or pleasing the creation. In this
instance, we are told that we must place the pleasure of the Creator
above all else:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَ عَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ سَيَجْعَلَ لَهُمُ
الرَّحْمٌنُ وُدًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Those who possess true faith and perform righteous deeds, shortly shall
the All-Merciful (al-Rahman) place true love amongst them.”[^3]

One of the great sages has stated that when a person's long-time friend
requests him to do something which goes against the laws of Allah (SwT),
the person should reply, “I am your friend right up until the brink of
the pit of Hell, however I am not going to follow you into it!”

When ‘Aqil, the brother of the Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali b. Abi
Talib (as) requested him for more than his share from the public
treasury, we see that since Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (as) was active in
seeking the pleasure of Allah (SwT), he denied his own brother a
'bonus'! This well-known event is a story that has been taught and
passed down for generations and is a lesson for all of us to learn from.

Sometimes this act (of trying to please the people) is committed at the
level of the society, while at other times the actual leader of the
people is their true faith, meaning that fulfilling the needs of the
people is done under the guidance of gaining the pleasure of Allah
(SwT). However, the world today does not accept this - rather, they say
that the only important thing is that the needs of the people are
fulfilled and because of this belief, things such as homosexual
relations are now being made legal!

We see that the leadership of the people by the people in the meaning
stated above has brought us many wars. The leadership of the American
people revolves around the wants and desires of the American nation; in
England, the government bases their policy on the needs of their people.

Sometimes we see the desires of these two nations differ from one
another since naturally, the material goals of the people differ from
one another. Sometimes, the leadership of the people clash and at
election time, the interests of 25% of the population would take
precedence over 75% of the population - and even in some instances we
see that 51% of the population would be on one side while 49% of the
population would be on the other side, however the desires and wishes of
the 49% of the population are entirely neglected!

However, if mankind permitted religion to lead them, then not only would
the needs of the people of the country be met, rather, even the needs of
the neighbouring countries would also be maintained!

We are all for leadership of the people by the people, and even in Nahj
al-Balagha we read that the masses of people have been encouraged to
lead the society and this can be clearly seen in the letter issued to
Malik al-Ashtar in which the Imam wrote that the majority of people are
supporters of Islam and are his defenders.

Thus if today, the people of the world do not wish to become engulfed in
wars, then the leadership of the people by the people of true faith must
take control and the pleasure of Allah (SwT) alone must be kept in one's
sight.

In the tradition under review, the Imam noticed that the person asking
the question was from Kufah - without doubt, they were people who had
placed the pleasure of the creations above the pleasure of the Creator
and it is for this reason that the Imam said to him (in a part of the
tradition) that, “If you had not left the side of ‘Ali (as) and Imam
al-Hasan (as), then you would have achieved greatness in this world and
the next! However since you did not observe their rights upon you, you
are now trapped in the clutches of the Bani Umayyah.”

Therefore anytime we are given advice, we must look it over, ponder over
it, and then see what Allah (SwT) would want and expect from us!

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 75, pg. 126

[^2]: Surat al-Raad (13), verse 16

[^3]: Surat Mariam (19), verse 96


