Discourse 40: Three Important and Fate Deciding Traits in the Life of a Person
==============================================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ: يَا عَلِيُّ، ثَلاَثٌ مَنْ لَمْ يَتُمَّ عَمَلُه:
وَرَعٌ يَحْجُزُهُ عَنْ مَعَاصِي اللٌّهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ وَ خُلْقٌ
يُدَارِي بِهِ النَّاسِ وَ حِلْمٌ يَرُدُّ بِهِ جَهْلَ الْجَاهِلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet Muhammad (S) has said, “O' ‘Ali! If the following three
traits are not found within a person, then his actions shall not be
complete: Wara’ which prevents him from committing transgressions
against Allah, the Noble and Grand; noble moral traits through which he
acts with tolerance with the people; and forbearance through which he
repels the ignorance of the ignorant person.” 

This tradition is specifically geared towards those who work alongside
others and have regular contact with people in their day to day
activities.

In the beginning of the tradition, the Prophet (S) has stated that, “If
these three characteristics are not present in a person, then there
shall be no prosperity in his actions, he shall not have any positive
outcome in his dealings, and his entire program (of life) shall be
destroyed.”

In reality, these three characteristics are issues that need to be
reviewed and studied in detail - a person's relationship with Allah
(SwT); His relationship with his friends; and his relationship with his
enemies.

Part 1: The relationship between a person and Allah (SwT) is summarized
in: “…Wara’ which prevents him from committing transgressions against
Allah, the Noble and Grand…” 

There are some scholars who have gone through great troubles to define
the word Wara’ and its scope, however to keep this discussion brief we
state that Wara’ is a state which results in a person keeping himself
away from performing sins and this is the same state which we refer to
as being 'just' (possessing the state of ‘Adalat). The habit or
second-nature of Wara’ does not guarantee 100% protection (from sins),
since if it was a 100% guarantee, then that would result in complete
‘Ismah - immunity from all sins.

We can better explain this issue by presenting the following example.
For some people, the road to performing sins is a smooth and paved route
which which they are able to traverse with no difficulty. However, there
are others who find obstacles while traveling on the road - things such
as barbed wire, deep valleys, rough rocks and other such things which
make it difficult for them to travel the road of sins and actually
prevent them from moving on this path.

The state of Wara’ are the obstacles which prevent a person from
committing sins. In other words, the path of sins is one which the
people of Wara’ find very difficulty to travel upon and they find
themselves faced with numerous impediments as their inner strength seeks
to pull them away from this road - the state of being of Wara’ and
‘Adalah.

Question: How does a person know if he possesses the habit and
second-nature of ‘Adalah - justice?

Answer: It is actually very easy to recognize this trait since:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الإِنْسَانَ عَلى نَفْسِهِ بَصِيرَةٌ وَ لَوْ أَلْقى مَعَاذِيرَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely mankind is witness over his own self even if he puts up
excuses.”[^1]

If in the face of being able and needing to lie, backbite, earn wealth
from forbidden sources, etc… a person sees that there is a force which
is preventing him from these things, then he should know that this
hidden force is nothing other than Wara’ and Taqwa.

However if he is free in his actions and if his eyes, ears, tongue and
all other parts of his body are without limits and restraints, then it
is clear that he has no Wara’ and Taqwa! Without doubt, the person who
does not possess Taqwa will not see fruition in any of his endeavours.

Although it is possible that such a person may temporarily be successful
in some of his endeavors, however in the end, he will fall flat on his
face in shame! Thus, in addition to having knowledge, we must also seek
to acquire Taqwa and this is the first responsibility which all of us
have.

In his work, Mustamsik al-’Urwatul Wuthqa, the late Ayatullah al-hakim
stated that, “The level of Taqwa which a Marja’ Taqlid must possess is
different than the Taqwa which the 'common people' must have. The
‘Adalah which he (the Marja’) possesses must be at a very high level and
if not, then he will fall prey to sins, since the more the knowledge and
status a person acquires within the society, the more the danger of him
committing sins.

Thus in summary, in the same proportion that the pull towards sins
becomes stronger (through a higher status in the society), the more the
power of refraining from these sins must become stronger in the person.”

Part 2: The relationship between a person and his friends: “…noble moral
traits through which he acts with tolerance with the people…” 

As we know, everyone has his or her own taste and style, and normally
they can be grouped under the following thought:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَاحِبُ الْحَاجَةِ لاَ يُرى إِلاَّ حَاجَتَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The person who has a need will not see anything other than the need
which he has (and having that fulfilled).”

Thus, when a difficulty arises, a person would not see the difficulties
of anyone other than himself and would actually expect that everyone
should focus their attention on him and his problems!

The person who wants to be considered as one of the leaders of the
society has a Divinely-granted calling which can not be fulfilled except
through his noble ethical traits. In other words, such a person must be
lenient with the people and must be ready to bear his friends, their
expectations and their harassment of him since in this situation, he
must observe patience and must bear the difficulties.

The person who is granted a higher status in the society would realize
that such an issue would be seen more in his life and it is just like
that person who grabs the hand of the scholars and leaders of the
society to kiss it. However when he is told not to grab the hand, he
would say, “I simply want to kiss his hand (out of respect for him).” 
When they are further told that if they grab the person's hand in that
fashion that they may break it, they would retort and state, 'It doesn't
matter if it breaks! It is he who wanted to reach to this station (and
thus, he must by ready to put up with these inconveniences!)'

We must learn how to be lenient and this can best be seen in the lives
of the true servants of Allah - the Infallibles (as). It was they, who
in the face of evil, showed goodness to the opposing party and treated
them with a good demeanor resulting in their opponents being humbled and
submissive!

With this said, we must learn how to interact with people - and what
better way than through the conduct of the Noble Prophet of Islam (S).

An Example of the Etiquette of the Prophet (S)
----------------------------------------------

Even though the victory of the Prophet of Islam (S) was through the help
and assistance of the Divine, however there are many apparent factors
that were also at play - one of the most important of these being the
ethical traits of the Prophet (S) that attracted others to him.

He possessed such lofty humanistic characteristics and noble ethical
traits that even the hard-headed enemies were captivated by his morals
and were forced to submit to him! In addition, those close to him were
also attracted to him. If we refer to the etiquette and morals of the
Prophet (S) as being his miracle, then we would definitely not have
overstated the fact!

An example of this ethical miracle can be seen in the victory (fath) of
Makkah. When the blood-thirsty and revenge-seeking polytheists were
working crimes and transgressions (against the Muslims) and had been
fighting against the faith of Islam and even the Prophet (S) himself for
many years, were put face to face with the Muslims and were finally
thrown in the grips of the believers, we see that the Noble Prophet (S),
going against what all of his friends and enemies thought he would do,
ordered the Muslims to forgive all of the polytheists of Makkah - thus,
all of their crimes were forgotten! It is due to this fact that this
verse of the Qur’an became manifest during the lifetime of the Prophet
(S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَدْخُلُونَ فِي دِينِ اللٌّهِ أَفْواجاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And you see people entering into the faith of Allah inn groups…”

The books of tafsir, history and even the story books are full of events
in relation to the good demeanor, forgiveness, mercy, altruism,
self-sacrifice and consciousness of Allah (SwT) which the Prophet (S)
displayed. However it is enough for us to state that in the tradition
from Husayn b. ‘Ali B it has been mentioned that he said, “I asked my
father the Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali b. Abi Talib B about the
characteristics of the Prophet (S) and his etiquette and my father, in a
very detailed manner, explained to me by stating…” 

In this long tradition, it has been mentioned that, “The Prophet (S) was
always cheerful and smiling with those whom he was in the company with,
and was always found to be gentle and soft-spoken. He was never seen to
be angry, hard-hearted, rude, foul speaking, picking faults of others,
nor excessively praising anyone. Not a single person was ever made to
feel hopeless by him and anyone who entered his house did not leave
disparaged.

There are three things that he kept away from himself: arguing with
others, speaking too much and entering into things which were none of
his business.

There are two things which he kept away from in relation to the people:
he never ridiculed or rebuked people and he never went forth to seek out
the slips, hidden mistakes and errors of the people.

It is only in relation to that area in which the Divine reward of Allah
(SwT) was possible did he speak. When he spoke, his words had such an
impact on the hearts of the people that everyone present would remain
quiet and did not move an inch and it is only when he stopped speaking
and remained quiet did they begin to speak.

However it is also seen that while in his presence, those around him did
not indulge in arguments or wrangling… Anytime a stranger or un-aware
person began to speak with anger and asked him for something, he would
bear that person's attitude with patience and would tell his companions,
'Anytime you see a person who has some need, ensure that you fulfill it
for him.'  He never cut anyone's speech short and waited for the person
to finish what he wanted to say.”

Yes! If the noble ethical traits and Divinely granted persona of the
Prophet (S) was not there, then the backwards, ignorant ‘Arab nation and
the angry, hard-lined ‘Arabs would not have come into the faith of Islam
and would have been the manifestation of the verse which reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ نْفَضُّوا مِنْ حَوْلِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…they would have dispersed from around you (Muhammad)…”

How good it would be that this Islamic etiquette is today, brought back
to life and instilled within the life of every single Muslim, the
greatness which is exemplified in the morals and etiquette of the
Prophet (S)!

In this regards, the narrations - whether in regards to the Prophet (S)
or the general responsibilities of all Muslims - are replete with words
of guidance. In this section, we shall narrate some of these traditions
as have been mentioned in Majma’ al-Bayan:

1. It has been narrated that the Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِِِنَّمَا بُعِثْتُ لاُتَمِّمَ مَكَارِمَ الأَخْلاَقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely I was appointed (to a Prophet) only to perfect the noble ethical
traits.”  
 In this tradition we see that one of the main goals of the appointment
of the Prophet (S) was to perfect and complete the great ethical values.

2. In another tradition from the same individual we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا الْمُؤْمِنُ لِيُدْرِكَ بِحُسْنِ خُلْقِهِ دَرَجةَ قَائِمِ
اللَّيْلِ وَ صَائِمِ النَّهَارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely the true believer, through his noble ethical traits, shall reach
to the stage similar to those who stand up in the night (in prayer) and
fast during the day.”

3. The Prophet (S) has also stated that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا مِنْ شَيْءٍ أَثْقَلَ فِي الْمِيزَانِ مِنْ حُسْنِ الْخُلْقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There is not a single thing which is heavier in the scale of (goods)
deeds than a good demeanor.”

4. The Prophet (S) has also told us that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَحَبَّكُمْ إِلـى اللٌّهِ أَحْسَنُكُمْ أَخْلاَقاً أَلْمَوْطُؤنَ
أَكْنَافاً، أَلَّذِينَ يَأْلَفُونَ وَ يُؤْلِفُونَ. وَ أَبْغَضُكُم
إِلـى اللٌّهِ أَلْمَشَّاؤُونَ بِالنَّمِيمَةِ، أَلْمُفَرِّقُونَ بَيْنَ
الإِخَوَانَ، أَلْمُلْتَمِسُونَ لِلْبَرآءِ الْعَثَرَاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The most beloved of you to Allah is the one who has the best etiquette,
the most humble and modest, is attracted to other people (due to the
morals) and whom other people are also attracted to (due to his morals).
The worst of you to Allah is the person who indulges in gossiping, makes
divisions between brothers, and tries to find faults in those people who
are free of error.”

5. The Messenger of Allah (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّكُمْ لَنْ تَسَعُوا النَّاسَ بِأَمْوَالِكُمْ فَسَعُوهُمْ بِـبَسْطِ
الْوُجُوهِ و حُسْنِ الْخُلْقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely you can never answer the needs of the people with your wealth,
thus, answer them through your cheeriness and good demeanor.”[^2]

6. It has been narrated from Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) from
his forefathers that the Messenger of Allah (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيْكُم بِحُسْنِ الْخُلْقِ، فَإِنَّ حُسْنِ الْخُلْقِ فِي الْجَنَّةِ
لاَ مَحَالَةَ، وَ إِيَّاكُمْ وَ سُوءُ الْخُلْقُ، فَإِنَّ سُوءَ
الْخُلْقِ فِي النَّارِ لاَ مَحَالَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I advise you to have a good demeanor since surely the person with a
good demeanor shall necessarily be in Paradise and I advise you to
refrain from having a negative demeanor since surely the person with
negative ethical traits will necessarily be in the Hell-fire.”

7. Jabir b. ‘Abdullah al-Ansari has narrated from Imam Muhammad b. ‘Ali
al-Baqir (as) that he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَبَسُّمُ الرَّجُلِ فِي وَجْهِ أَخِيهِ حَسَنَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A person smiling in the face of his brother is a good deed.”[^3]

8. Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلتَّبَسُّمُ فِي وَجْهِ الْمُؤْمِنِ الْغَرِيبِ مِنْ كَفَّارَةِ
الذُّنُوبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Smiling in the face of the true believer who is a stranger (in a land
which is not his home) is a penitence for one's sins.”[^4]

9. It has also been related from Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (as) that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِشَاشَةُ الْوَجْهِ عَطِيَّةٌ ثَانِيَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A cheery face is a second gift.”[^5]

3. The relationship between a person and his enemies: “…and forbearance
through which he repels the ignorance of the ignorant person.” 

Even in the face of ignorant people, a person must not show anger and
rage since in Islam, anger and rage are limited to certain instances.

We must learn from the Qur’an as there are 114 chapters and all of them,
with the exception of one (Suratul Tawbah) start with the words
“al-Rahman” or the Most Merciful and “al-Rahim” or the Most
Compassionate. Thus, in the face of our enemies, as much as we are able
to do and without them taking unfair advantage of us, causing us
difficulties and overpowering us, must show patience and forbearance.

Who is the Forbearing (halim) one?
----------------------------------

In regards to the explanation of one who is halim, we are told that:
“This is a person who, even though is able to do something, does not go
forth to perform it before its time and does not make haste in regards
to punishing a guilty person for his crime. He (SwT)s one who has a
spiritually large soul and is in complete control over his emotions.”

In his work al-Mufradat, Raghib has stated that, “hilm means to maintain
one's composure during a period of anger. Since this state of being
comes forth through a person's intellect and cognizance, sometimes this
trait (of forbearance) is referred to as a person's intellect and
cognizance.”[^6]

The halim and Forbearing Person in the Islamic Narrations
---------------------------------------------------------

1. The Noble Prophet (S) was once passing by a group of people, amongst
who was a very strong person who was able to lift large stones. Those
around this man referred to him as a very strong person and were amazed
at his weight lifting abilities.

The Noble Prophet (S) asked these people, “What is this gathering for?” 
The people replied that they were watching a very strong and powerful
weightlifter. The Prophet said to them, “Should I not tell you of the
one who is even stronger than this person?”  The Prophet (S) then said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَجُلٌ سَـبُّهُ فَحَلُمَ عَنْهُ، فَغَلَبَ نَفْسَهُ، وَ غَلَبَ
شَيْطَانَهُ وَ شَيْطَانَ صَاحِبُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The person who is even stronger than this weightlifter is the one who
when is cursed or sworn at, is able to show forbearance and is
victorious over his own soul (and desires) and is victorious over his
Satan while the Satan is alongside him.”

2. Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تُمَارِيَنَّ حَلِيماً وَ لاَ سَفِيهاً فَإِنَّ الْحَلِيمَ
يُقَلِّيكَ وَالسَّفِيهَ يُؤْذِيكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Never argue with a person who has forbearance nor with a foolish person
since surely the forbearing person shall take in whatever you tell him
(and bear it), while the foolish person shall bug you for arguing with
him.”[^7]

Hilm (an extreme form of patience) and the Halim in the words of Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as)]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحِلْمُ سِرَاجُ اللٌّهِ يَسْتَضِيءُُ بِهِ صَاحِبُهُ إِلـى
جَوَارِهِ، وَ لاَ يَكُونُ حَلِيماً إِلاَّ الْـمُؤَيَّدُ بِأَنْوَار
ِالْمَعْرَفِةِ وَالتَّوْحِيدِ وَالْحِلْمُ يَدُورُ عَلى خَمْسِ
أَوْجُهُ: أَنْ يَكُونَ عَزِيزاً فَيَذِلُّ، أَوْ يَكُونَ صَادِقاً
فَيُتَّهَمْ، أَوْ يَدْعُوا إِلـى الْحَقِّ فَيَسْتَخَفَّ بِهِ ، أَوْ
أَنْ يُؤذَى بِلاَجُرْمٍ، أَوْ أَنْ يُطَالِبَ بِالْحَقِّ
فَيُخَالِفُوهُ، فَإِذَا أَتَيْتَ كُلاَّ مِنْهَا حَقَّهُ فَقَدْ
أَصَبْتَ. وَ قَابِلَ السَّفِيَةَ بِالإِِْعَرَاضِ عَنْهُ وَتَرْكِ
الْجَوَابِ يَكُنِ النَّاسُ أَنْصَارَكَ، لأَنَّ مَنْ جَاوَبَ
السَّفِيَّهَ: فَكَأَنَّهُ قَدْ وَضَعَ عَلى النَّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Forbearance is the torch of Allah and through the light of it, the
person is brought closer to His presence. A person can never become a
halim (one with forbearance) except through assistance with the
Celestial Illumination of Monotheism and Cognizance (of Allah).

Forbearance comes about through the following five conditions: in that
instance in which a person has the ability to show greatness however he
humbles himself; when he is speaking the truth however he is charged
with lying; when he invites others to the Truth however the people
ridicule him; the time when others accuse of him sinning while he is
innocent; the time when he asks other people for his right, however they
oppose him.

If you give all of those (five points mentioned) their right, then you
have done the right thing. Respond to the foolish person by paying no
attention to him and by not answering him. Thus, by doing so, people
will be your supporters, because the person who answers the fool as the
like one who has placed himself in the fire.”

Summary
-------

The trait of forbearance is the opposite of anger and it is through
patience, humility and humbleness that a person is able to gain
forbearance.

The traits of humility and humbleness can not be achieved except through
realizing the truth of Monotheism and cognizance of the greatness,
magnitude and power of Allah, the High. Since the person recognizes
Allah (SwT) the all-Powerful as the only cause (of all effects in the
Universe) and all-Encompassing and the Sole Assistant and True Ruler
over all creations, then naturally he would keep the traits of pride,
self-conceit and arrogance far from himself and would seek to show his
servitude, humility, humbleness, obedience, lowness, submission, leaving
everything up to Allah's will, with complete contentment and patience.

This is what is meant in the noble traditions about the status of
knowledge coupled with forbearance - meaning that level and form of
knowledge with is coupled with humility and humbleness and which keeps
the traits of pride, self-conceit and arrogance far away from a person.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صد هزاران حلم دارند اين گروه                  هر يكى حلمى از آنها چو
كوه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حلمشان بيدار را ابله كند                          زيرك صد چشم را گمره
كند
  </p>
</blockquote>

 

[^1]: Surat al-Qiyamat (75), verse 15

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 71, pg. 394

[^3]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, pg. 188

[^4]: Jami al-Akhbar, pg. 107

[^5]: al-Ithna al-Ashariyyah, pg. 20

[^6]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 19, pg. 110

[^7]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, pg. 301


