Discourse 5: A Noble End
========================

At the end of the Ziyarat of Sayyidah Fatimah Ma’sumah b. Musa al-Kadhim
(as) we address Allah (SwT) and pray:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
… وَ أَسْئَلُكَ أَنْ تَخْـتِمَ لِي بِالسَّعَادَةِ فَلاَ تَسْـلُبْ
مِنِّي مَا أَنَا فِيهِ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O' Allah! I ask you for a noble end (to my life) and do not take away
(the true faith, security and Your consciousness) which I possess.”

Based on this line, we would like to discuss a tradition which speaks
about having a noble end to this life, as this is a very important
issue.

Sometimes, a person may live a very prosperous life, traversing the path
of the truth, however something may happen and the end of his life would
be filled with disbelief, sins and open rebellion! It is also possible
that a person lives a life of sin, however he is then given the
opportunity to change before his life ends and turn into a person such
as hur b. Yazid al-Riyahi! He may become such a person that within the
course of a few hours, he changes and becomes one whom people stand in
front of and proclaim:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِأَبِي أَنْــتُمْ وَ أُمِّي!
  </p>
</blockquote>

“May my father and mother be sacrificed for you!”

It is not only us, rather, even the Infalliables (as) stand in front of
the graves of such martyrs and say this line!

Having a good end to this life can be accomplished in various ways and
there is a tradition in Mizan al-hikmah that has been narrated from
‘Uyun al-Akhbar al-Riza in which this issue has been alluded to:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ الإِمَامُ الصَّادِقُ لِبَعْضِ النَّاسِ: إِنْ أَرَدْتَ أَنْ
يَخْتِمَ بِخَـيرِ عَمَلِكَ حَتّى تَقْبِضَ وَ أَنْتَ فِي أَفْضَلَ
الأَعْمَالِ فَعَظِّمِ لِلٌّهِ حَقَّهُ أَنْ تُبَذِّلَ نِعَمَائِهِ فِي
مَعَاصِيهِ وَ أَنْ تَغْـرُ بِحِلْمِهِ عَنْكَ وَ أَكْرِمْ كُلَّ مَنْ
وَجَدْتَهُ يَذْكُرُ مِنَّا أَوْ يَـنْـتَحِلَ مُوَدَّتِنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has said, “If you wish to have a
good ending (from the life of this world) and that your soul is taken
from you (while you are) in the best of states, then do not use the
blessings of Allah to commit transgressions. If you have performed a sin
and Allah has not yet punished you for it, then do not be proud at His
forbearance. Consider any one who narrates our (the Ahlu'l Bayt's) words
as being a noble person and one who accepts us and has intense love for
us.”[^1]

In this tradition, the Imam has stated, “You should perform three tasks
so that your end (in this life) will be a righteous one. First off,
whatever blessings Allah has given to you must not be used to transgress
His laws.”

In reality, this part of the tradition points to the issue we are told
that, “O' you who are incessantly transgressing - wake up! Why are you
taking the blessings of Allah and using them in disobedience! Your life,
wealth, all of the organs of your body, etc… are all blessings from
Allah, and yet you use them to perform sins! Truly this is something
despicable!”

The second point mentioned is, “When you commit a sin and Allah, through
His patience and forbearance gives you the opportunity to repent and
turn back to Him, do not use that occasion to feel proud and arrogant
and think to yourself that you  have done something good!”

The third point mentioned is, “Those who have a strong affection for the
Ahlu'l Bayt (as), are their Shi’a (true followers) and are continuously
speaking about them, must be respected.”

Definitely, it is through observing these commandments that one will
have a righteous end.

A person does not know when he will leave this world, and thus how good
it would be were he to die while performing righteous deeds within
Masjidul haram or one of the sanctuaries of the A\`immah (as)!
Conversely, how bad it would be if he were to leave the world in a state
of open disobedience to Allah (SwT)!

All of the great scholars feared their end and the actions that they
would be performing at the time of death and thus, they always asked
Allah (SwT) for a good end to come to them when they die. The reason for
this being so crucial is that the most important thing must be the final
page of our deed of records and what is written on it.

Thus, we must always entrust ourselves to Allah (SwT), and if we fall
prey to sins, we must immediately ask forgiveness for them!

[^1]: Mizan al-hikmah, no. 4621


