Discourse 7: Commentary Of “Keep Us On The Straight Path”
=========================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي تَفْسِيرِ قَوْلِ اللٌّهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ ) إِهْدِنَا الصِّرَاطَ
الْمُسْـتَـقِيمَ ( يَقُولُ الصَّادِقُ: أَرْشِدْنَا إِلـى الطَّرِيقِ
الْمُؤَدِّي إِلـى مَحَـبَّتِكَ، وَ الْمُبَلِّغِ دِيـنِكَ، وَ
الْمَانِعِ مِنْ أَنْ نَـتَّبِعَ أَهْوَائَنَا فَنُعْـتَبَ، أَوْ
نَأْخُذَ بِآرَائِـنَا فَنَهْلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the exegesis of the words of Allah, the Noble and Grand, (Keep us on
the Straight Path (as-Sirat al-Mustaqim)), [Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad]
as-Sadiq (as) said that this means, “Guide us to the path whose result
is Your love and which reaches to Your religion (complete code and way
of life) and which would prevent us from following our lower desires or
in which we would take other views and opinions (over Yours) which would
result in our destruction.”[^1]

In the exegesis of this verse of the Qur\`an which we read a minimum of
ten times within a 24 hour period, Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as)
has stated the following points:

1. The first sign of the Straight Path is that it leads to the love of
Allah (SwT). If day after day, our love for Allah (SwT) increases, then
this is a sign that we are on the Straight Path.

2. The Straight Path is that which makes us reach to the religion of
Allah (SwT) and the truth of His teachings. If we see that, gradually,
we are becoming closer to the truths of the faith, then it should be
clear that we are on the Straight Path.

3. The Straight Path is the road that prevents us from following our
lower, base desires and our personal opinions and judgements.

Therefore, if we see that we have these three characteristics within
ourselves, then we should know that we are definitely on the Straight
Path.

On the other hand, if we see that there is no effect of the love of
Allah (SwT) in our being or that our sincerity and presence of heart in
the Salat is becoming less, then it is clear that we have gone astray
from the Straight Path.

In addition, if we see that there is no increase in our knowledge in
regards to the Usul (fundamental beliefs) or the Furu’ (practical
actions) of the religion of Allah (SwT), then it is perfectly clear that
we have lost our direction from the Straight Path!

We seek refuge in Allah (SwT) that we, due to our lower desires, destroy
the color of the faith and our religious responsibilities as this is
something very dangerous!

When we stand for the Salat, we must seek guidance to the Straight Path
from Allah (SwT) with our entire presence and must also ask for an
increase in love for Him to be instilled within our hearts.[^2]

[^1]: Masnad al-Rida, vol. 1, pg. 314

[^2]: A question may come up that: What is the Straight Path (siratul
Mustaqim) and secondly, why is it that we are constantly seeking
guidance to the Straight Path from Allah (SwT) - are we currently
misguided? Furthermore, supposing that these words of ours are true,
then what about the Prophet (S) and the Aa’immah (as) who are examples
of perfect human being - what does it mean in relation to them? First,
the Straight Path is the path of purity and goodness; the path of
justice and equality and the path of true faith and righteous actions.
Secondly, in response to the question raised, we must state that: While
a person is traversing upon the path of guidance, there is a fear that
at any moment, he may slip off of the path and become misguided. It is
because of this fact that we must resign ourselves to our Lord and ask
Him to keep us firm and steady on the Straight Path. In addition,
travelling upon the path of guidance is the path towards perfection upon
which, stage by stage, a person passes through the stages of
difficulties so that he can reach to a higher level. We also know this
fact that the paths towards perfection are limitless and that they lead
to the Limitless Entity. Therefore, there is no room for amazement that
even the Prophets and Aaf1immah used to ask Allah (SwT) for guidance to
the Straight Path (siratul Mustaqim) since it is only Allah (SwT) who is
the Purely Perfect Entity and without exception, all others are
travelling upon the path to reaching complete perfection. Thus, what
harm is there if these personalities also ask Allah (SwT) to reach to a
higher level of perfection!?! (Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 1, pg. 46)


