Chapter 3 : On Wayfaring in the Quest of Perfection, and the States of the Wayfarer
===================================================================================

This chapter consists of six sections:

Section one: on solitude (khalwah)
Section two: on contemplation (tafakkur)
Section three: on fear (khawf)
Section four: on-hope (raja')
Section five: on patience (sabr)
Section six: on thankfulness (shukr)
Section One: On Solitude

God, the Exalted, says:

And leave alone those who take their religion for a pastime and a jest,
and whom the life of the world has deceived .... (6:70)

In the sciences of reality it has been established that every being
that has the preparedness to receive Divine effusion (fayd-e ilahi)
cannot be deprived of it when the preparedness exists and any obstacles
are absent. However, one can seek the benefit of Divine effusion only
when one knows two things. First, one should have convinced belief and a
faith free of doubt in the existence of that effusion. Secondly, he
should know that the existence of this effusion in every being will lead
to its perfection.

The knowledge of these two matters is at all times an essential part of
preparedness for receiving that effusion.

Now that this preliminary fact is known, it may be stated that the
seeker of perfection, after acquiring preparedness, is now obliged to
remove the obstacles. The biggest of these obstacles are the unnecessary
engagements that direct the soul's attention toward other-than-God and
keep it from attending fully to its real goal. These preoccupations
pertain either to the external senses, or the inner perceptual
faculties, or some of the vital faculties, or illusory thoughts (afkar-e
majazi, as opposed to waridat-e haqiqi, mentioned hereafter).

As to the outer senses, their preoccupation lies in infatuation with
viewing attractive forms and shapes, listening to harmonious sounds and
[pursuing] other objects of smelt, taste and touch.

As to the inner perceptual faculties, their preoccupation lies in
imagining forms and states that absorb attention. It may be an imaginary
love, or enmity, an exaggerated delight or an underscored loss, an
imagined order or disorder, or some memory of a past condition, or the
thought of some object of desire, such as wealth and status.

As to the vital faculties their preoccupation may be caused by grief,
fear, jealousy, or shame, anger or lust, or some treachery, an expected
pleasure, or the hope of overpowering some enemy or avoiding something
painful.

As to illusory thoughts, preoccupation with them lies in reflecting on
insignificant matters, or devoting oneself to some non-beneficial
science or anything preoccupation with which keeps one from one's
desired goal.

Khalwah means the avoidance of all these obstacles. Hence one seeking
khalwah should try to be free of inward and outward sensory
preoccupations and to discipline his animal faculties, so that they
don't divert him toward things which, being compatible with these
faculties, prompt him to avoid that which is not attuned to them. He
should refrain totally from illusory thoughts, which are thoughts whose
goal is attainment of good things of the life of the world and the
Hereafter. The good things of worldly life are ephemeral, and as to the
goods of the Hereafter, their goal is the attainment of lasting
pleasures for the ego seeking them.

After removing the outer obstacles and freeing the inner self from
preoccupation with anything other than Allah, one should direct all his
concern and his undivided intention to being watchful over the
happenings of the Unseen' (sawanih ghaybi) and being vigilant over real
intuitions (waridat-e haqiqi). That is called contemplation (tafakkur),
which shall be dealt with in a separate section which follows.

**Section Two: On Contemplation**

God, the Exalted and the Glorious, says:

Haven't they pondered within themselves? God created not the heavens
and the earth, and that which is between them, except with the Truth ...
? (30:8)

Although many meanings have been ascribed to [the term] tafakkur, their
essence is that contemplation is an inward journey of humanity from the
preliminaries (mabadi) to the goals (maqasid). The same sense is
ascribed to nazar in the terminology of scholars. None can make the
transition from deficiency to perfection without undertaking this
journey, and hence it has been said that the most essential of
obligations is contemplation and thought. The instances of encouragement
given to contemplation in the [Qur'anic] Revelation are countless:

And in that are signs for a people who think. (13:3)

And it has been stated in hadith:

An hour's contemplation is better than seventy years of worship. 15

One should know that the starting point from where this journey should
commence are 'the horizons and the souls' (afaqq wa anfus; 41:53). It is
a rational journey (sayr-e istidlali: lit. 'evidence-seeking journey')
guided by the signs (ayat) pertaining to each of the two. That is, the
wisdom found in every particle of these two realms of being (kawn)
guides to the greatness and perfection of their Originator, until one
witnesses the light of His creativity in every individual particle:

We shall show them Our Signs on the horizons and in their selves until
it is manifest unto them that it is the truth. (41:53).

And after that is attaining to the witness of Divine Glory over
everything else from among the creation:

... Does it not suffice that thy Lord is witness over all things?
(41:53)

so that its manifestation in every particle is disclosed.

As to the 'signs on the horizons,' they pertain to the knowledge of all
existents apart from God as they really are, and the wisdom in each
being, perceivable in accordance with human capacity, such as [is
disclosed by] the science of astronomy, the [study oft the heavens, the
stars and the motions and configurations of each of them, the
measurements and dimension of bodies and their properties, the science
of the lower world, the compositions and interactions of elements in
respect of form and quality,

the formation of dispositions, the composition of mineral, plant and
animal constitutions and formations, the celestial and terrestrial
spirits, the sources of motion of each of them and that which occurs in
them and is caused by them of the contraries and opposites, as well as
their specific and common properties, and the relevant sciences of
numbers, quantities, and that which pertains to them.

As to the signs within the soul,' they pertain to the sciences of the
bodies and the souls, known through the study of anatomy of simple
tissues, such as bones, muscles, nerves, and veins and that which is
beneficial for them, such composite organs as the main and subservient
members and the auxiliaries of each of them,

the bodily members and the study of the faculties and actions of each
of them and their states, such as health and disease, the science of the
soul and the character of its relation to the body, their actions and
mutual interactions, the causes of deficiency and perfection of each of
them and the factors responsible for their worldly or otherworldly
felicity and wretchedness and all that which pertains to these. These
constitute the preliminaries of this journey of contemplation.

As to the goal and destination of this journey-as will be known in
later chapters and sections-it is the attainment of the ultimate degree
of perfection.

**Section Three: On Fear and Grief**

God, the Glorious and the Exalted, says:

And fear Me if you are believers. (3:175) The ulama' have said: (Grief
relates to that which is gone, and fear to that which has not yet
come'). Hence grief is the inner pain felt on account of the occurrence
of something undesirable that cannot be avoided or for the loss of an
opportunity or something desirable which cannot be restituted.

Fear is the inward pain felt on account of some expected undesirable
occurrence whose causes are probable, or due to expected loss of
something desirable and sought after which cannot be restored.

Further, if the causes are certain to occur or very likely, it is
called anxiety and involves greater pain. And if these causes are known
to he unavoidable, the pain resulting therefrom is called fear caused by
melancholy' The fear and grief felt by the wayfarers is not without
benefit, because if the grief be on account of commission of sins, or
due to lost opportunity, as a result of past negligence of worship
(ibadah) or cessation of wayfaring in the path of perfection, that could
prompt one to resolve on penitence.

And if the fear be due to commission of sin, the incurring of loss, or
failure to attain to the rank of the virtuous, that could result in the
endeavour to acquire virtue and induce one to set out on the path of
perfection.

That is wherewith God frightens His servants:["O My servants, so fear
you Me!"] (39:16)

One who is free from fear and grief at this stage is one of the
hardhearted:

Then woe unto those whose hearts are hardened against remembrance of
God. Such are in manifest error. (39:22)

Any sense of security at this stage that removes this fear from the
heart is destructive:

Do they feel secure against God's devising? None feels secure against
God's devising but the losers. (7:99)

However, as to the perfect, they are free from this kind of fear and
grief:

Surely God's friends-no fear shall be on them, neither shall they
sorrow. (10:62)

Although 'khawf' and 'khashiyyah' are synonymous lexically, in the
terminology of this group (i.e. the gnostics) there is a difference
between the two, 'khashiyyah' being reserved for those who know
('ulama'),

Even so only those of His servants fear God who have knowledge.
(35:28)

and their paradise too is exclusive:

... that is for him who fears his Lord. (98:8)

and they are devoid of any fear (khawf):

... No fear shall be on them, neither shall they sorrow. (10:62)

Hence khashiyyah is a feeling of awe arising from consciousness of the
awe-inspiring greatness of the Truth, Majestic and Exalted, and
awareness of one's inadequacy and shortcoming in serving Him, or due to
an imagined lapse in the etiquette of servanthood, or a breach in
necessary obedience. That khashiyyah is a special kind of fear is
indicated by [the following Qur'anic verse]:

... and fear their Lord, and dread the evil [outcome of] reckoning.
(13.21)

And rahbah is close to khashiyyah:

... a guidance and mercy unto all those who hold their Lord in awe.
(7:154)

And when the wayfarer attains to the station of rida (satisfaction),
his fear is turned into security (amn).

... to them belongs the [true] security, and they are the guided.
(6:82)

Then he is neither repelled by anything repulsive nor attracted by
anything desirable, and this security is due to perfection. And if the
aforementioned security he due to deficiency, the possessor of this
security does not become free from khashiyyah until illuminated by the
vision of Unity (wahdah), whereat there remains no trace of khashiyyah,
for khashiyyah is associated with plurality (takaththur).

**Section Four: On Hope**

God, the Glorious and the Exalted, says:

But the believers, and those who emigrate and struggle in God's
way-those have hope of God's compassion .... (2:218) Whenever something
desirable is expected to be achieved in the future and the seeker
considers the actualization of its causes as likely, there arises in his
heart a feeling of delight, intermingled with expectation of success,
from the idea of its acquisition; it is called hope.

And should one know for certain that the causes have materialized and
that which is expected would of necessity occur in the future, it is
called waiting' for the object sought after, and, to be sure, the
delight in that case is greater.

And if the materialization of the means of attainment be not likely, it
is called 'wishing' (tamanna). And if the achievement of the means be
known to be impossible and unlikely, should there still remain an
expectation of achieving, that hope is either illusion or folly.

Fear and hope are opposites. In wayfaring, hope, like fear, has many
benefits, for hope causes progress in the degrees of perfection and
rapidity of movement on the path towards the goal:

... They look for a commerce that comes not to naught, that lie may pay
them in full their wages and enrich them of His bounty ... . (35:29-30)
And hope is the cause of optimism in the forgiveness and pardon of the
Creator, the Glorious and the Exalted, and trust in His mercy: ... those
have hope of God's compassion. (2:218)

And in respect of attainment of the goal as a result of this
expectation, He has said: I deal with My servant in accordance with what
he expects of Me. 16

The absence of hope at this stage results in despair and loss of
hope:

[Do not despair of God's mercy;] of God's mercy no one despairs,
excepting the unbelievers. (12:87)

Iblis was eternally damned on account of this despair.

... Do not despair of God's mercy. (39:53)

However, when the wayfarer attains to the station of gnosis (ma'rifah)
his hope disappears, for he knows that he deserved whatever has
actualized and that which did not materialize wasn't deserved.

In view of this, should hope still remain, that is either due to
ignorance of all that is deserved and not deserved, or an account of a
grudge against the Cause of all causes (musabbab al-asbab) for depriving
one from one's cherished goal.

From the previous section it was known that the wayfarer is not devoid
of fear and hope as long as he is in the state of wayfaring:

... They call on their Lord in fear and hope .... (32:16)

Hope accompanies fear, and it is not possible for one side to
preponderate over the other, far one who listens to the verses bearing
the promise and the threat, while he scrutinizes the symptoms of
deficiency and perfection, with the likelihood of one rather than the
other, knows shat the end of wayfaring might be either realization of
the goal or failure and deprivation:

Should the believer's fear and hope be weighed, they would be found to
be equal. 17

Should hope be preponderant, it would imply a misplaced sense of
security. Do they feet secure against God's devising? (7:99)

And if fear be preponderant, it would result in a despair leading up to
perdition:

... Verily of God's mercy no man despairs, excepting the people of the
unbelievers. (12:87)

**Section Five: On Patience**

God, the Glorious and the Exalted, says: ... and he patient; surely God
is with the patient. (8:46)

Sabr (patience) in the lexicon means restraining the soul from anxiety
at the time of occurrence of something undesirable, and that consists of
keeping the inner self from agitation and restraining one's tongue from
complaint and the bodily members from untoward movements.

Patience is of three kinds:

First is the patience of the common people, and that involves
restraining the soul in the path of forbearance and showing steadiness
in enduring, so that one's apparent condition appears to be satisfactory
to the mentally mature and ordinary people:

They know an outward part of the present life, but of the Hereafter
they are heedless. (30:7) Second is the patience of the ascetics
(zuhhad) and the devout ('ubbad), the God-fearing and the forbearing, in
expectation of an otherworldly reward:

Surely the patient will be paid their wages in full without reckoning.
(39:10) Third is the patience of the gnostics (urafa), as some of them
feet pleasure when something undesirable befalls them, for they think
that the Worshipped One, may His remembrance be glorified, has singled
them out of His servants to bear that affliction and that He has graced
them with a fresh care:

... and give thou good tidings unto the patient who, when they are
visited by an affliction, say, 'Surely we belong to God, and to Him we
return'; upon those rest blessings and mercy from their Lord,[and
those -they are the truly guided] (2:155-157)

It is reported in traditions that Jabir ibn Abd Allah al-Ansari, one of
the eminent companions [of the Prophet (s)], was afflicted with weakness
and decrepitude late in life. Muhammad ibn 'Ali ibn al-Husayn, known as
[al Imam] al-Baqir [may peace be upon him], went to pay him a visit and
inquired concerning his state [of health]. Jabir replied, "My state is
such that I prefer old age to youth, illness to health, and death to
life!"

Muhammad [a] said to him, "As for me, should He make me old, I would
prefer old age; should He keep me young, I would prefer youth; should He
make me ill, I would prefer illness; should He make me healthy, I would
prefer health; should He make me to die, I would prefer death; and
should He kelp me alive, I would prefer life:"

When Jabir heard this, he embraced Muhammad ['a] on his face and said:
"True was the Messenger of Allah [s1 who said to me, You shall see one
of my sons who will be my namesake. He shall plough [the fields of ]
knowledge thoroughly as the oxen plough the earth" For this reason he
was called "Baqir ulum al-awwalin wa al-akharin" (the plougher of [the
fields of] the sciences of the ancients and the later generations').

An understanding of these ranks [of patience] discloses that Jabir
enjoyed the station of patience and Muhammad ['a] the station of
satisfaction (rida). Rida' will be explained later on, God, the Exalted,
willing.

**Section Six: On Thankfulness**

God, the Glorious and the Exalted, says:

... And we shall reward the thankful. (3:145) "Shukr" in the lexicon is
the approbation given to a benefactor (mun'im) for the sake of his
favours (niam), and since most of the bounties, or rather all of them,
are from God, the Exalted, the best of things is to engage in thanking
Him.

Thanksgiving entails these things: First, the knowledge of the
Benefactor's favours, which extend all the way from the horizons' to the
souls'. Second, the feeling of delight on attaining those favours.

Third, making an effort, within the limits of possibility and one's
capacity, to obtain the satisfaction of the Benefactor. That consists
of: loving Him inwardly; praising Him, by word and deed, in a way that
is worthy of Him; and endeavouring to conduct oneself vis-a-vis the
Benefactor in a way commensurate with His station, through obedience and
by confessing one's inability to do that.

God, the Exalted, says:

If you are thankful, surely I will increase you ... . (14:7)

And it is stated in a tradition: (Faith consists of two halves:
patience and thankfulness'). 18 That is because the wayfarer is never
without a state which is either agreeable or disagreeable. He should be
thankful for that which is agreeable and patient in bearing that which
is disagreeable. In the same way as impatience is the opposite of
patience, ingratitude is the opposite of thankfulness. Infidelity (kufr)
is a kind of ingratitude (kufran):

... but if you are thankless My chastisement is surely terrible.
(14:7)

From this it is known that the station of thankfulness is above that of
patience. And as gratitude cannot be expressed except with the heart,
the tongue and the other members, each of them being a bounty from Him
and the capacity to employ them an additional bounty, should one want to
express gratitude for every bounty, one shall have to thank again for
this bounty and this would entail an endless expression of gratitude.
Hence that which is better is to begin and end thanksgiving with the
admission of inability. The confession of the inability to thank is the
ultimate degree of gratitude, in the same way as the confession of the
inability to praise Him is the ultimate degree of magnification. That is
why it has been said:

Thy praise cannot be encompassed; Thou art as Thou hast praised Thyself
and above what the speakers say sin praising Thee. 19

For the people of submission (ahl al-taslim), gratitude ceases, for
gratitude depends on the [idea of] restituting and compensating the
Benefactor, and one who has reached such a point in servitude as to
consider himself noshing, how can he place himself before Someone Who is
everything? Hence the ultimate point of gratitude is until where one
considers oneself to be an existent and the Benefactor to be another
existent.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
15. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-anwar, vol. 68, p. 327.

16. Ibid., vol. 68, p. 385.

17. Ibid., vol. 75, p. 259.

18. Ali al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-'ummal, vol. 1, p. 36.

19. Ibn Majah, Sunan, vol\_ 2, p. 1262, hadith 3841.


