Lesson 12 : Al-qur’an the Miracle of Islam
==========================================

**1. Prophets & Miracles**

The prophets and messengers of God are given miracles to prove the
truth of their claim. However, not all prophets were given the same
miracle.

Prophet Musa was given the staff which could turn into a serpent;
Prophet Isa was given the ability to cure the blind and the leper, and
to bring the dead back to life. Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) was given the
Qur'an as a miracle.

The difference between all other miracles and the miracle of the Qur'an
is that the other miracles were for those who witnessed them or they
ended with the death of the prophets.

For us they are news which may be believed or suspected according to
the trend of mind of the hearer. But the Qur'an is in our hands, a book
complete in itself; it claims and brings the proof within itself. And
its miracles are being unfolded every day.

As long as the sun rises in the East and sets in the West, the Qur'an
will remain as the final miracle of God.

**2. Al-Qur'an — the Everlasting Miracle**

The Qur'an is a multi-dimensional miracle: it is a miracle of Arabic
language and style; it is a miracle of prophecies; it is a miracle of
scientific revelations; it is a miracle of the best code of life.

Not only a miracle, it is a miracle-performer: it caused the
transformation of an extremely ignorant and unlettered people into the
guardians of knowledge and learning. This has also been realized by
non-Muslim scholars.

Hartwing Hirschfeld writes, "We must not be surprised to find the
Qur'an the fountainhead of science. Every subject connected with heaven
or earth, human life, commerce and various trades is occasionally
touched upon, and this gave rise to the production of numerous
monographs forming commentaries on parts of the Holy Book.

In this way, the Qur'an was responsible for great discussions, and to
it was indirectly due the marvelous development of all branches of
science in the Muslim world...This again not only affected the Arabs but
also induced Jewish philosophers to treat metaphysical and religious
questions after the Arabs' methods.

Finally, the way in which Christian scholasticism was fertilised by
Arabian theosophy need not be further discussed...

In the same manner, the Qur'an gave an impetus to medical studies and
recommended the contemplation and study of nature in general." (New
Researches into the Composition & Exegesis of the Qur'an [London, 1902]
p. 9)

Such contributions are quite apart from the religious subjects which
were initiated because of the Qur'an: the development of literature, the
codification of grammar and other related subjects which were founded
because of the Qur'an.

In fact, all Islamic subjects, all subjects connected with Arabic
literature and all subjects related to philosophy and theology came to
the Arabs through the Qur'an.

Below, we shall study some of the miraculous aspects of the Qur'an.

**(A) THE ELOQUENCE OF THE QUR'AN**

The language of the Qur'an is of such high standard that nobody could
meet its challenge. Arabs of the time of the Prophet were proud of their
language since it was a very rich and sophisticated one. Poets and
eloquent speakers were almost idols of their tribes.

Poems were learned and read on every occasion, and yearly competitions
were held for the best pieces of poetry in a place called Suq Ukadh.
Thus language and literature was the best art the Arabs had mastered
very well.

The Qur'an came and its miracle, to the Arabs' surprise, was its
language and style. The Qur'an was the challenge; God asked them to
produce a similar Qur'an: "Say: If the whole of mankind and jinn
gathered together to produce the like of this Qur'an, they could not
produce the like of it, even if they helped each other." (17:89)

Then the challenge was reduced to ten chapters (surahs), to show them
their weakness: "Do they say that "He has forged it'? Say: Then you
bring ten surahs like it, forged and call (to your aid) whomsoever you
can -other than God-- if you speak the truth,” (11:14)

Again the Arabs could not answer the challenge of the Qur'an. The
challenge was then reduced to one surah only. One surah may be only one
line. Still the proud eloquent Arabs could not face the challenge: "Do
they say \*He forged it'?

Say: Then bring one surah like it and call to your aid anyone you
can --other than God— if you speak the truth," (10:39) You can see the
logical reasoning and rational approach to convince the Arabs of its
miraculous quality. A surah may be only one line but the Arabs (and
non-Arabs too) could not succeed in their attempts to meet the standing
challenge.

The beauty of the Qur'an, the strength of its conviction, its logic and
simplicity, and its depth and wisdom was far above what the Arabs or
non-Arabs know or conceive. When the Qur'an was read, the idolaters used
to close their ears; some used to make noise, whistling and chanting, so
that they may not hear the Qur'an and be "bewitched".

The non-believers could not give any reasonable explanation to this
irresistible beauty and power of the Qur'an. However, they had to find
some excuse to put people off and to justify their opposition. They
invented lies and said, The Qur'an is nothing but poetry or magic. God
refuted their statement: "Therefore proclaim you the praises of your
Lord, for by the grace of your Lord you are no soothsayer, nor are you
one possessed."

The Arabs waged war after war to silence the Prophet of Islam. But the
easiest way would have been to produce a short surah (like al-Kawthar)
of equal standard and the claim of the Prophet would have been
refuted.

No sane person would use a sword when a few words could serve his
purpose in a more effective way. But the Arabs preferred war and it
proves that they found the Qur'an unanswerable.

To discover the Qur'an's eloquence, non-Arab speakers can turn to the
sayings of those Arabs who were experts in the language of those days
and which are recorded in history, and also to the present day authors
who write on this subject.

From the days of the Prophet till now, all specialists in the art of
Arabic eloquence have confessed to the unparalleled eloquence of the
Qur'an and have been overwhelmed in the face of it. For example, the
famous contemporary writer Abdul Fattah Tabari writes, "Arab history
tells us of many famous men, knowledgeable in the best poetry and prose,
like Ibn al-Muqaffa,

Jahiz, Ibn "Amid, Farazdaq, Bashshar, Abu Nuwas, Abu Tammam and so
forth, but all of them have shown humility when faced with the Qur'an,
and have of necessity confessed that the great Qur'an is not the word of
man, but a Divine revelation."

Dr. Taha Husayn, the famous contemporary Egyptian writer, said, "The
Qur'an transcends the limits of prose and poetry, because it has special
qualities which cannot be found in any poem or prose. So the Qur'an
cannot be called poetry or prose, rather it should be said, "It is the
Qur'an, that is all.'"

**(B) HARMONISATION OF ITS THEMES**

The Qur'an is a book which covers many subjects and events. The
discussions of its topics are not separated as is the case with normal
books. It discusses many topics in one page at times, but without losing
purpose and without going away from the main aim.

Considering the range of the topics the Qur'an comments on, the
repetition of some stories, the non-classification of the topics, it is
hard to find such a book without contradictions and errors.

By human standard, practically no book —of any subject-- is without
errors and mistakes. But here is a book which was not written at one
time. It is a collection of piece-meal revelations, covering a span of
about twenty three years.

Can any scholar believe that any human being, unlettered, will remember
every single word which he had uttered during the previous twenty three
years? It is impossible and hence the chances of contradictions.

But the Qur'an has no contradiction; and, according to that test, it is
the word of God.

Moreover, if someone reaches a stage of mastery over a special subject,
he may display brilliance in that subject; but if he undertakes
something on a subject of which he is not a master, he will not be able
to produce any distinctive work. Although the Qur'an contains many
different subjects, it has succeeded in retaining consistent style and
unity of expression.

**(c) SCIENTIFIC REVELATIONS**

Now, a non-Arab may rightly wonder about the claim of literary miracle.
He does not know Arabic, so the miraculous aspect of language might not
be appealing to him at all, or even, to some extent, to the illiterate
Arabs of our days whose colloquial language is a far deviation from the
classical style of the Qur'an.

In modern days, we need a miracle in science, telling us what is in the
heavens and within ourselves. The Qur'an, although not a scientific
text, reveals many secrets and wonders of the heavens and of ourselves
as part of its call to believe in the Creator of the universe.

**THE MOON & THE SUN:**

The Qur'an says: Do not you see how God created seven heavens in
harmony; and made the moon a light therein, and the sun a lamp?
(75:16-17) The moon is a solid object which reflects light, hence it is
a ‘light’. But the sun is a source of energy and light, so it is
described as a ‘lamp’.

The sun is not static but moving in a path exactly computed. The Qur'an
declared these facts 1400 years ago: And the sun is moving on the course
determined for it.

That is the decree of the Almighty, the All-Knowing; and the moon, We
have determined for it mansions (to traverse) till it becomes like the
old (and withered) lower part of a date-stalk;-the sun is not allowed to
catch up with the moon, nor can the night outstay the day. Each swims
along in (its own) orbit. (36:39-41)

**EXPLORING THE SPACE:**

The Qur'an says: O Company of jinn and men, if you have the power to
penetrate the regions of the heavens and the earth, then penetrate
(them); you will not penetrate them except with a power. (55:34) This
verse comes with undoubted encouragement to explore and travel through
outer space.

Here one should pause and think of the society in which the Prophet of
Islam lived. The means of transportation were camels, horses and
donkeys. The people lived in tents and worshipped idols. They had not
even dreamt of a car or an aeroplane or even a machine of any kind.

How does the Qur'an put such a high idea to encourage people not only
to fly but to travel to other planets and heavens? In materialistic
thinking, such a task is impossible because they claim that human
thoughts are reflections of his material environment.

Then the only solution in this case is to believe that the Qur'an is
not a product of the human mind, but is a revelation from God. No human
being could definitely put forth such an idea even if he were the
greatest astronomer or scientist.

**PHARAOH'S BODY:**

People in our times are proud of their knowledge and the Qur'an baffles
them even now. There are so many examples of verses which remained a
puzzle for commentators until the discoveries of recent times made their
meaning clear. Here is one example:

Speaking about the drowning of Pharaoh, the Qur'an says: And We brought
the children of Israel across the sea; and Pharaoh and his horse
persuade them wrongfully and aggressively; till, when the calamity of
drowning overtook him, he said,’ believe that there is no God but He in
whom the children of Israel believe, and I am of those who submit to
Him.'

What! Now! While you were disobedient before this and were of those who
create disorder (in society). So this day We will save you in body only,
so that you may be a sign to those who come after you. (10:91-93)

These verses clearly say that Pharaoh's body was recovered and it
became a sign of warning to later generations. But this thing is not
mentioned in the Bible. Still the Qur'an claimed that the body of
Pharaoh was recovered;

and 1300 years after this revelation, excavations have brought into
light that body which was mummified and preserved for future
generations, and even after these long centuries his face and body
clearly show the effect of drowning.

If the Qur'an was the work of a man, how did he know of this fact which
was not known even to the Jews and the Egyptians of that time?

In the end, it is necessary to remind the Muslims that if they get to
know the Qur'an, or get to know it better and put its great, magnificent
and precise project into action, greatness will be theirs, and more.

The huge edifice of the greatness of Muslims collapsed when they
stopped putting the commands of this heavenly book into practice. So
they fell down, they were satisfied only with the name of Islam.

Our departed greatness will return when we leave this crooked way and,
starting again, become true Muslims and put the Qur'an at the top of the
sights of our hearts and our wisdom, and make it an example for life, as
the Prophet said, "When calamities encompass you like the darkness of
the night, reach for the Qur'an."


