Lesson 14 : the Imamat Succession To the Prophet
================================================

**1. Introduction**

Eventually the inevitable occurred and the soul of the Prophet (a.s.)
flew to its eternal abode. For in the words of the poet Nizami, "he who
has not died and will never die is only God'.

It was clear that with the death of this great man a storm would blow
up over the peaceful ocean of Islam, and that turbulent waters would be
churned up. The ambitious would try to benefit and to get as much as
they could from this turbulence and commotion, to fish in these troubled
waters.

On the other hand, we know that the great mass of people believe in
anything they see; they have always been thus and have always been fuel
for a fire that anyone may care to kindle.

They need constant training and continual taking care of, and without
an educator they cannot reach their own perfection.

Now we must ask if such a society, in such conditions, needs a leader
who can take the reins of command in the place of the Prophet or not, so
that the result of all the pains the Messenger of Allah took should not
be dissipated?

Is there not a need for a knowledgeable, political authority who is
thoroughly acquainted with the Divine laws and who can guide and lead
the people on the right path in the right way?

The Shi'a belief holds that the Love of God and His infinite wisdom
demand that after the Prophet the people should not be without a leader.
Such a leader must be sinless and wise, so that his correctness of
speech and action may be a guarantee and a true sign of a superior man,
someone selected by God.

He must take the reins of the Muslim community in his hands and lead
and guide them with the extensive wisdom and foresight, without error,
and this he must take from the Prophet of Islam. Because there is no
reason for God, Who was considerate of the people in the time of the
Prophet to change His judgment and to withdraw His loving concern.

How could it be possible that God, Who by His Grace created thousands
of elaborate details for the protection and growth of our bodies, has
neglected to appoint a goodly successor to the Prophet? Does not the
bringing into existence of the best of communities, which is the aim of
Islam, need the selection of the best of leaders?

Is not the appointment of a sinless leader, educator and Imam the basis
of the contentment of society? Can Islamic society attain contentment
and happiness without divine supervision and leadership?

So if there is a need for the divine, sinless leader, and Islamic
society wants a divine educator, how can it be said that this matter has
been ignored by Islam and that the people have been left to
themselves?

In short, the same philosophy which demands the appointment of the
Prophet also precisely demands that God should introduce and appoint a
successor through the Prophet.

The Prophet of Islam (a.s.) said in the latter part of his life: "O
People, I swear before Allah that I have explained what will make you
nearer to heaven and what will take you far from the Fire." With this
explanation, how can it be said that the Prophet of Islam did not
appoint his immediate successor?

**2. Is the Qur'an not Sufficient?**

The Qur'an is the fundamental basis for every kind of Islamic concept.
Like a mighty rock, all the fruitful buildings of Islamic knowledge have
been made steady on it. It is the clear spring from which all the
streams of insight flow. The credibility and prestige of other religious
foundations rest on it.

But, on the basis of the proofs we shall give, one cannot be content
with the Qur'an alone to solve the problems of leadership, the
differences which crop up in Islamic society, or to satisfy the needs of
the Muslims people.

1. Firstly because the Qur'an and its great and abundant contents need
commentary and explanation.

Since all the verses are not alike in clarity, unacquainted readers in
the first moments of their journey may become lost and not take the path
to their destination.

So the Prophet himself or those appointed by him who have a , spiritual
link with what is beyond the external world, must be a guide in this
valley also, so that they can interpret and explain the Qur'anic verses
according to Allah's purpose.

For if not, ordinary people will sometimes interpret incorrectly and
will end up far from the truth. The Prophet himself has said, "Anyone
who interprets the Qur'an according to his own opinions will have a
place in the Fire."

It is recounted that a thief was brought into the presence of the
Abbasid caliph Mu'tasim so that he might be punished according to the
punishment prescribed in the Qur'an.

The command of the Qur'an is: "Cut off the hand of a thief." But
Mu'tasim did not know from where the hand should be cut. He asked his
Sunni "ulama. One of them said, "From the wrist."

"From the elbow," another said.

Mu'tasim was not satisfied. He was forced to ask Imam Muhammad at-Taqi
(a.s.), the ninth Shi'a Imam, who was present in that gathering. The
Imam replied, "Only four fingers must be cut off."

"Why?" '

"Since Allah has decreed in the Qur'an, "And that the places of sajdah
are for Allah.1 (72:18) that is the seven places of the body [which
touches the ground in prostration], ........ so they should not be cut
off."

All those present accepted and were satisfied with his proof. This kind
of interpretation is in fact interpretation of the Qur'an by the Qur'an,
and is peculiar to the Ahlu '1-bayt (a.s.), and no one, to whatever
degree he may be a master of interpretation, is able to succeed in
perfectly understanding interpretation in this way unless he has taken
the lead from the Imams of the Ahlu '1-bayt and has made them his
example.

2. What we have said above is only in regard to the correct
interpretation of the esoteric meaning and commands of the Qur'an. But
beneath the esoteric words and meanings of the Qur'an, there are shades
and layers of spiritual messages which can only be correctly explained
by qualified guides.

The Prophet of Islam (a.s.) said, "The Qur'an has a beautiful outer
meaning and a profound inner meaning."8 He also said, "The Qur'an has
profundity, and its profundity is deep too, up to seven inner
layers."9

According to the great exegetists, the entire Qur'an has a hermeneutics
and an inner meaning to it, and to arrive at them by thought and
research alone is not possible. It is not explicable to all through
words, for the ability to perceive and practice this is not given to all
men.

Only those near to God, the pure, those free from moral corruption, can
comprehend this, and use it for the solution of the differences and
incidents between men, and learn it, and then, by virtue of the immunity
from error and mistake that they have from God, teach it to others.

Those who are spiritually near to God and free from error are the
Prophet and his Ahlu '1-bayt about whom the Qur'an says: Allah desires
only to keep away from you, O the Ahlu 'l-bayt, abomination and to
cleanse you. (33:33)

There is also a hadith which says that only the Prophet and his Ahlu
'l-bayt can perceive all the truths of the Qur'an.10 This implies that
the Prophet (who was the recipient of the Qur'an) and his Ahlu '1-bayt
(who were his close family-members) are more acquainted with the meaning
of the Qur'an.

8 Al-KuJaynir al-Usul mm al-Kafi, vol. 2. p. 599.
9 Al-Kashani, Tafsir as-Safi, vol. 1, p. 39.
10 Tafsir Mir'atu 'l-Amvar, p. 16.

It is because of this connection between the Qur'an and the Ahlu
'1-bayt that the Prophet said, "I leave two things in your trust, the
Book of Allah and my family; if you attach yourselves to these two you
will never go astray.11

As a postscript, the summary of this lesson can be found in the
discussion which students of Imam Ja’far as-Sâdiq (a.s.) had with a
Sunni in the presence of the Imam.

A man from Damascus (which was the support base of the Umayyids) had
come to Medina with the intention of debating with one of the students
of Imam Ja’far as-Sâdiq (a.s.).

The Imam said, "Introduce this man to Hisham." Hisham was the youngest
of his students.

"O Child," said the man from Damascus, "ask me concerning the imamate
of this man (referring to Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq)." Hisham was angered by
his lack of manners and shuddered.

But he concealed his temper and began: "Is your Creator more kind and
loving towards His slaves, or the slaves themselves?" "The Creator."

"What has the loving Creator done for his slaves?"

"He has appointed a clear guidance and proof, to protect them from
differences and disunity, and to establish friendship and unity among
them. He has made clear to them their religious duties." "Who is that
guide?"

"The Prophet."

"Who is it after the death of the Prophet?"

"The Book of Allah and the sunnah of the Prophet of Islam."

"Can the Book of Allah and the sunnah of the Prophet prevent us from
differences today?"

"Yes."

11 Ibn Hanbal, Mitsnad, vol. 3 (Beirut) p. 17; al-Amini, al-Ghadir,
vol. 1, p. 55; Ghayatu 'l-Maram, p. 212

"So why do you and I who are both Muslims have a dispute, or in other
words, why have you come here from Damascus as a result of this
difference?"

The man from Damascus was silent and said no more.

Imam Ja’far as-Sâdiq (a.s.) said to him, "Why don't you speak up?"

"What shall I say?" he replied. "If I say we have no difference, then I
lie. And just as I said the Book of Allah and the sunnah of the Prophet
should take away the differences between us, so this also is untrue,
because, in many instances, the Book of Allah and the sunnah do not have
a clear and obvious meaning that could dispel our differences."

So the man from Damascus said that he wanted to ask the very same
question from Hisham. The Imam agreed.

"O Hisham. Who is more loving towards people? God, or the people
themselves?"

"God."

"Did he send them someone to protect the unity of Muslims and to take
over their control, to explain to them the truth and falsity?"

"Are you talking about the time of the Prophet, or about now?"

"In the time of the Prophet, it was him; no, tell me about now." "Today
it is this man who is seated here and to whom people come from every
corner of the land, and who gives us news of the heaven and the earth;
and this knowledge was bequeathed to him from his father and so on back
to the Prophet."

"How can I verify and accept this statement for myself?"

"Go now and ask him anything you like."

"That's right, there is no excuse; only I must ask."

Then Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) told him about his journey and of the
things that had happened to him on his way which only the man could know
of. When he had explained so that no doubt remained for him, the man
declared his belief in the Imam. This lesson has been adapted with minor
changes from Dar Rah-e Haqq, The Roots of Religion, Qum, Iran.


