Lesson 17 : Twelve Caliphs Or Imams
===================================

**1. The Hadith on Twelve Imams**

After studying about the leadership of Imam 'Ali and briefly reviewing
the khilafat of Saqifah, it is now advisable to refer to several parts
of the 77th chapter of Yanabi'u 3l-Mawaddah of a famous Sunni scholar
al-Hafiz Sulayman al-Qunduzi al-Hanafi (d. 1294AH/1877AD).

Al-Qunduzi first quotes a well known hadith of the Prophet that: "There
will be twelve caliphs, all from the Quraysh." This hadith has been
quoted by many books of ahadith including that of Bukhari, al-Muslim,
Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi.

Then al-Qunduzi quotes many traditions to the effect that the Prophet
said, "I, 'Ali, Hasan, Husayn and nine of the descendants of Husayn are
pure and sinless."

Then the author quotes that the Prophet said to Imam Husayn bin 'Ali:
"You are a chief, brother of a chief; you are an Imam, son of an Imam,
brother of an Imam; you are Proof (of Allah), son of a Proof (of Allah),
brother of a Proof (of Allah), and father of nine Proofs (of Allah), the
ninth of whom will be al-Mahdi."

After quoting many such traditions, he writes: "Some scholars have said
that the traditions (which show that the caliphs after the Prophet would
be twelve) are well known, from many chains of narration.

Now, with the passage of time and through historical events, we know
that in this hadith the Prophet has referred to the Twelve Imams from
his family (Ahlu ‘l-bayt) and descendants, because:

"This hadith cannot apply to the four al-khulafa'u ’r-rashidun from
among his companions, as they were less than twelve.

"And it cannot apply to the caliphs from the tribe of Umayyad, because
(a) they were more than twelve; (b) all of them were tyrants and unjust
(except 'Umar ibn 'Abdi ’l-‘Aziz); and (c) they were not from the Banu
Hashim as the Prophet has said in a hadith that "all of them will be
from the Banu Hashim’...

"And it cannot apply to the caliphs from the 'Abbasids, because (a)
they were more than twelve; and (b) they did not comply with (the
demands of) the verse Say, 7 do not ask of you any recompense for it
except the love for (my) near relatives' (42:23), nor with the tradition
of the Mantle.

"Therefore, the only way to interpret this hadith is to accept that it
refers to the Twelve Imams from the Holy Prophet's Ahlu '1- bayt and
descendants,

because they were, in their times, most knowledgeable, the most
illustrious, the most God-fearing, the most pious, the highest in their
family lineage, the best in personal virtues, and the most honoured
before Allah; and their knowledge was derived from their ancestor (the
Prophet) through their fathers, and by inheritance and by direct
teachings from Allah."

**2. A Few Facts About the Twelve Imams**

First Imam: Amiru '1-Mu'minin Abu '1-Hasan "ALI al- Murtaza, son of Abu
Talib, was born on 13th Rajab, 10 years before the declaration of the
Prophethood (600 A.D.), inside the Ka^bah; became Imam, on the death of
the Prophet on 28th Safar,

11/632; was fatally wounded by the poisoned sword of Ibn Muljim while
engaged in prayers at the mosque of Kufa (Iraq), and expired two days
later on 21st Ramadhan, 40/661 and was buried at an- Najaf (Iraq).

Second Imam: Abu Muhammad AL-HASAN al-Mujtaba, son of 'Ali, was born on
15th Ramadhan, 3/625 in Medina; died of poison on 7th or 28th Safar,
50/670 at Medina.

Third Imam: Sayyidu 'sh-Shuhada1 Abu "Abdillah ALHUSAYN, son of 'Ali,
was. born on 3rd Sha'ban, 4/626 in Medina; was martyred with his sons,
relatives and companions, on 10th Muharram, 61/680 at Karbala (Iraq).

He and his elder brother, al- Hasan, were sons of Fatimah az-Zahra, the
daughter of the Prophet of Islam (may peace be upon them all).

Fourth Imam: Abu Muhammad ‘ALI Zaynu 'l-’Abidin, son of al-Husayn, was
born on 5th Sha’ban, 38/659; died of poison on 25th Muharram, 94/712 or
95/713 in Medina.

Fifth Imam: Abu Ja'far MUHAMMAD al-Baqir, son of 'Ali Zaynu '1-'Abidin,
was born on 1st Rajab, 57/677 in Medina; died of poison on 7th Dhu
'1-hijjah 114/733 in Medina.

Sixth Imam: Abu 'Abdillah JA’FAR as-Sadiq, son of Muhammad al~ Baqir,
was born on 17th Rabi’u '1-Awwal, 83/702 at Medina; died there of poison
on 25th Shawwal, 148/765.

Seventh Imam: Abu '1-Hasan al-Awwal MUSA al-Kazim, son of Ja'far
as-Sadiq, was born in al-Abwa’ (7 miles from Medina) on 7th Safar
129/74(5; died of poison on 25th Rajab, 183/799 in the prison of Harun
ar-Rashid at Baghdad and was buried at Kazimiyyah, near Baghdad
(Iraq).

Eighth Imam: Abu '1-Hasan ath-Thani, "AL1 ar-Riza, son of Musa
al-Kazim, was born in Medina on llth Dhu '1-hijjah 148/765; died of
poison on 17th Safar, 203/818 in Mashhad (Iran).

Ninth Imam: Abu Ja'far ath-Thani MUHAMMAD at-Taqi al- Jawad, son of
'All ar-Riza, was born on 10th Rajab 195/811 in Medina; died of poison
in Baghdad on 30th Dhu 'l-qa"dah 220/835; was buried near his
grandfather at al-Kazimiyyah.

Tenth Imam: Abu '1-Hasan ath-Thalith ‘ALI an-Naqi al-Hadi, son of
Muhammad at-Taqi, was born on 5th Rajab 212/827 in Medina; died of
poison in Samarra (Iraq) on 3rd Rajab, 254/868.

Eleventh Imam: Abu Muhammad "AL-HASAN al-"Askari, son of 'Ali an-Naqi,
was born on 8th Rabi’u 'th-Thani, 232/846 in Medina; died of poison in
Samarra (Iraq) on 8th Rabi’u '1-Awwal 260/874.

Twelfth Imam: Abu '1-Qasim MUHAMMAD AL-MAHDI, son of al-Hasan
al-‘Askari, was born on 15th Sha'ban 255/869 in Samarra (Iraq).

He is our present Imam; he went into .Lesser Occultation in 260/874
which continued until 329/844; then the Greater Occultation began, which
still continues.

He will reappear when Allah allows him, to establish the Kingdom of
Allah on earth, to fill the world with justice and equality, as it would
be full of injustice and tyranny.

He is al-Qa'im (the one who shall stand to establish the rule of
Allah); al-Hujjah (the Proof of Allah over His creatures); Sahibu
'z-Zamân (the Lord of Our Time), and Sahibu 'IAmr (the one vested with
Divine authority).


