Publisher’s Note
================

When the valuable book "Odattod-Daee" was first translated into English
and published, those dear readers who were in contact with us highly
praised the publication of such a book for two reasons:

1- The spiritual content of "Odattod-Daee" was by the late Allameh
Sheikh Ahmad Ibn Fahd Helli, may his soul rest in peace.

2- Its good translation by a University Professor, Mr. Aghili Ashtiani.

We too thank God for giving us the honor of having published that book.
A couple of months after the publication of "Odattod-Daee" we offered
Mr. Aghili several books among which he chose this book "the Ethos of
the Prophets, from Adam to Khatam" for translation into English. The
book, authored by his eminence, Ayatollah Taj Langroodi, contains
mystical and moral points about the ethos and lifestyle of the Prophets
especially those of the holy Prophet of Islam.

The Publication of such books in any language and the moral points which
we can learn from them in all the stages of our life will lead to
illumination of thoughts and consolation of heart hence nearness to God.

It is hoped that the author, the translator, the publisher and all the
contributors will be equally rewarded by God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَانَ النَّاسُ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً فَبَعَثَ اللَّهُ النَّبِيِّينَ
مُبَشِّرِينَ وَمُنْذِرِينَ وَأَنْزَلَ مَعَهُمُ الْكِتَابَ بِالْحَقِّ
لِيَحْكُمَ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ فِيمَا اخْتَلَفُوا فِيهِ ۚ وَمَا اخْتَلَفَ
فِيهِ إِلَّا الَّذِينَ أُوتُوهُ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا جَاءَتْهُمُ
الْبَيِّنَاتُ بَغْيًا بَيْنَهُمْ ۖ فَهَدَى اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
لِمَا اخْتَلَفُوا فِيهِ مِنَ الْحَقِّ بِإِذْنِهِ ۗ وَاللَّهُ يَهْدِي
مَنْ يَشَاءُ إِلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(All) people are a single nation; so Allah raised Prophets as bearers
of good news and as warners, and He revealed with them the Book with
truth, that it might judge between people in that in which they differed
(2:213)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّا كَانَ مُحَمَّدٌ أَبَا أَحَدٍ مِّن رِّجَالِكُمْ وَلَكِن رَّسُولَ
اللَّهِ وَخَاتَمَ النَّبِيِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but he is the Apostle
of Allah and the Last of the Prophets (33:40)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أَرْسَلْنَاكَ شَاهِدًا وَمُبَشِّرًا وَنَذِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O Prophet! Surely We have sent you as a witness, and as a bearer of
good news and as a warner (48:8)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّكَ لَعَلَىٰ خُلُقٍ عَظِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And most surely you conform (yourself) to sublime morality (68:4)***


