16. The Ethos Of Prophet Ilyas (Elijah)
=======================================

Introduction
------------

Nasekh At-Tawareekh has recorded the birth of Elijah as 4506 after the
fall of Adam. According to Ibn -Katheer and his Qessas Al-Anbeeya (the
stories of the Prophets) Elijah was the son of Azer son of Eizar son of
Aaaron son of Imran. In Dehkhoda Lexicon, Elijah is said to be brother
of khidr who has also drunk from the water of life hence he is still
living and in the same way that serving on the earth has been assigned
to khidr, serving in the seas has been assigned to Elijah.

It is also said: That he travels in deserts guiding those who get lost.
Khidr and Elijah are said to meet in Qoba Mosque on Edil-Azha (the Feast
of Sacrifice) every year. According to Qessas Al-Anbeeya (the stories of
the Prophets) by Ibn -Katheer, khidr and Elijah meet each other in
Baytul-Muqaddas during the month of Ramadan every year; they perform
Hajj rituals, drink from Zamzam water and meet in Arafat. The same book
writes that Elijah was the messenger of Ba’albak in east Damascus;
people denied him, intended to kill him but he escaped from them taking
refuge in a cave.

Calling People To Monotheism
----------------------------

***"And Ilyas was most surely of the apostles. When he said to his
people: Do you not guard (against evil)? What! Do you call upon Bal and
forsake the best of the creators, Allah, Your Lord and the Lord of your
fathers of yore?" (37:123-126)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ إِلْيَاسَ لَمِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ. إِذْ قَالَ لِقَوْمِهِ أَلَا
تَتَّقُونَ. أَتَدْعُونَ بَعْلًا وَتَذَرُونَ أَحْسَنَ الْخَالِقِينَ.
اللَّهَ رَبَّكُمْ وَرَبَّ آبَائِكُمُ الْأَوَّلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

At A Host’s Table
-----------------

Ibn-Abbas has reported that there was a famine among the children of
Israel lasting for three successive years. One day Elijah passed by and
old woman saying: Do you have any food? She said: Yes, I have a little
flour and oil. She went and brought them. Elijah drawing his hands on
them prayed and asked for their blessing. God blessed them so much that
her bag was filled with flour and her Jar filled with oil.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ ابْنُ عَبّاسٍ: أَصَابَ بَني إِسْرائيلَ الْقَحْطُ ثَلاثَ سِنينَ
مُتَوالِياتٍ فَمَرَّ إِلْياسُ بِعَجُوزٍ فَقَالَ لَها: هَلْ عِنْدَكِ
طَعَامٌ فَقَالَتْ نَعَمْ، شيء مِنْ دَقِيقٍ وَزَيْتٍ قَلِيلٍ
فَجَاءَتْهُ بِشَيءٍ مِنْ الدَّقِيقِ وَالزَّيْتِ فَدَعا فِيهِمَا
بِالبَرَكَةِ فَمَسَّهُما فَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ في ذَلِكَ حَتّى مَلأَتْ
جِرابُهَا دَقِيقًا وَمَلأَتْ خَوابِيهَا زَيْتًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Praying For An Ailing Person
----------------------------

Elijah went to the house of a woman from the children of Israel who had
a son by the name of Jesse son of Akhtoob always being sick. That woman
gave refuge to Elijah who in turn prayed for that ailing person and he
was healed. Hence, he believed in Elijah and became his follower and
companion in a way that wherever Elijah went, he would follow him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ إِلْياسَ أَتَى إِلى بَيْتِ امْرَأَةٍ مِنْ بَنِي إِسْرائيلَ لَها
ابْنٌ يُسَمّى [الْيَسَع] ابْنُ أُخْطُوبٍ وَكَانَ بِهِ ضَرُّ فآوَتْهُ
وَأَخْفَتْ أَمْرَهُ فَدَعا لَهُ فَعُوفِي مِنَ الضُّرِّ الَّذي كَانَ
بِهِ وَاتّبَعَ الْيَسُعُ إِلْيَاسَ وَآمَنَ بِهِ وَصَدَّقَهُ وَلَزِمَهُ
فَكَانَ يَذْهَبُ مَعَهُ حَيْثُمَا ذَهَبَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Invocation
--------------

The holy Prophet said to Zeid Ibn -Arqam: Whenever you wish to be
safeguarded from drowning, fire and other evils, recite the following:
In the name of Allah, what Allah pleases, no one but Allah can remove
evil. In the name of Allah, what Allah pleases, no one but Allah can
bring us good. In the name of Allah, what Allah pleases, there is no
blessing but from Allah. In the name of Allah, what Allah pleases, there
is no help or power save with Allah. The Most High, the Great. In the
name of Allah, what Allah pleases, the Blessing of Allah be upon
Muhammad and his pure Progeny. And whoever recites it three times in the
morning will be safeguarded from drowning, fire and evils till night and
whoever recites it in the evening will be safeguarded till morning.
Khidr and Elijah meet each other in Hajj rituals every year and recite
this Doa when they part.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صَلّى اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ لِزَيْدِ بْنِ
أَرْقَمٍ: إِذا أَرَدْتَ أَنْ يُؤمِنُكَ اللَّهُ مِنَ الْغَرَقِ
وَالْحَرقِ وَالشَّرَقِ، فَقُلْ إِذَا أَصْبَحْتَ: (بِسْمِ اللَّهِ مَا
شَاءَ اللَّهُ لا يَصْرِفُ السُّوءَ إِلا اللَّهُ، بِسْمِ اللَّهِ مَا
شَاءَ اللَّهُ لا يَسُوقُ الْخَيْرَ إِلا اللَّهُ، بِسْمِ اللَّهِ مَا
شَاءَ اللَّهُ، مَا يَكُونُ مِنْ نِعْمَةٍ فَمِنَ اللَّهِ، بِسْمِ
اللَّهِ مَا شَاءَ اللَّهُ لا حَوْلَ وَلا قُوَّةَ إِلا بِاللَّهِ
الْعَليِّ الْعَظيمِ، بِسْمِ اللَّهِ مَا شَاءَ اللَّهُ وَصَلّى اللَّهُ
عَلى مُحَمّدٍ وَآلِهِ الطّيبِينَ. فَإِنَّ مَنْ قَالَهَا ثَلاثًا إِذا
أَصْبَحَ أَمِنَ مِنَ الْحَرقِ وَالْغَرَقِ وَالشَّرَقِ حَتّى يُمْسي
وَمَنْ قَالَها ثَلاثًا إِذا مَسَى أَمِنَ مِنَ الحَرَقِ وَالْغَرَقِ
وَالشَّرَقِ حَتّى يُصْبِحَ وَأَنَّ الْخِضْرَ وَإِلْيَاسَ عَلَيْهِما
السَّلامُ يَلْتَقِيانِ في كُلِّ مَوْسِمٍ فَإِذا تَفَرَّقَا تَفَرَّقَا
عَنْ هَذِهِ الْكَلِمَاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Meal
--------

The holy Prophet said: Eat celery, for it was the food of Elijah, Jesse
and Joshua son of Nun.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صَلَّى اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: عَلَيْكُمْ
بِالْكَرَفْسِ فَإِنَّهُ طَعَامُ إِلْيَاسَ وَيُوشَعَ بْنَ نُون.
  </p>
</blockquote>


