26. The Ethos Of Prophet Muhammad
=================================

The Personality Of The Holy Prophet
-----------------------------------

The holy Prophet of Islam, Muhammad Ibn-Abdullah was born in Mecca in
the Year of the Elephant (A.D.570) 6163 years after the Fall of Adam.
His father was Abdullah Ibn -Abdul-Muttalib Ibn -Hashim Ibn -Abd Munaf
and his mother was Amina daughter of Wahab Ibn -Abd Munaf.

When Amina was only one month pregnant, Abdullah made a trip to Medina
but became sick after fifteen days and passed away. His body was buried
in Darolnabeqa. It was Friday night of the 17th of Rabeeul Awwal when
Amina went to a chamber to weep over her husband. When birth-pangs
overtook her, there was a split in the ceiling of house and four
beautiful ladies came down saying: Fear not, for we have come to serve
you. Each took a seat near her and a secret voice called: O Amina! When
your child is born, say: I place him under the protection of the One God
from the evil of every envious one and every rebellious creature waiting
in ambush whether standing or sitting.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُعيذُهُ بِالواحِدِ مِن شَرِّ كُلِّ حاسِدٍ وَكُلِّ خَلقٍ مارِدٍ
يَأخُذُ بِالمَرصَدِ في المَوارِدِ مِن قائِمٍ وَقاعِدٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Several women in heavenly garments too came with crystal bowls of
sherbet giving her the glad tidings of Muhammad who was born at dawn on
Friday while falling in prostration before Ka’ba with both hands raised
towards heavens saying: There is no god but Allah.

It was a custom among the Arabs to entrust their children to nurses so
that their wives will give birth to more children. Most of these nurses
were from among the Bedouins. This made children more valiant and
eloquent. It is on this basis that the holy Prophet said; I am more
eloquent than Quraish, for I was nursed by the tribe of Sa’d Ibn -Bakr.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنَا أَعرَبُ مِن قُرَيشٍ استَرضَعتُ في سَعدِ بنِ بَكرٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

To sum it up, in each season of spring or fall, nursing women from Arab
tribes which were near Mecca, went to that city to take with them
infants for nursing. In the year Muhammad was born, Halima of Sa’adieh
along with her husband and her nursing child came to Mecca for the same
purpose. They were taken to Amina’s house where Muhammad was given to
her. Halima took him in her arms putting her breast into his mouth.
Muhammad never sucked Halima’s left breast leaving it for his foster
brother.

The holy Prophet lost his mother at the age of six. The story is that
Amina went to Abdul-Muttalib asking him to give her permission to visit
her maternal uncles of the tribe of Bani-Adan Ibn -Najjar who were in
Medina and to take Muhammad with her to show him to the relatives.
Abdul-Muttalib gave her the permission to do so. Hence, Amina,
accompanied by Umm-Ayman who attended the holy Prophet proceeded to
Medina. She stayed for a month in Darolnaqbeqa where Abdullah was
buried, visited her relatives and went back to Mecca but she became sick
and eventually died at Abwa midway between Mecca and Medina where she
was buried. Umm-Ayman brought Muhammad back to Mecca where he was placed
in the charge of his grandfather Abdul-Muttalib.

The holy Prophet lost his grandfather too at the age of eight. When
Muhammad was 12 old years, he accompanied his uncle, Abo-Taaleb to
Damascus on a trade trip. He married Khadija at the age of 25 and was
ordained as Prophet on Rajab 27th at the age of forty. The arch-angel,
Gabriel appeared to him in Hira Cave saying:

***"Read in the name of Your Lord Who created. He created man from a
clot." (96:1-2)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اقرَأْ بِاسمِ ربِّكَ الَّذي خَلَقَ، خَلَقَ الإنسانَ مِن عَلَقٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Coming down, Muhammad could hear from every tree he passed by
eloquently: Peace be upon you, Prophet of Allah. Peace be upon you O
messenger of Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلامُ عَليكَ يا نَبيَّ اللَّه السَّلامُ عَليكَ يا رَسولَ اللَّه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad entered his house where Khadijah saw a special light on his
face. Asked what kind of light it was, Muhammad said: The light of
Prophethood! Khadijah said: I have known you as a Prophet for years. She
further said: There is no go but Allah. Muhammad is the messenger of
Allah.

Muhammad said: Wrap me. Khadija did so and when he felt better, God
inspired:

***"O you who are clothed! Arise and warn, and your lord do magnify."
(74:1-3)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا أيُّها المُدَّثِّر قُم فَانذِر وَرَبَّكَ فَكَبِّر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

After three years of secretly inviting people to worship Allah, Gabriel
came down with the following verse:

***"Therefore declare openly what you are bidden and turn aside from the
polytheists." (15:94)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاصْدَعْ بِمَا تُؤْمَرُ وَأَعْرِضْ عَنِ الْمُشْرِكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then, he went to mount Safa and called out each tribe of Quraish saying:
Ya Sabaha, an Arabic word used when someone asks for help in looting.
Hearing it, people rushed to him asking: O Muhammad! What has happened?
He said: Will you believe me if I inform you of a great army in ambush
behind this mountain or will call me a liar? They said: We have never
heard a word of lying from you. Muhammad said: Now that you believe me,
I am but a warner to you. Abo-Lahab said: May you be perished, is that
what you called us for? O people! My nephew has gone mad, disperse!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَبًّا لَكَ أَلِهذا دَعَوتَنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then he took a stone with the intention to throw it at the holy Prophet
as a threat. At this moment, God sent the Quranic chapter — the flame —
as follows:

***"Perdition overtake both hands of Abo-Lahab, and he will perish. His
wealth and what he earns will not avail him. He shall soon burn in fire
that flames, And his wife, the bearer of fuel, upon her neck a halter of
strongly twisted rope."(111:1-5)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَبَّتْ يَدَا أَبِي لَهَبٍ وَتَبَّ. مَا أَغْنَىٰ عَنْهُ مَالُهُ وَمَا
كَسَبَ. سَيَصْلَىٰ نَارًا ذَاتَ لَهَبٍ. وَامْرَأَتُهُ حَمَّالَةَ
الْحَطَبِ. فِي جِيدِهَا حَبْلٌ مِنْ مَسَدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

A short time after this event, God sent the verse:

***"And warn Thy near relations" (26:214)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْذِرْ عَشِيرَتَكَ الْأَقْرَبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Following the revelation of this verse, the event of the Day of Warning
happened which has been mentioned in the books written by both Shiite
and Sunni Muslims. On that day, only Ali believed in the holy Prophet of
Islam yet some of those present showed hostility to such degree that
verses 90-93 of the Quranic chapter — Bani-Israel — describe them as
follows:

***"And they say: We will by no means believe in you until you cause a
foundation to gush forth from the earth for us. Or you should cause the
heaven to come down upon us in pieces as you think, or bring Allah and
the angels face to face (with us) or you should have a house of gold, or
you should ascend into heaven, and we will not believe in your ascending
until you bring down to us a book which we may read. Say: Glory be to my
Lord; am I aught but a mortal apostle?" (17: 90-93)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا لَنْ نُؤْمِنَ لَكَ حَتَّىٰ تَفْجُرَ لَنَا مِنَ الْأَرْضِ
يَنْبُوعًا. أَوْ تَكُونَ لَكَ جَنَّةٌ مِنْ نَخِيلٍ وَعِنَبٍ
فَتُفَجِّرَ الْأَنْهَارَ خِلَالَهَا تَفْجِيرًا. أَوْ تُسْقِطَ
السَّمَاءَ كَمَا زَعَمْتَ عَلَيْنَا كِسَفًا أَوْ تَأْتِيَ بِاللَّهِ
وَالْمَلَائِكَةِ قَبِيلًا. أَوْ يَكُونَ لَكَ بَيْتٌ مِنْ زُخْرُفٍ أَوْ
تَرْقَىٰ فِي السَّمَاءِ وَلَنْ نُؤْمِنَ لِرُقِيِّكَ حَتَّىٰ تُنَزِّلَ
عَلَيْنَا كِتَابًا نَقْرَؤُهُ ۗ قُلْ سُبْحَانَ رَبِّي هَلْ كُنْتُ
إِلَّا بَشَرًا رَسُولًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hostility mounted to such a degree that they decided to murder the holy
Prophet. Hence, Abo-Talib gathered the sons of Abdul-Muttalib and Hashem
sending them with their women and children to a valley called Shib of
Abo-Talib. All the sons of Abdul-Muttalib whether believers or
unbelievers decided to protect the holy Prophet save Abo-Lahab who
joined his enemies. Hamzeh and Abo-Talib were among the ardent
protectors of the holy Prophet.

Realizing that they could not harm the holy Prophet, forty enemies made
a pact not to treat the sons of Hashem kindly, not to give their
daughters to them in marriage, not to marry their daughters, not to
trade with them, and never to breach this till they surrender the holy
Prophet to them. They wrote this pact on a paper, sealed it and gave it
to the aunt of Abo-Jahl to safeguard. The supporters of the holy Prophet
were in Shib except for the Hajj season which was a sacred month during
which they came out to prepare food and went back to Shib. Three years
passed as such till one day when the supporters and opponents had
gathered near Ka’ba, Abo-Talib entered the gathering.

Some of the people had the impression that he had been tired of
protecting the holy Prophet and that he had come to surrender him. But
he started speaking as follows: O people! My nephew has informed that
God has missioned the termite to eat away all the words of pact only
except the name of God which has been left. Now bring that pact here. If
what I say is true, you can not possibly deny it and if what I say is a
lie, then I will surrender him to you to kill him. People agreed and
went away in order to bring the pact. Opening it, they found that all
the words had been eaten away and only the name of Allah they used to
write on the top of the letters during the era of ignorance, was there.

A person rose up saying: We hate this pact hence he tore it into pieces.
The following day, a group of people went to Shi’b of Abo-Talib bringing
the children of Abdul- Muttaleb to Mecca and giving them abode in their
houses. Staying in Shib of Abo-Talib lasted for three years and the holy
Prophet took advantage of the season of Hajj rituals during which people
came to Mecca from other places to propagate his divine message. Ansar’s
allegiance started from this same place. One day the holy Prophet was
standing in a place near Mena where six people by the name of As’ad
Ibn -Zarareh, Ebatat Ibn -Samet, Rafe Ibn Malek, Qatbeh Ibn -Ame, Aqaba
Ibn -Amer, and Jaber Ibn -Abdullah were passing by him. The holy Prophet
invited them to have a few words with them. He started his words by
saying: I am the messenger of Allah and invite you to the One God and my
Prophethood. The holy Quran is my miracle. Then, he started reciting
parts of the holy Quran. By hearing the holy Quran, they believed in it
saying: The people of Medina are two tribes, namely Aus and Khazraj, and
we belong to Khazraj tribe. These two tribes are always at war. If you
permit, we go back to Medina, resolve our differences, and will come
back here next year to take you with us to Medina. The holy Prophet
taught them parts of the holy Quran and they left Mecca for Medina
informing people of the holy Prophet’s ordainment, and reciting the holy
Quran for them. The following year when Hajj season came, the noblemen
of Medina gathered and sent twelve persons to Mecca as their
representatives to invite the holy Prophet to Medina. This twelve-man
team came to the holy Prophet who became happy to meet them. They took
the oath of allegiance to the messenger of God. This was called the
first allegiance.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
]اسعد بن زراره] و [عبادة بن صامت] و [رافع بن مالك] و [قطبة بن عامر] و
[عقبة بن عامر] و [جابر بن عبد اللَّه]
  </p>
</blockquote>

The holy Prophet ascended to heavens from the Sacred Mosque in Mecca
twelve years after his Prophetic mission at the age of 52. The story of
the holy Prophet’s ascension has been mentioned in the holy Quran and
historic books.

The holy Prophet migrated from Mecca to Medina at the age of 53 when his
enemies whose obstructionism was abortive decided to kill him by
choosing a valiant man from each tribe so that they will shed his blood
with their swords in a way that paying his blood-money and fighting of
one tribe against several tribes would be made easy. However, God
informed His messenger of this plan.

***"And when those who disbelieved devised plans against you that they
might confine you or slay you or drive you away; and they devised plans
and Allah too had arranged a plan; and Allah is the best of planners."
(8:30)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ يَمْكُرُ بِكَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لِيُثْبِتُوكَ أَوْ يَقْتُلُوكَ
أَوْ يُخْرِجُوكَ ۚ وَيَمْكُرُونَ وَيَمْكُرُ اللَّهُ ۖ وَاللَّهُ خَيْرُ
الْمَاكِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thus the holy Prophet was commissioned to migrate from Mecca to Medina.
After sunset when the atheists of Quraish gathered around the holy
Prophet’s house to kill him after midnight, the holy Prophet called on
Imam Ali to lie in his bed instead of him, to turn the trusts with him
to their owners and to join him in Medina later. The holy Prophet came
out of house reciting the Quranic chapter — Ya Seen — through Verse:

***"And We have made before them a barrier and a barrier behind them,
then We covered them over so that they do not see." (36:9)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا مِنْ بَيْنِ أَيْدِيهِمْ سَدًّا وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِمْ سَدًّا
فَأَغْشَيْنَاهُمْ فَهُمْ لَا يُبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then, he took a handful of dust throwing at those people saying : May
your faces be ugly.

Imam Ali put a green sheet on him and lay in the bed of the holy
Prophet. At this time, verse 207 of the Quranic chapter — the Cow — was
revealed to the holy Prophet:

***"And among men is he who sells himself to seek the pleasure of Allah;
and Allah is Affectionate to the servants." (2:207)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَنْ يَشْرِي نَفْسَهُ ابْتِغَاءَ مَرْضَاتِ اللَّهِ ۗ
وَاللَّهُ رَءُوفٌ بِالْعِبَادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

When they decided to carry out their plan, one of the atheists said: Let
Bani-Hashem Know in the morning that all tribes have a hand in shedding
his blood. When they entered the house early in the morning, they found
Imam Ali there asking: O Ali! Where is Muhammad? Imam Ali said: You had
not entrusted him to me.

To sum it up, the holy Prophet took refuge in Thawr Cave on Thursday,
the first of Rabeeul Awwal, 13 years after his Prophetic mission while
the atheists were chasing him but failed to know his whereabouts.
Finally, after spending three nights in the cave, at the dawn of the
third night, the holy Prophet set out for Medina along with Abo-Bakr and
entered Quba district and after a few days Abo-Bakr asked the holy
Prophet to enter Medina. The holy Prophet said: I will not enter Medina
as long as my brother, Ali has not joined me. After returning to their
owners what the people has entrusted to the holy Prophet for
safekeeping, Imam Ali set out for Medina and finally joined the holy
Prophet with sore in his feet. They founded Quba Mosque which was the
first ever built by the holy Prophet with the assistance of People.

Then they set out for Medina where the chiefs of Ansar tribes were
competing with one another to receive the holy Prophet but the holy
Prophet said: Let loose the harness of the she-camel. One version says
that the she-camel sat down at Abo-Ayyub Ansari’s house. Abo-Ayyub’s
mother who was blind rushed to the door joyfully saying to herself: I
wish I had eyes to see the messenger of Allah. The holy Prophet put his
hand on her eyes and she could see. Thus her wish was fulfilled. This
was the holy Prophet’s first miracle in Medina. The holy Prophet stayed
in Abo-Ayyub’s house for seven months and then moved to his own house.
The holy Prophet departed from this world after living in Medina for ten
years.

The holy Prophet lived for 63 years and his Prophethood lasted for 23
years. The detailed account of the holy Prophet’s life is to be found in
the books of history.

Sublime Morality
----------------

***"In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. Noon. I swear by
the pen and what*** ***the angels write. By the grace of your Lord you
are not mad. And most surely you shall have a reward never to be cut
off. And most surely you conform (yourself) to sublime morality."
(68:1-4)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ن ۚ وَالْقَلَمِ وَمَا يَسْطُرُونَ. مَا أَنْتَ بِنِعْمَةِ رَبِّكَ
بِمَجْنُونٍ. وَإِنَّ لَكَ لَأَجْرًا غَيْرَ مَمْنُونٍ. وَإِنَّكَ
لَعَلَىٰ خُلُقٍ عَظِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Holy Quran Testifies To His Compassion
------------------------------------------

***"Certainly an Apostle has come to you from among yourselves; grievous
to him is your falling into distress, excessively solicitous respecting
you; to the believers (he is) compassionate, merciful." (9:128)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ جَاءَكُمْ رَسُولٌ مِنْ أَنْفُسِكُمْ عَزِيزٌ عَلَيْهِ مَا
عَنِتُّمْ حَرِيصٌ عَلَيْكُمْ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ رَءُوفٌ رَحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Holy Quran Testifies To His Leniency
----------------------------------------

***"Thus it is due to mercy from Allah that you deal with them gently,
and had you been rough, hard-hearted, they would certainly have
dispersed from around you; pardon them therefore and ask pardon for
them, and take counsel with them in the affair; so when you have
decided, then place your trust in Allah; surely Allah loves those who
trust."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِمَا رَحْمَةٍ مِنَ اللَّهِ لِنْتَ لَهُمْ ۖ وَلَوْ كُنْتَ فَظًّا
غَلِيظَ الْقَلْبِ لَانْفَضُّوا مِنْ حَوْلِكَ ۖ فَاعْفُ عَنْهُمْ
وَاسْتَغْفِرْ لَهُمْ وَشَاوِرْهُمْ فِي الْأَمْرِ ۖ فَإِذَا عَزَمْتَ
فَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى اللَّهِ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُتَوَكِّلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Features
------------

When the holy Prophet was seven years old, one day he asked his foster
mother, Halimeh Sa’adieh: Where are my brethren? She said: My son! They
have taken out to pastures the sheep God has given us thanks to your
blessing. The holy Prophet said: O Mother! You have not treated me in a
fair manner. Halimeh asked: What for? The holy Prophet said: Is it fair
that I am in shade and drink from the milk of those sheep while my
brethren are out under the hot sun?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلما صارَ ابنَ سَبعِ سِنِين قَالَ لامّهِ حَليمةَ يا أُمّي أَينَ
إِخوَتي؟ قالَت يا بُنيَّ إِنَّهُم يَرعُونَ الغَنَمَ الَّتي رَزَقَنا
اللَّه إِيّاها بِبَرَكَتِكَ قالَ: يا أُمّاه ما أَنْصَفْتَني، قالَت
كيفَ يا وَلَدي، قالَ: أكُونُ أنا في الظِّلِّ وَإِخوَتي في الشَّمسِ
وَالحَرِّ الشَّديدِ وَأنا أَشرَبُ مِنها اللَّبَنَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Respect For Those Having Moral Virtues
------------------------------------------

Imam Ali has said: When the captives of Tay Tribe were brought to
Medina, among them there was a girl who said to the holy Prophet: Set me
free and expose me not before the Arab’s blame, for I am the daughter of
the generous man of the tribe. My father used to set the captives free,
give to the poor, support the weak, receive guests, give food to the
needy, clothe the bare, and remove sorrows from the hearts of the
grief-stricken. I am the daughter of Hatam Tay. The holy Prophet said:
Set her free, for her father, Hatam Tay Was fond of moral virtues.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ أميرُ المُؤمِنينَ عَليهِ السَّلامُ: لَمّا أَتانا سَبايا طَيٍّ
فَإِذا فيها جارِيةٌ..... فَقالَت يا مُحَمَّدُ إِن رَأيتَ أن تُخَلِّيَ
عَنّي وَلا تُشمِت بي أحياءَ العَرَبِ فَإِنّي ابنَةُ سِرَّةِ قَومي كانَ
أبي يَفُكُّ العانِيَ وَيُعطي العانِيَ وَيَحمي الذِّمارَ وَيُقرِئُ
الضَّيفَ وَيُشبِعُ الجائعَ وَيَكْسي المَعدومَ وَيُفَرِّجُ عَنِ
المَكروبِ أَنا ابنَةُ حاتَمِ طَيٍّ، فَقالَ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه:
خَلّوا عَنها فإِنَّ أَباها كانَ يُحِبُّ مَكارِمَ الأخلاقِ (الخ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Permanent Request From God
------------------------------

The holy Prophet used to weep a great deal beseeching God to bestow
moral virtues upon him. In his prayer, he used to say: O God! Make my
nature and temper good. He also said: O God! Keep me away from vices.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ النَّبيُّ صَلَّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه كَثيرُ الضّراعَةِ
وَالابتِهالِ، دائمُ السُّؤالِ مِنَ اللَّه تَعالى أَن يُزَيِّنَهُ
بِمَحاسِنِ الآدابِ وَمَكارِمِ الأخلاقِ، فَكانَ يَقولُ في دُعائِه:
اللّهُمَّ حَسِّن خَلقي وَخُلقي وَيقولُ: اللّهُمَّ جَنِّبني مُنكراتِ
الأخلاقِ (الخ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Moral Virtues Before Prophethood
------------------------------------

The holy Prophet even before his Prophethood, was endowed with twenty
moral virtues of Prophets one of which in a person would make him noble
let alone all to be gathered in a single person. He was trustworthy,
truthful, ingenious, of noble birth, dignified, eloquent, giver of
advice, wise, learned, pious, devout, generous, moderate, modest,
forbearing, merciful, zealous, patient, agreeable, accompanying, and
never associated with any star-gazer, fortune-teller and augury.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّهُ عَليهِ وَآلِه قَبلَ المَبعَثِ مَوصُوفًا
بِعشرين خَصلَةٍ مِن خِصالِ الأنْبِياءِ، لَو انفَرَدَ واحِدٌ بِأَحَدِها
لَدلَّ عَلى جَلاله، فَكيفَ مَن اجتَمَعَت فيهِ، كانَ نَبيًّا أمينًا،
صادِقًا، حاذِقًا، أَصيلا نَبيلا، مَكينًا فَصيحًا، نَصيحًا، عاقِلا،
فاضِلا، عابِدًا، زاهِدًا، سَخيًّا مَكيًا، قانِعًا مُتواضِعًا، حَليمًا،
رَحيمًا، غَيورًا، صَبورًا، مُوافِقًا، مُرافِقًا لَم يُخالِط مُنَجِّمًا
وَلا كاهِنًا وَلا عَيّافًا (الخ)
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Six Fold Features
---------------------

The holy Prophet used to eat on the earth, sit like servants, repair his
shoes with his own hands, patch his clothes with his own hands, ride on
a bare donkey with another person in the back. Seeing that there was a
painted curtain hanging from the top of door, the holy Prophet said to
his wife: Bring it down, for whenever I look at it, I remember the world
and its embellishments.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَد كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه يَأكُلُ عَلى
الأرضِ وَيَجلِسُ جَلسَةَ العَبدِ وَيَخصِفُ بِيَدِه نَعلَهُ وَيرقَعُ
بِيَدِه ثَوبَهُ وَيَركَبُ الحِمارَ العاري وَيردِفُ خَلفَهُ وَيكونُ
السِّترُ عَلى بابِ بيتِه فَيكُونُ عَلَيهِ التَّصاويرُ فَيَقولُ: يا
فُلانَةُ «لإحدى أَزواجِه» غَيّبِيهِ عَنّي فَانّي إِذا نَظَرتُ إِليهِ
ذَكَرتُ الدُّنيا وَزَخارِفها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Recommending Moral Virtues
--------------------------

Quoting his fathers, Imam Reza has reported that the holy Prophet said:
Be adorned with moral virtues, for God has delegated me with them. Some
of moral virtues are: To forgive one who has oppressed him, to be
bounteous to one who has deprived him, to unite with one who has cut off
relation and to visit one who does not come to visit him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنِ الرِّضا عَليهِ السَّلامُ عَن آبائِهِ عَليهِمُ السَّلامُ قالَ:
قالَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: عَلَيكُم بِمَكارِمِ
الأخلاقِ، فَإِنَّ اللَّه بَعَثَني بِها وَإِنَّ مِن مَكارِمِ الأخلاقِ
أَن يَعفُوَ الرَّجُلُ عَمَّن ظَلَمَهُ وَيُعطي مَن حَرَمَهُ ويَصِل مَن
قَطَعَهُ وان يَعودَ مَن لا يَعودُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Fair Attitude
-----------------

It has been reported on the authority of Imam Sadeq that the holy
Prophet divided among his companions the time he spent among them. He
used to cast his look at them equally. The holy Prophet never stretched
his legs while he was among his companions. If a man shook hands with
him, the holy Prophet never withdrew his hand till the man did so. When
people knew about it, they would immediately withdrew their hands after
shaking hands with him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَ: كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّهُ عَليهِ وَآلِه يُقسِّمُ لَحظاتِه بَينَ أَصْحابِه فَيَنظُرُ إِلى
ذا وَيَنظُرُ إِلى ذا بِالسَّويَّةِ، قالَ: وَلَم يَبسُط رَسولُ اللَّه
رِجلَيهِ بَينَ أَصْحابِه قَطُّ وَإِن كانَ لَيُصافِحَهُ الرَّجُلُ فَما
يَترُكُ رَسولُ اللَّه يَدَهُ حَتّى يَكونَ هُوَ التّارِكُ. فَلَمّا
فَطَنوا لِذلِكَ كانَ الرَّجُلُ إِذا صافَحَهُ مالَ بِيَدِه فَنَزَعهَا
مِن يَدِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Smile While Speaking
------------------------

It has been reported on the authority of Abi-Darda that whenever the
holy Prophet began to speak, he was smiling.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي الدَّرداءِ قالَ: كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه (ص) إِذا حَدَّثَ بِحَديثٍ
تَبَسَّمَ في حَديثِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Association With The Needy
------------------------------

The holy Prophet used to sit and eat with the needy. He fed them with
his own hands; he honored the learned people; he was fond of the noble
men; he treated them kindly; and he had a love of kinship while not
deeming his relatives superior to others.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: يُجالِسُ الفُقَراءَ
وَيُؤاكِلُ المَساكينَ وَيُناوِلُهُم بِيَدِه وَيُكرِمُ أَهلَ الفَضلِ في
أَخلاقِهِم وَيَتَألَّفُ أَهلَ الشَّرَفِ بِالبِرِّ لَهُم، يَصِلُ ذَوي
رَحِمَهُ مِن غَيرِ أَن يُؤثِرَهُمُ عَلى غَيرِهِم إِلا بِما أمَرَ
اللَّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Four Features
-----------------

It has been reported on the authority of Ibn -Abbas that the holy
Prophet used to sit and eat on the ground, take care of the sheep, and
accept the salves’ invitation and ate oat bread with them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن ابنِ عَبّاسٍ قالَ: كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه:
يَجلِسُ عَلى الأرضِ وَيَأكُلُ عَلَى الأرضِ، وَيَعتَقِلُ الشّاةَ،
وَيُجيبُ دَعوَةَ المَملوكِ عَلى خُبزِ الشَّعيرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Ali’s Description Of His Virtues
-------------------------------------

Describing the holy Prophet, Imam Ali said: The messenger of Allah was
the most generous, the bravest, the most truthful and the most faithful
of people, and in term of temper, the most lenient and in term of
association, the most honorable. Any one seeing him for the first time
was filled with awe and any one associating with him, loved him. I never
saw his like before and after him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أميرِ المُؤمِنينَ عَليهِ السَّلامُ كانَ إِذا وَصَفَ رَسولُ اللَّه
صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه قالَ: كانَ أَجوَدُ النّاسَ كَفًّا، وَأَجرأُ
النّاسِ صَدرًا وأَصْدَقُ النّاسِ لَهجَةً وَأَوفاهُم ذِمَّةً
وَأَليَنَهُم عَريكَةً وَأَكرَمَهُم عِشرَةً وَمَن رَآهُ بَدِيهةً
هَابَهُ وَمَن خالَطَهُ فَعَرَفَهُ أَحَبَّهُ، لَم أرَ مِثلَهُ قَبلَهُ
وَلا بَعدَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Helping Others
--------------

A Sunni hadith relates that the holy Prophet was on a trip when he
ordered his companions to slaughter a sheep and prepare a meal. One of
the companions said: I will slaughter the sheep. The second one said: I
will skin it, the third one said: I will be engaged in cooking it. The
holy Prophet said: I will go to the desert to gather wood for making
fire. The companions said: O Messenger of Allah! We would do it. Then he
said: I know you would do it. But Allah hates to see his servant enjoy a
state of privilege among his friends and companions and distinguish
himself over others. Then, he proceeded towards the desert and fetched
the necessary twigs and thorns.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرُوِيَ عَن طَريقِ العامَّةِ أنَّهُ كانَ في سَفَرٍ فَأمَرَ بِإصْلاحِ
شاةٍ، فَقالَ رَجُلٌ يا رَسولُ اللَّه عَلَيَّ ذِبحُها وَقالَ آخَر
عَلَيَّ سَلخُها وَقالَ آخَر عَلَيَّ طَبخُها، فَقالَ رَسولُ اللَّه
صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلهِ وَسلَّمَ وَعَلَيَّ جَمعُ الحَطَبِ فَقالوا
يا رَسولُ اللَّه نَحنُ نَكفيكَ فَقالَ قَد علِمتُ أَنَّكُم تَكفُوني
وَلكنّي أَكرَهُ أن أَتَمَيَّزُ عَليكُم فَإِنَّ اللَّه يَكرَهُ مِن
عَبدِهِ أَن يَراهُ مُتَمَيِّزًا بَينَ أَصْحابِه وَقامَ فَجَمَعَ
الحَطَبَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Helping His Own Family Members
------------------------------

The holy Prophet used to help his family members with work: he would sit
humbly at table, lick his fingers and never belch. He milked the sheep
himself; mended his shoes and clothes; did his personal works; broomed
the house; tied the camel, fed the watering camel; helped the servant
with grinding the wheat and kneading of flour; carried home what he had
shopped; prepared with his own hand water for purification and ablution
at night; sat with the needy, ate food with them and fed them with his
own hands.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكانَ في بَيتِه في مِهنَةِ أَهلِه وَيَقطَعُ اللَّحمَ وَيَجلِسُ عَلى
الطَّعامِ مُحَقَّرًا وَكانَ يَلطَعُ أَصابِعَهُ وَلَم يَتَجَشَّأ قَطُّ،
يَحلِبُ شاتَهُ وَيَرقَعُ ثَوبَهُ وَيَخصِفُ نَعلَهُ وَيَخدِمُ نَفسَهُ
وَيَقُمُّ البَيتَ وَيَعقِلُ البَعيرَ وَيَعلِفُ ناضِحَهُ وَيَطحَنُ مَعَ
الخادِمِ وَيَعجنُ مَعَها وَيَحمِلُ بِضاعَتَهُ مِن السُّوقِ وَيَضَعُ
طَهُورَهُ بِاللَّيلِ وَيُجالِسُ الفُقَراءَ وَيُؤاكِلُ المَساكينَ
وَيُناوِلُهُم بِيَدِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Reaction To An Arab’s Impudence
-----------------------------------

Anas Ibn -Malek reported that once an Arab clashed with the holy Prophet
by sharply pulling his aba (cloak open front) in a way that scratched
his neck saying: O Muhammad! Order to give me of God’s wealth which is
with you. The holy Prophet turned to him with a smile and ordered to
give something to him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أنَسِ بن مالكٍ قالَ: إِنَّ النَّبيَّ أَدرَكهُ أعرابِيٌّ فَأخَذَ
بِرِدائِه فَجَبَذَهُ جَبذةً شَديدةً حَتّى نَظَرتُ إِلى صَفحَةِ عُنُقِ
رَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه وَقَد أثَّرَت بِه حاشيةَ
الرِّداءِ مِن شِدَّةِ جَبذَتِه، ثُمَّ قالَ لَهُ: يا مُحَمَّدُ مُرْ لي
مِن مالِ اللَّه الَّذي عِندَكَ، فَالتَفَتَ إِليهِ رَسولُ اللَّه (ص)
فَضَحِكَ وَأمرَ لَهُ بِعَطاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Behavior At Home
--------------------

Imam Husayn said: I asked my father concerning the holy Prophet’s
behavior at home. He said: The holy Prophet used to go home whenever he
felt like at home, he would divide his time into three parts; one
portion for prayer, one portion for the household and one portion for
himself. He would issue orders to companions to look into people’s
affairs out of the portion he had devoted to himself and would not do
anything for himself.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ الحُسَينُ عَليهِ السَّلامُ: سَألتُ أبي عَن مَدخَلِ رَسولِ اللَّه
صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: فَقالَ: كانَ دُخُولُهُ لِنَفسِهِ مَأذُونًا
لَهُ في ذلِكَ، فَإِذا آوى إِلى مَنزِلِه جَزَّأَ دُخُولَهُ ثَلاثَةَ
أجزاءَ، جُزءٌ للهِ، وَجُزءٌ لِأهلِهِ وَجُزءٌ لِنَفسِه ثُمَّ جَزَّأَ
جُزأَهُ بَينَهُ وَبَينَ النّاسِ فَيَرُدُّ ذلِكَ بِالخاصَّةِ عَلَى
العامَّةِ وَلا يَدَّخِرُ عَلَيهِم مِنهُ شَيئًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Behavior Outside Home
-------------------------

The holy Prophet’s behavior outside home was such that he held his
tongue from what was unnecessary. He was fond of people and did not keep
aloof from them. He honored the nobleman of each nation, considering him
superior to others. He always bewared of people and guarded himself
against them without turning his face away from them of being
bad-tempered. He showed kindness to his companions and appeased them. He
asked after people, praised every good deed and denounced every bad deed
and was moderate in all affairs. He would not go into extremes. He was
not negligent of people’s affairs lest they would deviate from the right
path. He never neglected the truth nor exceeded it. His associates were
from among good people and the best of them were those who would give
more advice to them and the greatest of them were those who were fair to
their brothers-in-faith and wished them well.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه يَخزُنُ لِسانَهُ إِلا
عَمّا كانَ يُعينُه وَيُؤلِّفُهُم وَلا يُنَفِّرُهُم، وَيُكرِمُ كَريمَ
كُلِّ قَومٍ وَيُوَلّيهِ عَليهِم وَيَحذَرُ النّاسَ وَيَحترِسُ مِنهُم
مِن غَيرِ أن يَطوي عَن أحَدٍ بِشرَهُ وَلا خُلقَهُ وَيَتَفَقَّدُ
أَصْحابَهُ وَيَسألُ النّاسَ عَمّا في النّاسِ وَيُحسِّنُ الحَسَنَ
وَيُقَوّيهِ وَيُقَبِّحُ القَبيحَ وَيُهَوِّنَهُ، مُعتَدِلُ الأَمرِ
غَيرُ مُختَلِفٍ، لا يَغفُلُ مَخافَةَ أن يَغفُلُوا وَيَمُلّوا وَلا
يَقصِرُ عَنِ الحَقِّ وَلا يَجُوزُهُ، الَّذينَ يَلُونَهُ مِنَ النّاسِ
خِيارُهُم أَفضَلَهُم عِندَهُ أَعَمَّهُم نَصيحَةً لِلمُسلمينَ
وَأَعظَمَهُم عِندَهُ مَنزِلةً أَحْسَنَهُم مُواساةً وَمُوازَرَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Behavior In Meetings
------------------------

The holy Prophet attended no meeting without remembering God. He did not
choose a special place for himself in a meeting. He especially forbade
others to do so whenever he attended a meeting, he would sit where there
was an empty place.

He ordered to do the same to the companions paying his due respect to
each of the guests. No one had this impression that others were more
respectable than him to the holy Prophet. The holy Prophet was patient
to whomever he sat with till that person would rise up and leave.
Whoever asked the holy Prophet anything, his need was either met or he
was convinced with the holy Prophet’s sweet words. His temper was so
good that people considered him as a kind father.

People were all equal to him. His meeting was that of forbearance,
modesty, truthfulness, and trust and no voice was raised or any one
disgraced. If any one blundered, no one spoke of it elsewhere. Those in
his meeting treated themselves in a fair manner. Their behavior towards
each other was like friendship with the pious. They were humble to each
other. They respected the elderly and were kind to younger ones. They
gave superiority to the needy and took care of the homeless.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ لا يَجلِسُ وَلا يَقومُ إِلا عَلى ذِكرٍ وَلا يُوطِنُ الأماكِنَ
وَيَنهى عَن إِيتانِها وإِذا انتَهى إِلى قَومٍ جَلَسَ حَيثُ يَنتَهي بِه
المَجلسُ وَيأمُرُ بِذلِكَ وَيُعطي كُلَّ جُلسائِه نَصيبَهُ وَلا يَحسِبُ
أَحَدٌ مِن جُلسائِه أنَّ أحَدًا أكرَمُ عَليهِ مِنهُ، مَن جالَسَهُ
صابَرَهُ حَتّى يَكونَ هُوَ المُنصَرِفُ عَنهُ، مَن سَألَهُ حاجَةً لَم
يَرْجِع إِلا بِها أو بِمَيسورٍ مِنَ القَولِ، قَد وَسَّعَ النّاسُ مِن
خُلقِه فَصارَ لَهُم أبًا وَصاروا عِندَهُ في الخُلقِ سَواء، مَجلِسُهُ
مَجلِسُ حِلمٍ وَحياءٍ وَصِدقٍ وأمانةٍ، وَلا تُرتَفَعُ فيهِ الأَصواتُ
وَلا تُؤبَنُ فيهِ الحُرَمُ، ولا تَنثى فَلتاتِه مُتعادِلينَ،
مُتواصِلينَ فيهِ بِالتَّقوى مُتواضِعينَ يُوَقِّرُونَ الكَبيرَ
وَيَرحَمونَ الصَّغيرَ وَيُؤثِرونَ ذا الحاجَةِ وَيحفَظونَ الغَريبَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Behavior Towards His Associates
-----------------------------------

The holy Prophet was always lenient and of sunny disposition to his
associates. He was not rough, rude, frivolous, foul-mouthed or
fault-finder. He did not eulogize anyone and turned a blind eye to what
he did not like in a way that people never get disappointed with him. He
kept himself away from three things namely dispute, verbosity, and
saying what is useless. He abstained from three things in relation to
people: He never reproached any one, never found fault with any one, and
never pointed out people’s mistakes unless in a place where there was a
hope for pious deed.

When speaking, he attracted the audience so much so that no sound of
breath was heard from any one, and when he kept silent, they would start
speaking. People never disputed over anything in his presence. If any
one of them started speaking, the rest would keep silent till he would
stop speaking. They spoke in turn before the holy Prophet. Whenever
those present in a meeting started laughing, the holy Prophet too would
smile. He would be surprised at what they surprised at.

He was patient to impolite treatment by a stranger in conversation or
questioning to a degree that the companions would take him out of
meeting. The holy Prophet used to say: Help those in need. He never
accepted eulogy from any one unless his eulogy was a sign of thanks to
him. He never interrupted any one unless the speaker exceeded his limits
in which he would interrupt the speaker with a sign or by rising up.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ دائِمُ البِشرِ، سَهلُ الخُلقِ، لينُ الجانِبِ، لَيسَ بِفظٍّ وَلا
غَليظٍ وَلا صَخّابٍ وَلا فَحّاشٍ، وَلا عَيّابٍ، وَلا مَدّاحٍ،
يَتَغافَلُ عَمّا لا يَشتَهي فَلا يُؤيِسُ مِنهُ وَلا يَخيبُ فيهِ
مُؤمِّليهِ، قَد تَرَكَ نَفسَهُ مِن ثَلاثٍ، المِراءُ وَالإِكثارُ، وَما
لا يَعنيهِ، وَتَرَكَ النّاسُ مِن ثَلاثٍ: كانَ لا يَذُمُّ أَحدًا وَلا
يُعَيِّرُهُ وَلا يَطلُبُ عَثراتَهُ وَلا عَورَتَهُ وَلا يَتَكَلَّمُ
إِلا فيما رَجى ثَوابَهُ، إِذا تَكَلَّمَ أَطرَقَ جُلساءهُ كَأنَّما عَلى
رُءُوسِهِمُ الطَّيرَ فَإِذا سَكَتَ تَكَلَّمُوا وَلا يَتَنازَعونَ
عِندَهُ الحديثَ مَن تَكَلَّمَ أَنْصَتوا لَهُ حَتَّى يَفرُغَ، حَديثُهُم
عِندَهُ حَديثُ أوَّلِهِم، يَضحَكُ مِمّا يَضحَكونَ مِنهُ، وَيَتَعَجَّبُ
مِمّا يَتَعَجَّبونَ مِنهُ وَيَصبرُ لِلغَريبِ عَلَى الجَفوةِ في
مَسألَتِه وَمنطِقِه، حَتّى إِن كانَ أَصْحابُهُ ليَستَجلِبونَهُم
وَيقولُ: إِذا رَأيتُم طالِبَ الحاجَةِ يَطلُبُها فَارفِدهُ وَلا يَقبَلُ
الثَّناءِ إِلا مِن مُكافِئٍ وَلا يَقطَعُ عَلى أَحدٍ، كَلامَهُ حَتّى
يَجوزَ فَيَقطَعَهُ بِنَهيٍ أو قِيامٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Silence
-----------

The holy Prophet Kept silent in four situations: Forbearance, caution,
fate and meditation. His silence over fate and measuring was aimed to
view people equally and to listen to them equally but his silence in
meditation was aimed to meditate about mortal and immortal affairs, and
his silence in forbearance was due to patience in a way that he never
became furious nor hated anything. His silence in caution was related to
four things: He would do good deed so that the others would follow suit;
he abstained from doing any indecent acts so that people would keep away
from them. He endeavored for a sound decision aimed to improve the
affairs of ummah and would rise for all in which there was the good of
the world and the hereafter.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ سُكوتُهُ عَلى أَربَعٍ، عَلى الحِلمِ، وَالحَذرِ، وَالتَّقديرِ،
وَالتَّفَكُّرِ فَأما التَّقديرُ فَفي تَسويةِ النَّظرِ وَالاستِماعِ
بَينَ النّاسِ، وَأما تَفَكُّرِه فَفيما يَبقى أو يَفنى وجُمِعَ لَهُ
الحِلمُ في الصَّبرِ، فَكانَ لا يُغضِبُهُ شيءٌ وَلا يَستَفِزُّهُ
وَجُمِعَ لَهُ الحَذرُ في أربعٍ: أَخْذُهُ بِالحَسَنِ ليُقتدى بِه
وَتَركُهُ القَبيحَ لِيُنتَهى عَنهُ واجتهادُهُ الرَّأْيِ في صَلاحِ
أُمَّتِه وَالقِيامُ فيما جُمِعَ لَهُم خَيرَ الدُّنيا وَالآخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

How Would He Sit?
-----------------

The holy Prophet used to sit in three ways:

1- On his feet that is he would keep his shins above the ground holding
his knees between his hands while leaning on his forearm.

2- He would sometimes sit on his knees.

3- He would sometimes fold one leg putting the other on it. He would
never sit with legs crossed.

It has been reported that the holy Prophet used to sit mostly facing
Qibla.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه يَجلِسُ ثَلاثًا، القُرفُصاءَ
وَهوَ أن يُقيمَ ساقيهِ وَيستقبِلَهُما بِيَديهِ وَيَشُدَّ يَدَهُ في
ذِراعِه وَكانَ يَجثو على رُكبَتَيهِ وَكانَ يُثني رِجلا واحِدةً
وَيَبسُطُ عَلَيها الأُخرى وَلَم يُرَ مُتَرَبِّعًا قَطُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السّلامُ قالَ: كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه أكثرُ ما يَجلِسُ تُجاهَ القِبلَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

How Would He Sleep
------------------

The holy Prophet used to sleep on straw mat with nothing underneath.
Whenever he wanted to sleep, he would first brush his teeth, then would
lie on his right side when sleep overtook him while he was putting his
right arm under his face saying: O God! Preserve me from You
chastisement on the Day You will raise us.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: يَنامُ عَلى الحَصيرِ
لَيسَ تَحتَهُ شَيءٌ غَيرُهُ وَكانَ يَستاكُ إِذا أَرادَ أن يَنامُ
وَيأخُذُ مَضجَعَهُ وَكانَ إِذا آوى إِلى فِراشِه اضطَجَعَ عَلى شِقِّهِ
الأيمَنِ وَوَضَعَ يَدَهُ اليُمنى تَحتَ خَدِّهِ اليُمنى ثُمَّ يَقولُ:
اللَّهُمَّ قِني عَذابَكَ يَومَ تَبعَثُ عِبادَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

How Would He Enter A House
--------------------------

When the holy Prophet entered a house he would take sit in the lowest
side of the house.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكانَ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه وَسَلَّمَ إِذا دَخَلَ مَنزِلا قَعَدَ
في أَدنى المَجلِسِ حينَ يَدخُلُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

How Would He Take Part In A Funeral
-----------------------------------

Whenever the holy Prophet took part in a funeral, sorrows would overtake
him in a way that he spoke to himself and uttered few words.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: إِذا شَيَّعَ جِنازَةً
غَلَبَهُ كآبَةٌ وَأكثَرَ حَديثَ النَّفسِ وَأقَلَّ الكَلامَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

On Facing The Corpse Of Those In Debt
-------------------------------------

It has been reported on the authority of Moawieh Ibn Wahab that one day
I said to Imam Sadeq : We have been in informed that a man from Among
Ansar (the Helpers) has passed away while he is in debt. The holy
Prophet did not perform corpse prayer for him, forbidding others too,
till his debt was paid. Imam Sadeq said: This report is authentic. The
holy Prophet did not perform corpse prayer for that man so that people
will obey what is right, will pay each other’s debt, and will not
underestimate debt.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن مُعاوِيَةَ بن وَهَبٍ قالَ قُلتُ لأبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السّلامُ
بَلَغَنا أنَّ رجُلا مِن الأنصارِ ماتَ وَعَلَيهِ دَينٌ فَلَم يُصَلِّ
عَلَيهِ النَّبيُّ صَلَّى اللَّه عَلَيهِ وَآلِه وَقالَ لا تُصَلّوا عَلى
صاحِبِكُم حَتّى يُقضى عَنهُ الدَّينُ فَقالَ عَليهِ السَّلامُ ذلِكَ
حَقٌّ ثُمَّ قالَ عَليهِ السّلامُ إِنَّما فَعَلَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وآلِهِ ذلِكَ لِيَتَعاطَوا الحَقَّ وَيُؤدّي بَعضُهُم إِلى
بَعضٍ وَلِئلّا يُستَخَفُّوا بِالدَّينِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Concern About A Martyr In Debt
----------------------------------

Imam Ali said: Having performed his prayer with the companions, the holy
Prophet said: Is there anyone of the tribe of Bani-Najjar here? One of
their friend has been kept in front of paradise denied permission to
enter it, for he owes a Jew three Dirhams (though the person in debt was
a martyr).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن عَليٍّ عَليهِ السّلامُ قالَ: لَقَد صَلّى رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه بِأصحابِهِ ذاتَ يومٍ فَقالَ: ما هيهُنا مِن بَني
النَّجّارِ أحَدٌ وَصاحِبُهُم مُحتَبَسٌ عَلى بابِ الجَنَّةِ بِثَلاثَةِ
دَراهِمٍ لِفُلانِ اليَهودي وَكانَ شَهيدًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He And Pasture
--------------

It has been reported on the authority of Ammar: One day when I was
feeding my sheep and the holy Prophet too was feeding his own sheep, I
said: O Muhammad! Shall we feed our sheep in Fakh near Mecca where the
green pasture dazzles man’s eyes? The holy Prophet responded positive.

The following day when I went to that pasture, I found out that the holy
Prophet had come sooner but had not let his sheep go to the pasture,
saying: Since I had promised to come here, I did not like to feed my
sheep before yours.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرُويَ عَن عَمّارٍ رَضيَ اللَّه عَنهُ قالَ: كُنتُ أَرْعى غَنيمَةَ
أهلي وَكانَ مُحَمَّدٌ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه يَرعى أيضًا، فَقُلتُ
يا مُحَمَّدُ هَل لكَ في «فَخٍّ» فَإِنّي تَركتُها رَوضَةَ بَرقٍ، قالَ:
نَعَم، فَجِئتُها مِنَ الغَدِ وَقَد سَبَقَني مُحَمَّدٌ صَلّى اللَّه
عَليهِ وَآلِه وَهوَ قائِمٌ يَذودُ غَنَمَهُ عَنِ الرَّوضَةِ قالَ إِنّي
كُنتُ واعَدتُكَ فَكَرِهتُ أن أَرعى قَبلَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Eight Fold Virtues
----------------------

The holy Prophet was the most graceful of all in his meetings. His look
was lowered and lasted more upon the ground that towards the sky. He was
the most modest among people. He honored his companions more than
others. He never stretched his legs while he was among his companions.
He would make room whenever there was no room for sitting and his knees
were never ahead of those sitting with him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ أوقَرُ النّاسِ في مَجلِسِه، وَكانَ خافِضُ الطَّرفِ، نَظَرُهُ إِلى
الأرضِ أَطوَلُ مِن نَظَرِه إِلى السَّماءِ، وَكانَ أَعَفَّ النّاسِ،
وَأَشَدَّهُم إِكرامًا لأصحابِه لا يَمُدُّ رِجلَيهِ بَينَهُم،
وَيُوَسِّعُ عَلَيهِم إِذا ضاقَ المَكانُ، وَلَم يَكُن رُكبَتاهُ
يَتَقَدّمانِ رُكبَةَ جَليسِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A Child Polluting His Clothes
-----------------------------

Whenever an infant was brought to the holy Prophet to be blessed or to
be given a name, he would put the infant on his lap in order to respect
its family. Sometimes the infant happened to wet the holy Prophet’s
clothed hence those seeing the scene, yelled at the infant. However, the
holy prophet used to say: Do not stop the infant from doing so. Let the
infant be free and the parents joyfully took the infant and saw no
disturbance in him. The holy Prophet washed his clothes and purified
himself when they went away.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكانَ رَسولُ اللَّه (ص) يُؤتى بِالصَّبيِّ الصَّغيرِ ليَدعوا لَهُ
بِالبَرَكَةِ أو يُسَمّيهِ، فَيأخُذَهُ فَيَضَعَهُ في حِجرِه تَكرِمَةً
لأهلِه، فَرُبّما بالَ الصَّبيُّ عَليهِ، فَيَصيحُ بَعضُ مَن رَآهُ حينَ
يَبولُ، فَيَقُولُ: لا تَزرِموا بِالصَّبيِّ فَيَدَعُهُ حَتّى يَقضِيَ
بَولَهُ، ثُمَّ يَفرَغُ لَهُ مِن دُعائِه أو تَسمِيَتِه وَيَبلُغُ سُرورُ
أَهلِه فيهِ وَلا يَرَونَ أنَّهُ يَتَأذّى بِبَولِ صَبِيِّهِم فَإِذا
انصَرَفُوا غَسَّلَ ثَوبَهُ بَعدَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Inquiring After Brothers In Faith
---------------------------------

When the holy Prophet would not see one of his companions for three
days, he would inquire after them. He would pray for his companion if he
was on a trip, would visit him if he was ill or at home.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: إِذا فَقَدَ الرَّجُلُ
مِن إِخوانِه ثَلاثَةَ أَيَّامٍ سَأَلَ عَنهُ، فَإِن كانَ غائِبًا دَعا
لَهُ وَإِن كانَ شاهِدًا زارَهُ وَإِن كانَ مَريضًا عادَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Personal Affairs
--------------------

On one of his trips, the holy Prophet dismounted from his camel to
prepare for the preliminaries of prayer but returned immediately, the
companions asked: Where are you going? The holy Prophet said: To tie my
she-camel. They said: We will tie her. The holy Prophet said: Do not
ever ask for help from others for your personal Affairs as small as
tooth-pick.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكانَ في سَفَرِه فَنَزَلَ إِلى الصَّلاةِ ثُمَّ كَرَّ راجِعًا فَقيلَ
يا رَسولَ اللَّه أينَ تُريدُ؟ قالَ: أعقِلُ ناقَتي، قالوا نَحنُ
نَعقِلُها، قالَ: لا يَستَعينُ أَحدَكُم بِالنَّاسِ وَلو في قُضمَةٍ مِن
سِواكٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

When Visited
------------

Salman al-Farisi has reported: One day, I went to visit the holy
Prophet. He was leaning on a cushion. Seeing me, he placed it for me
saying: O Salman! God will forgive every Muslim who places a cushion for
his brother-in-faith to honor him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رُوِيَ عَن سَلمانَ قالَ دَخلتُ عَلى رَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ
وَآلِه وَهوَ مُتَّكِئٌ عَلى وِسادَةٍ فَألقاها إِليَّ، ثُمَّ قالَ: يا
سَلمانُ ما مِن مُسلِمٍ دَخَلَ عَلى أخيهِ المُسلِمِ فَيُلقي لَهُ
الوِسادَةَ إِكرامًا لَهُ إِلا غَفَرَ اللَّه لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Never Finding Faults With Others
--------------------------------

Anas has reported: I was serving the holy Prophet for nine years. Yet I
never remember the holy Prophet having said to me; why have you not done
such and such work. He never Found fault with me.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أَنَسٍ، قالَ: خَدَمتُ النَّبيَّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه تِسعَ
سِنين فَما أَعلَمُ أنَّهُ قالَ لي قَطُّ: هَلّا فَعَلتَ كَذا وَلا عابَ
عَلَيَّ شَيئًا قَطُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Pleasantries
----------------

Husayn Ibn Zeid has been reported as saying: I said to Imam Sadeq: May I
be sacrificed for you, did the holy Prophet ever use humor? The Imam
said: God describes him as one endowed with sublime morality. There is a
bit stiffness in all prophets whom God has appointed but He appointed
Muhammad with compassion and mercy. It was out of his compassion that he
used humor in relation to his companions so that his magnanimity will
not stop them from looking at them and asking their needs. Then Imam
Sadeq said: Quoting his grandfathers and Imam Ali, my father reported:
Whenever the holy Prophet found one of his companions sorrowful, he
would make them happy humor saying: God does not like one who faces his
brothers-in-faith with sour.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن الحُسَينِ بنِ زَيدٍ قالَ قُلتُ لِجَعفرِ بن مُحَمَّدٍ جُعِلتُ
فِداكَ هَل كانَت في النَّبيّ مُداعَبَةٌ؟ فَقالَ: وَصَفَهُ اللَّه
بِخُلقٍ عَظيمٍ وَإِنَّ اللَّه بَعَثَ أَنبِياءَهُ فَكانَت فيهِم
كَزازَةٌ وَبَعَثَ مُحَمَّدًا صَلّى اللَّهُ عَليهِ وَآلِه بِالرَّأفَةِ
وَالرَّحمَةِ وَكانَ مِن رَأفَتِه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه لأُمَّتِه
مُداعَبَتُهُ لَهُم لِكَيلا يَبلُغَ بِأحَدٍ مِنهُم التَّعظيمُ حَتّى لا
يَنظُرَ إِليهِ، ثُمَّ قالَ: حَدَّثَني أبي مُحَمَّدٌ عَن أبيهِ عَليٍّ،
عَن أبيهِ الحُسينِ عَن أبيهِ عَليٍّ عَلَيهِمُ السَّلامُ قالَ: كانَ
رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه لَيَسُرُّ الرَّجُلَ مِن
أَصْحابِه إِذا رآهُ مَغمُومًا بِالمُداعَبةِ، وَكانَ صَلّى اللَّه
عَليهِ وَآلِه يَقولُ: إِنَّ اللَّه يُبغِضُ المُعَبِّسَ في وَجهِ
إِخوانِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

An Example Of His Pleasantries
------------------------------

An old woman from among Ansar asked the holy Prophet to pray for her to
enter paradise, the holy Prophet said: The old people will not enter
paradise. The woman started crying. The holy Prophet started laughing
and said: Haven’t you heard God’s words:

***"Surely we have made them to grow into a (new) growth, then We made
them virgins." (56:35-36)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَت عَجوزٌ مِن الأنصارِ لِلنَّبيِّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: ادْعُ
لي بِالجَنَّةِ فَقالَ (ص) إِنَّ الجَنَّةَ لا يَدخُلُها العُجُزُ،
فَبَكَتِ المَرأةُ فَضَحِكَ النَّبيُّ (ص) وَقالَ: أما سَمِعتَ قَولَ
اللَّه تَعالى: إِنّا أَنشأْناهُنَّ إِنشاءً. فَجَعَلناهُنَّ أبكارًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A Similar Humor
---------------

The holy Prophet said to an old woman of Ashjaiah: The old people do not
enter paradise. Bilal found that woman crying, so he told the Prophet
about it. The holy Prophet said: Neither do the black. Both sat down and
started to cry. Abbas saw those two and told the holy Prophet about it.
The holy Prophet said: Nor the old men. After some time, he called them
and appeased them saying: God will make all beautiful, young, and
illuminated and will make them enter paradise. Then he added: Those in
paradise are bare, with no hair on their face but their eyes are touched
by surmadust.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقالَ لِلعَجوزِ الأَشجَعيَّةِ: يا أَشجَعيَّةُ لا تَدخُلِ العَجوزُ
الجَنَّةَ، فَرَآها بِلالٌ باكِيةً فَوصَفها لِلنَّبيِّ صَلّى اللَّه
عَليهِ وَآلِه فَقالَ: وَالأسوَدُ كَذلِكَ، فَجَلَسا يَبكِيانِ، فَرآهُما
العَبَّاسُ فَذَكَرهُما لَهُ، فَقالَ: وَالشَّيخُ كَذلِكَ، ثُمَّ دَعاهُم
وَطَيَّبَ قُلوبَهُم وَقالَ: يُنشِئُهُمُ اللَّه كَأحسَنِ ما كانوا
وَذَكَرَ: أنَّهُم يَدخُلونَ الجَنَّةَ شُبّانًا مُنَوَّرينَ، وَقالَ:
إِنَّ أهلَ الجَنَّةِ جُردٌ مُردٌ مُكَحَّلونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Laughter Before Others Humor
--------------------------------

Finding a jar of honey in the hand of a bedouin, a man by the name of
Noaiman took it and set out for Aisha’s house with him, saying: Take it.
The holy Prophet who was in Aisha’s house thought it was a gift from
Noaiman but after some time when the bedouin said: O people of house!
Return the honey or pay for it, the holy Prophet know all about it. He
paid for the honey and said to Noaiman: Where on earth did you do it? He
said: I know that the messenger of God liked honey on the one hand and
the bedouin had a jar of honey on the other. So I decided to do so. The
holy Prophet stared laughing without showing any sign of displeasure.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرأى نُعَيمانُ مَعَ إِعرابيٍّ عَكَّةُ عَسَلٍ، فَاشتَراها مِنهُ وَجاءَ
بِها إِلى بَيتِ عائِشَةَ في يَومِها وَقالَ: خُذُوها، فَتوَهَّمَ
النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه أنَّهُ أَهداها لَهُ، وَمَرَّ
نُعَيمانُ وَالإِعرابِيُّ عَلى البابِ، فَلَمّا طالَ قُعودُهُ قالَ يا
هؤُلاءِ رُدُّوها عَلَيَّ إِن لَم تَحضُر قِيمَتُها، فَعَلِمَ رَسولُ
اللَّه صَلَّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه القِصّةَ فَوَزَنَ لَهُ الثَّمَنَ
وَقالَ لِنُعيمانَ: ما حَمَلَكَ عَلى ما فَعَلتَ؟ فَقالَ: رَأيتُ رَسولَ
اللَّه (ص) يُحِبُّ العَسَلَ وَرَأيتُ الإِعرابِيَّ مَعَهُ العَكَّةُ
فَضَحِكَ النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه وَلَم يَظهَر لَهُ
نُكرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Showing Pleasure Before Others Humor
------------------------------------

Moammar Ibn khallad has reported: I said to Abol Hasan: May I be
sacrificed for you, there are words exchanged among people who laugh at
them. He said: It is not bad as long as it is not foul. I thought he
meant obscenity. Then he said: A man used come to the holy Prophet
giving him a gift and later on saying: Pay for my gift. The holy Prophet
then started laughing and remembered the bedouin’s act anytime he was
sad saying: I wish he would come to us again.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن مُعَمَّرِ بن خَلادٍ قالَ: سَألتُ أبا الحَسنِ عَليهِ السَّلامُ
فَقُلتُ: جُعِلتُ فِداكَ الرَّجُلُ يَكونُ مَعَ القَومِ فَيَجري بَينَهُم
كَلامٌ يَمزَحونَ وَيَضحَكُونَ فَقالَ: لا بَأسَ ما لَم يَكُن، فَظَنَنتُ
أنَّهُ عَنَى الفُحشَ، ثُمَّ قالَ إِنَّ رَسولَ اللَّه صَلَّى اللَّه
عَليهِ وَآلِه كانَ يَأتيهِ الإِعرابيُّ فَيُهدي لَهُ الهِديَةَ، ثُمَّ
يَقُولُ مَكانَهُ: اعْطِنا ثَمَنَ هَدِيَّتِنا، فَيَضحَكُ رَسولُ اللَّه
(ص) وَكانَ إِذا اغتَمَّ يَقولُ: ما فَعَلَ الإِعرابيُّ لَيتَهُ أتانا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Shaking Hands When Meeting Others
---------------------------------

Whenever the holy Prophet met people, he would take the lead in shaking
hands.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإِذا لَقى مُسلِمًا بَدَأَ بِالمُصافَحَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A Person Who Had Feared Him
---------------------------

Ibn-Massood has reported: A man came to the holy Prophet but when he
started to speak, he was overwhelmed with fear. The holy Prophet said:
Do not fear, for I am not a king.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن ابنِ مَسعودٍ قالَ: أَتى النَّبيَّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه
رَجُلٌ يُكَلِّمُهُ فَأرعَدَ! فَقالَ: هَوِّن عَلَيك فَلَستُ بِمَلِكٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Honoring Those Who Embrace Islam
--------------------------------

Jarir Ibn -Abdullah has reported: When the holy Prophet was appointed by
God, I went to him to express my allegiance to him. The holy Prophet
said: O Jarir, what are you here for? I said: I came here to embrace
Islam at your hand, O messenger of Allah! Then, the holy Prophet sported
his Aba (cloak open front) for me and then turned to his companions
saying: Whenever a nobleman of a tribe comes to you, honor him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن جَريرِ بن عَبدُ اللَّه قالَ: لَمّا بَعَثَ النَّبيُّ صَلَّى اللَّه
عَليهِ وَآلِه أتَيتُهُ لأُبايِعَهُ فَقالَ لي: يا جَريرُ لأيِّ شَيءٍ
جِئتَ؟ قالَ: قُلتُ: جِئتُ لأسلِمَ عَلى يَدَيكَ يا رَسولَ اللَّه،
فَألقى لي كِساءَهُ ثُمَّ أَقبَلَ عَلى أَصْحابِه فَقالَ: إِذا أتاكُم
كَريمُ قَومٍ فَأَكْرِموهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Honoring Guests
---------------

The holy Prophet honored whomever came to visit him. On many occasions,
he spread his Aba for him and placed his own cushion for him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ يُكرِمُ مَن يَدخُلُ عَليهِ حَتّى رُبَما بَسَطَ ثَوبَهُ وَيُؤثِرُ
الدّاخِل بِالوسادَةِ الَّتي تَحتَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A Man Who Came To Visit Him In Mosque
-------------------------------------

The holy Prophet was sitting by himself in mosque. At this time, a man
entered the mosque and went towards the holy Prophet who rose up and
stood back a little. The man said: O Messenger of Allah! The space is
wide here, for what you stood back? The holy Prophet said: A Muslim’s
right to a another Muslim is to observe his private space and stand back
a little.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دَخَلَ رَجُلٌ المَسجِدَ وَهوَ جالِسٌ وَحدَهُ، فَتَزَحزَحَ لَهُ، فَقالَ
الرَّجُلُ في المَكانِ سِعَةٌ يا رَسولُ اللَّه فَقالَ (ص) إِنَّ حَقَّ
المُسلِمِ عَلى المُسلِمِ إِذا رَآهُ يُريدُ الجُلُوسَ إِليهِ أَن
يَتَزَحزَحَ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Loving Children
---------------

The holy Prophet said: There are five Things I will not give up till I
pass away...Saluting children is one so that it will become a tradition
after me.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: خَمسٌ لا أَدَعَهُنَّ
حَتّى المَماتِ... وَتَسليمي عَلى الصِّبيانِ لِتَكونَ سُنَّةً مِن
بَعدي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالتَّلَطُّفُ بِالصِّبيانِ مِن عادَةِ الرَّسولِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Being Kind To Children Was A Habit Of The Messenger Of Allah
------------------------------------------------------------

Anas Ibn -Malik said: The Messenger of Allah on his way came across
several children. He greeted them and gave food to them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أنَسِ بن مالِكٍ قالَ: إِنَّ رَسولَ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ
وَآلِه مَرَّ عَلى صِبيانٍ فَسَلَّم عَلَيهِم وَهوَ مُغِذٌّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Kissing Of His Own Children
---------------------------

A man by the name of Ya’ala Ameri left the presence of the Messenger of
Allah for a party to which he had been invited. He saw Husayn playing
with the children in front of the house. After a short while, the
Messenger of Allah along with his companions left home. Seeing Husayn,
he opened his arms and leaving his companions, he went toward Husayn to
catch him. The child was running here and there. The Messenger of Allah
was after him smilingly and finally caught him. Putting a hand under the
child’s chin and another hand on his neck, the holy Prophet put his lips
on Husayn’s lips and kissed him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن يَعلي العامِري أنَّهُ خَرَجَ مِن عِند رَسولِ اللَّه (ص) إِلى
طَعامٍ دُعيَ إِليهِ فَإِذا بِحُسينٍ عَليهِ السَّلامُ يَلعَبُ مَعَ
الصِّبيانِ فَاستَقبَلَ النَّبيُّ (ص) ثُمَّ بَسَطَ يَدَيْهِ فَظَفَرَ
الصَّبيُّ هاهُنا مَرَّةً وَهاهُنا مَرَّةً وَجَعَلَ رَسولُ اللَّه (ص)
يُضاحِكُهُ حَتّى أَخَذَهُ إِحْدى يَدَيهِ تحت ذَقنِه وَالأُخرى تَحتَ
قَفاهُ وَوَضَعَ فاهُ عَلى فيهِ وَقَبَّلَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A Person Who Did Not Kiss His Child
-----------------------------------

The Messenger of Allah was kidding Hasan and Husayn when a man by the
name of Aqra Ibn -Habess said: O Messenger of Allah! I have ten children
but never kissed them. The Messenger of Allah said: It is not my fault
that God has taken the roof of mercy off your heart.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَبَّلَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه الحَسَنَ وَالحُسَينَ
فَقالَ الأقرَعُ بنُ حابِسٍ إِنَّ لي عَشرَةً مِنَ الأولادِ ما قَبَّلتُ
واحِدًا مِنهُم فَقالَ: ما عَلَيَّ أن نَزَعَ اللَّهُ الرَّحمَةَ مِنكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Eating With The Needy
---------------------

At the time of the Messenger of Allah, the needy passed the night in
mosque. One night, the Messenger of Allah ate food cooked in a stone-pot
with thirty of them near the pulpit and sent the remaining food for his
wives. They ate their fill too.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن جَعفَرٍ عَن أبيهِ عَليهِ السَّلامُ: إِنَّ المَساكينَ كانوا
يَبيتونَ في المَسجِدِ عَلى عَهدِ رَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ
وَآلِه، فَأفطَرَ النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه مَعَ المَساكين
الَّذينَ في المَسجِدِ ذاتَ لَيلةٍ عِندَ المِنبرِ في بُرمَةٍ فَأكَلَ
مِنها ثَلاثونَ رَجُلا، ثُمَّ رُدَّتْ إِلى أَزواجِه شَبَّعَهُنَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Behavior Toward Female Bedouins
-----------------------------------

Quoting Imam Sadeq Hasan Saiqel has reported: A Bedouin woman passed by
the Messenger of Allah who was sitting on the ground. She said: O
Messenger of Allah! You eat and sit as a servant does. The Messenger of
Allah said: Woe to you! Which servant is there to be better than me? She
said: Give me a morsel of what you are eating. He gave her a morsel. She
said: No, give out of what is in your mouth. The messenger of Allah gave
her out of food in his mouth. Imam Sadeq said: The woman was never
afflicted with any pain as long as she lived.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن الحَسَنِ الصَّيقَلِ قالَ: سَمِعتُ أبا عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ
السَّلامُ يَقولُ: مَرَّت امْرأَةٌ بَدَويّةٌ بِرَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه وَهوَ جالِسٌ عَلى الحَضيضِ فَقالَت: يا مُحَمَّدُ
وَاللَّه إِنَّكَ لَتَأكُلُ اكلَ العَبدِ وَتَجلِسُ جُلوسَهُ، فَقالَ
لَها رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: وَيحَك أيُّ عَبدٍ
أَعبَدُ مِنّي؟ قالَت: فَناوِلني لُقمَةً مِن طَعامِكَ، فَناوَلَها،
فَقالَت: لا وَاللَّه إِلا الّتي في فَمِكَ، فأخرَجَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه اللُّقمَةَ مِن فَمِه فَناوَلَها، فَأكَلَتها، قالَ
أبو عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ فَما أصابَها داءٌ حَتّى فارَقَتِ
الدُّنيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Forbearance Towards The Bedouins Impudence
----------------------------------------------

It has been reported that a bedouin of Bani-Solaim tribe had come from
desert with a lizard. But the animal escaped and he went after it.
Catching the animal, he put it in his sleeve and came towards the holy
Prophet crying loudly: O Muhammad! You are an enchanter and a liar. You
believe that there is a God who has appointed you over everything. I
swear by the Lat and Ozza! I would kill you with my sword and rid all of
you if I did not have the fear of being called hasty by my tribe. At
this moment Omar khattab rose up to attack him. The messenger of Allah
said: Sit down, O Aba Hafass. The forbearing person is hoped to enjoy
Prophethood. Then the holy Prophet turned to that bedouin, saying: O
brother of Bani-Solaim! Thus treated us the Arabs. They attacked on us
and were harsh in their speech. O Bedouin! I swear by God who has
truthfully raised me as a messenger, anyone harming us in this world
will be in the Fire in the hereafter.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرُوِيَ أنَّ إِعْرابِيًّا مِن بَني سُلَيمٍ يَتَبَدّى في البَريَّةِ،
فَإِذا هوَ بِضَبٍّ قَد نَفَرَ مِن بَينِ يَدَيهِ فَسَعى وَراءَهُ حَتّى
اصطادَهُ، ثُمَّ جَعَلَهُ في كُمِّه وَأَقبَلَ يَزدَلِفُ نَحوَ النَّبيِّ
صَلَّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه، فَلَمّا أن وَقَفَ باراهُ ناداهُ يا
مُحَمَّدُ أنتَ السّاحِرُ الكَذّابُ الَّذي ما أَظَلَّتِ الخَضراءُ وَلا
أقَلَّتِ الغَبراءُ مِن ذي لَهجَةٍ هوَ أَكذَبُ مِنكَ، أنتَ الَّذي
تَزعَمُ أنَّ لَكَ في هذِهِ الخَضراءِ إِلهًا بَعَثَ بِكَ إِلى الأسوَدِ
وَالأبيَضِ، وَاللّاتِ وَالعُزّى لَولا أنّي أخافُ أنَّ قَومي
يُسَمّونَني العَجولَ لَضَرَبتُكَ بِسَيفي هذا ضَربَةً أَقتُلَكَ بها
فَأسُودُ بِكَ الأوَّلينَ وَالآخرينَ، فَوَثَبَ إِليهِ عُمَرُ بن
الخَطّابِ لِيَبطِشَ بِه، فَقالَ النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه
اجْلِس يا أَبا حَفصٍ فَقَد كادَ الحَليمُ أن يَكونَ نَبِيًّا، ثُمَّ
التَفَتَ النَّبيُّ صَلَّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه إِلى الإِعرابيّ فَقالَ
لَهُ يا أَخا بَني سُلَيمٍ هكَذا تَفعَلُ العَرَبُ يَتَهَجَّمونَ عَلينا
في مَجالِسِنا يَهجُونَنا بِالكَلامِ الغَليظِ يا إعرابِيُّ، وَالَّذي
بَعَثَني بِالحَقِّ نَبِيًّا إِنَّ مَن ضَرَّني في دارِ الدُّنيا هوَ
غَدًا في النّارِ يَتَلَظّى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Facing The People’s Impudence
-----------------------------

Anas has reported; I was with the holy Prophet while he was wearing a
striped garment with a rough hem. At this time, a bedouin came pulling
the garment in a way that its hem injured the holy Prophet’s neck. The
bedouin said: O Muhammad! Load these two camels of mine with God’s
wealth which is with you, for it is neither yours nor that of your
father. The Messenger of Allah kept silent and then said: The wealth
belongs To Allah and I too am His servant. Shall I do to you what you
did? The bedouin said: No, for you do not recompense evil with evil. The
Messenger of Allah smiled and then ordered to load one of his camels
with oat and another with date.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أَنَسٍ قالَ: كُنتُ مَعَ النَّبيِّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه
وَعَليهِ بُردٌ غَليظُ الحاشِيةِ، فَجَبَذَهُ إِعرابِيٌّ بِرِدائِهِ
جَبذَةً شَديدةً حَتّى أَثَّرَت حاشِيَةُ البُردِ في صَفحةِ عاتِقِهِ
صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه ثُمَّ قالَ: يا مُحَمَّدُ احمِل لي عَلى
بَعيري هذَينِ مِن مالِ اللَّه الَّذي عِندَكَ فَإِنَّكَ لا تَحمِلُ لي
مِن مالِكَ ولا مالِ أَبيكَ، فَسَكَتَ النَّبيُّ صَلَّى اللَّه عَليهِ
وَآلِه ثُمَّ قالَ صَلَّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: المالُ مالُ اللَّه
وَأنا عَبدُهُ، ثُمَّ قالَ وَيُقادُ مِنكَ يا إعرابِيّ ما فَعَلتَ بي،
قالَ: لا، قالَ لِمَ؟ قالَ: لأنَّكَ لا تُكافِئُ بِالسَّيِّئَةِ
السَّيئَةُ، فَضَحِكَ النَّبيُّ صَلَّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه ثُمَّ أمَرَ
أَن يُحمَلَ لَهُ عَلى بَعيرٍ شَعيرٌ وَعَلى الآخرِ تَمرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Accepting An Apology
--------------------

Habbar Ibn -Muttalib is the one who horrified Zeinab, the daughter of
the Messenger of Allah into aborting her child. Hence, the holy Prophet
declared the shedding of his blood permissible. He came to the holy
Prophet apologizing for his bad deed, saying: O messenger of Allah! We
were atheists but God guided us through you and saved us from perdition.
Now forgive my ignorance and what has befallen you. I admit my bad deed.
The messenger of Allah said: I forgave you. Know that God has been most
kind to you for guiding you unto Islam. Islam too forgoes the era of
ignorance.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«هَبّارُ بنُ الأسوَدِ بن المُطَلِّبِ» هوَ الَّذي رَوَّعَ زَينَبَ بِنتَ
رَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه فَالقَت ذا بَطنِها، فَأباحَ
رَسولُ اللَّه صَلَّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه دَمَهُ لِذلِكَ، فَرُويَ
أنَّهُ اعتَذَرَ إِلى النَّبيِّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه مِن سُوءِ
فِعلِه وَقالَ وَكُنّا يا نَبيَّ اللَّه أهلَ شِركٍ فَهَدانا اللَّه
تَعالى بِكَ وَأَنقِذنَا بِكَ مِن الهَلَكَةِ فَاصفَح عَن جَهلي وَعمّا
كانَ يُبلِّغُكَ عَنّي فَإِنّي مُقِرٌّ بِسوءِ فِعلي مُعتَرِفٌ بِذَنبي
فَقالَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه قَد عَفوتُ عَنكَ وَقَد
أَحسَنَ اللَّهُ إِليكَ حَيثُ هَداكَ إِلى الإِسلامِ وَالإِسلامُ يَجُبُّ
ما قَبلَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Attitude Towards Abusive Poet
---------------------------------

Abdullah Ibn -Zaba’ari As-Sahmi was one of the most famous poets among
Quraish who dispraised Muslims in his poems urging others to kill them.
Reportedly, he had gone so far in his satirizing that he was even
impudent to the Messenger of Allah. On the conquest day of Mecca, he
fled but after a few days came back to the holy Prophet apologizingly.
The holy Prophet accepted his apology and he too became a Muslim. While
embracing Islam and offering his apology, he composed a quatrain the
prose translation of which is as follows: I beg your pardon. The pardon
of one whom I used to abuse. I was bewildered and astray. Then forgive
my offense. May my parents be sacrificed for you, for you are truly the
giver of mercy and receiver of mercy.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنّي لَمُعتَذِرٌ إِليكَ مِن الَّذي أَسدَيتُ إِذ أنا في الضَّلالِ
أَهيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاغفِر فِداكَ وَالِدَيّ كِلاهُما زُلَلي فَإِنَّكَ راحِمٌ مَرحُومٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Looking Into People’s Needs
---------------------------

One of the features of the holy Prophet was that he would always warmly
welcome the learned men and honored them to the extent of their virtues
in religion. The holy Prophet met their demands accordingly. The
Messenger of Allah encouraged them to remove their flaws, asked them
about the ummah (community) and made necessary remarks saying: Let those
who are present convey my message to those who are absent and convey to
me demands of those who have no access to me. Let it be known to you
that whoever takes the needs of them to a king, God will make his step
firm on the Day of judgment.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكانَ مِن سيرَتِه في جَزءِ الأُمَّةِ إِيثارُ الفَضلِ بِأدَبِه
وَقَسَّمَهُ عَلى قَدر فَضلِهِم في الدّينِ، فَمِنهُم ذو الحاجَةِ
وَمِنهُم ذو الحاجَتَينِ وَمِنهُم ذُو الحَوائِجِ، فَيَتَشاغَلُ بِهِم
وَيَشغَلُهُم فيما أَصلَحَهُم وَالأُمَّةُ مِن مَسألَتِه عَنهُم
وَبأخبارِهِم بِالَّذي يَنبَغي وَيَقُولُ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيُبَلِّغُ الشّاهِدُ مِنكُم الغائِبَ، وَأَبلِغُوني حاجَةَ مَن لا
يَقدِرُ عَلى إِبلاغِ حاجتِه، فَإِنَّهُ مَن أَبلَغَ سُلطانًا حاجَةَ مَن
لا يَقدِرُ عَلى إِبلاغِها ثَبَّتَ اللَّه قَدَمَيهِ يَومَ القِيامَةِ،
لا يُذكَرُ عِندَهُ إِلا ذلِكَ وَلا يَقبَلُ مِن أحَدٍ غَيرَهُ
يَدخُلُونَ رُوَّادًا وَلا يَفتَرِقونَ إِلا عَن ذَواقٍ وَيخْرُجُونَ
أَدِلَّةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Observing Others Turn
---------------------

It has been reported that a man of Ansar (the Helpers) came to the holy
Prophet and asked a question. Then there came a man of Thaqif clan. The
Messenger of Allah said: O brother of Thaqafi! the Ansari has come
before you. Wait until it is your turn.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرُويَ أَنَّ أَنصارِيًّا جاءَ إِلى النَّبيِّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ
وَآلِه يَسألُهُ وَجاءَ رَجُلٌ مِن ثَقيفٍ فَقالَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه يا أخا ثَقيفٍ إِنَّ الأنصاري قَد سَبَقَكَ
بِالمَسأَلَةِ فَاجْلِس كَيما نَبدَأُ بِحاجةِ الأنصاري قَبلَ حاجتِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

An Uninvited Guest
------------------

A tribe of Medina invited the Messenger of Allah along with five of his
companions to dine with them. On the way a sixth person joined them.
When they reached the house, the holy Prophet said to that man: You have
not been invited. Wait here till I get permission for You.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَدَعاهُ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه قَومٌ مِن أهلِ المَدينةِ إِلى
طَعامٍ صَنَعوهُ لَهُ وَلأصحابٍ لَهُ خَمسَةٌ، فَأجابَ دَعوَتَهُم،
فَلَمّا كانَ في بَعضِ الطَّريقِ ادرَكَهُم سادِسٌ فَماشاهُم، فَلَمّا
دَنَوا مِن بَيتِ القَومِ قالَ لِلرَّجُلِ السّادِسِ: إِنَّ القَومَ لَم
يَدعُوكَ فَاجلِس حَتّى نَذكُرَ لَهُم مَكانَكَ وَنَستَأذِنُهُم بِكَ
(لَكَ(
  </p>
</blockquote>

Carrying Goods Home
-------------------

The Messenger of Allah used to personally carry home whatever he bought.
The person accompanying him would say: O Messenger of Allah! Let me
carry it. But the holy Prophet said: The owner of goods is best to carry
them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ سَيِّدُ المُرسَلينَ يَشتَري الشَّيءَ فَيَحمِلُهُ إِلى بَيتِه
بِنَفسِه، فَيَقُولُ لَهُ صاحِبُهُ: اعطِني أَحمِلُهُ، فَيَقولُ: صاحِبُ
المَتاعِ أحَقُّ بِحَملِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Planting Trees And Milking With His Own Hands
---------------------------------------------

The Messenger of Allah used to suck the stone of date in his mouth and
then put it in the ground to grow.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ أَبو عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ: كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه يَحلِبُ غَنزَ أَهلِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Sadeq said: The Messenger of Allah used to milk goat with his own
hands for his family.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه وَسَلَّمَ: يَمُصُّ
النَّوى بِفيهِ وَيَغرِسُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

How Would He Walk?
------------------

Ibn-Abbas has reported that the Messenger of Allah used to walk in a way
that showed he was neither week ill.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن ابنِ عَباسٍ قالَ: كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه
إِذا مَشى مَشى مَشيًا يُعرَفُ أَنَّهُ لَيسَ بِمَشيٍ عاجِزٌ وَلا
بِكَسلانَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

How He Would Drink Water
------------------------

Imam Sadeq has reported that when the Messenger of Allah was drinking
water, he would say: Praise is due to Allah who has given us the clean,
pleasant and sweet water not the bitter or salty one and did not take us
to task for our sins.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَ: كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه إِذا شَرِبَ الماءَ قالَ: الحَمدُ للَّه الَّذي
سَقانا عَذبًا زُلالا وَلَم يَسقِنا مِلحًا أُجاجًا وَلَم يُؤاخِذنا
بِذُنُوبِنا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Avoiding Eating Hot Food
------------------------

It has been reported on the authority of Imam Sadeq that a hot food was
taken for the holy Prophet. He said: God has not set us the food out of
fire. Let it get cool. Truly hot food is not blessed, for Satan has a
share in it.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَ: إِنَّ النَّبيَّ صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه أُتيَ بِطعامٍ حارٍ جِدًّا، فَقالَ: ما كانَ اللَّه
لِيُطعِمَنا النّارَ، أَقِرُّوهُ حَتّى يَبْرَدَ وَيُمكِنَ، فَإِنَّهُ
طَعامٌ مَمحُوقُ البَرَكةِ وَلِلشَّيطانِ فيهِ نَصيبٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Contentment With Bread And Vinegar
----------------------------------

It has been reported on the authority of Imam Sadeq that when the
Messenger of Allah entered UmmSalamah’s house, she brought him a piece
of bread. The holy Prophet said: Is there any stew here? She said: No, O
Messenger of Allah! There is nothing but vinegar. He said: What an
excellent thing is vinegar, for any house having vinegar will not taste
poverty (to be content with bread and vinegar)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَ: دَخَلَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: إِلى أُمِّ سَلَمةَ رَضيَ اللَّه عَنها، فَقَرُبَت
إِليهِ كَسرَةٌ، فَقالَ: هَل عِندَكِ إِدامٌ؟ فَقالَت: لا يا رَسولَ
اللَّه ما عِندي إِلا «خَلٌّ» فَقالَ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: نِعمَ
الإِدامُ الخَلُّ، ما افتَقَرَ بَيتٌ فيهِ خَلٌّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Night He Retired To Bed Hungry
----------------------------------

Anas Ibn Malik has reported: I served the Messenger of Allah for ten
years. During this time, he never said fie to me or why have you done
this and have not done that. When the holy Prophet observed fast, he
usually broke it with milk, pieces of a loaf, and sherbet in the
evenings and Sahar (dawn). One day, I knew that the holy Prophet was
fasting; so I arranged for his Iftar but he did not appear for his
companions had invited him. So I drank the milk myself and retired. But
the holy Prophet entered the house an hour after night prayer. So I
asked one who was with him whether the holy Prophet had eaten anywhere
or had been invited by companions. The answer was no. Only God knew how
ashamed I was that night. There was nothing I would be able to offer if
the holy Prophet asked for food. Nevertheless, he went to bed hungry and
rose up hungry at dawn while he was still fasting. The Messenger of
Allah never mentioned it during his lifetime.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أنَسٍ، قالَ: خَدمتُ رَسولَ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه
وَسَلَّمَ عَشرَ سِنينَ، فَما قالَ لي أُفٍّ قَطُّ وَما قالَ لِشَيءٍ
صَنَعتَهُ لِمَ صَنَعتَهُ وَلا لِشَيءٍ تَرَكتُهُ لِمَ تَركتَهُ وَقالَ
كانَ لِرَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه وَسَلَّمَ شَربةً
لِلسَّحَرِ وَرُبَما كانَت واحِدةً وَرُبَما كانَت لَبَنًا وَرُبَما
كانتِ الشَّربَةُ خُبزًا يُماثُّ، فَهَيّأتُها لَهُ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ
وَآلِه وَسَلَّمَ ذاتَ لَيلةٍ فَاحتَبِسا النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه عَلَيهِ
وَآلِه وَسَلَّمَ فَظَنَنتُ أَنَّ بَعضَ أَصْحابِه دَعاهُ، فَشَرِبتُها
حينَ احتُبِسَ فَجاءَ بَعدَ العَشاءِ بِساعةٍ فَسَألتُ بَعضَ مَن كانَ
مَعَهُ هَل كانَ النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه وَسَلَّمَ أَفطَرَ
في مَكانٍ أو دَعاهُ أحَدٌ فَقالَ لا، فَبِتُّ بِلَيلةٍ لا يَعلَمُها
إِلا اللَّه مِن غَمٍّ إِن يَطلُبَها النَّبيُّ صَلَّى اللَّه عَليهِ
وَآلِه وَسَلَّمَ وَلا يَجِدُها فَيَبيتُ جائِعًا فَأصبَحَ صائِمًا وَما
سَألَني عَنها وَلا ذَكَرَها حَتّى السّاعَةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Eating A Little And Fearing God
-------------------------------

The messenger of Allah said: We are people who do not eat unless we are
hungry and when we eat, we do not eat our fill.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: نَحنُ قَومٌ لا نَأكُلُ
حَتّى نَجوعَ وَإِذا أَكَلنا لا نَشبَعُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Sadeq said: The Messenger of Allah liked nothing in world more than
going without food and fearing God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَ: ما أَعجَبَ رَسولَ اللَّه
صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه شَيءٌ مِنَ الدُّنيا إِلا أن يَكونَ فيها
جائِعًا خائِفًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Messenger of Allah never ate his fill.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ رَسولَ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه لَم يَمتَلئ قَطُّ
شَبعًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Quoting his father and grandfather, Imam Reza reported: Imam Ali said: I
was digging the moat with the Messenger of Allah. In the meantime,
Fatima came bringing with her a piece of bread which she offered to her
father. The Messenger of Allah said: What is this? She said: This is a
loaf of bread I have baked for Hasan and Husayn. I have brought you a
piece of it. The Messenger of Allah said: O Fatima! This is the first
meal I have after three days.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن الرِّضا عَلَيهِ السَّلامُ عَن آبائِهِ عَليهِمُ السَّلامُ قالَ:
قالَ أميرُ المُؤمِنينَ عَليهِ السَّلامُ كُنّا مَعَ النَّبيِّ صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه في حَفرِ الخَندَقِ إِذ جاءَت فاطِمَةُ وَمَعَها
كُسَيرَةً مِن خُبزٍ فَدَفَعَتها إِلى النَّبيِّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ
وَآلِه فَقالَ النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه ما هذِهِ
الكُسَيرَةَ؟ قالَت: خَبزتُهُ قُرصًا لِلحَسَنِ وَالحُسَينِ جِئتُكَ
مِنهُ بِهذِه الكُسَيرةِ، فَقالَ النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه
يا فاطِمَةُ أما إِنَّهُ أَوَّلُ طَعامٍ دَخَلَ جَوفَ أبيكِ مُنذُ
ثَلاثٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Aisha said: Three days passed yet the Messenger of Allah did not eat his
fill till he passed away. He could eat his fill but he had opted it for
himself.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَت عائِشَةُ: ما شَبِعَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه
ثَلاثَةَ أَيّامٍ مُتوالِيةٍ حَتّى فارَقَ الدُّنيا وَلو شاءَ لَشَبِعَ
وَلكِنَّهُ كانَ يُؤثِرُ عَلى نَفسِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Milk Mixed With Honey
---------------------

Imam Sadeq reported: The messenger of Allah broke his fast in Qoba
Mosque one Thursday evening and then said: Is there any drinks left? A
man by the name of Aous Ibn -Howli Ansari brought the holy Prophet a
bowl of milk mixed with honey. The holy Prophet sipped at it saying: One
of these two drinks will suffice. I will not drink any more nor will I
forbid it. This is due to my humbleness before God. Whoever is humble
before God, God will raise him to high positions and whoever is
arrogant, God will abase him. Whoever is moderate in earning a living,
God will give him sustenance. Whoever is extravagant God will derive him
of sustenance. And Whoever remembers death frequently, God will love
him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَ: أَفطَرَ رَسولُ اللَّه
صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه عَشِيَّةَ خَميسٍ في مَسجِدِ قُبا فَقالَ:
هَل مِن شَرابٍ؟ فَأتاهُ أَوسِ بن خُولي الأنصاري بِعَسٍّ مَخيضٍ
بِعَسلٍ، فَلَمّا وَضَعهُ عَلى فيهِ نَحاهُ، ثُمَّ قالَ: شَرابانِ
يَكتَفي بأحَدِهِما مِن صاحِبِه، لا أَشربُهُ وَلا أُحَرِّمُهُ وَلكِن
أَتَواضَعُ للَّه، فَإِنَّ مَن تَواضَعَ للَّه رَفَعهُ اللَّه وَمَن
تَكَبَّرَ خَفَضَهُ اللَّه، وَمَن اقتَصَدَ في مَعيشَتِه رَزَقَهُ
اللَّه، وَمَن بَذَّرَ حَرَّمَهُ اللَّه وَمَن أَكثَرَ ذِكرَ المَوتِ
أَحَبَّهُ اللَّه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Food And Fuel
-----------------

It has been reported on the authority of Imam Sadeq: Do not ever be
covetous of one who is above you and sufficient is what God said to the
Messenger: Let not their wealth and children surprise you. And Also God
said:

***And do not stretch your eyes after that with which we have provided
different classes of them, (of) the splendor of this worlds life.
(20:131)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَمُدَّنَّ عَيْنَيْكَ إِلَىٰ مَا مَتَّعْنَا بِهِ أَزْوَاجًا
مِنْهُمْ زَهْرَةَ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

And if you fear to be so, remember the life of the Messenger whose food
being oat bread, his sweet being date and his fuel being the branches of
date tree, whenever found.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَ: إِيّاكَ أَن تَطمَحَ
نَفسَكَ إِلى مَن فَوقَكَ وَكَفى بِما قالَ اللَّه عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
لِرَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: «فَلا تُعجِبُكَ أَموالَهُم
وَلا أَولادَهُم» وَقالَ اللَّه عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لِرَسولِه: «وَلا
تَمُدَّنَّ عَينَيكَ إِلى ما مَتَّعنا بِهِ أَزواجًا مِنهُم زَهرَةَ
الحَياةِ الدُّنيا» فَإِن خِفتَ شَيئًا مِن ذلِكَ فَاذكُر عَيشَ رَسولِ
اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه، فَإِنَّما كانَ قُوتُهُ الشَّعيرَ
وَحَلواهُ التَّمرُ وَوَقُودُهُ السَّعَفُ إِذا وَجَدَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Heedlessness To The World’s Glitter
---------------------------------------

Ibn-Sanan has quoted Imam Sadeq as saying: A man came to the Messenger
of Allah while he was sitting on a straw mat leaving its impression on
his body and having a pillow of date bark leaving under his head
impression on his face.

Drawing his hand on the holy Prophet’s body, the man said: Kassra and
Kaiser were not content with this way of living, for they used to sleep
on fine silk and brocade but you are sitting on this straw mat?! The
Messenger of Allah said: I amب superior and more noble than those two. I
swear by God that I have nothing to do with the example of a rider who
passes by a shady tree, takes a rest under it and departs when the shade
disappears.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن ابنِ سِنانٍ قالَ: سَمِعتُ أبا عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ
يَقولُ: دَخَلَ عَلى النَّبيِّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه رَجُلٌ وَهوَ
عَلى حَصيرٍ قَد أَثَّرَ في جَنبِه وَوسادةِ ليفٍ قَد أَثَّرَ في
خَدِّهِ، فَجَعَلَ يَمسَحُ وَيَقولُ: ما رَضيَ بِهذا كسرى وَلا قَيصَرُ،
إِنَّهُم يَنامونَ عَلى الحَريرِ وَالدّيباجِ، أنتَ عَلى هذا الحَصيرِ؟
قالَ فَقالَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه لَأنا خَيرٌ
مِنهُما وَاللَّه لَأنا أكرَمُ مِنهُما، واللَّه ما أنا وَالدُّنيا،
إِنَّما مَثَلُ الدُّنيا كَمَثَلِ راكِبٍ مَرَّ عَلى شَجَرةٍ وَلَها
فَيءٌ فَاستَظَلَّ تَحتَها، فَلَمّا أَن مالَ الظِّلُّ عَنها ارتَحَلَ
فَذَهَبَ وَتَرَكَها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Impression Of Straw Mat On His Side
---------------------------------------

It had been reported on the authority of Ibn -Abbass that once Omar came
to the holy Prophet while he was sitting on a straw mat with its
impression on his two sides. Omar said: O messenger of Allah! I wish you
would choose another mat. The holy Prophet said: What have I to do with
the world. The example of me and the world is the example of a rider
who, on a summer day, rests under a shady tree for an hour and then
departs.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن ابنِ عَبّاسٍ قالَ: إِنَّ رَسولَ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه
دَخَلَ عَليهِ عُمرُ وَهوَ عَلى حَصيرٍ قَد أَثَّرَ في جَنبِه، فَقالَ:
يا نَبيَّ اللَّه لَو اتَّخَذتَ فِراشًا فَقالَ: مالي وَلِلدُّنيا، ما
مَثَلي وَمَثَلُ الدُّنيا إِلا كَراكِبٍ سارَ في يومٍ صائِفٍ فَاستَظَلَّ
تَحتَ شَجَرَةٍ ساعَةً مِن نَهارٍ ثُمَّ راحَ وَتَرَكَها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Messenger of Allah never took heed of what made him attached to the
world.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: لا يَنظُرُ إِلى ما
يُستَحْسَنُ مِن الدُّنيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A House Devoid Of Luxury
------------------------

Ibn Abi-Yafoor has quoted Imam Sadeq as saying: A man of Ansar sent a
bowl of date for the Messenger of Allah as a gift. The holy Prophet said
to the maid servant who had brought it: Go into the room and bring me a
bowl or a plate if you can find any. She went inside but returned
empty-handed. The Messenger of Allah cleaned part of the ground with the
corner of his garment, saying: Put it here. Then he said: By God in
whose hands my life is. The world is worth a mosquito or it would not
have been given to atheists of hypocrites.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن ابنِ أبي يَعفورٍ قالَ: سَمِعتُ أبا عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ
يَقولُ: إِنَّ رَجُلا مِن الأنصارِ أَهْدى إِلى رَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه صاعًا مِن رَطَبٍ فَقالَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه لِلخادِمِ الَّتي جاءت بِه: ادْخُلي فَانظُري هَل
تَجِدين في البَيتِ قَصعَةً أو طَبَقًا فَتأتيني بِه؟ فَدَخَلَت ثُمَّ
خَرَجَت إِليهِ فَقالَت: ما أَصَبْتُ قَصعَةً وَلا طَبَقًا، فَكَنَسَ
رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه بِثوبِه مَكانًا مِن الأرضِ
ثُمَّ قالَ لَها: ضَعيهِ هاهُنا عَلى الحَضيضِ ثُمَّ قالَ: وَالَّذي
نَفسي بِيدِه لو كانَتِ الدُّنيا تَعدِلُ عِندَ اللَّه مِثقالَ بَعوضةٍ
ما أُعطِيَ كافِرًا وَلا مُنافِقًا مِنها شَيئًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Blessed 12 Dirhams
----------------------

The Messenger of Allah gave Imam Ali twelve Dirhams to buy him a shirt.
Imam Ali says: I went to the market and bought a shirt for twelve
Dirhams. Seeing the shirt, the holy Prophet said: I want a different
shirt, can the seller take it back? I said: I do not know and took the
shirt to the seller saying: The messenger of Allah wants a less
expensive shirt. Kindly take it back. The man took it back and refunded
the money. Hence the Messenger of Allah and I left for the market to buy
another shirt. On the way, the Messenger of Allah saw a slave girl
weeping. The Messenger of Allah asked; what is your crying for? She
said: O Messenger of Allah! My master gave me four Dirhams to buy
something but I lost it. Hence I do not dare to go back home.

The Messenger of Allah gave four Dirhams to her telling her to go back
home. Then we went to the market together and he bought a shirt for four
Dirhams, wore it and thanked god and set out. On the way the Messenger
of Allah saw a man who was bare and saying: Who will cover me so that
God will cover him with heavenly garment. The Messenger of Allah took
off his shirt and gave it to man and returned to the market to buy
another shirt for four Dirhams. He wore the shirt and thanked God and
set out for home. On the way he saw the same slave girl sitting in a
corner.

The Messenger of Allah said: Why did not you go home.? She said: I am
late and afraid to be beaten. The Messenger of Allah said: Come with me
and show the house of your master. Coming at the door, the Messenger of
Allah said: Peace at the upon you, O the people of the house! They did
not answer. The Messenger of Allah saluted again but there was no
answer. He saluted for the third time. This time, they said: And peace
be upon you O Messenger of Allah and a mercy of Allah and his blessings.
The Messenger of Allah said: How come you did not answer the first and
second time I saluted you? They said; We heard your salaam but we liked
to hear it again and again. The Messenger of Allah said: This girl is
late. Do not take her to task. They said: We set her free thanks to your
coming here. The Messenger of Allah said: Thanks God! I saw no more
blessed 12 Dirhams than this, for it clothed two bare men and set a
slave free.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جاءَ رَجُلٌ إِلى رَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه وَقَد بَلى
ثَوبُهُ فَحَمَلَ إِليهِ اثنى عَشَرَ دِرهَمًا فَقالَ: يا عَليُّ: خُذ
هذِه الدَّراهِمَ فَاشتَر لي ثَوبًا أَلبَسُهُ، قالَ عَليٌّ عَليهِ
السَّلامُ فَجِئتُ إِلى السُّوقِ فَاشتَرَيتُ لَهُ قَميصًا بِاثني عَشَرَ
دِرهَمًا وَجِئتُ بِه إِلى رَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه
فَنَظَرَ إِليهِ فَقالِ: يا عَليُّ غَيرَ هذا أحَبُّ إِليَّ، أتَرى
صاحِبَهُ يُقيلُنا؟ فَقُلتُ لا ادري، فَقالَ: انْظُر، فَجِئتُ إِلى
صاحِبِه فَقُلتُ: إِن رَسولَ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه قَد
كَرِهَ هذا يُريدُ ثَوبًا دُونَهُ فَأقِلنا فيهِ، فَرَدَّ عَلَيَّ
الدَّراهِمَ وَجِئتُ بِه إِلى رَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه
فَمَشى مَعي إِلى السُّوقِ لِيَبتاعَ قَميصًا فَنَظَرَ إِلى جارِيةٍ
قاعِدَةٍ عَلى الطَّريقِ تَبكي فَقالَ لَها رَسولُ اللَّه (ص) ما
شَأنُكِ؟ قالَت يا رَسولَ اللَّه إِنَّ أهلَ بَيتي أَعطُوني أربَعَةَ
دَراهِمَ لأشتَريَ لَهُم بِها حاجَةً فَضاعَت فَلا أَجسُرُ أن أَرجِعَ
إِليهِم، فَأعطاها رَسولُ اللَّه أربَعَةَ دَراهِمَ وَقالَ ارجِعي إِلى
أَهلِك، وَمَضى رَسولُ اللَّه (ص) إِلى السُّوقِ فَاشتَرى قَميصًا
بِأربَعةِ دَراهِمَ وَلبَسَهُ وَحَمِدَ اللَّه وَخَرَجَ، فَرَأى رَجُلا
عُريانا يَقولُ: مَن كَساني كَساهُ اللَّه مِن ثِيابِ الجَنَّةِ،
فَخَلَعَ رَسولُ اللَّه (ص) قَميصَهُ الَّذي اشتَراهُ وَكَساهُ السائِلَ
ثُمَّ رَجَعَ إِلى السُّوقِ فَاشتَرى بِالأربَعةِ الَّتي بَقيَت قَميصًا
آخَر فَلَبِسَهُ وَحَمِدَ اللَّه وَرَجَعَ إِلى مَنزِلِه وَإِذا
الجارِيةُ قاعِدَةٌ عَلى الطَّريقِ، فَقالَ لَها رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: مالَكِ لا تَأتين أهلَكِ؟ قالَت: يا رَسولَ اللَّه
إِنّي قَد أَبْطَأْتُ عَلَيهِم وَأَخافُ أَن يَضرِبُوني، فَقالَ رَسولُ
اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه مُري بَينَ يَدَيَّ وَدُلّيني عَلى
أَهلِكِ فَجاءَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه حَتّى وَقَفَ
عَلى بابِ دارِهِم ثَمَّ قالَ: السَّلامُ عَلَيكُم يا أَهلَ الدّارِ،
فَلَم يُجيبوهُ فَأعادَ السَّلامَ فَلَم يُجيبُوهُ فَأعادَ السَّلامَ
فَقالوا عَليكَ السَّلام يا رَسولَ اللَّه وَرَحمَةُ اللَّه وَبَرَكاتُه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقالَ لَهُم: مالَكُم تَرَكتُم إِجابَتي في أوَّلِ السَّلامِ وَالثّاني
قالُوا: يا رَسولَ اللَّه سَمِعنا سَلامَكَ فَأحبَبنا أَن تَستَكثِرَ
مِنهُ، فَقالَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: إِنَّ هذِه
الجارِيَةَ أَبْطَأْتُ عَلَيكُم فَلا تُؤاخِذُوها فَقالوا: يا رَسولَ
اللَّه هِيَ حُرَّةٌ لِمَمشاكَ، فَقالَ رَسولُ اللَّه (ص) الحَمدُ للَّه،
ما رَأيتُ اثني عَشَرَ دِرهَمًا أَعظَمُ بَركةً مِن هذِه، كَسَى اللَّه
بِها عُريانَين، وَأَعتَقَ بِها نَسمةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Care For Children
-----------------

It has been reported on the authority of Ummel-Fazl, the wife of Abbas
Ibn -Abdul-Motalleb, Imam Husayn’s nurse: One day the Messenger of Allah
took from me Husayn who was then an infant. The infant made the holy
Prophet’s garment wet. I sharply took away the infant from the Messenger
of Allah in a way that he started crying. The holy Prophet said: O
Ummel-Fazl! My garment can be cleaned and purified but what can remove
the displeasure of my son, Husayn?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رُويَ عَن أُمِّ الفَضلِ زَوجَةِ العَبّاسِ بن عَبدِ المُطّلِبِ
مُرضِعَةِ الحُسَينِ عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَت: أَخَذَ مِنّي رَسولُ اللَّه
صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه حُسَينًا أيّامَ رِضاعِه، فَحَمَلَهُ فَأراقَ
ماءً عَلى ثَوبِه، فَأخَذتُهُ بِعُنفٍ حَتّى بَكى، فَقالَ صَلّى اللَّه
عَليهِ وَآلِه مَهلا يا أُمَّ الفَضلِ إِنَّ هذهِ الإِراقَةَ الماءُ
يُطَهِّرُها فَأيُّ شَيءٍ يُزيلُ هذا الغُبارَ عَن قَلبِ الحُسَينِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Care For Children’s Personality
-------------------------------

The Messenger of Allah was preparing for prayer while Hasan was with
him. The holy Prophet kept him on his side and rose up for prayer. One
of the holy Prophet’s prostrations lasted longer than usual. The
reporter of this Hadith says: Raising my head after prostration, I saw
that Hasan was sitting on the holy Prophet’s shoulders. When the prayer
was completed, those present in mosque said: O Messenger of Allah! We
had not seen such long prostration before. We thought that you are being
inspired. The Messenger of Allah said: I was not being inspired! My son
was on my shoulder so I did not want to hasten and to put him down.
Therefore, I waited for the child to come down himself.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دُعِيَ النَّبيُّ (ص) إِلى صَلاةٍ وَالحَسَنُ مُتَعَلِّقٌ بِه،
فَوَضَعَهُ النَّبيُّ (ص) مُقابِلَ جَنبِه وَصَلّى، فَلَمّا سَجَدَ
أَطالَ السُّجودَ فَرَفَعتُ رَأْسي مِن بَينِ القَومِ فَإِذا الحَسَنُ
عَلى كِتفِ رَسولِ اللَّه (ص) فَلَمّا سَلَّمَ قالَ لَهُ القَومُ: يا
رَسولَ اللَّه لَقَد سَجَدتَ في صَلاتِكَ هذِه سَجدَةً ما كُنتَ
تَسجُدَها كَأنَّما يُوحى إِليكَ، فَقالَ: لَم يُوحَ إِليَّ وَلكِن ابْني
كانَ عَلى كِتفي، فَكَرِهتُ أن أُعجِّلَهُ حَتّى نَزَلَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Behavior Towards Other Children
-------------------------------

The holy Prophet’s behavior toward children was such that when he
returned from a trip, he would stop and order to bring children to him.
Then he would take some of them in his arms, put some others on his back
and shoulder and order his companions to take them in arms and put them
on their shoulders. Children were filled with joy and would never forget
its sweet memory. On many occasions when they would get together, they
used to tell the story for one another. Taking pride in it, one would
say: The holy Prophet took me in his arms but he put you on his back.
The other one would say: The holy Prophet ordered his companions to put
you on their back.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: يَقدِمُ مِن السَّفَرِ فَيَتَلَقّاهُ
الصِّبيانُ فَيَقفُ لَهُم ثُمَّ يَأمُرُ بِهِم فَيَرفَعُونَ إِليهِ
فَيَرفَعُ مِنهُم بَينَ يَديهِ وَمِن خَلفِه وَيَأمُرُ أَصْحابَهُ أَن
يَحمِلوا بَعضَهُم فَرُبَما يَتَفاخَرُ الصِّبيانُ بَعدَ ذلِكَ فَيَقولُ
بَعضُهُم لِبَعضٍ: حَمَلَني رَسولُ اللَّه (ص) بَينَ يَدَيهِ وَحَملَكَ
أنتَ وَراءَهُ وَيَقولُ بَعضُهُم أمَرَ أَصْحابَهُ أَن يَحمِلوكَ
وَراءَهُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Being Kind To Children While Praying
------------------------------------

The holy Prophet was performing prayer with a group of Muslims in a
certain place. Imam Husayn was then a small child. Now when the holy
Prophet went into prostration, Husayn sat on the holy Prophet’s back
while moving his legs and saying: Go! go! Every time the holy Prophet
raised his head from prostration, he would take and put him at his side
on the ground. This was repeated several times. A Jew, seeing it, come
to the holy Prophet after the prayer and said: You treat your children
in a way we never treat them. The holy Prophet said: Should you believe
in Allah and His messenger, You would be kind to children. The holy
Prophet’s kindness to the child impressed the Jew so much that he said:
I truly believe in Allah and his messenger. He had truly embraced Islam.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ النَّبيَّ صَلَّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه وَسَلَّمَ كانَ يُصَلّي
يَومًا في فِئةٍ وَالحُسَينُ صَغيرٌ بِالقُربِ مِنهُ، فَكانَ النَّبيُّ
إِذا سَجَدَ جاءَ الحُسَينُ عَليهِ السَّلامُ فَرَكِبَ ظَهرَهُ ثُمَّ
حَرَّكَ رِجليهِ فَقالَ حَل حَل، فَإِذا أَرادَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه أن يَرفَعَ رَأسَهُ أَخَذَهُ فَوَضَعَهُ إِلى
جانِبه فَإِذا سَجَدَ عادَ عَلى ظَهرِه وَقالَ حَل حَل فَلَم يَزَل
يَفعَلُ ذلِكَ حَتّى فَرِغَ النَّبيُّ مِن صَلاتِه فَقالَ يَهودِيُّ يا
مُحَمَّدُ إِنَّكُم لَتَفعَلونَ بِالصِّبيانِ شَيئًا ما نَفعَلُهُ نَحنُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقالَ النَّبيُّ صَلَّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: أما لَو كُنتُم
تُؤمِنُونَ بِاللَّه وَرَسولِه لَرَحِمتُمُ الصِّبيانَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ: فَإِنّي أُؤمِنُ بِاللَّه وَبِرَسولِه، فَأسلَمَ لَمّا رَأى
كَرَمَهُ مَعَ عَظُمَ قَدرِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Shortening Of Prayer
--------------------

The Messenger of Allah was such that whenever in prayer he heard a child
crying, he would shorten or performed it more quickly so that the
child’s mother who was in the congregational prayer would take care of
the child.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه يَسمَعُ صَوتَ
الصَّبِيِّ يَبكي وَهوَ في الصَّلاةِ، فَيُخَفِّفُ الصَّلاةَ فَتَصيرُ
إِليهِ أُمُّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Not Rejecting Any Needy Person
------------------------------

It has been reported on the authority of Imam Sadeq: The Messenger of
Allah was such that he would never reject any needy person. He would
give away if he had anything or would say: May God give it!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَ: ما مَنَعَ رَسولُ اللَّه
صَلَّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه سائِلا قَطُّ، إِن كانَ عِندَهُ أَعطى،
وَإِلا قالَ: يَأتي اللَّه بِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Giving Away His Own Shirt
-------------------------

It had been reported on the authority of Imam Sadeq: The Messenger of
Allah was such that whoever asked anything from him, he would give it to
him. One day a woman sent her son to the Messenger of Allah saying: Go
to him and ask something from him and in case he says I do not have
anything with me, say: Give me your own shirt. The boy came to the holy
Prophet and he gave away his own shirt

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَ: إِنَّ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه كانَ لا يَسألُهُ أحَدٌ مِنَ الدُّنيا شَيئًا إِلا
أَعطاهُ، فَأَرسَلَت إِليهِ امْرَأَةٌ ابنا لَها فَقالَت: انطَلِق إِليهِ
فَاسألهُ فَإِن قالَ لَكَ: لَيسَ عِندَنا شَيءٌ فَقُل: اعطِني قَميصَكَ،
قالَ: فَأخَذَ قَميصَهُ فَرَمى بِه إِليهِ (وَأعطاهُ(
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Most Generous Man On The Earth
----------------------------------

Gabriel said: I have examined all families on the earth but found no one
to be more generous than the Messenger of Allah in giving away his
possessions.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ جبرائيلُ: ما في الأرضِ أَهلُ عَشيرَةٍ مِن أبياتٍ إِلا
قَلَّبتُهُم، فَما وَجَدتُ أَحدًا أَشَدُّ إِنفاقًا لِهذا المالِ مِن
رَسولِ اللَّه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Generosity In The Eye Of Imam Ali
-------------------------------------

Imam Ali has reported that the holy Prophet was the most generous and
honorable among people. Any one associating with him started to love
him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أميرِ المُؤمِنينَ عَليِّ بن أبي طالِبٍ عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَ: كانَ
رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه أَجوَدَ النّاسِ كَفًّا
وَأَكرَمَهُم عِشرَةً، مَن خالَطَهُ فَعَرَفَهُ أَحَبَّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

An Ailing Beggar On His Knees
-----------------------------

It has been reported that a companion was in the holy Prophet’s house.
While they were eating, a disabled beggar came to the door. The
appearance of the beggar was such that every one was reluctant to make
contact with him. Giving him permission to enter the house, the holy
Prophet made him sit on his knees and inviting him to eat with them. A
man from Qureish who was there showed disgust and averted from him. As a
result, that man of Queish died with the same disability.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرُويَ أَنَّ رَسولَ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه وَسَلَّمَ كانَ
في نَفرٍ مِن أَصْحابِه في بَيتِه يَأكُلونَ، فَقامَ سائِلٌ عَلى البابِ
وَبِه زَمانَةٌ يَتَكَرَّهُ مِنها فَأذِنَ لَهُ، فَلَمّا دَخَلَ
أَجلَسَهُ عَلى فَخِذِه ثُمَّ قالَ: اطعَم، وَكانَ رَجُلٌ مِن قُريشٍ
اشْمَأزَّ مِنهُ وَتَكرَهُهُ، فَما ماتَ حَتّى كانَت بِه زَمانَةٌ
مِثلُها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Kind Behavior Towards The Poor
------------------------------

It has been reported that a man came to the holy Prophet asking him to
give him something. The holy Prophet said: There is nothing with us for
the moment but come along with me. If anything is brought to us, I will
give it to you. Omar said; O Messenger of Allah! God has not made you
duty-bound to what is beyond your power. The holy Prophet did not like
this comment. The man said: Give alms and fear not the Possessor of the
throne for its being a little. The Messenger of Allah liked these words,
smiled and joy could be seen in his face.

One who is hopeful of his favor will never be deprived of it nor will a
neighbor return from his house without being honored.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رُويَ أنَّ رَجُلا أتى النَّبيَّ صَلّى اللَّه عَلَيهِ وَآلِه فَسَألَهُ
فَقالَ: ما عِندي شَيءٌ وَلكِن اتَّبِع عَلَيَّ فَإِذا جاءَنا شَيءٌ
قَضَيناهُ، قالَ عُمَرُ: فَقُلتُ يا رَسولَ اللَّه ما كَلَّفَكَ اللَّه
مالا تَقدِرُ عَلَيهِ، قالَ: فَكَرِهَ النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه عَلَيهِ
وَآلِه فَقالَ الرَّجُلُ أَنفِق ولا تَخَف مِن ذي العَرشِ إِقلالا، قالَ
فَتَبَسَّمَ النَّبيُّ وَعُرِفَ السُّرورُ في وَجهِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حاشاهُ أن يُحرَمُ الرّاجي مَكارِمَهُ أو يَرجِعَ الجارُ مِنهُ غَيرَ
مُحتَرَمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Foster Mother
-----------------

Abot-Tofeil says: Being a small boy, I saw a woman coming to visit the
holy Prophet who spread his cloak for her. The woman sat on it. I asked
who this woman was. I was told she was his foster mother.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقالَ أَبو الطُّفيلِ رَأيتُ النَّبيَّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه
وَسَلَّمَ وَأنا غُلامٌ إِذ أَقبَلَت امرَأةٌ حَتّى دَنَت مِنهُ فَبَسَطَ
لَها رِداهُ فَجَلَسَت عَلَيهِ، فَقُلتُ مَن هذا؟ قالوا: أُمَّهُ الَّتي
أَرْضَعَتهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Respect For Foster Sister
-------------------------

Imam Sadeq has reported: One day the holy Prophet’s sister came to visit
him. The holy Prophet who was happy spread his sheet for her to sit on
it and started talking with her. He looked at her face and Laughed with
her. When his foster sister left and her brother came, the holy Prophet
did not receive him warmly. It was asked: O Messenger of Allah! How come
you treated her better than him. The holy Prophet said: she was more
kind to her parents than he was.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ أَبو عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ: إِنَّ رَسُولَ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه وَسَلَّمَ أتَتهُ أُختٌ لَهُ مِنَ الرِّضاعَةِ،
فَلَمّا نَظَرَ إِلَيها سَرَّ بِها وَبَسَطَ مَلحَفَتَهُ لَها فَأجلَسَها
عَلَيها، ثُمَّ أَقبَلَ يُحَدِّثُها وَيَضحَكُ في وَجهِها، ثُمَّ قامَت
وَذَهَبَت وَجاءَ أَخوها فَلَم يَصنَع بِه ما صَنَعَ بِها، فَقيلَ لَهُ:
يا رَسولَ اللَّه صَنعتَ بِأُختِه ما لَم تَصنَع بِه وَهو رَجُلٌ؟
فَقالَ: لأنَّها كانَت أبَرُّ بِوالِديها مِنهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Meeting People’s Demand Between 2 Prayers
-----------------------------------------

It has been reported that the holy Prophet used to shorten his prayer
when he saw that some one was sitting near him. He would complete his
prayer, would ask about his demand and after meeting his demand would
continue with his prayer again.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرُويَ أَنَّهُ لا يَجلِسُ إِليهِ أحَدٌ وَهوَ يُصَلّي إِلا خَفَّفَ
صَلاتَهُ وَسَألَهُ عَن حاجَتِه فَإِذا فَرَغَ عادَ إِلى صَلاتِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه لا يَجلِسُ إِليهِ أحَدٌ
وَهوَ يُصَلّي إِلا خَفَّفَ صَلاتَهُ وَأَقبَلَ عَلَيهِ فَقالَ: أَلَكَ
حاجَةٌ، فَإِذا فَرَغَ مِن حاجاتِه عادَ إِلى صَلاتِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In His Headquarters
-------------------

During one of the battles, the holy Prophet was saying his prayer in his
headquarters. At this time some riding Muslims passed by him. They
stopped and inquired after the holy Prophet. Praying for the holy
Prophet and saying that they would wait for him to complete his prayer
if they were not in a hurry, the riders left that place. When the holy
Prophet was through with his prayer, he turned to the companions
wrathfully and said: it is strange that a group of Muslims stopped
before you while inquiring after me and sending their greetings but you
did not respect them nor did you prepare any food for them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن داوُودَ بن عَبدِ اللَّه بن مُحَمَّدِ الجَعفَري عَن أَبيهِ أَنَّ
رَسولَ اللَّه صَلَّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه كانَ في مَغازيهِ فَمَرَّ بِه
رَكبٌ وَهوَ يُصَلّي، فَوقَفوا عَلى أَصْحابِ رَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه
عَليهِ وَآلِه فَسَأَلُوهُم عَن رَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ
وَآلِه وَسَلَّمَ وَدَعَوا وَأثنُوا وَقالوا: لَولا إِنّا عِجالٌ
لانتَظَرنا رَسولَ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه فَاقرَءُوهُ مِنّا
السَّلامَ وَمَضَوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَانفَتَلَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه مُغضِبًا، ثُمَّ
قالَ لَهُم: يَقِفُ عَلَيكُمُ الرَّكبُ وَيَسألونَكُم عَنّي
وَيُبَلِّغُوني السَّلامَ وَلا تَعرِضونَ عَلَيهِمُ الغِذاءَ (الخ)
  </p>
</blockquote>

A Thirsty Cat
-------------

Imam Ali said: While the Messenger of Allah was performing ablution, the
cat of the house took refuge to him. The Messenger of Allah knew that
the cat was thirsty. So he took the bowl of water to the cat which drank
from the bowl. Then the Messenger of Allah used the rest of water for
ablution.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ عَليٌّ عَلَيهِ السَّلامُ: بَينا رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ
وَآلِه يَتَوَضَّأُ، إِذ لاذَ بِه هِرُّ البَيتِ وَعَرَفَ رَسولُ اللَّه
صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه أنَّهُ عَطشانَ، فَأصغى إِليهِ الإِناءَ
حَتّى شَرِبَ مِنهُ الهِرُّ وَتَوَضَّأ بِفَضلِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Holy Prophet And Bedouin
----------------------------

It has been reported that a nomadic rough Arab came to the holy Prophet
demanding a charity. The holy Prophet gave him something. But he was not
pleased. The holy Prophet said: Was I benefactor? The man said: No. The
companions lost their temper and were about to harm him but the Holy
Prophet prohibited them. Later on, the Prophet took bedouin to his home
and favored him with some more. The Prophet asked: Am I a benefactor?
The man said: Yes. May Allah bless you and your family.

The holy Prophet said to him: You uttered harsh words which provoked the
wrath of my companions. Now that you have said kind words in my
presence, could you repeat the same in front of my companions so as to
ease the wrath which they have against you. The bedouin agreed. The
following day the holy Prophet turned his face to his companions and
said: This man says he is pleased with me. The bedouin replied: Yes! He
repeated what he had said privately to the holy Prophet. Then the
Messenger of Allah said: the example of me and this man is like a man
whose camel startled and ran away.

The people began shouting and running after the camel, thinking they
would help the camel’s owner. But the camel hoicked more and speeded up.
The owner of the camel shouted: Let my camel be at ease. I know better
how to calm it. So he went and picked up a handful of herbs and took his
position gently in front of the camel. Then he easily grasped the bridle
of his camel and set out on his way. The holy Prophet said: If I had let
you free yesterday, surely you would have killed this poor bedouin.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رُويَ أَنَّ إِعْرابيًّا جاءَهُ يَطلُبُ مِنهُ شَيئًا فَأعطاهُ، ثُمَّ
قالَ: أَحسَنتُ إِليكَ؟ قالَ الإِعرابِيُّ لا وَلا أَجمَلتَ، فَغَضِبَ
المُسلِمونَ وَقاموا إِليهِ فأشار إِليهِم أَن كُفُّوا ثُمَّ قامَ
وَدَخَلَ مَنزِلهُ وَارسَلَ إِليهِ وَزادَهُ شَيئًا، ثُمَّ قالَ:
أَحسَنتُ إِليكَ؟ قالَ نَعَم فَجَزاكَ اللَّه مِن أَهلٍ وَعَشيرَةٍ
خَيرًا، فَقالَ لَهُ النَّبيُّ إِنَّكَ قُلتَ ما قُلتَ وَفي نَفسِ
أَصْحابي مِن ذلِكَ شَيءٌ فَإِن أَحبَبتَ فَقُل بَينَ أَيديهِم ما قُلتَ
بَينَ يَديَّ حَتّى يَذهَبَ ما في صُدورِهِم عَلَيكَ قالَ نَعَم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمّا كانَ الغَد أوِ العِشاء جاءَ فَقالَ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه
إِنَّ هذا الإِعرابِيّ قالَ ما قالَ فَزِدناهُ فَزَعَمَ أَنَّهُ رَضِيَ
كَذلِكَ، قالَ نَعَم فَجَزاكَ اللَّه مِن أَهلٍ وَعَشيرَةٍ خَيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقالَ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه مَثَلي وَمَثلُ هذا مِثلُ رَجُلٍ لَهُ
ناقَةٌ شَردَت عَلَيهِ فَاتَّبَعَها النّاسُ فَلَم يَزيدُوها إِلا
نُفُورًا، فَناداهُم صاحِبُها خَلُّوا بَيني وَبَينَ ناقَتي فَإِنّي
أَرفَقُ بِها مِنكُم وَأَعلَمُ فَتَوَجّهَ لَها بَينَ يَدَيها فَأَخَذَ
لَها مِن قَمامِ الأرضِ فَرَدّها حَتّى جاءَت وَاستَناخَت وَشَدَّ
عَلَيها رَحلَها وَاستَوى عَلَيها وإِنّي لَو تَرَكتُكُم حَيثُ قالَ
الرَّجُلُ ما قالَ فَقَتَلتُمُوهُ دَخَلَ النّارَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Negus’ Envoys
-------------

It has been reported on the authority of Abi-Qatadah: When Negus’ envoys
came to the holy Prophet, he personally received them. His companions
said: We are prepared to receive them in your place. But the holy
Prophet said: When our companions had gone there, they were honored.
Therefore, I would like to recompense too.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَن أبي قَتادةٍ قالَ: وَفَدَ وَفدٌ للنَّجاشي فَقامَ النَّبيُّ صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه يَخدِمُهُم، فَقالَ: لَهُ أَصْحابُهُ نَكفيكَ
فَقالَ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه إِنهم كانوا لأصحابِنا مُكرَمينَ
وَإِنّي أُحبُّ أَن أُكافِئَهُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Son Of Hatam Tai
--------------------

Imam Ali said: When Adi Ibn -Hatam came to the holy Prophet, the
Messenger of Allah took him to his home where there was nothing but a
straw mat. The holy Prophet spread it for him and sat on the ground
himself.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ أَميرُ المُؤمِنينَ عَلَيهِ السَّلامُ لَمّا قَدِمَ عَدِيُّ بن
حاتَمٍ إِلى رَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه ادخَلَهُ
النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه بَيتَهُ وَلَم يَكُن في البَيتِ
غَيرُ خَصفَةٍ وَوِسادَةٍ مِن أُدمٍ فَطرَحَها رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه لِعَدِيِّ بن حاتمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Detachment From The World
-----------------------------

It has been reported on the authority of Imam Sadeq: One day the
messenger of Allah left home while he was sad. At this moment, an angel
came to him with keys to all the world treasures. The angel said: O
Muhammad! These are keys to the world. Your Lord says: Open and take of
it whatever you wish, for nothing will be reduced of what is with Me.
The Messenger of Allah said: The world is the home of one who has no
home and whoever accumulates wealth for the world, is not wise. The
angle said: By God who appointed you truthfully, I heard the same in the
fourth heaven from the angel who gave me the keys.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَ: خَرَجَ النَّبيُّ صَلَّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه وَهوَ مَحزونٌ فَأتاهُ مَلَكٌ وَمَعَهُ مَفاتيحُ
خَزائنِ الأرضِ فَقالَ: يا مُحَمَّدُ هذِه مَفاتيحُ خَزائِنِ الدُّنيا،
يَقولُ لَكَ رَبُّكَ افتَح وَخُذ مِنها ما شِئتَ مِن غَيرِ أن يَنقُصَ
شَيئًا عِندي، فَقالَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه الدُّنيا
دارُ مَن لا دارَ لَهُ وَلَها يَجمَعُ مَن لا عَقلَ لَهُ، فَقالَ
المَلَكُ: وَالَّذي بَعَثَكَ بِالحَقِّ لَقَد سمِعتُ هذا الكَلامَ مِن
مَلَكٍ يَقولُهُ في السَّماءِ الرّابِعةِ حينَ أُعطيتُ المَفاتيحَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Living A Simple Life
--------------------

The Messenger of Allah was brought a gift. He found no bowl to put the
gift in. He said: Put it on the ground, I am a servant like the other
servants of God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُهدِيَ إِلى رَسولِ اللَّه صَلَّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه هَدِيّةً فَلَم
يَجِد شَيئًا يَضَعُهُ عَليهِ، فَقالَ: ضَعهُ بِالحَضيضِ، فَإِنَّما أنا
عَبدٌ آكُلُ كَما يَأكُلُ العَبدُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Good Behavior
-------------

It has been reported on the authority of Imam Sadeq: One day when Aisha
was with the holy Prophet, a man came to the door and asked for
permission to visit him. The holy Prophet said: He is a bad brother for
the tribe. Aisha rose up and went inside the room, the holy Prophet gave
him permission to enter and treated him kindly. When the man left, Aisha
said: O Messenger of Allah! You said he was not a good man yet you
treated him kindly. The holy Prophet said: The worst servants of Allah
are those with whom people are reluctant to associate due to their bad
language.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَ: بَينا رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه ذاتَ يَومٍ عِندَهُ عائِشَةُ فَاستَأذَنَ عَلَيهِ
رَجُلٌ، فَقالَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: بِئسَ اخو
العَشيرَةِ، وَقامَت عائِشَةُ فَدَخَلَتِ البَيتَ، وَأذِنَ لَهُ رَسولُ
اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه فَدَخَلَ، فَأقبَلَ رَسولُ اللَّه
صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه حَتّى إِذا فَرَغَ مِن حَديثِه خَرَجَ،
فَقالَت لَهُ عائِشَةُ: يا رَسولَ اللَّه بَينا أنتَ تَذكُرُهُ إِذ
أَقبَلتَ عَليهِ بِوَجهِكَ وَبشرِكَ، فَقالَ لَها رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه إِنَّ مِن أَشَرِّ عِبادِ اللَّه مَن يَكرَهُ
مُجالسَتهُ لِفُحشِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Conclusion Of Speech
--------------------

It has been reported that whenever the holy Prophet completed his speech
and intended to rise up, he would say: O God, forgive us our sins, our
faults, what we have done intentionally, openly or secretly and what You
know of us best. You are the Giver and the Retarder. There is no god but
You.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرُويَ أنَّ النَّبيَّ كانَ إِذا فَرِغَ مِن حَديثِهِ وأرادَ أن يَقومَ
مِن مَجلِسِه يَقولُ: اللّهُمَّ اغفِر لَنا ما أخطَأنا وَما تَعمَّدنا
وَما أَسرَرنا وَما أَعلَنّا وَما أنتَ أعلَمُ بِه مِنّا أنتَ
المُقَدَّمُ وَأنتَ المُؤخَّرُ لا إِلهَ إِلا أنتَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Flattery
--------

A bedouin came to the holy Prophet saying: Aren’t you superior to us in
terms of both ancestor and children? You were superior to us in the era
of ignorance and you are our leader in Islam now. The holy Prophet
became furious saying: Behind how many veils does your tongue lie? He
replied: Two veils namely lips and teeth. The holy Prophet said: Neither
of two could avert the vehemence and freedom of your tongue. Then he
said: Among all things given to man, there is nothing more harmful than
glibness for his hereafter, Then in order to silence that man, he
ordered Imam Ali to cut that man’s tongue. People thought Imam Ali was
going to cut that man’s tongue but he gave him a few Dirhams and the man
kept silent.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أتى النَّبيَّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه إعرابِيٌّ فَقالَ لَهُ: ألَستَ
خَيرَنا أَبًا وَأكرَمَنا عَقِبًا وَرَئيسَنا في الجاهِليةِ وَالإِسلامِ؟
فَغَضِبَ النَّبيُّ (ص) وَقالَ يا أعرابِيُّ كَم دُونَ لِسانِكَ مِن
حِجابٍ؟ قالَ اثنانِ شَفتانِ واسنانِ فَقالَ النَّبيُّ صَلَّى اللَّه
عَليهِ وَآلِه فَما كانَ في أحَدِ هذَينِ ما يَرُدُّ عَنّا غَربَ
لِسانِكَ هذا؟ أما إِنَّهُ لَم يُعطَ أحَدٌ في دُنياهُ شَيئًا هوَ
أَضَرُّ لَهُ في آخِرَتِه مِن طَلاقَةِ لِسانِه يا عليُّ قُم فَاقطَع
لِسانَهُ فَظَنَّ أنَّهُ يَقطَعُ لِسانَهُ فَأعطاهُ دَراهِمَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

False Esteem
------------

It has been reported on the authority of Imam Sadeq that a man of
Bani-Fahd was beating his slave in a thorough-fare. The slave was
constantly seeking refuge in Allah hoping that the name of Allah would
stop his master from beating him.

The holy Prophet happened to pass by. Seeing the holy Prophet, the slave
sought refuge in Muhammad. Hearing the name of Muhammad, the master of
the slave stopped beating him. Addressing the man, the holy Prophet
said: This slave was seeking refuge with Allah but you didn’t care.
However, when he sought refuge in Muhammad, you stopped seating him.
Whereas Allah is the one in Whom one should seek refuge. Being aware of
his bad deed, the master set the slave free for the sake of Allah. The
Messenger of Allah said: By the one who has appointed me as a Prophet,
your face would be burnt in fire if you did not set him free.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَ: استَقبَلَ رَسولُ اللَّه
صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه رَجُلٌ مِن بَني فَهدٍ وَهوَ يَضرِبُ عَبدًا
لَهُ وَالعَبدُ يَقولُ: أَعوذُ بِاللَّه فَلَم يَقلَعِ الرَّجُلُ عَنهُ،
فَلَمّا أَبْصَرَ العَبدُ بِرَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه
قالَ: أَعوذُ بِمُحَمّدٍ، فَأقلَعَ عَنهُ الضَّربَ، فَقالَ رَسولُ اللَّه
صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: يَتَعوَّذُ بِاللَّه فَلا تُعيذُهُ؟
وَيَتَعوَّذُ بِمُحَمَّدٍ فَتُعيذُهُ؟ وَاللَّه أَحَقُّ أَن يُجارَ
عائِذُهُ مِن مُحَمَّدٍ، فَقالَ الرَّجُلُ: هوَ حُرٌّ لِوَجهِ اللَّه،
فَقالَ رَسولُ اللَّه (ص): وَالَّذي بَعَثَني بِالحَقِّ نَبِيًّا لَو لَم
تَفعَل لَواقَعَ وَجهُكَ حَرَّ النّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Exaggeration
------------

Imam Ali has said: One day the Messenger of Allah came to a group of his
companions. Joyfully and politely they said: Hail our Master and Lord!
The Messenger of Allah became angry saying: Do not speak like that.
Rather say: Hail our Prophet and the Messenger of our Lord! Speak
truthfully. Do not exaggerate in your speech or you will go astray.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن عَليِّ بن أبي طالبٍ عَليهِ السَّلامُ: إِنَّ رَسولَ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه خَرَجَ عَلى نَفَرٍ مِن أَصْحابِه فَقالوا لَهُ
مَرحَبًا بِسَيِّدِنا وَمولانا فَغَضبَ رَسولُ اللَّه غَضَبًا شَديدًا
ثُمَّ قالَ: لا تَقُولوا هكَذا وَلكِن قُولوا مَرحَبًا بِنَبيِّنا
وَرَسولِ رَبِّنا، قُولوا السّدادَ مِنَ القَولِ وَلا تَغلُوا في القَولِ
فَتَمرَقوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Seeking Heal From His Aba (Cloak)
---------------------------------

Bahre Saqa has quoted Imam Sadeq as saying: Good temper brings about
joy. Then, he said: Would you like me to tell you a hadith none of the
people of Medina knows? I said: Yes. Then the Imam said: One day when
the messenger of Allah was in mosque, a small girl of Ansar entered the
mosque and caught hold of the holy Prophet’s Aba (cloak). The Messenger
of Allah rose up without saying anything. The girl too did not say
anything. This was repeated for three times. When the holy Prophet rose
up for the fourth time, the girl was behind him. Having pulled a thread
of the holy Prophet’s Aba, the girl left the mosque. People asked the
girl: What was it you were doing to the holy Prophet by driving him into
a corner, for neither you nor the holy Prophet were saying anything,
what did you mean? She said: There is a person sick in our home. So they
sent me to take a thread of the holy Prophet’s Aba so that he will be
healed. I decided to do it myself but the holy Prophet noticed it and I
was ashamed. I did not want to ask him either. Therefore I eventually
managed to take a thread of his Aba.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن بَحرِ السَّقّاءِ قالَ: قالَ لي أبو عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ
يا بَحرُ حُسنُ الخُلقِ يَسُرُّ، ثُمَّ قالَ: الا أُخبِرُكَ بِحديثٍ ما
هوَ في يَدَي أحَدٍ مِن أَهلِ المَدينَةِ؟ قُلتُ: بَلى، قالَ: بَينَما
رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه ذاتَ يومٍ جالِسٌ في المَسجِدِ
إِذ جاءَت جارِيةٌ لِبَعضِ الأنصارِ وَهوَ قائِمٌ، فَأخَذَت بِطَرفِ
ثَوبِه، فَقامَ لَها النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه فَلَم تَقُل
شَيئًا، وَلَم يَقُل لَها النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه
وَسَلَّمَ شَيئًا حَتّى فَعَلَت ذلِكَ ثَلاثَ مَرّاتٍ فَقامَ لَها
النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه في الرّابِعَةِ وَهيَ خَلفَهُ،
فَأخَذَت هُدبَةً مِن ثَوبِه ثُمَّ رَجَعَت، فَقالَ لَها النّاسُ: فَعَلَ
اللَّه بِك وَفَعَل، حَبَست رَسولَ اللَّه ثَلاثَ مَرّاتٍ لا تَقولينَ
لَهُ شَيئًا وَلا هوَ يَقولُ لَكِ شَيئًا، ما كانَت حاجَتُكِ إِليهِ؟
قالَت: إِنَّ لَنا مَريضًا فَأرسَلَني أَهلي لِأخذِ هُدبَةٍ مِن ثَوبِه
لِيستَشفي بِها، فَلَمّا أرَدتُ أَخْذَها رَآني فَقامَ فَاستَحيَيتُ أَن
آخُذَها وَهوَ يَراني وَأَكرَهُ استَأمِرُهُ في أخذِها فَأخَذتُها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Shaking Hands
-------------

Imam Sadeq has reported: Meeting Hozaiqah, the holy Prophet stretched
his hand for shaking hands with him but Hozaiqah held back his hand. The
holy Prophet said: O Hozaiqah, I stretched my hand towards you but you
are holding back your hand? Hozaiqah said: O Messenger of Allah! I am
willing to shake hand with you but since I am polluted, I don’t want to
touch your hand. The holy Prophet said: Don’t you know that when Muslims
shake hands when meeting, their sins will fall down like the leaves of a
tree.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَ: لَقى النَّبيُّ صَلَّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه حُذَيفَةَ فَمَدَّ النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ
وَآلِه يَدَهُ فَكَفَّ حُذَيفَةُ يَدَهُ، فَقالَ النَّبيُّ صَلَّى اللَّه
عَليهِ وَآلِه يا حُذَيفَةُ بَسَطتُ يَديَ إِليكَ فَكفَفتَ يَدَكَ عَنّي؟
فَقالَ حُذَيفَةُ: يا رَسولَ اللَّه بِيَدِكَ الرَّغبَةُ وَلكِنّي كُنتُ
جُنُبًا فَلَم أُحِبُّ أَنْ تَمُسَّ يَدي يَدَكَ وَأنا جُنُبٌ فَقالَ
النَّبيُّ (ص) أما تَعلَم أَنَّ المُسلِمينَ إِذا التَقيا فَتَصافَحا
تَحاتَت ذُنُوبُهُما كما يَتحاتَت وَرَقُ الشَّجَرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Two Circles Of Believers
------------------------

One day when the holy Prophet entered the Mosque, his glance fell on two
groups, one engaged in prayers and supplications while the other busy in
discussing the Islamic sciences. Being asked about them, the holy
Prophet said: Both groups are engaged in useful activities but the group
engaged in teaching and learning is superior and he sat with them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَرَجَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه فَإِذا في المَسجِدِ
مَجلِسانِ، مَجلِسٌ يَتَفَقَّهونَ وَمَجلِسٌ يَدعونَ اللَّه
وَيَسألونَهُ، فَقالَ: كِلا المَجلِسينِ إِلى خَيرٍ، أمّا هؤُلاءِ
فَيدعُونَ اللَّه وَأمّا هؤُلاءِ فَيَتَعَلَّمونَ وَيَفقَهُونَ الجاهِلَ،
هؤُلاءِ أَفضَلُ بِالتَّعليمِ أُرسِلتُ ثُمَّ قَعَدَ مَعَهُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Zeal
----

The Messenger of Allah said: Prophet Ibrahim was zealous but I am more
zealous than him. May God curse believers and Muslims who have no zeal.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: كانَ إِبراهيمُ غَيُورًا
وَأنا أغيَرُ مِنهُ وَجَدَعَ اللَّه أنفَ مَن لا يُغارُ مِنَ المُؤمِنينَ
وَالمُسلِمينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Seeking Help From God On The Day Of Badr
----------------------------------------

Imam Ali said: On the day of Badr, I went to see what the holy Prophet
was doing with the strong enemy on the horrible scene. I found him
prostrating and saying constantly: O the Living One, O the
self-subsisting! I waited for some time but he was still in prostration
and kept on saying the same words till God made him victorious in the
battle.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ عَليٌّ عَليهِ السَّلامُ: لَمّا كانَ يَومُ بَدرٍ جِئتُ أَنظُرُ ما
يَصنَعُ النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه فَإِذا هوَ ساجِدٌ يَقولُ
«يا حَيُّ يا قَيُّومُ» فَتَرَدَّدتُ مَرّاتٍ وَهوَ عَلى حالِه لا يَزيدُ
عَلى ذلِكَ إِلى أن فَتَحَ اللَّه لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Listening To The Holy Quran
---------------------------

Ibn-Masood says: The Messenger of Allah said: Recite for me some verses
of the Quran. Ibn-Masood said: shall I recite for you the holy Quran
while it has been revealed to you? The holy Prophet said: Yes, I like to
have the pleasure of listening to it. Ibn-Masood says: I started
reciting the Chapter of An-Nisa (the women) until I reached the
following verse:

***“(O Prophet) How will it be, then, when We bring from every people a
witness and bring you as a witness against these?” (4:41)***

Just as I recited the verse, the Prophet wept and then said: Indeed,
that is enough for today.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن ابنِ مَسعُودٍ أنَّهُ قالَ: قالَ لي رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه
عَليهِ وَآلِه: اقرَأْ عَلَيَّ، قُلتُ يا رَسولَ اللَّه أقرَأُ عَلَيكَ
وَعَلَيكَ أُنزِلَ؟ قالَ نَعَم، أُحِبُّ أن أَسمَعَهُ مِن غَيري،
فَقَرَأتُ سُورةَ النِّساءَ حَتّى أتَيتُ إِلى هذِهِ الآيةِ «فَكَيفَ
إِذا جِئنا مِن كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ بِشَهيدٍ وَجِئنا بِكَ عَلى هؤُلاءِ
شَهيدًا» فَقالَ: حَسبُكَ الآن فَإِذا عَيناهُ تَذرِفانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Weeping
-------

The messenger of Allah used to weep for fear of God so much that his
prayer mat would become wet though he had committed no sin.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكانَ يَبكي حَتّى يَبتَلَّ مُصَلّاهُ خَشيَةً مِنَ اللَّه عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ مِن غَيرِ جُرمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Showing No Desire For Revenge
-----------------------------

It has been recorded in 28s that the Messenger of Allah never revenged
himself on any one, rather he forgave all those who persecuted him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جاءَ في الآثارِ: أنَّ رَسولَ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه لَم
يَنتَقِم لِنَفسِه مِن أحَدٍ قَطُّ بَل كانَ يَعفُو وَيصفَحُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Forbidding Backbiting
---------------------

The Messenger of Allah used to say to his companions: Do not talk behind
each other’s back before me, for I like to come to you with a sound
heart.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلَّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه يَقولُ: لا يُبَلِّغُني
أحَدٌ مِنكُم عَن أحَدٍ مِن أَصْحابي شَيئًا فَإِني أُحِبُّ أن أَخْرُجَ
إِليكُم وَأنَا سَليمُ الصَّدرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Enjoying No Privilege
---------------------

It has been reported on the authority of Abu Dharr that the Messenger of
Allah used to sit among the companions without any privilege and any one
not knowing him had to ask which one he was.

Abu Dharr says: We asked the holy Prophet to give permission to make a
bench for him so that newcomers would recognize him. Having acquired the
permission, we made a bench of clay on which the holy Prophet would sit
and we too took a seat on his two sides.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي ذَرٍّ قالَ: كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه:
يَجلِسُ بَينَ ظَهراني أَصْحابه فَيَجيءُ الغَريبُ فَلا يَدري أيُّهُم
هوَ حَتّى يَسألَ فَطَلَبنا إِلى النَّبيِّ أن يَجعَلَ مَجلِسًا
يَعرِفُهُ الغَريبُ إِذا أَتاهُ فَبَنَينا لَهُ دُكّانًا (دَكَّةً) مِن
طينٍ فَكانَ يَجلِسُ عَلَيها وَنَجلِسُ بِجانِبَيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Trustworthiness
-------------------

Imam Sadeq has been quoted as saying: Do not breach trust, for the
Messenger of Allah would return to its owner even if he was given a
needle and thread in trust.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَ: أَدُّوا الأَمانَةَ فَإِنَّ
رَسولَ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه كانَ يُؤَدّي الخَيطَ
وَالمَخيطَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Keeping Promise
---------------

Imam Sadeq has been quoted as saying: The Messenger of Allah who had an
appointment with a man by the side of a rocky place, waited for a long
time but the man did not show up. The sun was extremely hot in a way
that the holy Prophet suffered pain. A companion said: O Messenger of
Allah! How good it was if you would go to shade from sunlight. The holy
Prophet said: I had made arrangement to meet him in this place. If he
does not come, it is his fault.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَ: إِنَّ رَسولَ اللَّه صَلَّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه واعَدَ رَجُلا إِلى الصَّخرَةِ فَقالَ: أنَا لَكَ
هُنا حَتّى تَأتي، قالَ: فَاشتَدَّتِ الشَّمسُ عَليهِ، فَقالَ لَهُ
الصَّحابَةُ: يا رَسولَ اللَّه لَو أنَّكَ تَحوَّلتَ إِلى الظِّلِّ قالَ:
وَعَدتُهُ هاهُنا وَإِن لَم يَجِئ كانَ مِنهُ الجَشَرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Eating With Guests
------------------

Quoting his brother, Musa Ibn -Ja’afar, Ali Ibn -Ja’afar reported that
whenever the Messenger of Allah received guests, he would eat with them
and would not stop eating till the guests would stop.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن عَليِّ بنِ جَعفَرٍ عَن أخيهِ مُوسى عَلَيهِ السَّلامُ أنَّ رَسولَ
اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: كانَ إِذا أتاهُ الضَّيفُ أكَلَ
مَعَهُ وَلَم يَرفَع يَدَهُ مِن الخوانِ حَتّى يَرفَعُ الضَّيفُ يَدَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Never Speaking Ironically
-------------------------

It has been reported on the authority of Mas’adah: I heard from Imam
Sadeq saying to his disciples: Do not taunt one who is your friend with
his flaws nor reproach him for his wrongs, for this is not part of the
ethos of the Messenger of God nor those of the Imams.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن مَسعَدَةٍ قالَ: سَمِعتُ أبا عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ يَقولُ
لأصحابِه: لا تَطعَنُوا في عُيُوبِ مَن أَقبَلَ إِليكُم بِمَوَدَّتِه
وَلا تُوقِفُوهُ عَلى سَيِّئَتِه يَخضَعُ لَها فَإِنّها لَيسَت مِن
أَخلاقِ رَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه وَمِن أَخلاقِ
أَولِيائِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Salutation And Greeting
-----------------------

The Messenger of Allah would meet the demand of anyone coming to him
with a need whether he was a free man or a slave (Man or woman). He was
not harsh or bad-tempered. He never raised his voice on the marketplace.
He never recompensed evil with evil but forgave all wrongs. He was the
first to greet whomever he met.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا يَأتيهِ أحَدٌ حُرًّا أو عَبدًا أو أمَةً إِلا قامَ مَعَهُ في
حاجَتِه لا فَظٌّ وَلا غَليظٌ وَلا صَخابٌ في الأسواقِ وَلا يَجزي
بِالسَّيِّئَةِ السَّيِّئَةَ وَلكِن يَغفِرُ وَيصفَحُ وَيَبدَأُ مَن
لَقِيهُ بِالسَّلامِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Moral Mission
-------------

The Messenger of Allah has been quoted as saying: I have been tutored by
God and Ali has been tutored by me. My Lord has enjoined me generosity
and good deeds and has forbidden me envy and tyranny.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن النَّبيِّ صَلَّى اللَّه عَلَيهِ وآلِه قالَ: أنَا أديبُ اللَّه
وَعَلِيٌّ أدِيبي أمَرني رَبّي بِالسَّخاءِ وَالبِرِّ وَنَهاني عَنِ
البُخلِ وَالجَفا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Eating With Others
------------------

Imam Sadeq has reported that whenever the Messenger of Allah ate with
people, he was the first to eat and the last to stop eating. In this way
people were not ashamed of eating.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَ: كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه إِذا أكَلَ مَعَ القَومِ، أوَّلُ مَن يَضَعُ يَدَهُ
مَعَ القَومِ وَآخَرُ مَن يَرفَعُها إِلى أن يَأكُلَ القَومُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Never Disgracing People
-----------------------

The holy Prophet was such that when it was said that someone had done
something wrong, he never blamed him in the presence of others so as not
to disgrace him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه إِذا بَلَغَهُ عَن
الرَّجُلِ شَيءٌ لَم يَقُل ما بالَ فُلانٌ وَلكِن يقولُ: ما بالَ أَقوامٌ
يَقولُونَ حَتّى لا يَفضَحُ أَحدًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Equal Division
--------------

It has been reported on the authority of Imam Sadeq that a certain
amount of goods was brought to the holy Prophet. The Messenger of Allah
decided to divide it among the companions of Soffeh but since it was not
much, some of them could not have a share. So the Messenger of Allah
went to the deprived ones apologizingly lest they would become
broken-hearted saying: I was brought something. I wanted to divide it
equally among you but it was not enough. So I gave it only to those
feared to be hungry and impatient.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ يقولُ: أتى النَّبيَّ بِشَيءٍ
فَقَسَّمَهُ فَلَم يَسَع أهلَ الصُّفَّةِ جَميعًا فَخَصَّ بِه أُناسًا
مِنها فَخافَ رَسولُ اللَّه أن يَكونَ قَد دَخَلَ قُلوبَ الآخَرينَ
شَيءٌ، فَخَرَجَ إِليهم فَقالَ: مَعذِرةً إِلى اللَّه عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
وَإِليكُم يا أهلَ الصُّفَّةِ، أنا أوتينا بِشَيءٍ فَأرَدنا أَن
نُقَسِّمَهُ بَينَكُم فَلَم يَسَعكُم، فَخَصَصتُ بِه أُناسًا مِنكُم،
خَشَينا جَزَعَهُم وَهَلَعَهُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Weight-Lifter
-------------

The Messenger of Allah passed by a gathering among whom there was a man
who could lift a big stone. People were amazed with his strength. Seeing
it the holy Prophet asked: What is this gathering for? People told him
about the strong man lifting a big stone. The Messenger of Allah said:
Do you know who is stronger than this man? Stronger than this man is one
who is abused but he can endure it and one who overcomes his carnal
desire, the Satan of himself and the Satan of the abuser.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَرَّ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه بِقومٍ فيهم رَجُلٌ
يَرفَعُ حَجَرًا يُقالُ لَهُ حَجَرُ الأشِدّاء وَهُم يَعجَبُونَ مِنهُ،
فَقالَ ما هذا؟ قالوا: رَجُلٌ يَرفَعُ حَجَرًا يُقالُ لَهُ حَجَرُ
الأشِدّاء قالَ: أَفَلا أُخبِرُكُم بِما هوَ أَشَدُّ مِنهُ؟ رَجُلٌ
سَبَّهُ رَجُلٌ فَحَلُمَ عَنهُ فَغَلَبَ نَفسَهُ وَغَلَبَ شَيطانَهُ
وَشَيطانَ صاحِبِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In Ummi-Salmah’s Home
---------------------

It has been reported on the authority of Imam Sadeq: The Messenger of
Allah was one night in Ummi-Salamah’s house. It was midnight when
Ummi-Salamah woke up and noticed that the holy Prophet was not in his
bed. She was worried about what had happened. She got up and began to
search for the Prophet. She found the holy Prophet standing up in a dark
corner, raising his hands towards the sky, shedding tears and saying: "O
God! Do not take from me the good things that you have granted me Do not
let the enemy and the jealous blame me! My God! Do not let me return to
the evils from which you have saved me! My God! Do not leave me alone as
much as the twinkling of an eye!

Hearing these words, Ummi-Salama started crying. The Messenger of Allah
who noticed it asked: Why are you crying? She said: May my parents be
sacrificed for you. Why should I not cry? You who have such a rank and
great position with God and you fear Him to the extent that you ask Him
not to leave you alone for a moment! So, woe to me and other persons
like me! The holy Prophet said: How could I feel sure and not fear!?
Prophet Yunus was left alone for a moment and it befell him what you
know about it.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَ: كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلَّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه في بَيتِ أُمِّ سَلمَةَ في لَيلَتِها، فَفَقَدَتهُ
مِن الفِراشِ، فَدَخَلَها في ذلِكَ ما يَدخُلُ النساءَ، فَقامَت
تَطلُبُهُ في جوانِبِ البَيتِ حَتّى انتَهَت إِليهِ وَهوَ في جانِبٍ مِن
البَيتِ قائِمٌ رافِعٌ يَدَيهِ يَبكي وَهوَ يَقولُ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اللَّهُمَّ لا تَنزِع مِنّي صالِحَ ما أَعطَيتَني أَبَدًا، اللَّهُمَّ
لا تُشمِت بي عَدُوًّا وَلا حاسِدًا أَبَدًا؟ اللَّهُمَّ وَلا تَرُدَّني
في سُوءٍ استَنقَذتَني مِنهُ أَبَدًا، اللَّهُمَّ وَلا تَكِلني إِلى
نَفسي طَرفَةَ عَينٍ أَبَدًا».
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقالَ: يا أُمَّ سَلَمَةَ وَما يُؤمِنُني؟ وَإِنَّما وَكَّل اللَّه
يُونُسَ بنَ مَتي إِلى نَفسِه طَرفَةَ عَينٍ وَكانَ مِنهُ ما كانَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Endeavor In Prayer
------------------

It has been reported on the authority of Abdullah that O mar
Ibn -khattab came to the Messenger of Allah while he was very ill or had
fever. Omar said: O Messenger of Allah! How high your temperature is?
The holy Prophet said: Yet it did not prevent me from reciting thirty
chapters of the holy Quran among which seven were the longest. Omar
said: O Messenger of Allah! Allah has forgiven you your faults in the
past and in the future and yet you make such an endeavor!? The holy
Prophet said: Should I not be then a thankful servant?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن بَكرِ بن عَبدِ اللَّه أنَّ عُمَرَ بن خَطّابٍ دَخَلَ عَلى النَّبيِّ
صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه وَهوَ مَوقُوذٌ، أو قالَ: مَحمُومٌ، فَقالَ
لَهُ عُمَرُ: يا رَسولَ اللَّه ما أَشَدَّ وَعَكَ أو حَماكَ؟ فَقالَ: ما
مَنَعَني ذلِكَ أن قَرَأتُ اللَّيلَةَ ثَلاثينَ سُورَةً فيهِنَّ السَّبعَ
الطُّوَلَ. فَقالَ عُمَرُ: يا رَسولَ اللَّه غَفَرَ اللَّه لَكَ ما
تَقَدَّمَ مِن ذَنبِكَ وَما تَأخَّرَ وَأنتَ تَجتَهِدُ هذا الاجتِهادَ؟
فَقالَ: يا عُمَرُ أَفَلا أَكُونُ عَبدًا شَكُورًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Prostration
-----------

It has been reported on the authority of Imam Baqer that the Messenger
of Allah never woke up without falling in prostration to God — Almighty
and Glorified.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي جَعفَرٍ عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَ: ما استَيقَظَ رَسولُ اللَّه
صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه مِن نَومٍ قَطُّ إِلا خَرَّ للَّه عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ ساجِدًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Daily Praise And Thanks
-----------------------

The Messenger of Allah used to thank God 360 times that is the number of
blood vessels saying: All praise is due to the Lord of the worlds.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه يَحمَدُ اللَّه في كُلِّ
يَومٍ ثَلاثَ مِئةٍ وَسِتّينَ مَرَّةً عَدَدَ عُرُوقِ الجَسَدِ، يَقولُ:
الحَمدُ للَّه رَبِّ العالَمينَ كَثيرًا عَلى كُلِّ حالٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Repentance
----------

It has been reported on the authority of Imam Sadeq that the Messenger
of Allah used to repent seventy times a day without having committed any
sin saying: I repent unto Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَ: كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه يَتوبُ إِلى اللَّه في كُلِّ يَومٍ سَبعينَ مَرَّةً
مِن غَيرِ ذَنبٍ، كانَ يَقولُ: أَتوبُ إِلى اللَّه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thankfulness
------------

It has been reported on the authority of Imam Sadeq that the Messenger
of Allah who was riding his she-camel on a trip came down from the
camel, unexpectedly performed five prostrations and then mounted his
camel. His companions said; O Messenger of Allah! We saw you doing what
you would not do before. The Messenger of Allah said: Yes Gabriel came
to me with several glad tidings from Allah — Almighty and Glorified.
Therefore, I performed one prostration for every glad tiding.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ أنَّ رَسولَ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه
عَلَيهِ وَآلِه كانَ في سَفَرٍ يَسيرُ عَلى ناقةٍ لَهُ، إِذ نَزَلَ
فَسَجَدَ خَمسَ سَجداتٍ، فَلَمّا رَكِب قالُوا: يا رَسولَ اللَّه إِنّا
رَأيناكَ صَنَعتَ شَيئًا لَم تَصنَعهُ، فَقالَ عَليهِ السَّلامُ نَعَم
استَقبَلَني جبرَئيلُ عَليهِ السَّلامُ فَبَشَّرَني بِبِشاراتٍ مِنَ
اللَّه عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، فَسَجَدتُ للَّه شُكرًا لِكُلِّ بُشرى سَجدَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibrahim
-------

Anas Ibn -Malek has been quoted as saying: I saw that the holy Prophet’s
son, Ibrahim was dying. Shedding tears, the Messenger of Allah said:
Eyes are weeping and heart is sorrowful. I do not say anything save what
pleases our Lord and we are sorrowful for you O Ibrahim.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أنَسِ بن مالِكٍ قالَ: رَأيتُ إِبراهيمَ بن رَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه وَهوَ يَجودُ بِنَفسِه، فَدَمَعَت عَيناهُ فَقالَ
صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: تَدمَعُ العَينُ وَيَحزَنُ القَلبُ وَلا
أَقُولُ إِلا ما يَرضى رَبُّنا وَإِنّا بِكَ يا إِبراهيمُ لَمَحزُونون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Wrath
---------

It has been reported on the authority of Imam Ali that the Messenger of
Allah was never wrathful for the sake of the worldly affairs but when he
was wrathful for the sake of God, no one could change his mind.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رُويَ عَن أميرِ المُؤمِنينَ عَليهِ السَّلامُ أنَّهُ قالَ: كانَ
النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه لا يَغضَبُ لِلدُّنيا وَإِذا
أَغْضَبَهُ الحَقُّ لَم يَصرِفهُ أحَدٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

When Riding
-----------

When the Messenger of Allah was riding, he would not let anyone to go
with him on foot. The holy Prophet either make him ride with him and in
case he did not accept, the Messenger of Allah would say: You go first
and wait for me in a certain place.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رُويَ أن رَسولَ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه كانَ لا يَدَعُ
أَحدًا يَمشي مَعَهُ، إِذا كانَ راكِبًا حَتّى يَحمِلهُ مَعَهُ، فَإِن
أبى قالَ تَقَدَّم أَمامي وَادرِكني في المَكانِ الَّذي يُريدُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Inhibition
----------

The holy Prophet has been quoted as saying: Among the first things from
which my Lord inhibited me was quarrel with people.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن النَّبيِّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه قالَ: إِنَّ أَوَّلَ ما نَهاني
عَنهُ رَبّي عَزَّ وَجَلَّ.... إِلى أن قالَ: وَمُلاحاةَ الرِّجالِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

How He Would Walk?
------------------

It has been reported that the Messenger of Allah would take his steps
fast when on a trip and when he reached a vast desert, his pace became
faster. A companion of his has said: I saw no one faster than the
Messenger of Allah in walking as if the earth contracted under. His feet
and we could hardly catch up with him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلَّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: يَسيرُ العَنَقَ،
فَإِذا وَجَدَ فَجوَةً نَصَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما رَأيتُ أَحدًا أَسرَعُ في مَشيَتِه مِن رَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه
عَليهِ وَآلِه كَأنَّما الأرضُ تَطوي لَهُ وَإِنّا لَنَجهَدُ انفُسَنا
وَإِنَّهُ لَغيرُ مُكتَرِثٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He And The Orphans
------------------

When Ja’afar Tayyar son of Abo-Taleb was martyred in a battle and the
news reached Medina, the Messenger of Allah went to his house.
Addressing his wife, Asma the daughter of Amees, the holy Prophet said:
Bring me the children of Ja’afar. He took them into his arms, smelled
them and was kind to them. Abdullah Ibn -Ja’afar says: I remember well
the day the Messenger of Allah came to my mother, gave the news of my
father’s martyrdom and then drew his hand on my head and my brother’s
head.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لما أُصيبَ جَعفَرُ بن أبي طالِبٍ أَتى رَسولَ اللَّه أسماءُ فَقالَ
لَها: أَخْرِجي لي وُلدَ جَعفَرٍ، فَأُخرِجوا إِليهِ فَضَمَّهُم
وَشَمَّهُم، قالَ عَبدُ اللَّه بن جَعفَرٍ أَحفَظُ حينَ دَخَلَ رَسولُ
اللَّه عَلى أُمّي فَنَعى لَها أبي وَنَظَرتُ إِليهِ وَهوَ يَمسَحُ عَلى
رَأسي وَرَأسِ أخي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Condolence To The Son Of Zeid Ibn -Hareseh
------------------------------------------

When Zeid Ibn -Hareseh was martyred, the Messenger of Allah went to see
his family. Seeing the holy Prophet, Zeid’s daughter burst into tears in
a way that the holy Prophet too started crying. A companion asked: O
Messenger of Allah! What state was it? The holy Prophet said: This is
the eagerness of a friend towards his friend.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمّا أُصيبَ زَيدُ بن حارِثَةَ، انطَلَقَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلَّى اللَّه
عَليهِ وَآلِه إِلى مَنزِلِه فَلَمّا رَأتهُ ابنَتُهُ جَهَشَت،
فَانتَحَبَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه وَقالَ لَهُ بَعضُ
أَصْحابِه: ما هذا يا رَسولَ اللَّه؟ قالَ: هذا شوقُ الحَبيبِ إِلى
الحَبيبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Visiting The Sick And Taking Part In Funeral
--------------------------------------------

It has been reported on the authority of Anas Ibn -Malek that the
Messenger of Allah used to visit the sick, take part in the funeral of
Muslims, accept the slaves’ invitation and ride on an ass. On the day of
Khaybar, Gorayzah and Nazeer, he rode on an ass whose rein was a rope of
date fiber with sackcloth underneath him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أنَسِ بن مالِكٍ قالَ: كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ
وَآلِه: يَعُودُ المَريضَ وَيتَّبِعُ الجِنازَةَ، وَيُجيبُ دَعوةَ
المَملُوكِ، وَيَركَبُ الحِمارَ، وَكانَ يَومَ خَيبَرٍ وَيومَ قُرَيظَةَ
وَالنَّضيرِ عَلى حِمارٍ مَخطُومٍ بِحَبلٍ مِن ليفٍ تَحتَهُ إِكافٌ مِن
ليفٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Prayer For The Unjust
---------------------

It has been reported that when four teeth of the Messenger of Allah were
broken and his face was hurt in the Battle of Ohod, his companions
became upset, so they said: O Messenger of Allah! We wish that you would
curse them! The Messenger of Allah said: I was not delegated to curse
people but to pray and be a mercy for them. O God! Guide my people for
they do not know the truth.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرُويَ أنَّهُ لَمّا كُسِرَت رُباعِيَّتُهُ وَشَجَّ وَجهُهُ يَومَ
أُحُدٍ، شَقَّ ذلِكَ عَلى أَصْحابِه شَديدًا وَقالوا لَو دَعوتَ
عَلَيهِم، فَقالَ إِنّي لَم أُبعَث لَعّانًا وَلكِنّي بُعِثتُ داعيًا
وَرَحمَةً، اللَّهُمَّ اهدِ قَومي فَإِنَّهُم لا يَعلَمُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Explanation
-----------

It has been reported on the authority of Ibn-Abbas that whenever the
Messenger of Allah related a hadith or was asked a question, he would
repeat it three times to make it fully understood.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ ابنُ عباسٍ كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه إِذا
حَدَّثَ الحَديثَ أو سألَ عَنِ الأمرِ كَرَّرَهُ ثَلاثًا لِيُفَهِّمَ
وَيَفهَمُ عَنهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

When He Felt Proud
------------------

Whenever the Messenger of Allah saw a Jew, a Christian, a Sabian, a
Zoroastrian or any other person of non-Muslims, he used to say: Praise
is due to Allah who has made me excel you with Islam being my faith, the
holy Quran my book, Prophethood my mission, Ali being my Minister, my
brothers being the believers and Ka’aba being my Qibla.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه إِذا رَأى يَهودِيًّا أو
نَصرانِيًّا أو صابِئًا أو مَجوسيًّا. أو واحِدًا عَلى غَيرِ مِلَّةِ
الإِسلامِ قالَ: الحَمدُ للَّه الَّذي فَضَّلَني عَلَيكَ بِالإِسلامِ
دينًا وَبِالقُرآنِ كِتابًا وَبِمُحَمَّدٍ نَبيًّا وَبِعَليٍّ إِمامًا
وَبِالمُؤمِنينَ إِخوانًا وَبِالكَعبةِ قِبلَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Humiliating Others
------------------

Imam Baqer and Imam Sadeq have been polyquoted as saying: Abu Dharr
humiliated a man by calling him, O son of a black since his mother was
black. The Messenger of Allah said: O Abu Dharr! Are you humiliating him
because of his mother?! Abu Dharr rubbed his head and face against the
earth (regretted) so much that the Messenger of Allah was pleased with
him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن الباقِرَينِ عَليهِما السَّلامُ: أنَّ أَبا ذَرٍّ عَيَّرَ رَجُلا
عَلى عَهدِ النَّبيِّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه بِأُمِّه فَقالَ: يا بن
السَّوداءِ وَكانَت أُمُّهُ سَوداء فَقالَ لَهُ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلَّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه تُعَيِّرُهُ بِأُمِّه يا أَبا ذَرٍّ؟! قالَ فَلَم
يَزَل أَبو ذَرٍّ يُمَرِّغُ وَجهَهُ في التُّرابِ وَرَأسَهُ حَتّى رَضِيَ
رَسولُ اللَّه (ص(
  </p>
</blockquote>

Three Other Virtues
-------------------

It has been reported on the authority of Imam Sadeq Allah would never
answer negatively to people’s demands. He would give to needy person if
he had something with him. If he had nothing with him, he would say God
willing it would be fulfilled. He would never reproach people because of
their wrong acts and he would participate in battles along with other
combatants since the time the Quranic verse "Fight them in Allah’s way;
this is not imposed on you except in relation to yourself" was revealed
to him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن جَعفَرِ بن مُحَمَّدٍ قالَ: ما سُئِلَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه
عَليهِ وَآلِه شَيئًا قَطُّ فَقالَ: لا، إِن كانَ عِندَهُ أَعْطَاهُ
وَإِن لَم يَكُن عِندَهُ قالَ: يَكُونُ إِنشاءَ اللَّه، وَلا كافَأَ
بِالسَّيِّئَةِ قَطُّ، وَما أَلقى سَرِيَّةً مُذ نَزَلَت عَلَيهِ
«فَقاتِل في سَبيلِ اللَّه لا تُكلَّفُ إِلا نَفسَكَ» إِلا وَلّى
بِنَفسِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Camel Race
----------

It has been reported on the authority of Imam Sadeq that a bedouin came
to the holy Prophet saying: O Messenger Allah! Would you like your
she-camel to race with my she-camel? The Messenger of Allah accepted it
and the Bedouin happened to win the race.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي عَبدِ اللَّه عَليهِ السَّلامُ قالَ: قَدِمَ إعرابِيٌّ النَّبيَّ
صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه فَقالَ: يا رَسولَ اللَّه تُسابِقُني
بِناقَتِكَ هذِه؟ فَسابَقَهُ فَسَبَقَهُ الإِعرابِيُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Brushing The Teeth
------------------

It has been reported that the Messenger of Allah would never go to bed
without having toothbrush at his bedside. He would brush his teeth when
he woke up and would say: I have been enjoined to brush my teeth in a
way I feared it would become an obligatory act.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرُوِيَ أنَّهُ لا يَنامُ إِلا وَالسِّواكُ عِندَ رَأسِه، فَإِذا نَهَضَ
بَدَأَ بِالسِّواكِ وَقالَ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: لَقَد أُمِرتُ
بِالسِّواكِ حَتّى خَشيتُ أن يُكتَبَ عَلَيَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Brushing The Teeth At Night
---------------------------

The holy Prophet used to brush his teeth three times a night, once
before going to bed, the second time when he woke up for performing
night prayer and the third time before the morning prayer.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكانَ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه يَستاكُ كُلَّ لَيلةٍ ثَلاثَ مَرّاتٍ:
مَرَّةً قَبلَ نَومِه وَمَرَّةً إِذا قامَ مِن نَومِه إِلى وِردِه،
وَمَرَّةً قَبلَ خُروجِه إِلى الصَّلاة الصُّبحِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

New Clothes
-----------

It has been reported on the authority of Ibn -Abbas that whenever the
Messenger of Allah wore new clothes, he would praise Allah and then
performed two Rak’at prayer.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن ابنِ عَبَّاسٍ قالَ: إِنَّ رَسولَ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه
إِذا لَبِسَ ثَوبًا جَديدًا حَمِدَ اللَّه وَصَلّى رَكْعَتَين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In Prayer
---------

When supplicating, the Messenger of Allah used to raise his two hands as
a needy person begging food.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: يَرفَعُ يَدَيهِ إِذا
ابتَهَلَ وَدَعا كَما يَستَطعَمُ المِسكينُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Holy Prophet’s Oaths
------------------------

One of the oaths taken by the holy Prophet was: Nay, I seek forgiveness
of Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَت مِن أَيمانِ رَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَلَيهِ وَآلِه: لا
وأَستَغفِرُ اللَّه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Kissing The Hand Of A Worker
----------------------------

Anas Ibn -Malek reported: When the Messenger of Allah was returning from
Tabook battle, a man by the name of Sa’ad Ansari welcomed the holy
Prophet shaking hand with him, finding that the man’s hands coarse, the
holy Prophet said: What has happened to your hands? The man said: O
Messenger of Allah! I have wielded spade and rope so much that my hands
have become coarse. I earn my living in this way. Kissing the man’s
hands, the holy Prophet said: This is the hand the Fire will not touch.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَوى أَنَسُ بن مالِكٍ أنَّ رَسولَ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه
لَمّا أَقبَلَ مِن غَزوَةِ تَبوكٍ استَقبَلَهُ سَعدُ الأنصاري فَصافَحَهُ
النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه ثُمَّ قالَ لَهُ: ما هذا الَّذي
أَكنَبَ يَدَيكَ؟ قالَ يا رَسولَ اللَّه أَضرِبُ بِالمَرِّ وَالمِسحاةِ
فَأنفِقُهُ عَلى عِيالي فَقَبَّلَ يَدَهُ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه
عَليهِ وَآلِه وَقالَ هذِه يَدٌ لا تَمَسُّها النّارُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Tidying Up
----------

Quoting his father, Imam Sadeq has reported that a man came to the door
of the holy Prophet and asked to see him. Leaving his chamber to see the
man, the holy Prophet, instead of Looking into a mirror, stood in front
of bowl of water to tidy himself. When the holy Prophet returned, Aisha
asked: O Messenger of Allah! For what did you stand before the bowl of
water when going to see that man and made yourself look tidy? The
Messenger of Allah said: O Aisha! God loves a Muslim who makes himself
tidy when he goes to see his brother-in-faith.

It has been reported that the Messenger of Allah made himself look tidy
to his companions and to a greater extent to his wife saying: Surely God
loves a person who makes himself tidy when he goes to see his
brothers-in-faith.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن جَعفَرٍ عَن أَبيهِ عَلَيهِما السَّلامُ قالَ: وَقَفَ رَجُلٌ عَلى
بابِ النَّبيِّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه يَستَأذِنُ عَليهِ قالَ:
فَخَرَجَ النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه فَوُجِدَ في حُجرَتِه
رَكوَةً فيها ماءٌ فَوَقَفَ يَستَوي لِحيَتَهُ وَيَنظُرُ إِليها فَلَمّا
رَجَعَ داخِلا قالَت لَهُ عائِشَةُ: يا رَسولَ اللَّه أنتَ سَيّدُ وُلدِ
آدَمَ وَرَسولُ رَبِّ العالَمينَ وَقفتَ عَلى الرَّكوَةِ، تُسَوّي
لِحيَتَكَ وَرَأسَكَ؟ قالَ: يا عائِشَةُ إِنَّ اللَّه يُحِبُّ إِذا
خَرَجَ عَبدُهُ المُؤمِنُ إِلى أَخيهِ أن يَتَهيَّأَ لَهُ وَأن
يَتَجَمَّلَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abo-Jahl’s Confession
---------------------

A man by the name of Akhnas Ibn -Shareeq met Abo-Jahl on the day of Badr
saying: O Abol-Hakam! There is no one here but you and me to hear our
words. Now tell me whether Muhammad is truthful or liar? Abo-Jahl said:
By God! Surely Muhammad is truthful and he has never told a lie.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقيلَ إِنَّ الأخنَسَ بن شَريقٍ لَقى أَبا جَهلٍ يَومَ بَدرٍ، فَقالَ
لَهُ: يا أَبَا الحَكَمِ لَيسَ هُنا غَيري وَغَيرُك يَسمَعُ كَلامَنا
تُخبِرُني عَن مُحَمَّدٍ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه صادِقٌ أم كاذِبٌ؟
فَقالَ أبو جَهلٍ وَاللَّه إِنَّ مُحَمَّدًا صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه
الصّادِقُ وَما كَذَبَ مُحَمَّدٌ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه قَطُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Akramah Son Of Abo-Jahl
-----------------------

Akramah Ibn -Abo-Jahl was one of the ardent enemies of the Messenger of
Allah. He was among four persons the shedding of whose blood the holy
Prophet had made permissible allowing people to kill them wherever they
found them even though they might catch hold of Ka’ba’s curtain. Akramah
who had fled Mecca went to sea and embarked on a ship but there was a
storm in the sea and he vowed with his Lord that should he be saved from
drowning he would come to the Messenger of Allah and swear allegiance
with him and embrace Islam. By chance, he was saved and when he came to
the holy Prophet to embrace Islam, the Messenger of Allah rose up and
gave him a hug saying: Bravo to the riding traveler. Muslims used to
call him the son of Allah’s enemy (Abo-Jahl)! Akramah went to the holy
Prophet complaining of it. Hence, the Messenger of Allah forbade them
and appointed him to collect Zakat (Alms).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ كانَ شَديدُ العَداوَةِ لِرَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ
وَآلِه وَهوَ أحَدُ الأربَعةِ الَّذينَ أَباحَ النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه
عَليهِ وَآلِه دِماءَهُم وأَمَرَ النّاسَ بِقَتلِهِم أينَما وَجَدُوهُم
وَإِن كانوا مُتعَلِّقينَ بِأَستارِ الكَعبَةِ، فَفَرَّ وَرَكِبَ البَحرَ
فَأَصابَتهُ عاصِفٌ فَعاهَدَ رَبَّهُ أن يَأتي رَسولَ اللَّه صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه وَيُبايِعَهُ إِن أَنْجاهُ اللَّه تَعالى، فَنَجى
وَأتى وَاسلَمَ فَقامَ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه فَاعتَنَقَهُ وَقالَ
مَرحَبًا بِالرّاكِبِ المُهاجِرِ، وَكانَ المُسلِمونَ يَقولُونَ هذا ابنُ
عَدُوِّ اللَّه أبي جَهلٍ، فَشَكى ذلِكَ إِلى النَّبيِّ صَلّى اللَّه
عَليهِ وَآلِه فَمَنَعَهُم مِن ذلِكَ، ثُمَّ استَعمَلَهُ صَلّى اللَّه
عَليهِ وَآلِه عَلى صَدَقاتِ هَوازِنٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Habits
------

Anas has reported: When someone was telling the holy Prophet something
privately, he would listen carefully; when he shook hands with a person,
he never withdrew his hand till that person withdrew his hand; he would
rise up when receiving and seeing someone off; his knees were never
ahead of other persons knees; he was the first to greet and shake hands;
he never stretched his legs in the presence of his companions; he
respected the guests and on many occasions spread his own clothes for
them to sit on; he would put a mattress and cushion for them and if they
refused he would insist on it; he would mention his companions title to
honor them and would call them by the fairest names and designation, and
never interrupted any one.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ أَنَسٌ: ما التَقَمَ أحَدٌ أُذُنَ رَسولَ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه
عَليهِ وَآلِه فَيُنَحّي رَأسَهُ حَتّى يَكونَ الرَّجُلُ هوَ الَّذي
يُنَحّي رَأسَهُ، وَما أخَذَ أحَدٌ بِيَدِه فَيُرسِلَ يَدَهُ حَتّى
يُرسِلَها الآخَرُ، وَما قَعَدَ إِلى رَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ
وَآلِه رَجُلٌ قَطُّ فَقامَ حَتّى يَقومَ وَلَم يُرَ مُقَدِّمًا
رُكبَتَيهِ بَينَ يَدَي جَليسٍ لَهُ وَكانَ يَبدَأُ مَن لَقيهُ
بِالسَّلامِ وَيَبدَأُ أَصْحابَهُ بِالمُصافَحَةِ، لَم يُرَ قَطُّ مادًّا
رِجلَيهِ بَينَ أَصْحابِه، يُكرِمُ مَن يَدخُلُ عَلَيهِ وَرُبَما بَسَطَ
لَهُ ثَوبَهُ وَيُؤثِرَهُ بِالوَسادَةِ الَّتي تَحتَهُ وَيعزِمُ عَليهِ
في الجُلوسِ عَليهِ، إِن أبى، وَيُكَنّي أَصْحابَهُ وَيَدعُوهُم بِأحَبِّ
أَسمائِهِم تَكرِمَةً لَهُم وَلا يَقطَعُ عَلى أحَدٍ حَديثَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Water Carrying
--------------

It has been reported that the holy Prophet was on a trip and the water
for his ablution was with Abo-Qatadah. The day was hot and people felt
extremely thirsty. Hence, they rushed to the Messenger of Allah asking
for water. Having quenched their thirst with the rest of the ablution
water, the holy Prophet turned to Abo-Qatadah and said: Drink some
water! Abo-Qatadah said: No, O Messenger of Allah! You drink it. The
holy Prophet said: The water carrier (Saaqi) should drink last.
Abo-Qatadah drank water and after him, the Messenger of Allah, started
drinking water. Evidently this is one example of the moral virtues which
the holy Prophet’s companions had acquired. Nevertheless, the holy
Prophet was always leading in this connection and set example for them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرُوِيَ أنَّ النَّبيَّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه كانَ في سَفَرٍ
وَكانَ عِندَ أبي قَتادَةَ وُضُوءَهُ فَتَوَضَّأَ وَفُضِلَت في الميضاةِ
فَضلَةً فَلَمّا حَمى النَّهارُ واشتَدَّ العَطَشُ بِالنَّاسِ ابتَدَروا
إِلى النَّبِيِّ يَقولونَ: الماء الماء فَسَقاهُمُ النَّبيُّ جَميعًا
بِفَضلِ وُضُوئِه الَّذي كانَ في الميضاةِ ثُمَّ قالَ لأبي قَتادَةَ
اشرَب فَقالَ لا بَل اشرَب أنتَ يا رَسولَ اللَّه فَقالَ اشرَب فَإِنَّ
ساقِيَ القَومِ آخِرَهُم شُربًا فَشَرِبَ أبو قَتادَةَ ثُمَّ شَرِبَ
رَسولُ اللَّه (ص).... هذا مِن مَكارِمِ الأخلاقِ الَّتي لا يَزالُ
يَأخُذُها بِها أَصْحابُهُ وَيَتَقَدَّمُ بِها إِليهِم وَيُكَرِّرُها
إِليهِم الخ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Those Resembling Him
--------------------

The Messenger of Allah said: Shall I inform you which one resembles me
more than the others? They said: Yes, O Messenger of Allah! He said: The
one who is the most affable, the one who is the most forbearing, the one
who is the most kind to his relatives, and the one who is the fairest
among you in anger and pleasure.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: ألا أُخبِرُكُم
بِأشبَهِكُم بي أَخلاقًا؟ قالوا: بَلى يا رَسولَ اللَّه، فَقالَ:
أَحْسَنَكُم أَخلاقًا وَأَعظَمَكُم حِلمًا وَأبَرَّكُم بِقَرابَتِه
وَأَشَدَّكُم إِنصافًا مِن نَفسِه في الغَضَبِ وَالرِّضا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Greeting Women
--------------

It has been reported on the authority of Asma, the daughter of Yazid:
The Messenger of Allah passed by a group of women and greeted them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أسماءَ بِنتِ يَزيدٍ أنَّ رَسولَ اللَّه مَرَّ بِنسوةٍ فَسَلَّمَ
عَلَيهِنَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

General Pardon
--------------

When Mecca was conquered, both friends and foes asked for revenge.
Therefore a bloodshed was expected. Addressing Abo-Sofian, the
banner-bearer of Islam chanted the following slogan: Today is the day of
revenge; today is the day of disrespect; today is the day of disgrace of
Quraish. Hearing this from the banner-bearers of Islam, Abo-Sofian cried
out! O Messenger of Allah! Is it you who have ordered to kill us while
you are the most merciful and the most kind of people! The holy Prophet
who heard it, paused a little and then said: O Abo-Sofian! Today is the
day of mercy and honor for Quraish. Hence, the slogans of revenge turned
into that of mercy. Then the holy Prophet pardoned all the enemies of
Islam saying: I will treat you as Joseph treated his brothers. "There
shall be no reproof against you this day; Allah may forgive you, and He
is most Merciful of the merciful".

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اليَومُ يَومُ المَلحَمَةِ، اليَومُ تُسبَى الحُرْمَةُ، اليَومُ أَذَلَّ
اللَّه قُرَيشًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا رَسولَ اللَّه أَمَرتَ بِقَتلِ قَومِكَ فَأَنتَ أَبَرُّ النَّاسِ
وَأرحَمُ النّاسِ وَأَوصَلُ النَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا أَبا سُفيانَ بَل اليَومُ يَومُ المَرحَمَةِ، أَعَزَّ اللَّه قُرَيشًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذهَبُوا فَأنتُمُ الطُّلَقاءُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تَثريبَ عَليكُمُ اليَومَ يَغفِرُ اللَّه لَكُم وَهوَ أَرحَمُ
الرّاحِمينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Respect For The Elderly
-----------------------

Anas said: An old man came to the Messenger of Allah. Those present did
not respect the old man as they should. The holy Prophet said: He who is
not kind to our children and does not respect our elderly people is not
from us.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنَسٌ: جاءَ شَيخٌ إِلى رَسولِ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه في
حاجَةٍ فَأَبْطَأُوا عَن الشَّيخِ أن يُوسِّعُوا لَهُ فَقالَ (ص): لَيسَ
مِنّا مَن لَم يَرحَم صَغيرَنا وَلَم يُوَقِّر كَبيرَنا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Meeting A Worker
----------------

On day when the Messenger of Allah was sitting among his companions, he
saw a strong man who was busy doing his job since early morning. The
companions said: How good it was if he would use his strength in the way
of God! The holy Prophet said: What you say is not right, for this man
works to earn his living in order to preserve himself from the
abjectness of begging. In this way, he is following the path of God.
Even if he works hard for his weak parents and children in order to meet
their needs, he is still walking in the path of God. But if he works to
amass further wealth and to be proud of it, then he is in the way of
Satan.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه جالِسًا مَعَ أَصْحابِه ذاتَ يَومٍ
فَنَظَر إِلى شابٍّ ذي جَلَدٍ وَقُوَّةٍ وَقَد بَكَّرَ يَسعى، فَقالُوا
وَيحَ هذا لَو كانَ شَبابُهُ وَجَلَدُهُ في سَبيلِ اللَّه فَقالَ صَلّى
اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه لا تَقولوا هذا فَإِنَّهُ إِن كانَ يَسعى عَلى
نَفسِه لِيَكُفَّها عَن المَسأَلَةِ وَيُغنيها عَن النّاسِ فَهوَ في
سَبيلِ اللَّه وَإِن كانَ يَسعى عَلى أَبَوَينِ ضَعيفَينِ أو ذُرّيّةٍ
ضِعافًا لِيُغنِيَهُمُ وَيَكفيَهِم فَهوَ في سَبيلِ اللَّه وَإِن كانَ
يَسعى تَفاخُرًا وَتَكاثُرًا فَهوَ في سَبيلِ الشَّيطانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Meeting An Idle Person
----------------------

Seeing a man whose appearance surprised him, the Messenger of Allah
asked : Does he have an occupation? If the answer was negative, he would
say: He is disfavored with me. They asked: For what O Messenger of
Allah? The holy Prophet said: This is because if a believer has no
occupation, he will earn his living with his religion (sells his
religion).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: إِذا نَظَرَ إِلى
الرَّجُلِ فَأعجَبَهُ قالَ: هَل لَهُ مِن حِرفَةٍ؟ فَإِن قالوا لا قالَ:
سَقَطَ مِن عَيني، قيلَ: وَكَيفَ ذاكَ يا رَسولَ اللَّه؟ قالَ: لأنَّ
المُؤمِنَ إِذا لَم يَكُن لَهُ حِرفَةٌ يَعيشُ بِدَينِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Learning How To Use Weapons
---------------------------

Realizing that Muslim’s conquest and war affairs required some of his
companions should get familiar with new weapons and their use, the
Messenger of Allah sent two of his companions to a village in Yemen to
be trained.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَأى الرَّسولُ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه أنَّ اتِّساعَ الفُتُوحِ
يَقضي بِأن يَتَعَلَّمَ بَعضُ أَصْحابِه صنعَةَ الدَّباباتِ وَالمَجانيقِ
وَالضُّبُورِ فَأرسَلَ إِلى جَرشِ اليَمَنِ اثنَينِ مِن أَصْحابِه
يَتَعَلَّمانِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Seeking Refuge To God
---------------------

The Messenger of Allah said: O God! I seek refuge to You from inability,
idleness, cowardice, envy, decrepitude, cruelty, ignorance, destitution,
abjectness, poverty and I seek refuge to You from poverty, blasphemy,
immoral life, discord, hypocrisy, and infamy and I Seek refuge to You
from deafness, dumbness, dumbness, insanity, leprosy, vitiligo and bad
diseases.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: اللَّهُمَّ إِنّي أَعوذُ
بِكَ مِنَ العَجزِ وَالكَسَلِ وَالجُبنِ وَالبُخلِ وَالهَرَمِ وَالقَسوةِ
وَالغَفلَةِ وَالعَيلَةِ وَالذِّلَّةِ وَالمَسكَنَةِ وَأَعوذُ بِكَ مِنَ
الفَقرِ وَالكُفرِ والفُسُوقِ وَالشِّقاقِ وَالنِّفاقِ وَالسُّمعَةِ
وَالرِّياءِ وَأَعوذُ بِكَ مِنَ الصَّمَمِ وَالبَكَمِ وَالجُنونِ
وَالبَرَصِ وَسَيّئِ الأسقامِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In another supplication, the Messenger of Allah said: O God! I seek
refuge to You from a knowledge that will not benefit anyone, a heart
devoid of compassion, a prayer which is not heard and a soul which is
not insatiable. O God I seek refuge to You from these four.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: اللَّهُمَّ إِنّي أَعوذُ
بِكَ مِن عِلمٍ لا يَنفَعُ وَقَلبٍ لا يَخشَعُ وَدُعاءٍ لا يُسمَعُ
وَنَفسٍ لا تَشبَعُ وَأَعوذُ بِكَ اللّهُمَّ مِن شَرِّ هؤلاءِ الأربَعِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Greater Jihad
-----------------

The Messenger of Allah sent a group of people to war. When they
returned, the holy Prophet said; Bravo to the people who have done the
lessor Jihad and should now do the greater Jihad. It was asked: O
Messenger of Allah! What is the greater Jihad? The holy Prophet said:
Jihad against one’s self.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ رَسولَ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: بَعَثَ سَريَّةً
فَلَمّا رَجَعوا، قالَ: مَرحَبًا بِقومٍ قَضوا الجِهادَ الأصغَرَ وَبَقيَ
عَليهِمُ الجِهادَ الأكبَرَ، قيلَ: يا رَسولَ اللَّه وَما الجِهادُ
الأكبَرُ؟ قالَ: جِهادُ النَّفسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Advice
------

Addressing a group of people who were engaged in pleasantry, the
Messenger of Allah said: Remember death. I swear by the One in Whose
Hand my life is, if you would know what I know, you would certainly
laugh a little and would cry frequently.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ رَسولُ اللَّه (ص): لِقومٍ يَتَحَدَّثُونَ وَيَضحَكُونَ: اذكُرُوا
المَوتَ، أما وَالَّذي نَفسي بِيَدِه لَو تَعلَمونَ ما أَعلَمُ
لَضَحِكتُم قَليلا وَلَبَكَيتُم كَثيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Adulteration
------------

The Messenger of Allah passed by a man selling food. The holy Prophet
asked: How is the quality of your food? The man answered: At this
moment, the holy Prophet who was inspired by God to taste the food found
out that it was adulterated so he said: To us does not belong one who is
fraud.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَرَّ رَسولُ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه بِرَجُلٍ يَبيعُ طَعامًا
فَسَألَهُ كَيفَ تَبيعُ فَأخبَرَهُ فَأوحى اللَّه إِليهِ أن ادخِل يَدَكَ
فيهِ فَأدخَلَ يَدَهُ فيهِ فَإِذا هُوَ مَبلُولٌ فَقالَ النَّبيُّ صَلّى
اللَّه عَلَيهِ وَآلِه: لَيسَ مِنّا مَن غَشَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Advice To Survivors
-------------------

The Messenger of Allah passed by a grave in which a man had been buried
the previous night and at its side his wife and children were crying.
The holy Prophet said: Two Rak’at of prayer of which you make light work
is more worthy than the whole world.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَرَّ النَّبيُّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه بِقَبرٍ دُفِنَ فيهِ
بِالأمسِ إِنسانٌ وَأَهلُهُ يَبكونَ فَقالَ: لَرَكعَتانِ خَفيفَتانِ
مِمّا تَحتَقِرونَ أَحَبُّ إِلى صاحِبِ هذا القَبرِ مِن دُنياكُم
كُلِّها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Children Of The End Of The World
--------------------------------

Looking at some children, the Messenger of Allah said: Woe to the
children of the end of the world due to their fathers. A man asked:
Polytheist fathers? The holy Prophet said: No, due to their believing
fathers who do not teach them anything of religious duties and forbid
their children when they themselves learn some of the Islamic
injunctions and are only content that their children acquire something
of the worldly profit. I am clear of them and they are clear of me.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رُويَ عَن النَّبيِّ صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: أنَّهُ نَظَرَ إِلى
بَعضِ الأطفالِ فَقالَ وَيلٌ لأولادِ آخِرِ الزَّمانِ مِن آبائِهِم
فَقيلَ يا رَسولَ اللَّه مِن آبائِهِمُ المُشرِكينَ فَقالَ لا مِن
آبائِهِم المُؤمِنينَ، لا يَعلَمُونَهُم شَيئًا مِنَ الفَرائِضِ وَإِذا
تَعَلَّموا أَولادَهُم مَنَعوهُم وَرَضَوا عَنهُم بِعَرَضٍ يَسيرٍ مِن
الدُّنيا فَأنا مِنهُم بَريءٌ وَهُم مِنّي بُرآءٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Practical Lesson
----------------

During one of his trips, the holy Prophet accompanied by his companions
arrived at a barren and arid area. The holy Prophet said: Gather some
fire-wood? The companions said: O Messenger of Allah! We are in a barren
area where there is no single piece of wood. The holy Prophet said:
Whatever it may be, everyone must gather a quantity of wood as much as
he can. The companions tried to pick up even the small pieces of wood.
When all of them piled up what they had gathered, the holy Prophet said:
Minor sins are just the same as these small pieces of wood. Avoid minor
sins, for there is a searcher for everything and the Recorder of sins
writes whatever people offer to leave behind them.

***“We have recorded every thing in a clear writing.” (Ya Seen:12)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ رَسولَ اللَّه صَلّى اللَّه عَليهِ وَآلِه: نَزَلَ بِأرضٍ قَرعاءَ
فَقالَ لأصحابِه ائْتُوا بِحَطَبٍ: فَقالوا: يا رَسولَ اللَّه نَحنُ
بِأرضٍ قَرعاءَ ما بِها مِن حَطَبٍ قالَ: فَليأتِ كُلُّ إِنسانٍ بِما
قَدِرَ عَلَيهِ، فَجاءوا بِه حَتّى رَمَوا بَينَ يَدَيهِ بَعضَهُ، فَقالَ
رَسولُ اللَّه (ص) هكَذا تُجتَمعُ الذُّنُوبُ ثُمَّ قالَ: إِيّاكُم
وَالمُحقَّراتُ مِن الذُّنُوبُ فَإِنَّ لِكُلِّ شَيءٍ طالِبًا: الا
وَإِنَّ طالِبَها يُكتَبُ ما قَدَّمُوا وَآثارَهُم وَكُلَّ شَيءٍ
أَحصَيناهُ في إِمامٍ مُبينٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>


