Introduction by the Author
==========================

 

**In the Name of God, the All­Compassionate, the All‑Merciful**

 

*Every heart that is not aflame is no heart;*

*A frozen heart is nothing but a handful of clay.*

*O God! Give me a breast that sets ablaze,*

*And in that breast a heart, and that heart*

*consumed with fire.*[^1]

   
 There is a shared commitment to love and compassion among all great
religions of the world. The virtue of love is universally recognised.
However, it is sometimes understood in different ways within different
traditions. In Islam, the concept of love is one of the most important
concepts. This fact manifests itself in Islamic philosophy, theology,
mysticism and ethics; indeed, in some aspects, it plays the melt crucial
role. For example, in defining the Islamic point of view on the relation
between God and tie‑whole universe in general, and between God and
mankind in particular, love has the most significant place. Love is so
central in Islam that it is seep as "the firmest handhold of faith" and
"faith is nothing but love for the sake of God and hate for the sake of
God". God has created the world out of love. We, treats human beings
with love and asks them to lake.

In the present work, I have tried to elaborate on the significance and
the doctrinal foundations of love in Islam. I have studied both Divine
love (for Himself, for all beings and for mankind) and human love (for
God and for fellow humans). Of course, this short study can be
considered just as an introduction to the subject of love.  
    
 To understand the Islamic point of view, my study has involved
considerably scriptural exegesis. I have greatly relied on the Qur'an
and the *Sunnah* as the primary sources of Islamic thought. The *Sunnah*
can be regarded as the application of the Qur'anic teachings to the
problems of life as exemplified in the Prophet's deeds, sayings and
approvals (of the deeds or sayings of others in his presence). The
*Sunnah* of the Prophet is narrated by Muslims generation after
generation, especially by his household, *ahlul‑bayt.* I have also
referred to some masterpieces of great Muslim mystics, philosophers,
theologian and poets on the subject of love. What h have done in this
work has been to discover a generally accepted picture of love in Islam.
Unless otherwise mentioned, I have tried to refer to common points and
what is acceptable to all Muslims. Indeed, in principle, there seems to
be not much difference between different scholars on the subject at
issue.  
    
 I have to say that there have been many works completely or partly
dedicated to this subject. However, there is still more to be said on
this important and vital issue, especially for English readers. The
present work enjoys access to original Islamic sources in Arabic and
Persian, while considering available literature on the subject in
English as well. In any case, I hope this study can make a useful
contribution to the field of Islamic studies.  
    
 In the present work, I have tried to elaborate on the significance and
the doctrinal foundations of love in Islam. I have studied both Divine
love (for Himself, for all beings and for mankind) and human love (for
Cod and for fellow humans). Of course, this short study can be
considered just as an introduction to the subject of love.  
    
 Knowing God and getting close to Him that I felt I would no longer be
able to continue my ordinary life. Despite ail the plans that my parents
and I had previously made for me, I decided to start a completely new
life. I left my city and moved to the city of Qum, in which one of the
main Islamic seminaries exists for more than one thousand years. I
devoted my life to knowing more profoundly about Islam and, more
importantly, to get closer to God. Although I am not happy with the
success that I have made, I am quite confident that I have made the best
decision for myself and I have chosen the brightest way, the path of
love.  
    
 I would like here to thank all who read and made comments on the draft
of the present work. I would like also to thank my husband and children
for their encouragement, love and support throughout the period of my
research for this work. And at last but not least, I would extend my
feelings of deep gratitude to God in place of His every favour upon us
and upon all His servants, past and still remaining.  
    
**Mahnaz Heydarpoor**  
**London, February 2001**  
  

[^1]: Vahshi Kermani, 1583


