Introduction
============

Meer Anis or Mirza Dabeer need no introduction. The translation of their
immortal marsias perhaps does. The Urdu‑speaking Shias who have had the
pleasure of reading and hearing Meer Anis' and Mirza Dabeer's marsias
can attest that nothing else can evoke with such clarity and such depth
the memory, the emotion and the pathos of Karbala, as do these marsias.
In Hyderabad, India where I grew up, Muharram and these marsias are
synonymous. The recitation of the marsias there has reached an art form,
passed on for generations, refined and evolving with every new reader.

The Shias owe much to Meer Anis and Mirza Dabeer who put into words for
them, in a heart‑wrenching, exquisitely human form, the Divine glory of
Prophet's Muhammad's household, the tragedy of Karbala, the clash
between good and evil, and the ultimate triumph of good. A Majlis in the
Urdu‑speaking Shia community without the marsias of Meer Anis or Mirza
Dabeer is inconceivable.

Yet those of us who live in the West have been forced to accept the
undeniable fact that our children will probably never experience the
beauty of Meer Anis' or Mirza Dabeer's words. The thought is painful;
the loss of significant proportions. Who, if not Meer Anis or Mirza
Dabeer, can bring Karbala to life for our children.? Who will tell the
tale as well as they did? A tale told in a manner so as to evoke within
us grief, pain, and above all, love for the Ahlul Bayt? I lamented at
the thought that nobody can do all this as well as Meer Anis or Mirza
Dabeer. I continue to believe that this will remain true forever.

The idea of translating Meer Anis' and Mirza Dabeer's marsias was born
from this sense of loss; after all, if our children cannot understand
the words of these memorable poets because they don't know Urdu, why not
bring the words to them in the language that they do understand? This
book is a humble attempt to accomplish this task

I must apologize to the reader, however, for the numerous deficiencies
in my translation. while I have tried to adhere to Meer Anis' and Mirza
Dabeer's words as much as possible, in my attempt to maintain a rhythm
in the verses, I have often lapsed in this effort. I also apologize for
the mistakes, the incongruities, or the gaps with which the reader may
find my translation to be riddled. Despite all this though, it is my
hope that the translation gives the reader a sense, *albeit* slight, of
the beauty of Meer Anis' and Mirza Dabeer's memorable poetry


