Introduction
============

Happiness is the major concept of every time and place, and has always
been emphasized in different schools by different scholars. It can be
investigated from different points of view. Investigation of happiness
from the religious, philosophical and psychological viewpoints may be
considered as the most important one; especially that the close
relationship between religion and philosophy is a very significant
matter in this regard.

Paying attention to the factors, which have influence on happiness, is
really considering all virtuous, merits, values, and "what's desirable
and worthwhile" (White, 2006).

Those who have recognized these factors can live happier (Martin, 2006)
and this indicates the might and magnitude of happiness. It is here that
knowledge is truly causes happiness and so the ways to nurturing it can
be discovered.

Happiness is taken from the Greek word 'Happ' which means "Luck or good
fortune" (Martin, 2006). Although there is pleasure in happiness, but
happiness is not equal to pleasure. It is much higher than Pleasure; it
is a real, stable and original pleasure which is quite consistent with
man's nature. Pleasure is one of the elements of (or subset of)
happiness (Martin, 2006 & Blackburn 2005).

In other words, though there is pleasure in happiness, but happiness is
not the same as pleasure. According to Martin (2006), happiness consists
of a combination of three distinct elements; pleasure (the emotional
sensation of feeling good in the here and now), the absence of
displeasure (freedom from unpleasant sensations, such as anxiety or
pain) and satisfaction (judging, or reflection, that your life is good).
Thus, happiness depends on both feeling (pleasure) and thinking
(satisfaction). Some psychologists and philosophers argue that there is
a fourth dimension to happiness, which they variously refer to as
'meaning', 'purpose' or 'virtue'. This embodies the sense that for a
life to be truly happy it must have some deeper purpose or meaning
beyond pleasure or satisfaction. For some people, this fourth dimension
means religion, though the fourth dimension can be included in the other
dimensions, especially the element of satisfaction.

Nettle (2005) believes that happiness includes three levels; level one
(momentary feelings: joy, pleasure, etc), level two (judgment about
feelings (well- being, satisfaction, etc.), level three (quality of
life: flourishing, fulfilling one's potential, etc.).

Happiness is the overall satisfaction with quality of life (Veenhoven,
1996; cited from Hartog and Oosterbeek, 1996). Happiness is being found
in, and sometimes identified with, a life of fulfillment - and harmony
within both the individual and in that individual's relations with
others (Mackinnon; quoted from Macquarrie and Chidress, 2001).

How is it possible for us to reach happiness? It is the most crucial
and important question about happiness which has been put forward
regarding happiness through history. If we try to discover the
viewpoints in religions and philosophy and psychology, we can achieve a
true answer to this question. This causes a common understanding in
different societies and among different people that would be much more
effective than expressing the differences between different
viewpoints.

Researching on psychology of happiness, which reveals the similarities
between religions, philosophy and psychology, is the other aim of this
book. This will probably lead us to this fact that there might be some
absolute and true constant standards and criteria for happiness in all
times and places, and this also will cause people not to search for
happiness from false resources, since all of persons, religious or
unreligious, and because of self-love, seek happiness.

Most recent researches concerning happiness and its correlatives have
been reported in order that it might be made possible to compare the
viewpoints of philosophers and religious Islamic texts with the
psychological researches about happiness to reveal and show the
similarities of philosophy, religion (Islam), and psychology. This will
cause a general and acceptable framework to be prepared for all
people.

Discovering and understanding of the factors that cause happiness can
help people to live happier and therefore better, to be better
individually and socially, and to reach nearer to God and to the aim for
which they have been created.

What is happiness really based on? The answer to this question will
determine the correlatives of happiness or the effective factors which
determine the individuals' happiness. This is all that is meant by the
word "foundation" in this book. In other words, foundations of happiness
answer these questions: what is happiness? What is the difference
between happiness and pleasure? What things cause happiness? Is it
possible to reach happiness in this world?

It is also meant by the combination "religious, philosophical and
psychological foundations of happiness" in this book those answers that
religions, (e.g. Islam in this research), philosophers and psychologists
give to these questions.

Divine religions can have a philosophical origin. Therefore, many
philosophical reasons can be put forward for the interpretation and
justification of religious problems. Thus, there is a very close
relationship between philosophy and religion, and then one might expect
many similarities between philosophy and religion.

Since these two, in turn, are based on thinking and cognition, it is
quite reasonable that their teachings be consistent with scientific and
empirical researches. That is the reason why the main purpose of this
research was the extraction of the philosophical and religious
foundations of one of the most important philosophical-religious and
psychological subjects; i.e. happiness. Although "psychology" can be
considered as a subset of philosophy, but since it is considered today
as a separate and independent discipline, happiness can also be
considered as a psychological topic, and many researches have been done
regarding happiness in psychology; therefore, the main goal of this
research is to extract the philosophers, psychologists and religion's
(Islam) view of happiness. Much emphasis is placed on inferring the
shared philosophical, religious and psychological foundations.
Non-Muslim and non-Iranian, and Muslim and Iranian, ancient or modern
philosophers, were chosen who had some views of happiness and their
views and character are reason or proof or all of the worldlings. The
major purpose of doing this was to reach a shared and common model and
frame for happiness, or those things that can cause people to reach
happiness, which is acceptable for various people of the world today,
especially when these philosophical and religious views are compared
with the most recent researches.


