Section (1). Religious Foundations of Happiness
===============================================

**1-1. Cognition of the world
**
We should know the world as it is. An easy life is the result of the
cognition of the world. The prophet of Islam said that if you knew of
the world what I know, your souls would feel complacency from it. He
also said in his prayers, "0 God! show the being and universe to me as
it is."

Also, Imam Ali said that every one who knows the world, will not grieve
at it. He does not say the world is full of pleasures; rather, he says
that if your knowledge and cognition of the world are real, despite its
hardships and in spite of confessing to them, we will not sorrow. Imam
Hussein, in the hardest moments of Ashura, said, "0 my Lord, I forbear
Your Decree," and the more he became closer to death (martyrdom), the
more he became happy. Thus, grief and distress due to hardships are
rooted in unawareness. Unawareness causes dissatisfaction, and
dissatisfaction causes sorrow and grief. The prophet of Islam said that
God has verily placed, through His wisdom and bounty, welfare and
happiness in certitude and satisfaction, and grief in doubt and
dissatisfaction. In addition, Imam Ali said that certitude is the best
remover of sorrow (Pasandideh, 2007, p. 23-27).

A great part of life's hardship is because of our own stringency, and
not of real problems of life. Therefore, we should search for
tranquility of life in ourselves and search for it in internal factors.
Imam Kazem says to take life easy, because God made life pleasant for
those people who take it easy. Imam Ali says in this regard, "I
investigated and searched through life, and I did not see it save in
leaving carnal desires. Therefore, leave these desires so that your life
may become delightful" (Pasandide, 2007, p. 137-139).

The prophet of Islam says that wisdom comes down from the heavens, but
it does not come down to the hearts where the tomorrow's grief is. The
prophet of Islam says that God has placed, because of His wisdom and
bounty, welfare and happiness in certitude and satisfaction, and sorrow
and grief in doubt and anger.

Philosophy and wisdom sprung from the cognition of the world can bring
humans to an admirable position in which they see the universe and its
events as they are. They see as beautiful only those things that are
beautiful, and they see as ugly only those things that are ugly. They
enjoy the good and hate the bad. Therefore, they see no obscenity in
what God has created and has brought up because God is "Who has created
all things well" (The Sura of Sajdeh 32: 7). There are three essential
concepts, each of which is the prerequisite of the next; they are
knowledge, attitude, and behavior. The improvement in knowledge should
lead to an improvement in attitude, and improvement in attitude should
lead to an improvement in behavior. Therefore, a person who has a
comprehensive personality and has the above concepts in himself or
herself will be more likely to achieve happiness.

**1-2. Knowledge**

The prophet of Islam said that (real and spiritual) knowledge is a
light that God places in the hearts of those whom He likes. It is
evident that it is a (faithful) heart that deserves such knowledge.

The prophet of Islam says that if I spend a day in which I do not learn
something that makes me nearer to God, may the sunrise of that day not
be blessed to me. He also says, "If one person is guided by you, it
would be better for you than all the world."

Knowledge, beatitude, and goodness can bring humans to happiness; it
means that if we plan to increase our knowledge and cognition to get
more attached to art and beautiful nature, and to try to be more helpful
to people, it will be possible for us to live more happily. There is
also an interaction and interrelationship between the above three
important key words; an increase in any of them causes an increase in
the others.

According to Imam Ali, "thought" (a correct thinking) leads to
happiness: "People! Think well, and observe with insight and take
lessons and accept admonitions and take the necessary supplies for the
hereafter so that you may attain happiness." In addition, Imam Hasan
introduces "thought" as the root of all virtues or goodness.

The prophet of Islam believes that knowledge or cognition is a way to
Paradise, and Imam Ali introduces knowledge as the peak of all virtues
(Tayyebi & Moeenoleslam, 2004, p. 67).

The following statement is the expressive language of aware, good, and
pious persons: "0 God! How can I thank you that Thou taught me not to
pass indifferently and unresponsively by the side of the beauty of a
flower, freshness of a bloom, flourish of a bud and tenderness of a
breeze."

According to the prophet of Islam, if the friends of God are silent,
their silence is spent in thinking, and if they speak, their speech is
remembrance (of God and spirituality).

There are many Islamic traditions and Qur'anic verses that indicate the
importance of due silence, thought, night, and tears. There are many
spiritual positions and tranquilities that are attained only through the
understanding of the above factors.

The prophet of Islam introduces "silence" as the first worship (cited
in Mohammadi Rey Shahri, 1993, vol. 5, p. 433). Imam Ali introduces
talking for a long time as a calamity and states that a long speech
really makes listeners tired (as cited in Barumand, 2001). According to
Imam Ali, "thinking" grows and is increased in the light of such
silence, and silence is the garden and cultivation place of man's
thinking. The Qur'an says regarding the silence sprung from cognition,
"When they hear what has been sent down to the messenger, thou seest
their eyes overflow with tears because of truth they recognize. They say
our Lord, we believe; so do Thou write us down among the witnesses" (The
Sura of Maedah 5: 83).

Night is one of the best opportunities for silence, thinking, and
spiritual tears. The Qur'an says in this regard, "As for the night, keep
vigil a part of it, as a work of supererogation for thee; it may be that
thy Lord will raise thee up to a laudable station" (The Sura of Esra'
17:79).

Thus, the prophet of Islam is commanded from God to "keep vigil the
night, except a little, a half of it, or diminish a little, or add a
little, and chant the Koran very distinctly. Behold, we shall cast upon
thee a weighty word. Surely the first part of the night is heavier in
tread, more upright in speech" (The Sura of Mozzammel 73:2-6).

**1-3. Pain and endurance**

It is of the most basic and fundamental religious beliefs that the
world flows on the basis of divine wisdom, and there is not even one
phenomenon or event that has no reason. Thus, it is important for us to
know wisdom and expediencies of events. A good life is not a life that
is full of pleasures and without pain; rather, a good life is a
meaningful life. Therefore, meaningful pain cannot make the aware
persons annoyed. The prophet of Islam said, "No prophet was annoyed like
me" and he still endured and saw the good results of his endurance and
patience. These are some of the reasons why the Qur'an says, "Certainly
We have created man to be in distress" (Balad 90:4), and "Who created
death and life, that He might try you which of you is fairest in works,
and he is the All-mighty, the All-forgiving" (Molk, 67 :2). Another
verse says, "Surely We will try you with something of fear and hunger,
and diminution of goods and lives and fruits, yet give thou good tidings
unto the patient" (Baqarah, 2:155) (cited in Pasandideh, 2007, p.
280-290).

We will surely face pain and difficulties. According to Imam Ali, the
world "is a house surrounded by calamities and well-known for
deceitfulness. Its conditions do not last and those who inhabit it do
not remain safe" (sermon 226).

If we know these facts and come to know that all these difficulties and
pains can surely lead to our perfection, we will not suffer from such
problems but the problems will lead to our happiness. If we believe that
we will definitely face such problems like fear, hunger, decline in
wealth, etc., in this world, then we will surely suffer less stress, and
we will enjoy more mental health. Therefore, we must change our
attitudes toward the world and its problems so that we may attain a
position in which we see no pain and difficulty, and all that we want
will be done, because in such a position, we only want what God wants,
and what God wants will be done.

A believer in one God knows that all the events of the world are
meaningful and goal-oriented, not accidental. The Qur'an teaches us that
"those who have said our Lord is God then have gone straight, upon them
the angles descend, saying: Fear not, neither sorrow; rejoice in
Paradise that you were promised. We are your friends in the present life
and in the world to come; therein you shall have all that your souls
desire, all that you call for, as hospitality from one All-forgiving,
All-compassionate" (Fosselat, 41:30-32). And the Qur'an also emphasizes
the fact that "surely, God's friends-no fear shall be on them, nor shall
they sorrow. Those who believe, and are god-fearing, for them is good
tidings in the present life and in the world to come" (Yunos, 10:62).

It adds, "Yet it may happen that you will hate a thing which is better
for you, and it may happen that you will love a thing which is worse for
you. God knows, and you know not" (Baqarah, 2:216), and "it is possible
you may be averse to a thing, and God set in it much good" (Nesa',
5:19).

The first symptom of spiritual disorders is to grieve for those things
that do not deserve grief.

**1-4. Asceticism**

One of the ways in which humans can achieve happiness is asceticism.
The real meaning of asceticism is "not wanting," not "not having". Real
asceticism does not want worldly things to the extent that one becomes
so attached to them that he becomes somewhat indifferent to God. Imam
Ali says that all asceticism from the viewpoint of the Qur'an has been
summarized in this verse: "that you may not grieve for what escapes you,
nor rejoice at what has come to you" (Hadid, 57:23).

Imam Ali says that the fruit of asceticism is peace of mind. He also
introduces asceticism as the great comfort. The prophet of Islam deems
asceticism as the cause of comfort of soul and body (Pasandideh, 2007,
p. 48-49).

The prophet of Islam introduces the affluence of the soul as the real
affluence and enrichment. Some people think they should get more
possibilities, facilities, and income for their lives to be happier.
Such an attitude causes them to try to get more of such things. This
state, in turn, makes them be greedy and avaricious. The greedier people
become, the more they distance themselves from happiness and
tranquility. A greedy person is considered a deprived one. Imam Sadeq
says that a greedy person is deprived of contentment, and then he is
affected with inconvenience; deprived of satisfaction, he then loses his
certitude. Imam Ali says that a greedy person is never seen resting.
Imam Ali also orders people to act with dignity in acquisition of
sustenance.

On the other hand, a miserly person, according to Imam Ali, increases
his stress, and according to the prophet of Islam, a stingy person has
the least comfort (Pasandideh, 2007, p. 71-79).

As for wealth and worldly things, Imam Sajjad says that there is no one
who requires a little of the worldly, unless he or she becomes greedy
for it. Everyone who obtains more from the world becomes needier. There
is no tranquility and comfort in the wealth of the world, but Satan
tempts human beings that their restfulness is in gathering wealth and
through this leads them to more pain (Pasandideh, 2007, p. 242). The
prophet of Islam says that whosoever does not desist from staring at
people's wealth will experience lasting grief (Loqmani, 2006, p. 200).
According to the prophet of Islam, extreme interest in this world
increases one's grief, and piety and asceticism, causes tranquility of
health and body.

The prophet of Islam says that for one who is satisfied with the
livelihood (sufficiency) level in life, the least level of life will be
sufficient for him. He also says that extreme interest in the world
increases grief, and asceticism toward the worldly pleasures causes
tranquility of the body and heart. The prophet of Islam believes that
those staring at other people's wealth will always be annoyed, and the
fire of anger will never abate in their hearts. The Qur'an complains of
some people and says, "What! Do you build on every prominence a sign,
sporting, and do you take to you castles, haply to dwell forever?"
(Sho'ara' 26:128-129). In addition, the prophet of Islam says that some
people build that which they do not inhabit and gather that which they
do not eat (Pasandideh, 2007, p. 167-168).

If someone compares himself with those whose worldly things such as
money, etc., are better than his, this will cause grief and sorrow in
him. The Qur'an says, "So he (Korah) went unto his people in his
adornment. Those who desired the present life said, 'Would that we
possessed the like of that Korah has been given: surely he is a man of
mighty fortune.'" (Qasas, 28:79).

Therefore, God orders his prophet, "Stretch not thine eyes to that We
have given pairs of them to enjoy-the flower of the present life, that
We may try them therein, and thy Lord's provision is better, and more
enduring" (Taha, 20:131).

Imam Sadeq says in this regard that everyone who stares at whatever is
in the hands of the worldly persons will have lasting grief, and the
Prophet of Islam says that the sorrow of such a person will increase
(Pasandideh, 2007, p. 100, 107).

**1-5. Faith and belief in God**

Faith and belief in God can be considered as one of the causes of
happiness. The Qur'an says in this regard: "those who believe, and have
not confounded their belief with evildoing-to them belongs the true
security; they are rightly guided" (An'am, 6:82) (cited in Akbari, 2006,
p. 177).

Imam Ali emphasizes that real believers receive happiness when guided.
The word "faith" in Islam (eeman) is taken from "amn," which means
"secure, safe, tranquility ..." All of these words denote the close
relationship between "faith" and "happiness." But it should be noted
that a kind of faith can lead to happiness that is based on knowledge
and cognition of God and all human beings, the world, death, and
hereafter. Therefore, the belief of those believers can be acceptable
when it is founded on a great insight. That is the reason that the
prophet of Islam orders us to fear God and enlighten our hearts with the
light of "faith" so that we may fear no one and nothing save God the One
and Only.

Imam Ali says, "opportunity passes away like the cloud; therefore, make
use of good opportunities (Saying 21). Thus, losing such a valuable
opportunity will cause sorrow and loss. The Qur'an says, "By the
afternoon! Surly Man is in the way of loss, save those who believe, and
do righteous deeds, and counsel each other unto the truth, and counsel
each to be steadfast" (Asr, 103:1-3). The prophet of Islam says that the
one whose intimate is God will not fear. Imam Ali says, "Who is there to
go towards God like the thirsty going to the water?"(sermon 124).

Supplication and prayer of good bondsmen of God relieve them from
grief. We should trust in God, that we consign all of our works and life
to Him, and then we should do our duty and make efforts as far as
possible for us or consistent with those powers and abilities that God
has given to us, and finally we should be quite satisfied with those
things that occur. These three golden keywords can actually lead us to
happiness: trust in God, effort, and satisfaction.

**1-6. Remembrance of God and His verses**

One of the original needs of all human beings is to be with God. God
blew His spirit into man; thus, if man is not connected to God, he will
not enjoy a happy life. The Qur'an says, "Those who believe, their
hearts being at rest in God's remembrance, in God's remembrance are at
rest the hearts" (Ra'd, 13:28), and "whosoever turns away from My
remembrance, his shall be a life of narrowness" (Taha, 20:124) (cited in
Pasandideh, 2007, p. 215- 219).

The prophet of Islam emphasizes and tells us to associate with someone
whose visit causes remembrance of God: his tongue should increase your
knowledge, and his morality and deeds should make you anxious and
interested in the hereafter.

It should be remembered here that the remembrance of God, according to
the Qur'an, causes the rest and tranquility of man's hearts. According
to Imam Ali, the happiest persons are those whose hearts and souls wish
to worship and obey God (Tayyebi & Moeenoleslam, 2004, p.144).

One of the factors of happiness is the remembrance of God. According to
the prophet of Islam, the delight of believers in the world is the
remembrance of God, their affection for Him, and acquiring His
satisfaction. According to Imam Sajjad, "Through Thy remembrance, is
alive my heart" (Akbari, 2006, p. 49).

The prophet of Islam says that remembrance of death, reciting the
Qur'an, remembrance of God, and wisdom cause the inner happiness of
humans.

God describes the Qur'an as "cure and mercy," "and We send down, of the
Koran, that which is a healing and a mercy to the believers; and the
unbelievers it increases not, except in loss" (Esra', 17:82). According
to Imam Ali, one should "learn the Qur'an, for it is the fairest of
discourse and understand it thoroughly, for it is the best blossoming of
hearts. Seek cure with its light, for it is the cure of hearts. Recite
it nicely, for it is the most beautiful narration" (sermon 110).

He adds in another part of Nahj-al-Balaghah, "know that this Qur'an is
an adviser who never deceives, a leader who never misleads and a
narrator who never speaks a lie. No one will sit beside this Qur'an but
that when he rises he will achieve one addition or one
diminution-addition in his guidance and elimination in his (spiritual)
blindness" (sermon 176).

The prophet of Islam introduced God as a (spiritual) physician. Imam
Ali calls the prophet a physician. Imam Ali, in the Du'a of Komeil,
considers God as the source whose Name is healing and His remembrance is
treatment.

**1-7. Worshipping God**

Prayer and worship of God can remove sorrow and cause happiness. Imam
Sadeq recommends that when a worldly grief overcomes someone, he should
perform ablution, go into a mosque, and pray to God (Akbari, 2006,
p.189).

The ultimate goal of man's creation is submission to God: "I have not
created the Jinn and mankind except to serve me" (Thariyat, 51:57). But
those are they who can achieve such a position as to obtain the
necessary knowledge for cognition of God, because it is impossible to
worship God without knowing Him. On the other hand, how is it possible
that a person knows God as He deserves and does not love Him? In such a
case, for the one who knows and loves God, God's remembrance will cause
a sacred tranquility and happiness in him, as the Qur'an says: "in God's
remembrance are at rest the hearts" (Ra'd, 13:28). It is regarding such
a status that Imam Sajjad says, "My God, who can have tasted the
sweetness of Thy love, then wanted another in place of Thee? Who have
become intimate with Thy nearness, then sought removal from Thee?" (The
Whispered prayer of the Lovers). The prophet of Islam considers the
happiness of the believers in meeting with friends, the time of breaking
a fast, and worship in the last hours of night.

So much is certain that Adam had a joyful life when he lived in
Paradise, but when God ordered him and Eve, "draw not nigh this tree,
lest you be evildoers" (Baqarah, 2:35), and they did not obey, God
commanded them: "get you all down, each of you an enemy of each; and in
the earth a sojourn shall be yours and enjoyment for a time" (Baqarah,
2:36). Therefore, they came to the earth. Man's grief started at the
separation from the paradise and God, because man did not feel harmony
with this world and worldly materials.

We should only grieve when we are not acting towards achieving the
goals for which we have been created. It means when we are not good
persons, when we do not help others, etc. The Qur'an introduces God's
bounty as the cause of happiness and something that is better than
worldly things: "Say: in the Bounty of God-and His mercy-in that let
them rejoice, it is better than that they amass" (Yunos, 10:58).

**1-8. Friendship**

Loneliness makes one annoyed. Man likes to be with others and
communicate with them. This is an emotional need. Friendship can save
man from loneliness and make him happy. The happiness of having friends
occurs when one can find a friend who is similar to him or her. Imam
Sadeq says that one can find his restfulness in his faithful brother. On
the other hand, one should find an analogous friend for herself or
himself, and she or he should keep away from bad persons as far as
possible. According to Imam Ali, having little communication with such
persons is the cause of keeping one's religion sound and freeing man
from nearness to the rebels.

One of the factors of human happiness is having a good spouse.
According to the Qur'an, "of his signs is that He created for you, of
yourselves, spouses that you might repose in them, and he has set
between you love and mercy. Surely in that are signs for people who
consider" (Room, 30:12), and, "it is He who created you out of one
living soul, and made of him his spouse that he might rest in her"
(A'raf, 7:189).

Happiness in spouses is when there is friendship (love) and mercy
between them. In addition, happiness is in having good children,
according to the prophet of Islam. (Pasandideh, 2007, p. 203-204; 210).
The word "man" or "human being" (Ensan) in Arabic is taken from "Ons,"
which means "affinity". Some etymologists believe that the origin of the
meaning is that affluence, beauty, and affinity in the earth is possible
only in the light of the existence of human beings, while other
etymologists say that it is because man's life is (not) possible without
affinity with others. And some say that it is because he is a
manifestation of God's names and these are attuned with him. Some
etymologists believe that the word is taken from the Arabic word
"nissyaan," which means "forgetfulness". As the Qur'an says, "and we
made covenant with Adam before, but he forgot, and we found in him no
constancy" (Taha, 20:115).

It can be concluded from these facts that man should first be the cause
of happiness. Second, man's happiness is obtained through being with
other human beings and through his being with God; forgetting God causes
grief in him.

The Qur'an says regarding some (bad) people, "you think of them as a
host; but their hearts are scattered" (Hashr, 59:14). And Imam Ali says
in this regard, "You are brethren in the religion of God. Dirty nature
and bad conscience have separated you. Consequently, you do not bear
burdens of each other nor advise each other. What is your condition? You
feel satisfied with what little you have secured from this world while
much of the next world of which you have been deprived does not grieve
you. The little of this world, which you lose, pains you so much so that
it becomes apparent in your faces, and in the lack of your endurance
over whatever is taken away from you" (sermon 113).

One of the reasons behind this is egoism, while affection causes the
selfishness to be removed. According to Imam Ja'far Sadeq, the reason
for affection towards others is the selection of and preferring the
beloved to others. According to the prophet of Islam, God is the friend
of the one who loves him. According to him, the happiest people are
those who have relations with good and great individuals. Imam Ali
orders us to be with scholars so that we may achieve happiness (Tayyebi
& Moeenoleslam, 2004, p. 146-147). The prophet of Islam believes that
visiting religious brothers causes happiness (Akbari, 2006, p. 47).

**1-9. Goodness and helping others**

The prophet of Islam says of the one who solves a problem of the
believers that God will solve seventy-two of his problems in the world
and in the hereafter. According to Imam Sadeq, "Make your (religious)
brother happy, so that God may make you happy" (Akbari, 2006, p. 123-
126).

The prophet of Islam said that whosoever wishes his prayer to be
responded to and his grief to be relieved should relieve the
difficulties of one who has confronted a problem (Akbari, 2006, p. 189).
One of the factors in relieving sorrow and attaining happiness is to
pray. The Qur'an says, "and Jonah (Dhal-Nun)-when he went forth enraged
and thought that we should have no power over him; then he called out in
the darkness, 'There is no god but Thou; Glory be to Thee! I have done
evil.' So We answered him, and delivered him out of grief, even so do we
deliver the believers" (Anbia', 21:87-88) (cited in ibid, p. 197).

Imam Ali recommends that we remove grief and sorrow from ourselves by
giving alms (Akbari, 2006, p. 201). The prophet of Islam considers
friendship towards the poor as a divine gift, saying to Imam Ali, "God
has verily bestowed upon you the love of the distressed and the poor."
The prophet introduces the best of persons who are more useful for the
people.

The prophet of Islam says that there is a home in the paradise, which
is called "the house of happiness"; no one enters it except the one who
has made the orphans happy. He also says that whosoever causes happiness
to a believer has made him (the Prophet) happy, and the one who makes
him happy has truly made God happy. The prophet of Islam also says that
for whoever relieves a disaster of the world from a believer, God will
surely relieve seventeen disasters of him in the hereafter. He
introduces the best works before God, as satisfying a poor one by paying
his or her debt or relieving a grief of him or her. He also says that
the best people are the ones whom we can hope and expect goodness from
them and be safe from their evils. He adds that one who wishes his
prayers to be responded to and his sorrow to be relieved should solve
the problems of a poor person. The prophet of Islam introduces showing
kindness toward orphans and paying attention to the poor and distressed
as some factors that cause happiness in the hereafter.

We should ask ourselves to what extent we have acted for tranquility of
others that we can expect to have tranquility.

The prophet of Islam asked a person about his feelings toward the
believers. He answered that he knows them as himself; what makes them
annoyed makes him annoyed too, and what makes them happy makes him
happy, too. The prophet of Islam says, "You are the friend of God; none
of creatures benefits as you, unless one who is like you. Your success
is higher than those who have capital such as wealth, etc. I announce
that you are of the wealthy people." The prophet of Islam says that
loving others for the sake of God is considered as the firmest hold of
"faith."

The Qur'an considers doing "goodness" as one of the factors of
happiness in man's life: "0 men, bow you down and prostrate yourselves,
and serve your Lord, and do good; haply so you shall prosper" (Hajj
22:77). The Qur'an even says that inviting other people to "goodness"
can lead to happiness: "Let there be one nation of you, calling to good,
and bidding to honor, and forbidding dishonor; those are the prosperous"
(Aal Imran, 3:104). The Qur'an also says, "therefore, hasten to (do)
good works" (Baqarah, 2:148) (cited in Loqmani, 2006, p. 49).

**1-10. Security**

Happiness is impossible without security. Imam Ali says that every
happiness needs security. The Qur'an refers to the bounty of security in
many of its verses: "So let them serve the Lord of this House, who has
fed them against hunger and secured them from fear" (Qoraysh,
106:3-4).

God even introduces security as an introduction and background for
worship :

"God has promised those of you who believe and do righteous deeds that
He will surely make you successors in the land, even as He made those
who were before them successors and that He will surely establish their
religion for them that He has approved for them, and will give them in
exchange, after their fear, security. They shall serve Me, not
associating with Me anything. Whoso disbelieves after that, those-they
are the ungodly" (Moor, 24:55).

"And it was based on this fact that Abraham when reestablishing the
Kaaba, said, "My Lord, make this land secure, and provide its people
with fruits, such of them as believe in God and the Last Day" (Baqarah,
2:126) (cited in Pasandideh, 2007, p. 173-175).

**1-11. Sleep**

Since working is one of the factors of happiness, while on the other
hand continuous working and effort makes one tired, we need enough
sleep, which is in itself one of the other factors of happiness. The
Qur'an says, "And We made your sleep to be rest (to you)" (Naba', 78:9),
and "And He it is Who made the night a covering for you, and the sleep a
rest, and He made the day to rise up again." (Forgan, 25:47). In some
verses of the Qur'an, God refers to night as one of the causes of man's
tranquility: "It is He who made for you the night to repose in it, and
the day to see" (Yunos, 10:67), and "He causes the dawn to break; and
has made the night for a repose, and the sun and the moon for a
reckoning" (An'am, 6:96) (cited in Pasandideh, 2007, p. 179-180).

1-12. Work One of the factors of man's life is to work. Imam Sadeq says
that if all humans' needs were satisfied, life would not be delightful
for them, and they would not enjoy it. Then he adds that the best tact
for what has been created for human beings is in the fact that there is
a place or position for their efforts so that unemployment may not make
them annoyed (Pasandideh, 2007, p. 150-151).

1-13. Health

One of the important factors of happiness is health. All pleasures of
life are meaningless unless one is healthy. Imam Ali says that there is
no goodness in life save with health. He also believes that through
health, life pleasures are understandable. According to him, health is
the highest bounty, and no other pleasures are more delightful
(Pasandideh, 2007, p. 177-178).

1-14. Humor

The other factor of happiness is humor. The prophet of Islam considers
humor as one of the characteristics of the believers, and he himself was
on familiar terms with humor and made himself and others happy.
According to Imam Ali, man makes his soul restful in the light of humor
(Pasandideh, 2007, p. 182-184).

1-15. Travel

According to Imam Ali, travel can relieve people from grief. (Akbari,
2006, p. 184-185). In addition to this, the Qur'an mentions the
following benefits of travel: "Have they not journeyed in the land? Have
they not beheld how was the end of those before them?" (Yusof, 12:109).
"Have they not traveled in the land so that they should have hearts with
which to understand, or ears with which to hear?" (Hajj, 22:46). "Indeed
there have been examples before you; therefore travel in the earth and
see what was the end of the rejecters." (Aal Imran, 3:137). "Say:
journey in the land, then behold how was the end of the sinners" (Naml,
27:69). "Journey in the land, then behold how was the end of those that
were before" (Rum, 30:42).


