Section (3). Psychological Foundations of Happiness
===================================================

**3-1. Cognition of the world**

Happiness depends on a considerable extent on how we think about the
world, as well as our emotional responses. Someone who can think
straight and solve real life problems is better equipped to be happy.
Wisdom means being able to understand and deal with the challenges, both
great and small, that we encounter in everyday life. Wise people can
identify the problem and then work out how to resolve it in a practical
way. Wise people also recognize the inherent uncertainties of life,
appreciate the limits of their own knowledge, and cope well with
ambiguity (Martin, 2006, PP. 66- 67).

There is no objective way to tell you if you have had a good life, a
good day, or a good hour. Your life is a success based only upon your
judgment.

A study was done recently in which people on opposite sides of an issue
where given the same newspaper article to read. Those people were asked
to read the article carefully and to offer their reaction. On average,
people said they thought the article was biased against their own
position. That is, people on both sides of the issue thought the exact
same article was biased against their side. The article could not
possibly have been biased against both sides of the issue. Obviously, it
was not the content of the article that drove the reaction, but the
perspective of the readers. Life events have the same effect. The same
event can be seen positively, or it can be seen negatively. It depends
upon your perspective. (Niven, 2000)

Knowing whether some ones have recently suffered a personal setback or
personal triumph is not as good a predictor of how satisfied they are
with their lives as knowing how they perceive the causes and
consequences of those events. (Staats, Armstrong-Stassen, and
Partillo1995; cited in Niven, 2000)

What is the shape of the World? What condition is it in? Scientists,
philosophers, and kings could offer a never-ending debate on the
question, but there is no real grade for the world apart from the one
you assign it. (Niven, 2000)

People who have experienced similar life events can wind up with nearly
opposite perceptions of life satisfaction. Researchers have compared,
for example, people who have received a job promotion, and they found
that while some of the people treasure the opportunity others lament the
added responsibility. The implication of life events are a matter of
perspective. (Chen 1996; cited in Niven, 2000)

**3-2. Faith and belief in God, and worshipping Him**

Argyle (2004) says Pollner found nearness to God and, having a friendly
image from God, had relationship with happiness. Another factor may be
firm faith. Elison (1991) showed that after continuance of social
support and private worship, firm faith cause happiness. Ellison, et al.
(1989) found that intensity of worship (frequent prays and feeling of
nearness to God) are the strongest predictors of Satisfaction with life.
They also showed that religious beliefs are the most important source of
happiness. Pray and prayer can increase happiness and health. Paloma and
Pendleton (1991) found that when religious experiences occur in praying,
feeling health and happiness maximizes. Religious behaviors cause
positive excitements. Religious ceremonies create popular feeling, and
cause feeling of unity with presence of others.

Religion's benefits broadly divide into four factors: social support,
spiritual support, a sense of purpose and meaning, and the avoidance of
risky and stressful behaviors. Doing good works through acts of charity
provides another sense of connection to community. Religion can often
help us feel more included in society, and it can give us a sense of
being united and a feeling of continuity in life. The word 'religion'
derives from the Latin religious meaning 'to bind together' and this is
what organized religion tends to do to its followers. And being
connected to others is an important ingredient for happiness. So it
comes as no surprise to learn that religious people are generally
happier than those who are not. Slough Volunteer says: am a Muslim and
Muslims are very community- oriented. Family is everything, so we
already understand much of the ethos of happiness that is in the
manifesto" (Hoggard, 2005, PP. 190192). Religion can also make us more
compassionate, and the result of our compassion can make us feel better
too.

A research, mostly conducted in the USA, has found that religious
people tend to be somewhat happier than nonreligious people, other
things being equal. Religion does provide a firm structure for
encouraging people to behave and think in ways that make them feel
happier (Martin. 2006, PP. 114-117).

Religion can show us the way in a world in which bad things happen. It
can teach us that much of what we see is so complex that we cannot
understand why and how it occurred.

Everywhere in our world, there is mystery. Everywhere there are
questions. Religion offers answers. Religion offers consistency.
Religion offers hope. (Niven, 2000)

A research on the effect of religion on life satisfaction found that,
regardless of what religion people affiliated themselves with, those who
had strongly held spiritual beliefs were typically satisfied with life,
while those who had no spiritual beliefs typically were unsatisfied.
(Gerwood, LaBlanc, and piazza 1998; cited in Niven, 2000)

**3-3. Resilience and hardiness**

The capacity to maintain or restore well- being in the face of
adversity is referred to by psychologists as resilience, or hardiness.
The evidence confirms that resilient individuals are usually happier
than those who are more easily cast down by life's inevitable upsets;
individuals to have supportive personal relationships, persistence,
motivation, an ability to plan a head, and practical knowledge (Martin,
2006, P.57).

That there are many problems in the world is obvious to anyone, but
take comfort in the notion the eventually good prevails. Whether your
focus is on the criminal justice system or a spiritual system, realize
that those who have wronged the world will eventually pay some price
(Niven, 2000).

Regardless of the experiences subjects personally dealt with, whether
they had personally been the victim of a crime or known someone close
who had, those who believed the world ultimately report just a 1 13
percent higher level of life satisfaction (Lipkus, Dalbert, & Siegler,
1996; cited in Niven, 2000).

Think of the happy times you, your family, and friends have had
together. Recalling happiness of the past has the powerful ability to
bring us happiness in the present. (Niven, 2000)

When people consciously choose to think back on their past, over 80
percent tend to focus on very positive memories. (Hogstel and Curry
1995; cited in Niven, 2000)

**3-4. having long- term goals**

According to researches, individuals whose daily efforts relate
directly to achieving their longer- term goals tend to be happier than
those whose strivings are unrelated to their goals (Martin, 2006, P.
56). A life that is meaningful and has some purpose to it is more likely
to be a happy life. Someone who knows where he wants to go, and why,
will probably be happier. Studies have confirmed that people who regard
their life as meaningful tend to be happier and more satisfied other
things being equal (Martin, 2006, PP. 56). We are better equipped to be
happy if we can enjoy the present, prepare for the future and avoid
dwelling on the Past. Happy people are usually able to think ahead, but
they do not spend their lives waiting for some imaginary future or
endlessly mulling over bad things that happened in the past. They are
also capable, at the right time, of losing themselves in the here and
now and relishing the present moment (Martin, 2006, P.62).

Studies of older Americans find that one of the best predictors of
happiness is whether a person considers his or her life to have a
purpose. Without a clearly defined purpose, seven out of ten individuals
feel unsettled about their lives; with a purpose, almost seven out of
ten feel satisfied. (Lepper1996; cited in Niven, 2000)

Without a purpose, nothing matters. You can wok forty hours a week,
come home to cook, clean, and then take up seventy-two new good habits,
but if there is not a reason you are doing it, none of these activities
will mean anything to you. (Niven, 2000)

In a research on college students, a comparison was made between
students who enjoyed lives and studies and students who were least
comfortable with their environments. A major difference between the two
groups was a sense of underlying purpose in life, which almost twice as
many of the former group had. (Rahman and Khaleque 1996; cited in Niven,
2000)

**3-5. Friendship and social relations**

According to Argyle (2004), social relations have a very great effect
on happiness and other aspects of health, and it might be the greatest
single cause. In other studies, some evidences have been represented
based on this fact that marriage and family life has the strongest
effect on satisfaction and happiness. Being with friends is one of the
major sources of pleasure. Helping others when distressed causes a
friendship experience, which is a positive source of excitement (Batson,
1987). It was found that adults have more attention to others' needs
than their own needs in close relations (Clark & Reis, 1988). Many
studies have shown that in o.3 to 0.4 levels, satisfaction of being with
friends have a correlation with satisfaction of life and happiness.
Close friends are a particular source of happiness. Weiss (1973) found
that people do need a friendly relation and a network of relations to
avoid loneliness. Close friends are probable similar in attitudes,
beliefs and interests. These similarities and sharing in one another's
viewpoints causes their self-esteem to be improved. Social support from
friends affects people physically and psychologically. Ross and Mirowsky
showed that social support leads to a decrease in depression. Those who
have relations with people are less affected by stress and they try more
actively to cope or adjust with their problems (Crandall, 1984). Social
relations have a strong effect on health and mortality (death rate);
these relations increase or improve health and decrease mortality (death
rate).

In a recent survey, more than 60 percent of British adults claimed that
their friendships were more important than career, money or even family.
People with strong social support and intimate friendships visit the
doctor less often (Hoggard, 2005, P. 50). Friendship is extremely
valuable, and it is also one of the least expensive ways to be happy.
People of all ages report the most positive moods over all when they are
with friends. Research has shown that personal relationships contribute
more to our mental and physical health than money, fame, conventional
success or material possessions. On average, lonely people have shorter,
unhealthier and unhappier lives. On the other hand. happy people make
the best friends. In addition, people with close, fulfilling friendships
arc happier. In a 2005 study by the University of Adelaide in Australia
it is found that keeping up with friends rather than family is the key
to a longer life. A strong network of friends and confidents
significantly improved longevity. Experts believe that this finding,
could herald a new approach to later life, where friends band together
in networks based on similar age and interests. Another study of 2800
men and women over the age of 65 showed that those with more friends had
a lower risk of health problems. and they recovered faster if they did
fall ill. Meanwhile, a Yale University study of 10,000 senior citizens
over a live-year period showed that loners were twice as likely to die
from all causes. A 2002 study conducted at the university of Illinois by
Psychologist ED Diener and Martin Seligman found that the most salient
characteristics shared by the 10 percent of students with the highest
levels of happiness and the fewest signs of depression were their strong
ties to friends and family, and commitment to spending time with them
(Hoggard, 2005, PP. 51 & 54).

Some of our most intense and meaningful experiences are the result of
family relationships. While individuality is very important to the
developing adult, there are great opportunities for joy and growth that
can be experienced within family life. In the overall aim of increasing
happiness, the family is exceptionally important (Hoggard, 2005. P.
113).

Joining groups, participating, volunteering ... all these community
activities score high on the pleasure scale, and through them comes
trust in others. Andrew Mawson says that as people become involved with
others and do things together, they come to care about them. So they do
same good for other and improve their own world at the same time
(Hoggard, 2005, P. 172). The American psychologist ED Diener and Martin
Seligman investigated individuals who ranked in the top percent of
consistently very happy people. Their most striking finding was that
very happy people were highly connected. Compared to averagely happy or
unhappy people. they had stronger and richer personal relationships.
They were also more sociable, more extroverted, and more agreeable. Good
relationships may not be sufficient by themselves to make a happy
person. because other things matter as well, but they are usually
necessary (Martin. 2006. P. 74).

Personal relationships, especially the close ones, are enormously
important for happiness; they contribute more than money, fame,
conventional success, material possession. intelligence or even health.
Psychological research has found that individuals who are generally
inclined to assume the best of other people, and therefore to trust in
them, tend to be happier than those whose inclination is to be
suspicious and distrustful (Martin. 2006, PP. 80- 81). By and large,
happy people do not spend their time thinking about themselves and
dwelling on their own feeling. Rather, their attention tends to he
focused outwards on the world around them. The findings from the
research generally confirm that outward focus is associated with
happiness and mental health, including lower rates of depression. Among
other things, individuals who arc concerned about other people and not
just themselves, are less affected by people, and not just themselves,
are less affected by' stress. Studies have found that elderly people,
whose personal goals and aspirations revolve around an interest in the
well-being of others, are usually happier than those who arc concerned
mostly with looking after themselves (Martin, 2006, PP. 60-61).

Close relationships, more than personal satisfaction or one's view of
the world as a whole, are the most meaningful factors in happiness. If
you feel close to other people. you are four times as likely to feel
good about yourself than if you do not feel close to anyone. (Magen,
Birenbaum, and Pery 1996: cited in Niven, 2000)

If you want to know if people are happy, do not ask them how much money
they have in the bank. Do not ask how large their take-home salary is.
Ask them about their friends. (Niven, 2000)

Relationships are built on mutual appreciation, and there is no better
way to show that appreciation than to tell someone how much you care.

Researchers at the University of Houston have studied the question of
why we do not tell people how important they are to us. One area they
studied was reaction to sad events like funerals.

One subject, Bill, lost a close family member recently. Some of Bill's
friends sent sympathy cards, some sent flowers, some sent notes, some
told him they were there for him, and some did nothing.

Why did some of his friends not say anything?

Perhaps they thought that telling others 'we care' means being
vulnerable. For these people, relationships may be more of a competition
than a celebration, and competitions arc premised on strength, power,
and position.

- Researchers have cautioned that we do not win at relationships; we
win by having relationships (Niven, 2000).

A research on unemployed adults has found that the length of
unemployment was less important to a person's self-esteem than the
amount of social support received from parents, family members, and
friends. (Lackovic-Grgin and Dekovic 1996; cited in Niven, 2000)

Even if you are right, there is nothing to be gained from letting
yourself become adversarial with your loved ones. Remember how much more
important these people are to you than is the issue you are talking
about. (Niven, 2000)

As family members scatter across the country, it becomes easy to forget
to include them in your thoughts and in your time. Keep up the contact;
share with your family the news of your life. They want to know, and you
will feel better if your bond is maintained. (Niven,2000)

Studies that examine the importance of family to senior citizens as
compared to adults not yet entering middle age show family relationships
to be an equally crucial component of life satisfaction for both age
groups.- (O'Connor 1995; cited in Niven, 2000)

We no longer live in a time when people know all their neighbors and
consider them to be friends. A shocking number of people have never had
a conversation with their neighbors, and some could not pick them out of
a lineup. Introduce yourself, or invite your neighbor over for coffee.
Neighbors arc not a great potential source of friendship; they make us
feel more comfortable in our homes, where most of us spend much of our
time. (Niven, 2000)

Greater community interaction can increase happiness by almost 30
present, (Sugarman 1997; cited in Niven, 2000).

**3-6. Goodness**

Doing good also makes us feel good. We establish deep interpersonal
relationships and empathy for others, and also have the perfect
opportunity to practice flow activities. Those things we enjoy and that
really take us out of our selves. Scientists agree that being kind to
others triggers a cascade of positive effects. It makes us feel generous
and capable, and gives us a greater sense of connection with others. In
addition, when we do good deeds, we are helping more than just the
recipient; we arc helping everybody. Of course, it feels good to be on
the giving end. but psychologist Jonathan Haidt suggests that people
witnessing others performing good deeds also benefit: they experience an
emotion called 'elevation'. He explains that we get this feeling when we
see people behave honorably or act heroically, or when we witness
someone show gratitude or help someone else. And when we feel elevated.
it makes us more open and considerate, and more loving towards humanity
(Hoggard, 2005, P. 173),

People who compromise what they believe in to satisfy their goals wind
up dissatisfied with their accomplishments. If you do not believe
yourself to be moral, satisfaction is unattainable. (Niven, 2000)

Being happy and being moral buttress each other. People, who feel they
lack morals, report they are half as likely to feel happy compared to
those who feel they are moral. (Garrett 1996 (Panos 1997; cited in
Niven, 2000)

Giving help is a win-win situation. So pay attention to your
surrounding and offer the help that you can. It could be as simple as
making a habit of holding the door open for the person coming in behind
you. It is a gesture of friendliness that makes another person feel
better and makes you feel good about yourself. (Niven, 2000)

Life satisfaction was found to improve 24 percent with the level of
altruistic activity. (Williams, Haber, Weaver, and Freeman 1998; cited
in Niven, 2000)

**3-7. Money and income**

Argyle (2004) says that some researches have reported a very little
relationship between income and happiness. In developed countries, there
is a week correlation between wealth and happiness. This correlation is
more in poorer countries. Considering this fact that we spend money for
those things, which we are interested in, and since we think that it is
money that causes pleasure for us, it is wrongly, supposed that
happiness roots in money. However, other causes of happiness (such as
love, more recreation positive attitudes, choosing goals) are less
expensive or are free. In addition, some of them cause good income and
earnings as well. Making people and countries wealthy has a very little
effect on their happiness, although very poor persons and those who live
in very little (poor) countries are less happy than those who have a
better financial situation.

Money is riot even one of the six key factors now scientifically
established to affect happiness most: mental health, satisfying and
secure work, a secure and loving private life, a safe community. freedom
and moral values. Over the past two decades, an increasing body of
social-science and psychological research has shown that there is no
significant relationships between how much money a person earns and
whether he or she feels good about life. A time magazine poll reinforced
this view by finding that money ranked 14th as a major source of
happiness for its readers. Wealth is like health: its absence breeds
misery, but having it does not guarantee happiness. Being in chase of
money rather than meaning in life is a formula of discontent. Money
generally makes us unhappy and dissatisfied, especially when we compare
our own income with that of others. Yes, richer people, in such a case,
may be happier -not because of the absolute size of their wealth. but
because they have more than other does people do. And the wealth gap
harms the rest of us. Income rivalry makes those left behind more
miserable than it makes the winners extra happy. However, it should also
he noted that the winners compare themselves with those ones who are
wealthier than they are. People judge wealth relatively rather than
absolutely. Competition for money and status is thus a zero-sun game:
and the more opportunities there are for comparison-rankings, league
tables, and advertising, the greater the dissatisfaction will be. Rich
people with a history of mental illness are up to three times more
likely to kill themselves than those with less money. According to
Seligman, an American positive psychologist, "people who value money
more than the other goals are less satisfied with their income and with
their lives as a whole" (Hoggard, 2005, PP.64-71)

Happiness is much more a product of psychological wealth than material
wealth. Money and fame are clearly no guarantees of happiness. Money
does, of course, have some bearing on happiness. Whilst it may not add
much to the happiness of people who are already well off, it does make a
difference to people who have very little. A basic minimum amount of
wealth provides a crucial bulwark against many sources of stress and
unhappiness. Possessing sufficient money means not having to worry about
food or shelter.

Material wealth is not a basic human psychological need whereas, for
example, being connected with other people is. A more searching
explanation as to why money buys relatively little happiness in wealthy
nations rests on three psychological processes, each of which dilutes
the psychological benefits of rising wealth. These processes are
habituation ('the shine wears off). rising aspirations ('the more you
have, the more you want"), and social comparison ('keeping up with the
Donets'). The pursuit of fame, like the pursuit of wealth, is more often
a recipe for unhappiness. Researchers have found that children and
adults whose main aspirations in life centre around money, fame, or
their Own physical appearance tend to have poorer mental health than
those who arc more concerned with intrinsic goals like developing close
relationships or helping others (Martin. 2006, PP. 144-156).

has surprisingly little lasting impact on happiness. Acquiring more
money or possessions can make us feel better for a while, but the rise
in mood tends to be modest and short-lived. We soon get used to what we
have and our expectations rise, leading us to want ever more. More
importantly, the process of trying to acquire wealth can actually make
us less happy if it gets in the way of things that really do matter,
such as personal relationships or a sense of put-pose and meaning. There
is good evidence that highly materialistic people are less happy on
average than those who have other priorities in life (Martin, 2006,
PP.68).

We spend so much time chasing dollars, worrying about dollars, and
counting dollars. It may surprise you to learn that satisfaction with
life is no more likely among the rich. (Niven, 2000)

A study of life satisfaction looked at twenty different factors that
might contribute to happiness. Nineteen factors did matter, and one did
not. The one factor that did not matter was financial status. (Hong and
Giannakopoulos 1995; cited in Niven, 2000)

**3-8. Work**

According to Argyle (2004), those who lost their jobs, became less
happy. Unemployed persons feel boredom, have a little self-esteem,
sometimes become angry, and sometimes emotional indifference appears in
them. Unemployed persons were fewer members of recreational groups, less
exercised, less associated with others, thus enjoyed less social
support, and had more passive recreations for 5 hours in a day
(Gershuni, 1994).

Work has a huge bearing on our happiness. Work offers far more than
money. A satisfying job can bring structure and meaning to life, along
with mental and emotional stimulation. This is true for those engaged in
unpaid work, such as caring for their children or elderly relatives, as
it is for the highest-earning investment banker. After basic needs are
met, pay has surprisingly little influence on job satisfaction. A 2004
report published by the learning skills council clearly showed that
happiness is more important to workers than money. It also revealed that
93 percent of teenagers agreed that doing something they enjoy is more
important than making money (Hoggard, 2005, PP.72 & 76).

We are generally happier when actively engaged in some reasonably
challenging task, rather than passively witnessing other people's
experiences on a TV screen. Happy people spend at least some of their
time engaged in meaningful and satisfying activities (Martin, 2006,
pp.53).

Find something to do, because the feeling that we have too much to do
is much more pleasing than the feeling that we have nothing to do.
(Niven,2000)

In studies of college students, those with more demanding schedules
were 15 percent more satisfied with life. Despite the more demanding
schedules, the individuals studied did not experience any more stress
than those with less to do. (Bailey and Miller 1998; cited in
Niven,2000)

At its best, work gives us a sense of purpose and enhances our
appreciation of our life outside of the workplace. Appreciate all that
your job gives you, and help you appreciate what really matters. (Niven,
2000)

A research on over 1,500 mothers found that working outside the home
increased life satisfaction 5 percent and contributed to a feeling of
equality in the family. (Rogers 1996; cited in Niven, 2000)

**3-9. Exercise**

Hills and Argyle (1998) found that the individuals, who were members of
athletic clubs, got more and better scores in the Oxford happiness
inventory as compared with those who were not members of these clubs
(Argyle, 2004).

Doctors increasingly prescribe exercise as part of wider treatment for
mental illnesses, such as depression and seasonal affective disorder
(SAD). Physical activity plays a role in establishing and maintaining a
positive mood and self-esteem. It also improves social integration and
decreases anger. It is less passive than popping a pill, and makes us
feel that we are regaining control of our life. Researches among young
of fenders, people recovering from drug and alcohol abuse, and those
diagnosed with schizophrenia suggest that they benefit too. Exercise can
relieve symptoms of premenstrual syndrome and promote restful sleep.
Scientist has found that cognitive functioning (mental ability) in the
elderly improves with exercise (Hoggard, 2005. PP.156-157).

Physical activity is an important contributor to health and happiness.
People who regularly take physical exercise are usually happier as well
as physically healthier than those who spend their days sitting at a
desk (Martin, 2006, P. 109).

People, who exercise, whether that involves an intense workout or just
a regular long walk, feel healthier, feel better about themselves, and
enjoy life more. (Niven, 2000)

A research on physical activity finds that exercise increases
self-confidence, which in turn strengthens self-evaluations. Regular
exercise, including brisk walks, directly increases happiness 12
percent, and can indirectly make a dramatic contribution to improving
self-image. (Fontane 1996; cited in Niven, 2000).

**3-10. Sleep**

Sleep is not just a biological necessity; it is a neglected source of
pleasure. It offers us refuge from pleasant and unpleasant life events.
Humans are not built to work at night and sleep by day, but many do.
Tired people are less emotionally resilient and often feel 'out of
touch' with what is going on in their lives. In extreme cases, sleep
deprivation can lead to feelings of persecution and paranoia,
depression, weight gain, impaired performance and damaged social
relationships. We can survive for longer without food than sleep
(Hoggard, 2005, P. 149). If one wants to be happy and healthy then she
or he must have a sufficient quantity and quality of sleep and at the
right times (Martin, 2006, P. 108).

Do not skimp on sleep. A full night's rest is fuel for the following
day. Rested people feel they work better and are more comfortable when
the day is over. wen, 2000)

Quality and quantity of sleep contribute to health, wellbeing, and a
positive outlook. For those who sleep less than eight hours, every hour
of sleep sacrificed results in an 8 percent less positive feeling about
the day (Pilcher & Ott, 1998; Panos, 1997; cited in Niven, 2000).


