3-11. Mental Health
===================

Various studies have found that happiness relates more strongly to
people's mental health than it does to their objective physical health;
that is their health as assessed independently by a doctor (Martin,
2006, P. 105).

**3-12. Recreation**

Recreation can make people happy, and it is very important because
recreation contrary to our communications, job and personality is under
our own control (Argyle, 2004).

**3-13. Travel**

Travel can be a source of great joy, broadening our experience of other
lives and cultures, making us more adventurous and empathetic, and
allowing us the chance to be caught up in flow activities. According to
psychologists, there are seven socio-psychological benefits in travel;
they are: 1) Exploration and evaluation of self, 2) Relaxation, 3)
Escape from a perceived mundane environment, 4) prestige, 5) Regression
to a childlike, Playful state, 6) Enhancement of kind relationships, 7)
Facilitation of social interaction (Hoggard, 2005, P. 167).

**3-14. Humor**

Argyle (2004), according to the results of different researches,
introduces humor as a source of happiness. It can have an important role
in increasing social coherence. A laugher is expressing positive
emotion. Humor has a causal impart on temper and happiness and it
reduces the effect of stressors.

In studies of hundreds of adults, happiness was found to be related to
humor. The ability to laugh, whether at life itself or at a good joke,
is a source of life satisfaction. Indeed, those who enjoy silly humor
are one-third more likely to feel happy. (Solomon1996; cited in Niven,
2000)

Your smile makes other people happy, which in turn makes you happy.
(Niven, 2000)

Every day make for yourself some time to enjoy, to be silly, to laugh.
(Niven, 2000)

Regularly having fun is one of the five factors in leading a satisfied
life. Individuals who spend time just having fun are 20 percent more
likely to feel happy and 36 percent more likely to feel comfort with
their age and stage in life. (Lepper 1996; cited in Niven, 2000)

**3-15. Self- efficacy and education**

Happy people tend to feel more empowered and more in control of their
lives than unhappy people do. They are also more likely to feel that
they have the skills, knowledge and motivation to exert that control; a
sense that psychologists refer to as self-efficacy. Research shows that
young people who report feeling high self-efficacy are happier on
average. Education obviously has a major role to play in developing
self-efficacy and a sense of control (Martin, 2006, PP. 5556).

Do not write yourself off. If you do not believe in yourself, you will
not be able to function. (Niven, 2000)

Across all ages and all groups, a solid belief in one's own abilities
increases life satisfaction by about 30 percent, and makes us happier
both in our home lives and in our work lives. (Myers and Diener 1995;
cited in Niven, 2000)

Believing in yourself means thinking you are a capable person, not that
you will never make a mistake. Do not think that because you are a
talented person you cannot learn from others or you should never be
criticized or that others want to know how highly you think of yourself.
(Niven, 2000)

In studies on married couples, a significant connection is found
between rigidity in one partner and discord in the relationship. Where
one partner is convinced he or she is correct and therefore not open to
suggestion, the length of time disagreements continue is about three
times as great. (Botwin, Buss, and Shackelford 1997; cited in Niven,
2000)

When things go peppery, we sometimes start a list of ways we failed,
ways we caused the problem. This kind of thinking not only can upset us,
but it also can keep us away from being able to function. The truth is
that any situation is the result of some things that are in your control
and some things that are out of your control. Do not delude yourself
into thinking a bad situation that is completely of your making.
Remember, it makes more sense to deal with outcomes than with faults.
(Niven, 2000)

Happiness does not depend on how bad happen to an individual. What is
more important is whether an individual tends to make negative
conclusions about him or herself when negative events occur. Individuals
who think of themselves as the case of negative events are 43 percent
less likely to be satisfied than those who do not. (Panos 1997; cited in
Niven, 2000)

We need self-reinforcement, a belief in ourselves that is strong and
unwavering. Be ready to pick yourself up when you are feeling down.
(Niven, 2000)

The tendency to reinforce one's own self-confidence improves life
satisfaction by about 20 percent for both men and women. (Seybolt and
Wagner 1997; cited in Niven, 2000)

**3-16. Love of learning**

Someone who loves learning for its own sake, and therefore continues to
learn throughout his life, is much better equipped to be happy, healthy
and successful than someone whose learning, gland withers the day he
leaves school. A love of learning remains central to happiness and
health throughout the lifespan, including in old age (Martin, 2006. P.
208).

**3-17. Social and emotional competency**

One of the characteristics of happy people is having at least moderate
levels of social and emotional competence. To be happy, one needs basic
social skills to form and maintain personal relationships, together with
the emotional literacy to understand and deal effectively with his or
her own feelings and other people's (Martin, 2006, P.30).

Take the time to help, comfort, or just be with those you care about
when they are in need. You will feel good about your efforts, and it
will bring you an even closer relationship. (Niven, 2000)

The need for support or the number of problems individuals face is a
less strong predictor of their happiness than the amount of support
available to them. (Jou and Fukada 1997; cited in Niven, 2000)

**Conclusion**

It can be concluded from this research that according to 'slam. Muslim
and non-Muslim, Iranian and non Iranian, ancient and modern philosophers
all over the world, whose viewpoints were investigated in this hook, and
all psychological researches stated in this research, spirituality and
morality cause humans to reach happiness. In more concrete terms, they
all believe that moral virtues, righteousness, wisdom and knowledge have
a very definite and certain influence in leading human beings to
happiness. The Qur'an and the Islamic traditions emphasize the role of
faith. righteous deeds, fearing of God, and patience and endurance
against hardships in leading man to feel happy.

Most of philosophers believe that these characteristics have a very
high impact on man's happiness. Therefore, we should come to know that
it is impossible for us to achieve happiness unless we acquire such
properties, which means that other worldly and abject things cannot take
man to happiness, although some humans may mistake their superficial and
sensory pleasures for original and stable happiness. It can also be
deduced that one of the most important aims of man's creation is the
getting to happiness. Thus, religion and philosophy have confirmed it as
the goal of man's creation, and have specified given methods for taking
humans to that goal. In other words, reaching happiness is possible for
man but through particular ways and methods.
Happiness is movements in the way that gets to the purpose for which we
have been created, that is man's perfection which in itself can cause
happiness, and the happiness in turn is of the highest ranks of
perfection and elevation.

There is a close relationship between knowledge, beauty, goodness and
happiness. The more man reaches to knowledge, beauty and goodness, the
happier he will be and the happier he is, the more he will reach to
knowledge, beauty, and goodness.

All religion and philosophy can he summarized in knowledge, beauty and
goodness. Thus, through a real religiosity in the real sense of the
word, one can reach to happiness. In other words, religiosity can take
man to happiness which is based on knowledge and philosophy. There are
some characteristics which whatever they increase, the happiness will be
increased as well, such as moral virtues. goodness and righteousness.
However, there are some other things that whatever they increase, man's
happiness is not necessarily increased, such as money and wealth that
possessing an average of them is sufficient, ( 113 ) It can also be
deduced from this book that there is nothing more important in leading
man to happiness than knowledge and cognition, because if there is a
real knowledge in a person, there will be all the good characteristics
such as religiosity, morality and spirituality in him as well, i.e.
those factors which can definitely cause happiness.

Happiness is the best standard and Criteria in judgment about the
individuals' personalities and behaviors. That is, if a person has not
yet attained happiness, his personality and behavior are not completely
confirmable.

Unconfirmable grief and sorrows are the definite symptoms of spirit and
soul illness, i.e. the person has serious problems in those factors
which can cause happiness in him, that is, morel virtuous, religiosity,
etc. Therefore, he or she soon tries to solve the problems and move on
the desirable route.

We can see that happiness is not in searching for the external factors,
rather it exists in the internal factors which are mostly in man's
ability to acquire them without paying a high price and cost.

When man reaches as position on which he is as he should be, and he
behaves as it deserves, and he sees the universe as it is, he well be
happy in such a status. So happiness is hidden in gaining a
philosophical insight to the being and universe, and is obtained through
nurturing different aspects of the individual's personality and nature,
and so it is quite consistent with man's nature and personality, and it
differs materially with artificial and superficial pleasures. Making
other people happy can cause us to be happy or our happiness to be
increased, and it is of the signs of a person who has reached happiness
that he wishes to make other people happy.

As we should consider the factors which can cause hum being's
happiness, we should also pay attention to those factors which can cause
the peoples' sorrows and grief and according to the viewpoints of
religious text and philosophers, these are: unbelief, sin, wrongdoing.

We should also know this fact that those who can reach happiness that
want knowledge, morality, etc, because these things are respectful and
important in themselves, not they want to use these thing to as tools
for reaching fame, money, etc.

Most of philosophers also believe that: spiritual and intellectual
pleasures are much higher than sensory pleasures, humans should live in
such a manner that they can reach happiness, no pleasure is comparable
to reaching God, human beings reach recognition of God when they are
free from flaunting and seeking fame. Recognition of God is the highest
happiness. The final happiness for Humans in the hereafter through
observing religious teachings, happiness is highest possible thing for
human being; happiness is in the perfection of man's speculative and
practical powers. This is also all that the results of the most recent
psychological researches about happiness show: the improvement of
religious, moral and scientific attitude and behavior could have
relationship with an increase in happiness or can cause an increase in
it. Thus, it is up to all of people not to mistake happiness for
superficial pleasures and not to seek happiness from worldly and
material affaires. The people of the world should try to avoid
differences by trying to seek and reach the real happiness which is the
shared aim of all human beings.

Considering the religious and philosophical viewpoints, confirm this
fact that knowledge, religiosity, morality and spirituality have a very
important role in leading humans to happiness. Therefore, religious,
moral and spiritual education, or education in general, play a crucial
role in creating and increasing happiness in individuals and society.
Thus it is suggested, according to the results of this research, that
much more attention to be paid to education if we want to have happier
students and finally happier people, i.e. educational goals, teaching
evaluation methods, educational contents, educational spaces,
communications, etc. to be formulated in such a manner that increase the
happiness in students and decrease grief and sorrow in society. It is
also suggested to the future researchers to investigate each of these
issues, i.e. educational goals, teaching methods, evaluations, contents,
spaces, etc. to what extent have had influence on increasing or
decreasing happiness in students and it is also suggested to investigate
about this fact that what educational things have impact on increasing
and decreasing the students' happiness, and have educational goals,
contents, etc. be formulated so that the happiness of the students may
be increased.

**References**

Akbari, M. (2006). Grief and Happiness in Tradition of the Fourteen
Innocent Ones (Peace be upon them). (2nd education.). Qom: Safheh
Negar

Alavi, H.R. (2005). The essential points of educational philosophy.

Kerman: Shahid Bahonar university of Kerman publications.

Argyle, M. (2004). The Psychology of Happiness. (2nd ed.). Isfahan:
Jahad-e-Daneshgahi Pblications of Isfahan

Aristotles' Nicomachean Ethics, Translated by W. D. Roy. Oxford: Oxford
University Press

Audi, R. (2001). The Cambridge dictionary of philosophy. Second
edition. U.K.: Cambridge university press.

Barumand, M. (2001). Methods of Instruction in the Qur'an and
Tradition. Rasht: Ketab-e-Mobin

Beheshti, M., Faghihi, A.N. & Abja'fari, M. (2001). Muslim scholars'
ideas on education and its foundations. Vol.4. Tehran: Samt.

Blackburn, S. (2005). Oxford Dictionary of philosophy. (2nd ed.).
Oxford: Oxford University Press

Bureau of Houzeh and university cooperation. (1998). Muslim scholars
ideas on education and its foundations. Vol.1. Tehran: Samt.

Comte - Sponvill, A. (2003). Great virtues. Translated into English by
Catherine Temerson. U.K: Vintage.

Copleston, F. (1983). History of philosophy. Tehran: Soroush-Elmi,
Farhangi

Curley, E. (1996). Benedict De Spinoza - Ethics - England: Penguin
Classics.

Davies, B. (2003). Aquinas. Second edition. London, New York:
Continuum.

De Batton, A. (1969). Philosophy condolences. Tehran: Gognus.

Dowar, G. (2002). Religious studies: philosophy & Ethics. Oxford:
university press.

Durant, v. (1983). History of philosophy. Seventh edition. Tehran:
Danesh.

Forughi, M.A. (1997). Wisdom in Europe. Fifth edition. Tehran: Safi Al
ishah.

Frede, D. (2003). Plato's ethics: an overview Stanford encyclopedia of
philosophy. University of I lamburg.

Freedman, D.N.: Myers, A.C. & Becd, A.B. (2000). Dictionary of the
Bible. U.K. Willam B. Eerdmans Publishing Company.

Ghazzali, M. (1982). Kimia-e-Saadat. Tehran: Elmi & Farhangi

Ghazzali, M. (2000). A Sellection of Kimia-e-Saadat. Selection,
Introduction, and Interpretation of the Words by Saeed Youof Nia.
Tehran: Gadyani

Griffin, J. P. (2000). In Concise Routledge Encylopedia of philosophy.
(pp. 332- 333). London and New York: Routledge

Hartog, J. and Dosterbeek, H. (1996). Health, wealth, and happiness:
why pursue a higher education? University of Amsterdam.

Department of Economics.

Hoggard, L. (2005). How to Bo Happy. London: BBC Books

Holy Qur'an. (2007). English translation by Arthr J. Arberry. (3rd
ed.). Qom: Ansariyan

Honderich, T. (2005). The Oxford companion to philosophy. Second
edition. UK: Oxford university press.

Imam Ali. (1996). Nahjul Balagha. English translation by seyed Ali
Reza. Qom: Ansariyan

Imam Sajjad. (2003). The Psalms of Islam. English translation by C.
Chittick. (3rd ed.). Qom: Ansariyan Kardan, A. (2002).Movement of
education ideas in west. Tehran: samt.

Koshentzo, L. (1998). Great philosophers of Greece. Tehran: Ghazal.

Loqmani, A. (2006). Best Life Wishes. (3rd ed.). Qom: Behesht-eBinesh
(Paradise of Insight)

MacKinnon (2005). Happiness, in J. Macquarrie & J. Childress (Eds.). A
New Dictionary of Christian Ethics (p. 260). London: Scm Press

Macquarrie, J. and childress, J. (2001). A New Dictionary of Christian
Ethics. UK: Scm Press.

Martin, P. (2006). Making Happyy People. London: Harper Perennial

Miller, J. (2005). Spinoza's Axiology. Queen's university, Ontario.

Mohammad (the prophet of Islam). (1995). Nahjolfasaha (11th
education.). Tehran: Islamic culture Publication Bureau

Mohammadi Rey Shahri,M.(1993). Mizanolhekmah (Standard of wisdom). (4th
ed.). Qom: Islamic propaganda Brea of Qom Howzeh

Nadler, S. (2005) Baruch Spinoza - Stanford Encyclopedia of
philosophy.

Naqib zadeh. (1999). Philosophy of education. Tehran: Tahuri

Naqib zadeh. A. (1993). An introduction to philosophy. Tehran: Tahuri

Nettle, D. (2005). Happiness. Oxford: Oxford university press.

Niven, D. (2000). The 100 Simple Secrets of Happy People.
HarperSanFrancisco: A Division of harperCoUms Publishers.

Noddings, N. (2005). Happiness and education. Cambridge: Cambridge
university press.

Norman, R. (2005). In T. Honderich (Ed.), The Oxford Companion to
Philosophy. (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press

Pasandideh. A. (2007). Satisfaction With Life. (5th education.). Qom:
Dar-al-hadith Printing and Publications organization.

Pawelski, J. 0. (2008). In J. Lachs & R. Talaisse (Eds.), American
Philosophy an Encyclopedia (pp. 356- 357). New York and London:
Routledge

Plato's Republic. Translated by Robin Waterfield (1993). Oxford: Oxford
Univesity press.

Pojman, L. P. (2003). Classics of philosophy. 2nd edition. New York,
Oxford: Oxford University Press

Popkin, R. H. & Stroll, A. (1995). Philosophy made simple. Tenth
edition. Tehran: Hekmat.

Qur'an Culture and Knowledge Center. (2007). Encyclopedia of the
Glorious Qur'an. Qom: Institute of Book (Boostan-e-Ketab)

Rendel. J.H. & Bakler, B. (1996). An Introduction to philosophy.
Tehran: Sorush

Rorty. A.O. (1998). Philosophers on Education. London and New York:
Rutledge.

Rousseau. J. J. (2001). Emile. Tehran: Nahid

Sharma, S.R. (2001). Philosophy and ethics in Islam. Parakash house:
Qmsons publications.

Wild, J. (1930). "Ethic," in Spinoza. New York: Charles Scribner's
Sons.

Tabatabaie, M. H. (1987). Al-Mizan interpretation. Tehran: Scientific
Foundation of Tabatabaie

Tayyebi, N. & Moeenoleslam, M. (2004). Psychological Foundations of
Happiness with emphasis on Religious Attitude. (2nd ed.). Qom:
Behesht-e-Binesh (Paradise of Insight)

Tusi, K. N. (1985). Akhlage - e - Nasari. Tehran: Kharazmi

Tusi, K. N. (1998). A selection of Akhlag-e-Naser. Introduction,
Selection and Intrpretation of the wordsa by Shahram Rajab Zadeh.
Tehran: Gadyani

White, N. (2006). A brief history of happiness. U.K.: Blackwell
publishing.

Yaspers, K. (1996). Spinoza - philosophy of divinity and politics.
Khorramshahr: Tarh- e - nou.


