Suratul Insan (al-Dahr), Mankind or The Time
============================================

This chapter was revealed in Medina and contains 31 verses

**In the Name of Allah, the All-Beneficent, the All-Merciful**

Contents of Suratul Insan
-------------------------

Although this chapter is short, its contents are deep, multi-faceted and
comprehensive, and can be divided into five sections:

• The creation of the human being and his origin as a drop of sperm
(with the egg), followed by the guidance which one has been given and
the freedom of choice to do as one pleases.

• The reward given to the righteous doers - the history of revelation of
this section is directly related to the Ahlul Bayt - which we will
discuss in depth.

• The reasons why these righteous doers (the Ahlul Bayt ) deserve the
reward which they were given, which is explained through the use of very
short, yet powerful verses.

• The importance of the Qur’an and how to implement its legislations,
along with the various difficulties on the path of self-reformation.

• The overall rule of the will of Allah (while at the same time
attesting to the freedom of choice that mankind has).

Various names have been mentioned for this chapter, the most famous
being: ‘al-Insan’ - ‘Humanity’; ‘ad-Dahr’ - ‘The Time’; and ‘Hal Ata’ -
‘Has there come’ and each of these have been extracted from the words
contained in the first few verses of this chapter. However as we will
soon see in regards to the merits of recitation of this chapter, in the
traditions, it has only been referred to as ‘Hal Ata’.

Was this chapter revealed in Medina?
------------------------------------

The place of revelation for this chapter – whether it was in Medina or
Mecca - is a discussion among the exegetes of the Qur’an.

The consensus of the scholars and exegetes from the Shia tradition is
that the entire chapter or at least the beginning section in which the
status of these righteous individuals (the Ahlul Bayt) and the actions
of these noble personalities has been mentioned was revealed in Medina.

These verses form the basis of a historical event in regards to an oath
made by Imam Ali , his wife Fatima Zahra , their children - Imam Hasan
and Imam Husayn , and [their house-keeper] Fidhdhah, which we will
mention.

In addition, it is well-known among the scholars of the Ahlus Sunnah
that the revelation of these verses was in Medina, just as al-Qurtubi
has mentioned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ قَالَ الْجَمْهُورُ مَدِينَةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The well-known opinion of the scholars (is that it was revealed in)
Medina.[^1]

The following scholars consider some or even a part of this chapter as
being revealed in Medina:

1. Hakim Abul Qasim al-Haskani has narrated from Ibne Abbas in regards
to the number of verses which were revealed in Mecca and Medina and has
stated that this chapter was revealed in Medina after Suratul Rahman
(55) and before Suratul Talaq (65).[^2]

The author of al-Aydhhah, Ahmad al-Zahid, also narrates this opinion
from Ibne Abbas.[^3]

2. In History of the Qur’an, written by Abu Abdillah al-Zanjani, who has
taken his information from Nazmul Durr wa Tanasurul Ayat was Suwar, it
is mentioned that a group of prominent scholars of the Ahlus Sunnah have
narrated that Suratul Insan is among those chapters which were revealed
in Medina.[^4]

3. In al-Fihrist of Ibne Nadim, it has been narrated from Ibne Abbas
that chapter Hal Ata is the eleventh chapter revealed in Medina.[^5]

4. In al-Itqan of al-Suyuti, it has been mentioned from al-Bayhaqi as
seen in Dalaiilul Nubuwwat from Akramah that the chapter Hal Ata was
revealed in Medina.[^6]

5. In Durrul Manthur the same tradition (as mentioned above) has been
narrated from Ibne Abbas from a different chain of narrators.[^7]

6. al-Zamakshari, in his work, Tafsirul Kashshaf, has narrated the
well-known historical event for which the initial verses of this chapter
were revealed as being in regards to the vow taken by (Imam) Ali , his
wife and their children.[^8]

7. In addition to the references stated above, many other prominent
scholars of the Ahlus Sunnah have also stated that the initial verses of
this chapter were revealed in regards to (Imam) Ali , Fatima Zahra ,
Hasan and Husayn and this proves that this chapter was revealed in
Medina, because both Imams Hasan and Husayn were born in Medina.

Other scholars who have stated this belief include: al-Wahidi in his
work Asbabul Nuzul; al-Baghwiin Maʿlimul Tanzl; Sibt b. al-Jawzi in his
work al-Tadhkirah; Ganji al-Shafi in his work Kifyatul Talib, and
others.[^9]

This opinion is so well known and acknowledged by the scholars that
Muhammad b. Idris al-Shafi, one of the four Imams of the Ahlus Sunnah,
composed the following (well-known) poem:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الى م الى م و حتى متى أعاتب فى حب هذا الفتى!
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و هل زوجت فاطم غيره ؟ و فى غيره هل اتى هل اتى ؟!
  </p>
</blockquote>

Till when, till when, and until what time?

Shall you rebuke me for loving this chivalrous man?

Did Fatima marry any other than him?

And was Hal Ata revealed for other than him (Ali)?[^10]

There are numerous other references in these regards which we will
mention under the discussion of the verses in this chapter.

However, with all of these proofs, there are still individuals who
insist that this chapter was revealed in Mecca and deny all of the
traditions which speak about this chapter being revealed in Medina and
that this chapter was sent down in regards to Ali, Fatima and their two
children, Hasan and Husayn.

It is astounding to see that anytime a verse and Prophetic tradition
ends up proclaiming the virtues of Imam Ali and the Ahlul Bayt, a group
of people stand up and raise a clamor and become very sensitive – as if
Islam has fallen into danger if they were to accept these traditions.

Seeing as how they claim that Imam Ali is among the ‘Rightly Guided
Caliphs’ and is one of the great leaders of Islam and that they have
love for the Ahlul Bayt , then in our opinion, the animosity which they
have stems from the days of ruler-ship of the Umayyad empire and the
negative propaganda of that era which has taken them over.

May Allah protect us all from such errors in our life.

Merits of Recitation of Suratul Insan
-------------------------------------

It has been narrated from the Noble Prophet that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ قَرَأَ سُوْرَةُ  هَلْ أَتَى كَانَ جَزَاؤُهُ عَلى اللهِ جَنَّةً
وَ حَرِيراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A person who recites chapter “Hal Ata”, his reward with Allah will be
paradise and garments of silk.[^11]

In a tradition from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir it has been stated that: “One
of the rewards which will be granted to a person who recites the chapter
‘Hal Ata’ every Thursday morning is that on the Day of Resurrection,
they will be alongside the Noble Prophet.”[^12]

Section One: Verses 1 to 4
--------------------------

**In the Name of Allah, the All-Beneficent, the All-Merciful**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“ هَلْ أَتَى عَلىٰ الإِنْسَانِ حِينٌ مِنَ الدَّهْرِ لَمْ يَكُنْ
شَيْئاً مَذْكُوراً ۞ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَا الإِنْسَانَ مِنْ نُطْفَةٍ
أَمْشَاجٍ نَبْتَلِيهِ فَجَعَلْنَاهُ سَمِيعاً بَصِيراً ۞ إِنَّــا
هَدَيْـنَاهُ السَّبِيلَ إِمَّا شَاكِراً وَإِمَّا كَفُوراً ۞ إِنَّا
أَعْــتَدْنَا لِلْكَافِرِينَ سَلاَسِلاً وَأَغْلاَلاً وَسَعِيـراً “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Has there not come over the human being a period of time when he was
a thing not worth mentioning?*** ****** ***Surely We have created the
human being from a small life-germ uniting (itself): We mean to try him,
so We have made him hearing, seeing. Surely We have shown him the way:
he may be thankful or unthankful. Surely We have prepared for the
unbelievers chains and shackles and a burning fire.”***

**We transformed a worthless drop of sperm into a human being and then
gave them the tools of guidance**.

Although most of the discussions in this chapter of the Qurʾan revolve
around the Day of Resurrection and the blessings contained in paradise,
the beginning of the chapter focuses on the creation of a human being
because if we pay close attention to the creation (of the human being),
then we will be able to focus closely on the Resurrection (just as
discussed in the exegesis of Suratul Qiyamat).

In the first verse we read:

***Has there not come over man a period of time when he was a thing not
worth mentioning?***[^13]

The atoms which make up a person’s physical body were spread over
various parts of the earth within the drops of water in the rivers and
the air that blew over the earth. The primary matters used in the
creation (of the first human being) were spread over these vast regions
and in reality; mankind was lost among them and was not even worth
mentioning.

Is the meaning of ‘human being’ in this verse, a specific person, or is
it reference to humanity in general? Is it a specific reference to Adam
? The verse which follows tells us that the ‘human being’ has been
created from a drop of sperm and thus this is a clear indication that
the correct answer is that the ‘human being’ in this verse refers to
humanity in general.

However, some scholars believe that the reference to the ‘human being’
in the first verse is that of Adam while in the second verse, it refers
to the offspring of Adam , however it is highly improbable for this
meaning to exist given that these two verses come one after another.

In regards to the exegesis of the sentence

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
‘لـَمْ يَكُنْ شَيْئاً مَذْكُوراً’ –
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘he was not even a thing worth mentioning’,*** numerous opinions are
cited.

One belief states that when a person was just a mere drop of sperm and
after that, a fetus, he was a thing not spoken about. However after
traversing through various stages in the womb resulting in his physical
completion, he then became something which was spoken about and
mentioned.

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir has said: “A person is, in the knowledge of
Allah, something aforementioned, however in the world of the creation,
he was not spoken about.”[^14]

In some commentaries of the Qurʾan it is mentioned that the meaning of
the ‘human being’ in this verse is the scholars who, before gaining
their knowledge, are not worthy of being mentioned, however after
attaining knowledge, they are remembered – either during their lifetime
or after their death.

Other scholars have stated that when ʿUmar b. al-Khattab heard this
verse being recited by someone, he said: “O’ how I wish Adam had
remained aforementioned and had never been brought into creation and his
sons would never have been tested.”[^15]

It is astonishing to hear such a comment as in reality, such a complaint
is actually an attack on the creation of humanity (and an attack on the
Creator).

After the stage of creation of mankind and him becoming something worthy
of mentioning, we read:

***Surely We have created man from a small life-germ uniting (itself):
We mean to try him, so We have made him hearing, seeing.***

The word **‘أَمْشَاجٍ’** - ‘small life-germ’ is the plural of **‘مشج’**
or it may be the plural of ‘**مشيج’** and it means ‘something
mixed’.[^16]

The creation of the human being is from a mixed sperm (this may refer to
the uniting of the man’s sperm with the woman’s egg) - just as has been
mentioned in the traditions of the Ahlul Bayt in which this process has
been discussed in general terms.

This verse may also refer to the various traits and characteristics
which are present in the sperm such as its genetic inheritance from the
genes which it carries and other such things. It may also relate to the
mixture of various things which makes up the sperm as there are numerous
substances in each drop of sperm.

It may also refer to a combination of all of these things - and this
last meaning is more comprehensive and appropriate to accept as the
interpretation of this word. A final possibility exists which states
that the word ‘**أمشاج’** refers to the course of movement of the sperm
inside of the womb.

The phrase, ‘**نَبْتَلِيهِ’** - ‘We wish to test him’ refers to this new
creation reaching the stage of a human being with a responsibility upon
himself, many duties to fulfill, and a test to undergo (from Allah ).
This is one of the greatest bounties of Allah in that a person has been
given this great status and has been found worthy of having a
responsibility and duty to perform (towards Him).

Since it is not possible to fulfill a responsibility and be thoroughly
tested without having an awareness (about what the test is in regards
to), in the last verse of the section under review, some of the ways
which can be used to recognize this test, such as the power of sight and
hearing which the human being has at his disposal, have been mentioned.

Exegetes of the Qur’an have stated that the meaning of ‘testing’, as
seen in this verse, are the changes which a fetus goes through from its
beginning as a drop of sperm until it becomes a fully developed human
being. However by keeping in mind the use of the phrase
‘**نَبْتَلِيهِ’** - ‘We wish to test him’ and also the term
**‘إنسان’** - ‘human being’ which has been used, the first exegesis
given is the most appropriate one.

Thus, from the wordings of this verse we come to understand that the
source of all realizations which a person benefits from are his senses.

In other words, the awareness which comes about through the (five)
senses is the root through which everything is understood, and this is
the opinion of a majority of the Muslim philosophers and also the
opinion of the Greek philosophers, one being Aristotle.

Seeing as how the responsibility which a person has on his shoulders and
the test which one is put through requires one to possess knowledge and
awareness (to be able to take the examination) and that one also
requires the tools to develop this knowledge, a person requires two
other things – guidance and the freedom of choice. Therefore, in the
next verse under review it has been mentioned that:

***Surely We have guided him to the way: he may be thankful or
unthankful.***[^17]

The phrase ‘**هَدَيْنَاهُ’** or ‘We have guided him’ which is used in
this verse has a very broad meaning and includes the ontological
guidance, the primordial guidance, and also the legislational guidance,
even though in the context of this verse, it may only refer to the
legislational form of guidance.

An explanation of this form of guidance (noted above) is: Seeing as how
Allah has created mankind to test him and for him to reach perfection,
the introductory steps to reach this ultimate goal have also been
created within him and the necessary power (to complete this test) have
also been granted to him - this is referred to as ontological guidance.

Following this stage, we see that deep within a person’s primordial
nature, Allah has placed the love for traversing the path (towards Him)
and through the natural inspirations given to him, this path has also
been shown.

It is through this primordial guidance given to each and every human
being that one makes his way to yet another path which is the divinely
sent leaders and great prophets – those who have been granted the Divine
teachings and clear rules and regulations to show everyone the path
towards the legislational guidance. Indeed, these three forms of
guidance are universal and are for the benefit of all of humanity.

In summary, this verse points to three very important and determining
issues in every person’s life:

• Responsibility;

• Guidance;

• Freedom of choice.

In addition, each of these has a correlative and also complements one
another. In addition, the verse which reads:

***Surely We have shown him the way: he may be thankful or
unthankful***

invalidates the beliefs of compulsion or coercion in one’s actions.

The use of the words ‘**شَاكِراً**’ - ‘thankful’ and ‘**كَفُوراً’** -
‘unthankful’ are the most appropriate words which can be used in this
instance because in the face of the Divine blessing which is guidance
(to the path), a person who has been receptive and submissive and has
chosen the path of guidance will naturally be thankful for this great
blessing. However those who go against guidance are truly unthankful for
what they have been granted!

Since not a single person’s hands or tongue can truly thank Allah as He
deserves (to be thanked), the thanking (**شَاكِراً)** Allah has been
mentioned as the active participle; whereas for the ungratefulness the
word meaning extremely ungrateful **(كَافُورً)** has been used in the
exaggerative form.

This is because those who ignore this great bounty of Allah (guidance)
have committed the highest degree of ungratefulness since Allah has
provided them with all of the various tools of guidance, and thus it
would be very ungrateful to ignore the bounty of guidance and take the
wrong path (in life).

In addition, it must be noted that ‘**كَفُورٌ’** - ‘unthankful’ is a
word used both in the meaning of the ‘denial of bounties’, and also in
relation to ‘disbelief’ in regards to the theological issues, just as
Raghib has mentioned in his work, al-Mufradat.

In the last verse under review in this section, there is a brief, yet
meaningful allusion to the eventual outcome of those who choose to take
the path of disbelief and ingratitude:

***Surely We have prepared for the unbelievers chains and shackles and
a burning fire.***

The use of the word **‘أَعْتَدْنَا**’ - ‘We have prepared’ is yet
another emphasis on the fact that the punishment is something which will
definitely overcome a specific group of people (the disbelievers and
unthankful people).

It is true that one reason a person may prepare something beforehand
(which he may not use for some time) is that he fears that later on, he
may be faced with a situation of limited ability (to perform that task)
and that when he is in need of that thing, he will not be able to do it.

However this definition has no meaning in regards to Allah since
whatever He wishes to do, He merely needs to give the order of
‘**كُنْ’** - ‘be’ and it is immediately enacted. At the same time, in
order to categorically state that this punishment will engulf the
disbelievers, it is stated that the tools needed to punish them are
already in existence.

The word ‘**سَلاَسِلَ’** - ‘chains’ is the plural of ‘**سلسلة’**, while
the word ‘**أَغْلاَلٌ’** - ‘shackles’ is the plural of **‘غلّ’** and
means a loop or something spiral in shape which is placed around the
neck or hands of a person (like handcuffs) and then this thing is tied
with chains.[^18]

The purpose of mentioning the words ‘shackles’ and ‘chains’ and the
burning flames of fire is to explain the great punishment which will be
given to these people. This has also been mentioned in other verses of
the Qurʾan in which the words ‘**عَذَابٌ’** - ‘punishment’ and
‘**أسارت’** - ‘captivity’ are mentioned in the plural.

These people’s freedom in regards to their desires of the transient
world will lead to their captivity in the next world. It is the fire of
this world which they paid no attention to which will manifest itself in
the next world and engulf them.

### Point: The tumultuous world of the fetus

We know that a human fetus comes into existence by the union of the
man’s sperm with the woman’s egg. The creation of the fetus, its
composition and then the various stages which the embryo goes through is
one of the most amazing realities and wonders of the great world of
creation which we are in.

With all of the advancements in the science of embryology, many curtains
of the mysteries of this world have been lifted, however many mysteries
still remain hidden. Some of the amazing facts which we allude to make
up only a small part of this entire process of life.

1. The sperm which a man ejaculates is a living, moving, microscopic
organism which has a head, neck and moving tail. It is interesting to
note that with every ejaculation, anywhere from 200 to 500,000,000
sperms are released – a number which equals the population of many
countries combined! However from this uncountable number, only one or a
few actually enter the woman and are able to fertilize an egg.

The reason why such a sheer number of sperm come out is due to the fact
that as the sperms travel to reach towards the egg and seek to join it,
many of them end up dying, and if this large number of sperm did not
come out at the time of ejaculation, then it would have been difficult
for an egg to ever be fertilized.

2. The womb, before the period of pregnancy, is the size of a walnut,
however after the egg is fertilized and the fetus begins to grow, it
becomes so large that it ends up taking up a large portion inside of the
women. It is amazing to see that the walls of the womb are so flexible
that even with such a heavy weight inside of it, it still is able to
have such resilience.

3. The blood which lines the woman’s womb is not in her blood veins,
rather, it is moving in-between the various organs, as if this blood was
in the veins, then undoubtedly, with the strong force (of the growing
fetus) pushing up against the walls of the women, it could easily break.

4. Some scholars believe that the egg of the woman contains positive
electricity while the sperm has negative electricity within it and it is
for this reason they are attracted to one another. When the sperm
reaches the egg, it releases an electrical charge and thus the countless
sperms which are around the one (which entered into the egg) are
expelled from that area.

Other scholars have stated that when the sperm enters the egg, a
chemical substance is excreted which forces the other sperms to flee.

5. The fetus lies within a large sack submerged in a thick, dark liquid
called the amniotic fluid. This sack is insulating the fetus against the
rapid movements of the mother or any hits on the abdomen of the mother.
Moreover, it keeps the fetus consistently warm such that the change of
the outside temperature does not impact the temperature of the fetus.

Most interestingly is that this large sack and the amniotic fluid puts
the fetus into a weight-less environment and prevents the different
parts of the fetus from exerting pressure on itself which may cause
damage to the fetus.

6. The food of the fetus comes from the placenta through the umbilical
cord – meaning that the blood which flows through the mother contains
the food and oxygen (needed by the fetus) and this enters into the
placenta and then after going through another purification, enter into
the heart of the fetus through the umbilical cord and from there, that
which the fetus needs is distributed throughout its entire body.

It is interesting to note that the left and right side of the heart of
the fetus are connected to one another since the filtration which is
normally carried out by the lungs is not an issue (for the fetus)
because the fetus does not breathe. However upon birth, the chest cavity
of the child separates and the lungs begin to work and help the child to
breathe.[^19]

Section Two: Verses 5 to 11
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“ إِنَّ الأَبْرَارَ يَشْرَبُونَ مِنْ كَأْسٍ كَانَ مِزَاجُهَا كَافُوراً
۞ عَيْناً يَشْرَبُ بِهَا عِبَادُ اللهِ يُفَـجِّرُونَهَا تَفْجِيراً ۞
يُوفُـونَ بِالنَّذْرِ وَيَخَافُونَ يَوْماً كَانَ شَرُّهُ
مُسْـتَطِيـراً ۞ وَيُطْعِمُونَ الطَّعَامَ عَلىٰ حُبِّهِ مِسْكِيناً
وَيَتِيماً وَأَسِيراً ۞ إِنَّمَا نُطْعِمُكُمْ لِوَجْهِ اللهِ لاَ
نُرِيدُ مِنْكُمْ جَزَاءً وَلاَ شُكُوراً ۞ إِنَّا نَخَافُ مِنْ رَبِّنَا
يَوْماً عَبُوساً قَمْطَرِيراً ۞ فَوَقَاهُمُ اللهُ شَرَّ ذٰلِكَ
الْيَوْمِ وَلَقَّاهُمْ نَضْرَةً وَسُرُوراً “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely the righteous shall drink from a cup the admixture of which
is camphor.*** ****** ***A fountain from which the servants of Allah
shall drink; they make it to flow a (goodly) flowing forth.*** ******
***They fulfill vows and fear a day the evil of which shall be spreading
far and wide.*** ****** ***And they give food out of love for Him to
the poor and the orphan and the captive.*** ****** ***We only feed you
for Allah‘s sake; we desire from you neither reward nor thanks.***
****** ***Surely we fear from our Lord a stern, distressful day.***
****** ***Therefore Allah will guard them from the evil of that day and
cause them to meet with ease and happiness.”***

### A testament to the status of the Family of the Prophet

Ibne Abbas has narrated:

“Both Hasan and Husayn were sick when the Prophet, along with a group of
his companions came to see how they were doing.

The Prophet said to Imam ʿ’Ali: ‘O’ Abul Hasan! It would be good if you
took an oath (to Allah) for your children to be cured from their
sickness.’

Thus, Imam Ali and Fatima, and their female-servant, Fidhdhah, made an
oath to Allah that if the children recovered, then they would fast for
three days (according to some traditions, Hasan and Husayn also took
part in the oath that they too would fast for three days).

A short time elapsed and both of them were cured from their sickness.

Even though they had very little food in the house, Imam Ali still
divided the barely he had at home into three portions and his wife,
Fatima took one-third of this and ground it into flour and baked bread
with it.

At the time of breaking the fast, a beggar came to the door of their
house and said: ‘Peace be upon you, O’ family of Muhammad! I am a poor
person from among the poor Muslims. Please give me some food - may Allah
bless you with food from paradise!’

All of the members of the house placed this poor person’s needs ahead of
their own and each of them gave their portion of bread to the poor man
and that evening, they all broke their fast with only water.

On the second day, they also kept a fast and at the time of breaking the
fast with the food which had been prepared (barley bread), an orphan
came to the door and just like the previous day, they gave the orphan
whatever they had. Again, they broke their fast with only water and
prepared to begin the third day of fasting.

On the third day, a war-captive came to their house at sunset, asking
for food and once again, this family gave away all of the food which
they had!

When the morning of the fourth day rose, Imam Ali took Hasan and Husayn
by the hand and went to see the Prophet. When the Prophet set eyes upon
them, he saw them trembling due to their intense hunger! He immediately
said to them: ‘It is very troubling for me to see you in such a state!’

The Prophet got up and accompanied them to the house of Fatima and saw
her standing in the prayer niche. She too was suffering the pangs of
hunger which were evident from her frail body and the heavy inset of her
eyes. Witnessing this heart-breaking sight, the Prophet became extremely
grieved.

Immediately at this point, the Angel Gabriel came down and said: ‘O
Muhammad! Take this chapter (of the Qur’an) Allah sends his salutations
upon such a family.’

The Prophet then recited the chapter which was revealed to him, “chapter
Hal Ata” (according to some scholars the Prophet recited from  
 “…***surely the righteous…” until “…surely your endeavors shall be
thanked***…”  
 which makes up eighteen verses which were revealed to him.

The incident narrated above is a summarized version of the tradition as
mentioned in al-Ghadir.

This narration is very similar to numerous other traditions found in
other books which have been stated in regards to this event. In
al-Ghadir, there are traditions from 34 well-known scholars of the Ahlus
Sunnah who have narrated this tradition in their books (the author of
al-Ghadir has also mentioned the names of these books and the pages on
which this information can be found).

Thus, the tradition quoted above is very well known among the scholars
of the Ahlus Sunnah. Rather, it is a considered as a consecutively
narrated tradition (mutawatir).[^20]

The Shia scholars are unanimous that these eighteen verses, or rather
the entire chapter, was revealed in regards to the noted event and all
of them, without exception have stated in the books of exegesis and
traditions that the narrations in regards to this event constitute one
of the important distinctions and virtues of Imam Ali , Fatima Zahra,
and their two sons.

In addition, just as we mentioned in the beginning of this chapter, this
event is so well known and acknowledged that even in the poems which
have been written (by both the Shia and the Ahlus Sunnah), such as the
well-known poem of Imam al-Shafi, this event has been mentioned!

At this point, let us review some of the excuses which are brought up
every time the merits and greatness of Imam Ali are brought forth by
those who show an extreme sense of resentment to him.

Argument 1: They say that this chapter was revealed in Mecca, whereas
the particular historical event clearly shows us that this chapter was
revealed in regards to something which took place after the birth of
Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn which no doubt took place in Medina.

Reply: As we touched on in brief at the beginning of this chapter, we
have clear proofs in hand which show that the entire content of chapter
Hal Ata or at least the eighteen verses mentioned previously were
revealed in Medina.

Argument 2: The wordings of the verses are of a general nature, thus how
can we apply them to specific individuals?

Reply: It goes without saying that simply having verses which are of a
general nature does not go against the principle that they may be
revealed for specific individuals.

There are many verses of the Qur’an which have a very general and
comprehensive meaning; however the history of revelation shows us that
they have a specific interpretation. It is amazing to see that some
people can take a general understanding of a verse to negate the history
of revelation of that specific verse!

Argument 3: Some individuals have stated that there are other reasons
for revelation of this chapter and its verses and these reasons are not
in line with what has been stated.

Some of these people include the likes of al-Suyuti in his work, Durr
al-Manthur, who has narrated that an African man came to the Prophet and
asked him about the glorification and praise of Allah . Umar stood up
and told the man: “You have asked the Messenger of Allah enough
questions!” To this, the Prophet replied: “Be quiet ʿUmar!” It was at
this time that the chapter of Hal Ata was sent down to the Prophet!
[^21]

In another tradition mentioned in Durr al-Manthur, it has been stated
that a man from Ethiopia came to the Messenger of Allah and wanted to
ask him a question.

The Prophet told him to go ahead and ask him and to wait for his reply.

The man asked: “O Messenger of Allah! A group of you (Muslims), from the
point of view of your skin color, facial characteristics and status,
have a greater rank than we do.

If I too bring about true faith in what you all believe and I too act in
the same that you act (in regards to my righteous deeds), will I be in
paradise with you?” The Prophet replied: “Yes. I swear by that One who
holds my life in His hands that the trail of (spiritual) light of the
black skinned people will be seen in paradise for the span of 1,000
years.”

At this point, the Prophet went on to explain the great reward given to
a person who says: “There is no entity worthy of worship except for
Allah and Glory and Praise be to Allah” and it was at this time that
chapter Hal Ata was revealed.[^22]

Reply: Keeping in mind that these traditions have close to no
relationship to the contents of chapter Hal Ata, in our opinion it seems
that such traditions were fabricated by the Umayyad Dynasty or others in
order to crush the true history of revelation of this chapter!

Argument 4: Another excuse may be given in regards to the history of
revelation of this chapter and one may ask how is it possible for a
person to go three days without food and to break his fast with merely a
glass of water!?

Reply: This is one of the most ridiculous criticisms that can be brought
up in regards to this chapter as we ourselves have seen many people in
our lifetime who, in order to be cured of a specific sickness, have been
instructed by their doctor to fast for not only three days which is very
easy, rather, they have fasted for a period of forty days in which they
only drink water and completely abstain from food! It is through such a
medically sanctioned program that they have been able to ward off many
illnesses!

In addition, a well-known non-Muslim doctor named Alexi Soforin has
written a book in regards to the medicinal benefits of such a fast and
has even mentioned a very precise program to follow in this regard.[^23]

As a point of interest, some of the scholars who have worked on Tafsir
Namuna (the exegesis you are currently reading) have tried this form of
fasting and have survived with drinking only water for 22 days straight!

Argument 5**:** There are others who, in order to pass off the greatness
(of the family of the Prophet) that is seen in this chapter, have taken
another route and have stated other things such as the following:

One example is what a scholar of the Ahlus Sunnah, al-Alusi, has
written: “If we say that this chapter was not revealed in regards to
Imam Ali and Fatima, then this does not remove anything from their worth
and status since them being referred to as **“أبرار”** or ‘righteous
individuals’ (in other narrations) is well-known to everyone.”

He then goes on to list some of their virtues and states: “What can
anyone say in regards to these two individuals except that Imam Ali is
the master of all the true believers and the wasi (executor) of the will
of the Prophet and Fatima is a part of the body of the Messenger of
Allah and is considered as a share-holder of the essence in Muhammadi
Hasanayn are the spirit and essence and the leaders of the youths of
paradise!?

However what we have just stated does not mean that we renounce others
(around the Prophet) rather we state that anyone who does not follow
their path is indeed misguided.”[^24]

However we state that if such a great worth and honor which is so
well-known (throughout the Islamic texts) is neglected and passed over,
then slowly other virtues would also meet the same fate and a day will
come when some of the main virtues of Imam Ali, the leader of the women
of the world - Fatima Zahra, and Hasanayn will also be denied!

It must be noted that in some traditions which have been narrated from
Imam Ali himself, he used these verses in various debates with his
opponents to show the status of his two sons and himself.[^25]

It is important to mention that an **‘أسير’** or ‘war captive’ was a
term normally used in Medina since in Mecca, due to the fact that no
Islamically permitted wars had taken place, this term was not used much
(if even at all) and this is another proof of this chapter being
revealed in Medina.

The final point which we must mention is that according to the opinion
of a group of scholars, such as al-Alusi, the well-known commentator of
the Ahlus Sunnah, a majority of the pleasures and bounties of paradise
have been mentioned in this chapter, with the exception of the Hurul Ayn
which in the Noble Qur’an are most often considered as one of the
pleasures of paradise.

However in this chapter, there is absolutely no mention of them! It is
possible that this may be due to the fact that this chapter was revealed
in regards to Fatima Zahra, her husband and their two sons and due to
the respect being shown to this great lady of Islam, there is no mention
about them (meaning the Hurul Ayn)![^26]

Our discussion in regards to the history of revelation of this section
was long, however we had no choice but to explain this issue in detail
given the unfair accusations which have been leveled in regards to its
revelation.

### The great reward for the righteous

In the previous verses, after mankind was divided into two categories -
‘the thankful’ - ‘**شَكُورٌ’** and ‘the ungrateful’ - ‘**كَفُورٌ**’;
also known as ‘those who express gratitude for what they are given’ and
‘those who are not in the least appreciative of the bounties they have
been given’, we were given a short glimpse of the painful punishment
which has been prepared for the ungrateful.

However the verses under review also explain the rewards of the thankful
and righteous (good doers and spiritually purified) and indeed, some
very interesting points are mentioned.

We first read: ***Surely the righteous shall drink from a cup the
admixture of which is camphor.***

The word ‘**أَبْرَارَ’** - ‘righteous’ is the plural of **‘بَرِّ’** and
its original meaning is ‘something very wide,’ and it is for this reason
that a wide and open expanse of desert is known as **‘بَر’** (with a
‘fatha’ on the first letter). Due to the fact that a person’s righteous
actions have a wide reaching outcome within society, it is for this
reason that this word has come to be used for such an individual.

However the word **‘بِرِّ’** (with a ‘kasrah’ on the first letter)
refers to a person who does good. Some scholars have stated that the
difference between **‘بر’** - ‘righteous’ and **‘خير**’ - ‘goodness’ is
that **‘بر’** refers to an act of goodness which is done with complete
understanding, while **‘خير**’ is a general word of any act of goodness
(done without any understanding of its merits).

The word **‘كَفُورٌ’** or ‘ungrateful’ has many meanings from the
lexical point of view and the most well-known one is a ‘good smelling
thing’ such as sweet smelling plants. Another meaning of this word is
camphor which has a very strong and powerful smell and is used by
medical professionals as a disinfectant.

The above mentioned verse shows us that this pure drink of paradise will
be something which has a strong aroma and is not something that only the
taste-buds will experience, but even the smell will reach the (smelling)
glands!

Some exegetes of the Qur’an have stated that **‘كَفُورٌ’** ‘ or
‘camphor’ in this verse is the name of a spring of paradise, however
this interpretation does not fit with the reading of the verse:  
***…the admixture of which is camphor.***

Since the word ‘**كَفُورٌ’** ‘ comes from the root **‘كَفَرَ’** which
means ‘to cover something’, some scholars of the ʿArabic language, such
as al-Raghib in al-Mufradat, believe that this word was chosen for
‘camphor’ because the part of the tree from which this substance is
extracted is hidden from one’s sight –under the bark of the tree.

Other scholars have stated that the word **‘كَافُورٌ’** or ‘camphor’
refers to an extremely white and cool substance because usually camphor
brings coolness to the one who uses it and its extreme whiteness is
something which is often times used in similitudes.

Keeping in mind what we have stated, the first exegesis given is the
correct one, especially since sometimes in the Islamic texts; the word
camphor has been used alongside musk and amber which are some of the
best forms of perfume.

The source of this glass of pure drink is then mentioned:  
***A fountain from which the servants of Allah will drink; they make it
to flow a (goodly) flowing forth (from wherever they wish.***[^27]
***&*** [^28]

Yes indeed, the source of the pure drink which will be placed at the
disposal of the righteous individuals and servants of Allah will be done
in such a way that wherever they are and (whenever they) wish to drink
from it, it will be ready for them! In regards to the starting place and
spring of this drink, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هِيَ عَيْنٌ فِي دَارِ النَّبِــيِّ تُفَجِّرُ إِلـٰى دَوْرِ
الأَنْبِيَاءِ وَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

This is a spring which runs from the house of the Prophet and goes
through the houses of all of the other prophets and the true
believers.[^29]

Just like in the life of this world in which the sources of knowledge
and mercy flow from the house of the Noble Prophet towards the servants
of Allah and the righteous doers, in the next life, which will be a
greater manifestation of this similitude, the well of this pure drink of
the Divine will also flow from the house of revelation, and the streams
from this well will flow into the houses of the true believers!

The word ‘**يُفَجِرُّونَ’** - ‘flowing forth’ comes from **‘تفجير’** and
the original root letters of this word are **‘فَجَرَ’** which means to
‘split something large whether this be the splitting of the ground or
something else. Since the morning light breaks open the curtains of the
night, the morning time is referred to as ‘**فجر’** ‘fajr’.

In addition, a person who is an open sinner and transgressor is referred
to as a **‘فَاجِرٌ’** – ‘fajir’ since he rips open the veils of modesty
and spiritual purity and has chosen to leave the path of the truth.
However, in the verse under review, the meaning of this word is the
‘splitting of the ground’.

It should be noted that among all of the bounties of paradise which have
been mentioned in this chapter, the first one is that of a pure and
aromatic drink.

This may be due to the fact that after completing the accounting for
one’s deeds on the Plain of Mahshar (the area in which all of humanity
will gather for their deeds to be accounted for), the person will step
into paradise and drink from this elixir which will remove all grief and
sorrow! From here, with a presence that is completely (spiritually)
intoxicated with the love of Allah , one will then be able to partake in
the other Divine gifts that are waiting for one in paradise.

After discussing the actions and characteristics of the righteous people
and the servants of Allah , we are then given five reasons why these
people deserve all of these incomparable bounties.

We first read***:*** ***They fulfill the vows and fear a day the evil
of which will be spreading far and wide.*** ******

The words, ‘**يُوفُونَ’** ‘they fulfill’ and **‘يَخَافُونَ’** ‘they
fear’ and all of the sentences which come after this are all in the
present/future verbal form tense and this shows that this is a life-time
program which is perpetual.

However, like it was stated in the history of revelation of these
verses, the true and perfect manifestation of these events is Imam Ali ,
Fatima Zahra and their two sons, Hasan and Husayn who fulfilled the oath
that they had made and fasted for three consecutive days, breaking their
fast with a mere glass of water! It was through this act that their
hearts more so became filled with the awe of Allah and the anxiety over
the Day of Judgment.

The word ‘**مُسْتَطِيرَ’** means ‘expansive’ and ‘far-flung’ and points
to the various forms of punishment that will take place on that grand
day.

When these individuals fulfill the vows which they have made obligatory
upon themselves, they have lived up to and given the rights to the
obligatory acts of the Divine in the most perfect way, as they struggle
to ensure the performance of such vows.

The fear of these people for the evil of that great day is a reference
to their faith in the Day of Resurrection and their feelings of an
intense responsibility which lies on their shoulders in regards to the
fulfillment of the commandments of Allah(s)

These individuals have a strong belief in the Resurrection and have
complete faith in all forms of punishment for the evil doers and this is
reflected in their actions.

At this point, the third righteous deed is mentioned: ***And they give
food out of love for Him to the poor and the orphan and the captive.***

It is not an easy task to feed these sorts of people, rather it takes
self-sacrifice to perform this act when one himself is in a state of
desperate need. From another point of view, the food is being fed to
people of various backgrounds (thus, one needs to be able to tolerate
such people) - the poor, an orphan and a war captive. Thus, the mercy
which they (the members of the Ahlul Bayt ) have for others is universal
and their assistance and support includes everyone.

The pronoun in the phrase ‘**عَلـى حُبِّهِ’** returns back to ‘food’
meaning that even though they had a love and longing for the food (due
to their fasting), they still gave it up for the love of Allah .

This is the same thing which can be seen in verse 92 of Chapter Ale
Imran (3) that states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَنْ تَنَالُوا الْبِرَّ حَتَّى تُنْفِقُوا مِمَّا تُحِبُّونَ}
  </p>
</blockquote>

***You shall never attain righteousness until you spend out of that
which you love***.

Other scholars have stated that the pronoun in the phrase **‘عَلـى
حُبِّهِ’** returns back to Allah which was mentioned in the previous
verse, and so in this scenario, the verse would mean: “They give their
food to the poor, orphan and war captive only for the love and sake of
Allah.” However keeping in mind that this comes up in the next verse,
the first opinion given is the correct one in our estimation.

The meaning of ‘**مِسْكِينَ’** ‘poor person’, **‘يَتِــيمَ’** ‘orphan’
and **‘أَسِيرَ’** ‘war captive’ are clear terms, however what is the
detailed meaning of the term ‘war captive’ who does this allude to and
what sort of a war captive was this? This is a point of discussion among
the exegetes of the Qur’an.

Many exegetes have stated that the ‘war captive’ could have been from
the polytheists or disbelievers who came to seek assistance under the
protection of the Islamic government in Medina. Other scholars have
stated that the meaning of ‘war captive’ in this verse is a slave who
was owned by a person and was in need of help.

Yet other scholars have stated that the meaning of ‘war captive’ was a
prisoner. However the first interpretation is the most appropriate and
accepted one.

At this point, another question arises: According to the history of
revelation of this verse, a war captive came to the house of Imam Ali at
the time of breaking the fast; but shouldn’t war captives have been held
in a prison cell?

The answer to this question will become clear by keeping in mind the
following point:

According to the historical narrations, during the time of the Prophet,
there were absolutely no prisoners of war. It was the Prophet himself
who would distribute the prisoners to other Muslims for them to maintain
and look after.

The Prophet told the Muslims that they must watch over these people and
treat them with kindness. Sometimes it so happened that the Muslims did
not have the ability to feed themselves, let alone their prisoners, and
thus they would seek assistance from other Muslims to help feed them.

Often times, these prisoners would go along with the Muslims who were
guarding them and at other times, they would be instructed to go out on
their own to other Muslims to seek food and assistance. As we know, at
that time in history, the Muslims were under numerous pressures and
difficulties and thus, food and other necessities were very scarce.

Of course, after some time when the Islamic government spread and
established itself, the number of prisoners also increased and the
number of criminals was also on the increase throughout the Islamic
lands. It was at this time that ‘formal prisons’ took shape and the
feeding and taking care of these prisoners was then carried out through
the public treasury of the government.[^30]

Therefore, from the above mentioned verse we clearly deduce that one of
the best actions is to feed the needy and destitute – not only the needy
Muslims who are held captive in jails in non-Islamic countries; but in
addition, even the non-Muslims fall under this Islamic ruling. We see
that feeding one such individual is considered as one of the greatest
acts of the righteous individuals!

In a tradition from the Messenger of Allah we read that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِسْتَوْصُوا بِالأَسْرىٰ خَيْراً وَ كَانَ أَحَدُهُمْ يُؤْثِرُ
أَسِيرَهُ بِطَعَامِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Deal with the prisoners in the best of ways and prefer them (the
prisoners) over your own selves by even giving them your food.[^31]

The fourth noble action of these righteous individuals was their true
sincerity; because they said:

***We feed you only for Allah‘s sake; we desire from you neither reward
nor thanks.***

This program of life is not limited to merely feeding others, rather it
is one in which all of the deeds of a person are done with purity of
heart and solely for the sake of Allah, in which there is not even the
slightest hope of receiving a reward from the people rather, they do not
even ask for praise or thanks!

Principally, we see that in Islam, the worth of an act is based on the
sincerity of the intention (behind the act), and if any action is
performed with an intention of being for other than Allah , whether it
is for showing off, for one’s own lower self or ego, for the praise and
thanks from people, or for a material reward (in this life), then such
an action will have absolutely no spiritual or Divine reward.

In a famous tradition from the Noble Prophet of Islam we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ عَمَلٌ إِلاَّ بِالنِّيَّةِ وَ إِنَّمَا الأَعْمَالُ بِالنِّيَّاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

There is no action (accepted) except with an intention (attached to it)
and surely all actions are based on their intentions.

The meaning of the phrase ‘**وجه الله’** or the ‘face of Allah‘ is the
sacred essence of Allah , since Allah does not have a physical face and
this has also been emphasized in other verses of the Qur’an, such as
Suratul Baqarah (2), verse 272:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَا تُنْفِقُونَ إِلاَّ ابْتِغَاءَ وَجْهُ اللهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

…***and you do not spend but to seek Allah‘s pleasure***…

In addition, in Suratul Kahf (18), verse 28, when describing the
righteous companions of the Prophet we read that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اصْبِرْ نَفْسَكَ مَعَ الَّذِينَ يَدْعُونَ رَبَّهُمْ بِالْغَدَاةِ وَ
الْعَشِيِّ يُرِيدُونَ وَجْهَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And withhold yourself with those who call on their Lord Morning and
evening desiring His goodwill…***

In the final verse which describes the actions of these righteous
individuals we read:  
***Surely we fear from our Lord a stern, distressful day.***

It is possible that these words were not verbally spoken but rather,
through their demeanor and actions, were understood, and it is also
possible that it may be that these individuals actually verbally uttered
such statements.

It should be noted that the word ‘**عَبُوسَ’** “stern and distressful”
has been used for the Day of Resurrection, however this word is usually
used only as a characteristic for a human being and refers to a person
who is rude and crass.

However in this verse, we see it used for a non-living being and this is
because it is an emphasis on the fearful state of that Day. By this we
mean that the Day of Resurrection will be so difficult and frightful
that not only will mankind be in a state of distress, but rather, even
that day itself will be one of distress! Furthermore, it can be stated
that the day itself will feel distress, just like a human is scared!

What is the meaning of the word ‘**قَمْطَرِيرَ’** and from what root
word does this originate? The exegetes of the Qur’an and the scholars of
the Arabic language have discussed this issue at length. Some scholar’s
state that this word comes from **‘قمطر**’, while others have stated
that it is derived from **‘قطر**’ and the **‘م’** has been added to it.
However the most prominent opinion is the first one given, and thus this
word mean ‘a great sense of distress and fright’.[^32]

At this point, a question may come up that: If the righteous people are
working solely for the sake of Allah , then why should they say that
they are fearful of the punishment of that Day? Is the motivation of
working for Allah conducive to working due to the fear of the punishment
of the Resurrection!?

If we keep in mind the following point, then the answer to this question
will become clear to us:

Even though these people are working solely for Allah, but if they fear
the punishment of the next life then this is due to the fact that this
is a punishment from Allah; if they have an affinity to the pleasures of
paradise then they do so because these blessings and pleasures stem from
Him as well.

This is the same thing which is mentioned in the books of jurisprudence
in the section on intention of the acts of worship where we read:
“Having the intention of closeness to Allah in our actions of worship
does not go against the motivation of the attraction for the reward, or
the fear for the punishment, or even the granting of Divine material
gifts while in this transient world from Allah (such as a person
performing the special salat for rain salatul istisqa) since all of
these things return back to Allah.

In addition, this is something which is referred to as a “motivation for
a motivation” even though the highest stage of worship is one in which
there is no motivation of an action due to desire for the pleasures of
paradise or the fear of the punishment of the hell-fire rather,
everything is done under the guise of love of Allah.”

In addition, the phrase: ***We fear from our Lord a stern, distressful
day*** also alludes to the fact that this fear is also a fear of Allah.

A point which is interesting to note is that the second and fifth
characteristics are both in regards to fear with the difference that in
the first scenario, there is only talk about the fear of the Day of
Resurrection, while in the second instance; there is mention about the
fear of Allah on the Day of Resurrection.  
 In one verse, the Day of Resurrection has been presented such that the
fear of that day will be widespread, while in another instance (in the
fifth characteristic), there is talk about the fright and extreme
terror, which in reality, shows the vastness of that day and the
vastness of the punishments and fears as well.

In the last verse under review, we reach the general conclusion of the
righteous actions and pure intentions which these noble individuals had
and are told:

***Therefore Allah will guard them from the evil of that day and cause
them to meet with ease and happiness.***

The word **‘نَظْرَةٌ’** ‘ease’ actually means vivacity, opulence and a
particular form of succulence which will come about due to the
superabundance of blessings and pleasures given to a person. The look of
tranquility and inner peace and happiness on the faces of these
individuals will be apparent for everyone to see! Thus, if while in the
transient world, these individuals felt a sense of responsibility in
regards to that fearful day, then in exchange, Allah will drown them in
delight and pleasures on that day.

The use of the word ‘**لَقَاهُمْ**’ ‘shall cause them to meet’ is one of
the most interesting terms used which shows that Allah will welcome His
guests with a special form of kindness and will drown them in pleasures
and happiness in the shadow of His mercy.

### Feeding a hungry person is the best deed

Not only in the verses under discussion is the topic of feeding people
considered as one of the noble deeds for the righteous and true servants
of Allah, rather this has also been emphasized in many other verses of
the Qur’an and it shows that Allah has a special affinity with this
action.

When we look at the world today and examine the published news reports,
we read that every year millions of people die from hunger - whereas in
other parts of the world, there is such an excess of food, that they end
up throwing away so much that one cannot even begin to calculate how
much is wasted! When we weigh the importance of this Islamic commandment
and look at the state of the world in which we are living, we see the
worth of the noble ethical teachings of Islam.

There is also great emphasis in the Islamic narrations on this act which
we can better understand in the light of the following traditions:

1. The Noble Prophet has stated that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَطْعَمَ ثَلاَثَةَ نَفَرً مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ أَطْعَمَهُ اللهُ
مِنْ ثَلاَث ِجَنَانِ فِي مَلَكُوتِ السَّمٰوَاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A person who feeds three Muslims will be fed by Allah from the food of
three gardens of paradise in the celestial heavens.[^33]

2. Imam Jaʿfar as-Sadiq has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَطْعَمَ مُؤْمِناً حَتَّى يَشْبَعَهُ لَمْ يَدْرِ أَحَدٌ مِنْ
خَلْقِ اللهِ مَا لَهُ مِنَ الأَجْرِ فِي الآخِرَةِ، لاَ مَلَكٌ
مُقَرَّبٌ، وَ لاَ نَبِيٌّ مُرْسَلٌ إِلاَّ اللهَ رَبَّ الْعَالَمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Not a single person from the creations of Allah can comprehend the
reward given in the next life to a person who feeds a believer until he
is satiated not the close angels to Allah and not even the deputed
prophets only Allah, the Lord of the Universe.[^34]

3. In another tradition also from Imam Jaʿfar as-Sadiq we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَإِنْ أَطْعَمَ مُؤْمِناً مُحْتَاجاً أَحَبَّ إِلَـيَّ مِنْ أَنْ
أَزُورُهُ، وَ لَإِنْ أَزُورُهُ أَحَبُّ إِلَـيَّ مِنْ أَنْ أَعْتَقَ
عَشْرَ رِقَابٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

If I was to feed a needy believer, then this would be more beloved to me
than going to visit him (which also has a great reward), and if I was to
go and visit him, this is even more loved to me than freeing ten
slaves![^35]

Note that in the traditions, we are not only encouraged to feed the poor
and hungry, rather, in some narrations, it is clearly stated that
feeding the believers, even if they are not needy is equivalent to
freeing a slave! This shows us that the act of feeding others is not
only in place to alleviate the needs of the people, but it is also there
to foster love, unity, friendship and closeness with one another!

The opposite can be seen in the materialistic world of today in which
sometimes two close friends or relatives will go to a restaurant and
each of them will pay their own portion of the bill. It is as if the act
of being kind to one another is something strange to them!

In other traditions it has been stated that feeding hungry people in
general (even if they are not believers and Muslims) has been considered
as one of the best actions, as can be seen in a tradition from the Noble
Prophet of Islam :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْ أَفْضَلِ الأَعْمَالِ عِنْدَ اللهِ إِبْرَادُ الْكِبَادِ الْحَارَةٌ
وَ إِشْبَاعُ الْكِبَادِ الْجَائِعَةٌ وَ الَّذِي نَفْسِ مُحَمَّدٍ
بِيَدِهِ لاَ يُؤْمِنُ بِي عَبْدٌ يُبِيتُ شَبَعَانِ وَ أَخُوهُ - أَوْ
قَالَ جَارُهُ - الْمُسْلِمُ جَائِعٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

One of the best actions in the sight of Allah is to cool the burning
livers [help alleviate a person’s difficulties] and feed the hungry
stomachs. I swear by the one who holds the soul of Muhammad in His hand
that a servant who goes to sleep while his brother in faith - or his
neighbor - goes to bed hungry has not truly believed in me![^36]

Although the above mentioned tradition is in regards to feeding a
Muslim, however we see in the beginning that it speaks about feeding any
hungry person and thus, it is not improbable to assume that it has a
wide interpretation and it may even include the animals and in this
regards too, there are numerous traditions.[^37]

Section Three: Verses 12 to 22
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“ وَجَزَاهُمْ بِـمَا صَبَرُوا جَنَّةً وَحَرِيراً ۞ مُتَّكِئِينَ
فِــيهَا عَلىٰ الأَرَائِكِ لاَ يَرَوْنَ فِيهَا شَمْساً وَلاَ
زَمْهَرِيراً ۞ وَدَانِيَةً عَلَيْهِمْ ظِــلاَلُـهَا وَذُلِّلَتْ
قُطُوفُهَا تَــذْلِيلاً ۞ وَيُطَافُ عَلَيْهِمْ بِـآنِيَةٍ مِنْ
فِـضَّةٍ وَأَكْـوَابٍ كَانَتْ قَوَارِيرَ ۞ قَـوَارِيرَ مِنْ فِضَّةٍ
قَدَّرُوهَا تَقْدِيراً ۞ وَيُسْقَوْنَ فِيهَا كَأْساً كَانَ مِزَاجُهَا
زَنْجَبِيلاً ۞ عَيْناً فِيهَا تُسَمَّى سَلْسَبِيلاً ۞ وَيَطُوفُ
عَلَيْهِمْ وِلْدَانٌ مُخَلَّــدُونَ إِذَا رَأَيْتَهُمْ حَسِبْـتَهُمْ
لُؤْلُؤاً مَـنْـثُوراً ۞ وَإِذَا رَأَيْتَ ثَــمَّ رَأَيْتَ نَـعِيماً
وَمُــلْكاً كَبِـيراً ۞ عَالِيَهُمْ ثِـيَابُ سُنْدُسٍ خُضْرٌ
وَإِسْـتَبْرَقٌ وَحُلُّوا أَسَاوِرَ مِنْ فِضَّةٍ وَسَقَاهُمْ رَبُّهُمْ
شَرَاباً طَهُوراً ۞ إِنَّ هٰذَا كَانَ لَـكُمْ جَزَآءً وَكَانَ
سَعْـيُكُمْ مَشْكُوراً “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And reward them, because they were patient, with garden and silk,***
****** ***Reclining therein on raised couches, they shall find therein
neither (the light of) the sun nor intense cold.*** ****** ***And close
down upon them (shall be) its shadows, and its fruits shall be made near
(to them), being easy to reach.*** ****** ***And there shall be made to
go around them, vessels of silver and goblets which are of glass,***
****** ***(Transparent as) glass, made of silver; they have measured
them according to a measure.*** ******

***And they shall be made to drink therein a cup the admixture of which
will be ginger,*** ****** ***(Of) a fountain therein which is named
Salsabil.*** ****** ***And around them will go youths never altering in
age; when you see them you will think them to be scattered pearls.***
****** ***And when you see them, you will see blessings and a great
kingdom.*** ****** ***Upon them will be garments of fine green silk and
thick silk interwoven with gold, and they shall be adorned with
bracelets of silver, and their Lord will make them drink a pure
drink.*** ****** ***Surely this is a reward for you, and your striving
will be recompensed.”***

### The great rewards of paradise!

After a general overview in the previous verses about the salvation
granted to the righteous doers from a painful punishment on the Day of
Resurrection, their reaching to the station of meeting their Beloved and
being drowned in pleasure and happiness, the verses currently under
review offer an exegesis of the blessings of paradise. In these verses,
a minimum of fifteen bounties have been mentioned.

The first thing spoken about is a place of residence and clothing for
the people of paradise:

***And reward them, because they were patient, with garden and
silk.***

Therefore, in return for the fortitude and self-sacrifice shown in this
world, which in one way was displayed by being truthful to their promise
made (to Allah ), by keeping their fast and donating their food to the
poor, orphan and war captive when the time for breaking the fast came,
Allah will grant them a special place in the gardens of paradise and
dress them with the best clothing.

It is not only in this verse, but rather other verses of the Qur’an also
clearly show this truth that the rewards on the Day of Resurrection will
be given to that person who showed patience and fortitude (patience in
the way of obedience; refraining from committing sins and forbearance in
bearing trials and tribulations). In verse 24 of Suratul Rad (13) we
read that the angels will say the following words to the people of
paradise:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَلاَمٌ عَلَيْكُمْ بِمَا صَبَرْتُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon all of you due to the patience which you showed.

In verse 111 of Suratul Muminun (23), it is mentioned that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي جَزَيْـتُهُمُ الْيَوْمَ بِـمَا صَبَرُوا أَنَّـهُمْ هُمُ
الْفَائِزُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely I will reward those people on that Day (the Day of Judgment)
due to the patience which they had and indeed those people will be the
victorious ones***.

We then read:  
***Reclining therein on raised couches, they shall find therein neither
(the severe heat of) the sun, nor intense cold.***

By mentioning their physical state (of reclining on raised couches),
this points to the comfort and ease which they will experience, for this
is how people can usually be seen (in this world) when they are
relaxing.

This verse also points to the perfect weather conditions in paradise.
This verse does not tell us that there will be no sun or moon in
paradise, rather, it tells us that if there is a sun, then its rays will
not be such so as to trouble people, however at the same time, the trees
will still cast a shadow which will be used as a shade!

The word ‘**زَمْهَرِيرَ’** comes from the word ‘**زمهر’** which means
‘intense heat’, ‘intense anger’ or ‘eyes turning red due to the anger a
person is feeling’, however in this verse, the first meaning is the
correct one and it is interesting to note that it has been mentioned in
the traditions that there is a spot in the hell-fire that is so cold
that the body parts will shatter due to it![^38]

The original meaning of the word ‘**أَرَائِكَ’** whose plural is
**‘أريكة**’ are ‘tables’ or ‘platforms’ which are found in a bridal room
and in this verse, its meaning is the beautifully decorated, raised
platforms which the inhabitants of paradise will rest upon. The famous
commentator of the Ahlus Sunnah, al-Alusi, in his tafsir, Ruhul Maani
has narrated a tradition from Ibne Abbas that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَيْنَا أَهْلَ الْجَنَّةِ فِي الْجَنَّةِ إِذَا رَأَوْا ضَوْءَا
كَضَوْءِ الشَّمْسِ، وَ قَدْ أَشْرَقَتِ الْجَنَانُ بِهِ فَيَقُولُ
أَهْلُ الْجَنَّةِ يَا رِضْوَانَ مَا هٰذَا؟ وَ قَدْ قَالَ رَبَّنَا لاَ
يَرَوْنَ فِيهَا شَمْساً وَ لاَ زَمْهَرِيراً، فَيَقُولُ لَهُمْ
رِضْوَانٌ لَيْسَ هٰذَا بِشَمْسٍ، وَ لاَ قَمَرٍ، وَ لٰكِنْ عَلِيٌّ وَ
فَاطِمَةَ ضَحِكاً، وَ أَشْرَقَتِ الْجَنَانِ مِنْ نُورِ ثَغرَيهِمَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

When the people of paradise will be in paradise, suddenly they will see
a light which will resemble the light of the sun through which paradise
will be illuminated. The people of paradise will say: ‘O’ Ridhwan (the
guardian angel of paradise), what is this illumination that we are
seeing? Our Lord had clearly stated (in the Qur’an) that:

***…they shall find therein neither the light of the sun nor intense
cold?”***

Ridhwan will reply to them,

***“This is not the illumination of the sun nor the moon, rather, it is
Ali and Fatima laughing and thus, all of paradise is being illuminated
through the light of their teeth!***[^39]

The next verse continues with the blessings:  
***And close down upon them (shall be) its shadows and its fruits shall
be made near (to them), being easy to reach.***[^40]

There will be no difficulties in reaching the food, nor will their hands
become dirty; they will not even need to expend any energy or move from
their seats to get the fruits that they want!

Once again, it is important that we remind ourselves that the rules
which govern human life in this world are drastically different from the
next world and that which we read about the bounties of paradise in
these and other verses of the Qur’an is only a cursory glance at the
expressive bounties which will be present there.

According to some clear traditions which have been mentioned in these
regards, there are bounties stored in paradise that not even a single
eye has yet seen; not a single ear has heard about; and there are things
which no one has ever even thought about!

Ibne Abbas has stated the following in regards to some of the verses of
this chapter: “That which Allah has mentioned in the Qur’an in regards
to the pleasures of paradise have no comparison or example in this
material world.

However Allah has referred to these bounties by using names of things
which we know and recognize in this world. For example in regards to the
pure drink, he has called it ‘zanjabil’ or a drink of ginger since this
is an aromatic substance which the Arabs had a strong affinity
towards.”[^41]

We are then given a glimpse of how the guests of Allah will be welcomed
into paradise, what will be at their disposal and who will serve
them***:***

 ***And there shall be made to go around them vessels of silver and
goblets which are made of glass.***

The chapter continues:  
***(Transparent as) glass, made of silver; they have measured them
according to a measure.***

The containers will hold various types of foods of paradise and there
will also be a variety of refreshing and revitalizing drinks in the
silver goblets. The people will have as much as they want to eat and
drink and the servants of paradise will constantly be nearby, ready to
serve them.

The word ‘**آنِيَةٌ’** whose plural is **‘إناء**’ refers to any type of
dish [which food is put into], while the word **‘أَكْوَابٌ**’, whose
plural is **‘كوب’** refers to a glass which does not have a handle -
sometimes referred to as a tumbler or goblet.

The word **‘قَوَارِيرَ**’ whose plural is **‘قارورة’** refers to a
crystalline glass - however the mind-boggling point in this verse is
that we are told that the glasses are “crystalline glasses (see-thru)
however they are made of “silver”! In the world which we live in, no
such tumbler exists, since crystalline glass cups are made from a
special substance which is smelted.

However Allah, the One who has created the particles (such as sand and
other types of rocks) which can then be transformed into transparent,
see-thru glass (by His creations) is definitely able to create see-thru
tumblers made of silver!

From these words, we can deduce that the dishes and tumblers of paradise
are clear and lucid like glass, however they have the brightness,
luminance, and beauty of silver and the drinks which will fill these
vessels are something completely different than what is present in this
world!

In a narration from Imam Jafar as-Sadiq it is mentioned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَنْفُذُ الْبَصَرُ فِي فِضَّةِ الْجَنَّةِ كَمَا يَنْفُذُ فِي
الْزُجَاجِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In paradise, a person’s eyes will penetrate through silver just like a
person’s eyes can see through tumblers made of crystal in this transient
world.[^42]

Also, in our day and age, scientists have been able to discover various
types of rays (such as x-rays) which can penetrate through a body and
see through it just like a person sees through glass.

Ibne Abbas has stated that: “All of the blessings of paradise have a
comparison and similitude in this world except for the see-thru glasses
which are made of silver, as there is no comparison to that in this
world!”[^43]

After this we read: ***And they will be made to drink therein a cup,
the fusion of which will be of ginger.***

Many exegetes have stated that the pre-Islamic Arabs had a passion for a
specific type of drink made with ginger and it had a very strong taste
to it and it is for this reason that such a drink has been mentioned in
the Qur’an and will be given to the people of paradise.

However it is clear that the difference between these two drinks (the
one in this world and that given to the people in paradise) is as the
difference of the earth to the sky! rather, we can state that the
dissimilarity is like the difference between this world and the next
world!

From what we understand of the history, it seems that the Arabs used to
enjoy two types of drinks -one brought about joy and happiness, while
the other calmed them down and put them into a mellow mood.

The first drink was mixed with ginger, while the second one was mixed
with camphor. Seeing as how the realities of the other world cannot be
described and contained in the words we use in this world, we have no
choice but to present these concepts with a broad description and to
state that they are greater than the understanding of that which we have
in this world.

Various commentaries have been given in regards to the ginger spoken
about in this section; however most of the interpretations of this word
revolve around an aromatic item used in food and drink.

***We then read:*** ***(Of) a fountain therein which is named
Salsabil.***[^44]

Salsabil is the word used for this very tasty drink which is easy to
consume and is nourishing. A majority of exegetes of the Qur’an believe
that this word comes from the root ‘**سلاسة’** which means ‘something
that flows’ - just as a person’s smooth and flowing words are referred
to as being ‘**سليس’**. Other scholars believe that it comes from the
root **‘تسلسل’** which means a ‘continuous movement’.

Thus, in this verse, the meaning could be something (like a spring)
which is always flowing. Both of the meanings are similar to one another
and in both cases, the letter ‘**باء’** has been appended to the word.

Other scholars believe that this word has been constructed from two
separate words **‘سأل’** and ‘**سبيل’**; others consider it as coming
from the words ‘**سال’** and **‘سبيل’**. If we accept this first
opinion, then the meaning is ‘a path to request something’; while if we
take the second opinion, then the meaning is ‘he chose a path’, however
the meaning of both of these is again something which is nourishing.

Other scholars have clearly stated that in the Arabic language, the word
**‘سَلْسَبِيلٌ’** did not exist and that the first time it was used in
Arabic was in the Noble Qur’an.[^45] However, the first opinion stated
is the most accepted and appropriate understanding.

We are then given a description of those who have been invited to this
joyous gathering in the presence of the Merciful in paradise:  
***And youths, ever altering in age, shall go around them; when you see
them you will think them to be scattered pearls.***

Not only will the people be in the everlasting paradise, but even their
age, beauty and youthful state of enjoyment will also remain with them
for eternity! In addition, those who will lead them into paradise will
have these same traits, and this can be seen from the words
‘**مُخَلَّدُونَ’** or ‘for eternity’, and also the phrase ‘**يَطُوفُ
عَلَيْـهِمْ’** or ‘they will encircle them’.

The use of the phrase **‘لُؤْلُؤاً مَنْثُوراً’** or ‘as scattered
pearls’ is a reference to the beauty, clarity, illumination and
attraction of these individuals (the servants of those in paradise) and
also their broad presence in this divine and spiritual banquet.

Seeing as how the blessings of the next life cannot be described - even
by using the most expressive and meaningful words in the English
language, in the next verse we read:  
***And when you see them, you shall see blessings and a great
kingdom!***[^46]

Various commentaries have been offered for the words **‘نَعِيمٌ’** -
‘blessings’ and **‘مُلْكٌ كَبِيرٌ’** - ‘a great kingdom’.

There is a tradition from Imam Jafar as-Sadiq in which he said that the
meaning of this verse is the kingdom which will never go away or be
destroyed.[^47] It may also refer to the blessings of paradise being so
numerous that it is not possible to enumerate them.

The phrase ‘a great kingdom’ may refer to the angels who will ask the
people of paradise for permission when they want to enter the sacred
grounds and upon entering, they will greet them with the words of peace;
it may also refer to the belief that the people in paradise will have
any wish or desire granted to them; another meaning of this phrase is
that the people in the lowest spiritual rank of paradise whose
jurisdiction of governance will be equivalent to the time it takes to
travel 1,000 years in any direction (in paradise); the final meaning of
this phrase is the perpetual and ever-lasting kingdom which contains all
of a person’s needs and desires.

According to the books of ʿArabic lexicography, the word ‘**نَعِيمٌ’**
refers to the ‘countless blessings’ while ‘**مُلْكُ كَبِيرٌ**’ refers to
the ‘greatness and vastness of the gardens in paradise’ and this word
covers a broad definition and can include everything mentioned above.

Up to now, some of the blessings of paradise that have been mentioned
include: houses; couches; shadow of coolness; fruits; drinks; vessels
and groups of servants. At this point, we turn our attention to the
objects of beautification which the people of paradise will be granted:

 ***Upon them will be garments of fine green silk and thick silk
interwoven with gold...***[^48]

The meaning of ‘**سُنْدُسٌ**’ is a ‘very thin silk cloth’ while
**‘إِسْتَبْرَقٌ’** refers to a ‘thick silk cloth’. Some scholars have
stated that the second word has come from the Farsi word **‘استبر’** or
‘**ستبر**’, while others state that perhaps it comes from the Arabic
word **‘برق**’ which means ‘light’ or ‘lightning’.

The verse continues and we read: ***…and they shall be adorned with
bracelets of silver…***

These bracelets of silver are transparent – just like glass - however
they will be more beautiful than rubies and pearls!

The word **‘أَسَاوِرَ’** whose plural is **‘أسورة’** and can also be
**‘سَوَارٌ’** or **‘سِوَارٌ’** was originally a Farsi word **‘دستوار’**
and means a bracelet, however when it was imported into the ʿArabic
language, its spelling went through a minor change and became
‘**سوار’.**

The choice of the color green for the clothing of paradise is because
this color brings delight and pleasure, just like we see the beautiful
leaves on trees. Of course green also has various tints and hues to it
and each of them carries its own special sophistication.

In some verses of the Qurʼan, such as verse 30 of Suratul Kahf (18), we
are told that the people of paradise will be beautified with bracelets
of gold:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
.يُحَلَّونَ فِيهَا مِنْ أَسَاوِرَ مِنْ ذَهَبٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

…***They will be adorned therein with bracelets of gold…***

However this does not conflict with what has been mentioned in the verse
under review since it is possible that sometimes, one will be beautified
with bracelets of gold, while at other times another type of bracelet
will be worn (as mentioned in the verse under review).

At this point a question may arise: Are gold and silver bracelets not
only ornaments of beautification for women alone? How is it possible
that the men in paradise will use these forms of adornment?

The answer to this question is clear: In many parts of the world, gold
and silver are used as items of beautification for men and women (even
though Islam prohibits men from wearing gold). Of course, there is a
difference in the style of the bracelets which men and women wear,
however from verse 53 of Suratul Zukhruf (43) quoting the words of the
Pharaoh:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“ فَلَوْ لاَ أَلْقى عَلَيْهِ أَسْوِرَةٌ مِنْ ذَهَبٍ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Why has he (Moses) not been given bracelets of gold?***

we see that the wearing of gold bracelets was something that indicated a
person’s greatness in Egypt at that time. In addition, as we have
alluded to many times that when describing the gifts of paradise, the
words used in this world are never sufficient;

However there is no other option except to refer to the great pleasures
and indescribable blessings of that world with these limited words.

At the end of this verse, in describing the final and most important of
blessings in this chain of bounties, we read:  
***…and their Lord will make them drink a pure drink.***

In the beginning of this discussion, there was mention about the
refreshing drinks which will flow into the peoples’ cups from the spring
of Salsabl that will quench the thirst of the inhabitants of paradise.
However there is a vast difference between what was previously mentioned
and what is stated in this verse!

From one angle, the ones who will quench the thirst are the ‘**وِلْدَانٌ
مُخَلَّدُونَ**’ the ever-young servants; however in this verse, the one
who will quench the thirst of those in paradise is Allah and what
amazing wording has been used here.

Keep in mind that the word used in this verse is **‘ربّ’** a word which
tells us that He is the same Creator which has continuously nurtured
humanity and is our Ruler and Teacher and that He has been with us
during our entire course of struggling to reach perfection, when we
finally reach the ultimate stage, then we will see His Lordship as it
manifests to the highest pinnacles and with the hand of His Power, He
will satiate the thirst of His righteous and well-acting servants with a
pure drink!

In addition, the word ‘**طَهُورٌ’** which is used in this verse refers
to something which is ‘pure’ and also has the ‘ability to purify’ other
things. Therefore, this drink cleans the body and spirit of a person
from all forms of filth which may be remaining, and also brings about
such a sense of spirituality, light and pleasure with it that it cannot
be described with words!

Imam Jafar as-Sadiq has stated:

**  
**

يُ

**  
**
طَهِّرُ هُمْ عَنْ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ سِوىٰ اللهَ.

***(This drink) will purify the heart of a person from everything
(within him) except for Allah***.[^49]

The curtains of negligence will be removed; the spiritual veils will all
be shattered and the believer will be made worthy of remaining eternally
in the proximity of Allah , an exhilaration which this pure drink gives
and which is greater than any other blessing, and loftier than any other
possible gift!

The impure, forbidden drinks of this world corrupt the intellect and
spiritually distance a person from Allah; however the pure drink which
is given by the hand of the Lord (in paradise) will make a person
negligent of everything other than Allah, such a person will become
drowned in His beauty and majesty!

In summary, the subtle points in this verse and all that which is
contained in this blessing is greater than any other gifts!

In a tradition from the Messenger of Allah, We can deduce that the
source of this pure drink is located in paradise:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَـيُـسْقَونَ مِنْهَا شَرْبَةً فَيُطَهِّرُ اللهُ بِهَا قُلُوبُهُمْ
مِنَ الْحَسَدِ!... وَ ذٰلِكَ قَوْلِ اللهِ عَزَّوَجَلَّ وَ سَقَاهُمْ
رَبُهُّمْ شَرَاباً طَهُوراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

So then Allah will give them a drink through which their hearts will be
purified from jealousy! … And this is the meaning of the words of Allah,
the Noble and Grand,

***[And their Lord will give them a pure drink.***[^50]

It is interesting to note that the word **‘طَهُورٌ’** ‘pure’ has been
mentioned in the Noble Qur’an on only two occasions, once in chapter
al-Furqan (25), verse 48 in regards to rain which purifies all things
and also brings the dead back to life, and then again in this verse
referring to the pure drink of paradise which will purify and give a new
life!

In the final verse under review in this section, we read:

***Surely this is a reward for you, and your striving will be
recompensed.***

This has been stated in case some people think that these gifts and
grand rewards are given for no reason! Rather, these are the rewards for
a person’s struggles and (righteous) actions, self-building and keeping
away from sins.[^51]

The mere act of mentioning (this final statement) brings forth unusual
spiritual pleasures and a special sense of beauty to it that Allah the
Great, or His angels are speaking directly to the righteous and good
doers and are acknowledging and appreciating them by saying that:
“Everything which you are being given is due to your actions, and the
struggles which you went through in life are definitely appreciated.”

According to some exegetes of the Qur’an, in regards to all of these
blessings and gifts, the greatest one is when Allah thanks a person for
his righteous deeds!

The use of the past-tense verb **‘كَانَ’** tells us about an action
which occurred in the past, and it is possible that this verb has been
used as an allusion to the fact that the blessings (in paradise) are
already prepared for the believers (before they arrive there). As an
example, when a person wants to invite some important guests to his
house, he will make all of the necessary arrangements before they come
to his house.

Section Four: Verses 23 to 26
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا نَحْنُ نَزَّلْنَا عَلَيْكَ الْقُرْآنَ تَنْـزِيلاً ۞ فَاصْبِرْ
لِحُكْمِ رَبِّكَ وَلاَ تُطِعْ مِنْهُمْ آثـِماً أَوْ كَـفُوراً ۞
وَاذْكُـرِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ بُكْرَةً وَأَصِيلاً ۞ وَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ
فَاسْجُدْ لَهُ وَسَبِّحْهُ لَيْلاً طَوِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely We ourselves have revealed the Qur’an to you revealing (it)
in portions. Therefore wait patiently for the command of your Lord, and
obey not from among them a sinner or an ungrateful one. And glorify the
name of your Lord in the morning and evening. And during a part of the
night prostrate to Him, and give glory to Him (a) long (part of the)
night.”***

### Five points for success in adhering to Allah’s laws

From the beginning of this chapter until this point, the verses focused
on the creation of humanity followed by one’s resurrection and then the
rising up on the Day of Judgment.

The verses in this section present us with words spoken directly to the
Prophet and contain definite commandments in regards to the guidance of
humanity and the patience and fortitude which they must display while on
the path of life. In reality, these verses direct the course which guide
us to the astounding bounties and blessings - holding firm to the
Qur’an, following the leadership of the Prophet of Islam and taking
inspiration from the commandments which he (the Prophet ) has been
given.

We first read: ***Surely We Ourselves have revealed the Qur’an to you
revealing (it) in portions.***

Some exegetes of the Qur’an have stated that the word ‘**تَنْـزِيلٌ’** –
‘in portions’ used in this verse has been mentioned as an unconditional
object and refers to the gradual revelation of the Qurʾan and its effect
on the spiritual training of a person.

Others have stated that it refers to the greatness and status of the
heavenly Book and highlights the fact that the Qurʾan has been revealed
by Allah – keeping in mind that other forms of emphasis also exist in
this verse such as **‘إِنَّ’** - ‘surely’; and **‘نحَنُ’** - ‘We’ and
the ‘verbal sentence’ which also acts as a form of emphasis.

Indeed, this verse actually provides an answer to those who claimed that
the Prophet was a sooth-sayer, magician or was fabricating lies against
Allah!

Five important commandments are then given to the Prophet of Islam, the
first one being an invitation to patience and fortitude***:***

***Therefore wait patiently for the command of your Lord…***

The Prophet (p) is commanded to disregard any difficulties, obstacles
and the many enemies and opponents on the path (of conveying the faith
of Islam) and to continue to press forward just as he did in the past.
It is interesting to note that the commandment to have fortitude has
been mentioned with a ‘**فاء**’ which means ‘the result’ as seen in the
word ‘**فَاصْبِرْ’**.

This means that the revelation of the Qur’an is from Allah - and since
Allah is the Prophet’s assistant and support, then without doubt he must
have fortitude, and the use of the word ‘**رَبّ’** or ‘Lord’ is also a
subtle allusion to this issue.

The second commandment given to the Prophet is that he must not
compromise with the misguided people:

***…and obey not from among them a sinner or an ungrateful one.***

In reality, this second order actually highlights the first commandment
of being patient which was given to the Prophet.

As we know, some of the Prophet’s enemies tried to divert him to the
wrong path through the use of various tactics.

It has been mentioned in the narrations that Utbah b. Rabiah and Walid
b. Mughayrah asked the Prophet to give up his mission of inviting people
(towards Islam) and if he complied, they would give him such a large
amount of wealth that he would be taken care of (forever). They also
promised him the most beautiful Arab women as his wives and many other
material bounties!

In the verse under review, Allah ordered the Prophet, who was a great
and truthful leader, to exhibit patience in the face of such satanic
whisperings from the people, which they will put forth later on and that
he must have fortitude in the face of their temptations which would make
him a great leader within the society! In summary, he was not to submit
to them, and not even pay any attention to their threats!

It is true that the Prophet of Islam never submitted to such demands,
however this verse simply emphasizes the importance of this subject and
is also an everlasting lesson for all leaders who are treading the path
of Allah.

Although some exegetes of the Qur’an have stated that the word
**‘آثم’** - ‘sinner’ refers to ʿUtbah b. Rabiah, and that
**‘كَفُورٌ’** - ‘ingrate disbeliever’ refers to Walid b. Mughayrah or
Abu Jahl – all three were from the polytheistic Arabs, however it is
clear that both **‘آثِم’** - ‘sinner’ and **‘كَفُورٌ’** - ‘ungrateful
disbeliever’ and ‘one who makes others disbelieve’ are words with broad
applications and refer to all sinners and polytheists - even if the
three individuals noted were the most obvious examples of these traits.

It should also be noted that the word **‘آثِـم’** - ‘sinner’ has a
general understanding to it which also includes those who are referred
to as a **‘كَفُورٌ’** - ‘an ingrate disbeliever’. Therefore, mentioning
the word **‘كَفُورٌ’** - ‘ingrate disbeliever’ is referred to (in the
ʿArabic language) as ‘mentioning a specific term after a general term’
and is done to accentuate the discussion.

However, seeing as how patience and perseverance in the face of the
tirade of enormous challenges is not something easy and traversing this
path requires two particular abilities, we then read:

***And glorify the name of your Lord in the morning and evening.***

We are then told:

***And during a part of the night, prostrate to Him, and give glory to
Him (a) long (part of the) night.***

This act of (the night) prayer should be done so that under the shade of
the remembrance (dhikr), prostration (sajdah) and glorification
(tasbih), the required power and spiritual strength and assistance
needed to struggle against the difficulties of this path can be
harnessed.

In this verse, the word **‘بُكْرَةٌ’** refers to the beginning of the
day, while the word **‘أَصِيلٌ’** refers to the end of the day or the
evening time.

Some scholars have stated that the word **‘أَصِيلٌ**’ which refers to
the end of the day comes from the root word **‘أصل**’ and this is
because the end of the day makes up the initial or earliest part of the
night. From other phrases used, we can deduce that the word
**‘أَصِيلٌ’** is sometimes used in reference to the time gap between
mid-day and sunset, as can be seen in al-Mufradat of Raghib.

From the opinions of other scholars, we understand that the word
**‘أَصِيلٌ’** refers to the beginning of the night and they have
explained this word as meaning the same as **‘عشـى’** because this word
refers to the commencement of the night - just as the salat of maghrib
and ʿisha can be referred to as ishaayn (lit. the two isha’ prayers). In
addition, we deduce from the opinion of other scholars that **‘عشى’**
includes the time from the decline of the sun at noon until the morning
of the next day.

However, keeping in mind that **‘أَصِيلٌ’** which has been mentioned in
this verse is the opposite of **‘بُكْرَةٌ’** - ‘morning’, and we then
read a discussion in regards to worship in the night, it is clear that
the meaning of the word in this verse is the last part of the day just
before the night period.

In any case, these two verses illustrate the necessity of paying
constant attention to the Pure Essence of Allah both night and day.

Some scholars have stated that this verse is a specific reference to the
five daily prayers (salawat), or in relation to salaatul layl, or
specifically in regards to the salat of fajr, dhhuhr, asr, maghrib, and
isha.

However the apparent reading is that these prayers (salawat) are the
clearest proofs of this continuous remembrance of Allah and the
glorification and prostration to Him.

The usage of the phrase **‘لَيْلاً طَوِيلاً’** - ‘a long portion of the
night’ is in reference to a significant portion of the night which must
be kept aside for the glorification of Allah; and when Imam Ali al-Ridha
was asked in regards to this verse and what the meaning of the
glorification (tasbih) was, he replied: “This refers to salatul layl
(the night prayer).”[^52]

However it is not unlikely to assume that the exegesis he offered is
only the clearest understanding of this verse (however there may be
other commentaries possible) since salatul layl plays a very important
role in strengthening the spirit of true faith, purification of the soul
and keeping alive a person’s intention of obeying the commandments of
Allah.

At this point, we must take notice that although the commandments given
in the above verses made up a part of the regiment of the Prophet of
Islam, however in reality, these verses contain lessons for all people
who are traversing the path of spiritual and societal leadership and are
working for the guidance of humanity.

Therefore, we must know that after gaining complete certainty and
perfect faith and receiving the message which one must convey, it is
necessary to observe patience and perseverance and not have any fear
while facing difficulties on the path, since guiding people – especially
when a person is put face to face with those who are unaware of the
truth and in which the strong-headed enemies are present - is something
which is always fret with great difficulties.

Thus, if a person is not led by patience and fortitude, then no message
will ever be triumphant!

At the next stage, a person must struggle and forge ahead with full
energy and fortitude in the face of the whisperings of the Satanic
forces – the open sinners and disbelievers, and whatever evil plans and
plots that they may use to misguide the leaders of the society and try
to erase the life-giving message from humanity.

Such leaders must not be fooled by the wicked plans or whisperings, nor
can they permit the warnings that such people give to the spiritual
leaders to find a way into their psyche.

Thus, in order to achieve spiritual power in all stages, gain a firm
determination, acquire deeply rooted resolve and an iron-clad decision
making process, a leader must be in the remembrance of Allah at every
moment - morning and evening!

He must prostrate and humble himself in His presence – especially in the
night prayers and vigils, and through his prayers and supplications, ask
Him for help. If this is carried out, then success is guaranteed.

If a person is faced with tribulation or defeat in any of these stages,
then through the benefit of the principles mentioned in the verses
quoted (and the five acts mentioned), a person will be able to make up
his (spiritual) losses. Thus, those who are travelling this path should
take the course of spiritual building from the Prophet of Islam, and his
invitation and message, and follow these things in one’s own life to
attain success!

Section Five: Verses 27 to 31
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“ إِنَّ هٰؤُلاَءِ يُحِبُّونَ الْعَاجِلَةَ وَيَذَرُونَ وَرَآءَهُمْ
يَوْماً ثَقِيلاً ۞ نَحْنُ خَلَقْنَاهُمْ وَشَدَدْنَا أَسْرَهُمْ وَإِذَا
شِــئْنَا بَدَّلْنَا أَمْثَالَهُمْ تَبْدِيلاً ۞ إِنَّ هٰذِهِ
تَذْكِرَةٌ فَمَنْ شَآءَ اتَّخَذَ إِلـىٰ رَبِّهِ سَبِيلاً ۞ وَمَا
تَشَآءُونَ إِلاَّ أَنْ يَشَآءَ اللهُ إِنَّ اللهَ كَانَ عَــلِيمًا
حَكِيماً ۞ يُدْخِلُ مَنْ يَشَاءُ فِي رَحْمَتِهِ وَالظَّالِمِينَ
أَعَدَّ لَهُمْ عَذَابًا أَلِيمًا “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely these people love the transitory world and neglect a grievous
day before them.*** ****** ***We created them and made firm their make,
and when We please, We will bring in their place the likes of them by a
change.*** ****** ***Surely this is a reminder, so whoever wishes takes
to his Lord a way.*** ****** ***And you do not will except that Allah
wills, surely Allah is Knowing, Wise.*** ****** ***He makes whom He
pleases to enter into His mercy; and (as for) the unjust, He has
prepared for them a painful chastisement.”***

### This is simply a warning – it is up to you to choose the path!

In the previous verses, the Prophet was warned that he must never fall
under the influence of two groups of people - the **‘آثـْمٌ’** -
‘sinners’ and the **‘كَفُورٌ**’ - ‘disbelievers’. According to history,
these two designations were manifest by people who thought they could
influence the determination and objective of the Prophet and that they
could bribe him with wealth, status and beautiful women, and the verses
under review offer us a greater description of these people.

We first read: ***Surely these people love the transitory world and
neglect a grievous day which is before them.***

The views of such people do not go past spiritual negligence and the
fulfillment of the lower desires and their only sphere of reason is in
regards to attaining uninhibited, material pleasures. It is astonishing
to see that such people wanted the Noble Prophet to be just like they
were!

However these naive, spiritually blinded individuals decided to ignore
the momentous days which await them – tragic days from the point of view
of the punishment therein; the accountability for the deeds which they
had performed, and because of the length of time these days will last
and the disgrace and dishonor that these people will face.

The use of the phrase **‘وَرَائِهِمْ’** - ‘behind them’ should
technically speaking, be another word which conveys the meaning of ‘the
day which is in front of them (to come)’, however the phrase ‘behind
them’ has been used because this is a day which they have entirely
forgotten about and it can be said that they threw this day behind their
backs! However, according to some exegetes of the Qur’an, the word
**‘وراء’** is sometimes used in the meaning of behind and sometimes for
something which is in front of a person.[^53]

These people are warned that they should not feel proud about their
power because this is something which Allah has granted to them, and
anytime He wants, He can instantly take these things away from them. In
this verse we read:

***We created them and made firm their make, and when We please We will
bring in their place the likes of them by a change.***[^54]

The primary meaning of the word **‘أَسَرٌ’** was ‘to tie something up
with a chain’ and it is for this reason that captives are referred to as
**‘أسير’** since they were normally tied with chains.

However in this verse, the word **‘أسر’** refers to the strong
relationships within a person’s essence (which bind things together
within him) which give him the ability to carry out important tasks. In
this verse, the Qurʾan has pointed to an extremely focused aspect of the
physical life which is the various relationships that exist in the
numerous body parts of a human being, such as the nerves of various
sizes that connect all of the body parts with one another, just like
iron joins various parts of a large machine.

This connection between body parts includes things such as the ligaments
and tendons which join with the bones of various sizes and also the
flesh of the body. All of this is put together and forms one complete
unit which is ready and able to carry out any activity.

This verse also points to the power and strength of a person. In
addition to this verse elucidating upon the self-sufficiency and
needlessness of anything which are traits of Allah alone, it also refers
to the fact that He does not even need the obedience and faith of His
creations! Through this verse, people are made aware that if there is
even a whisper of true faith within them, then in reality, this is a
grace and mercy from their Lord! This can be seen in verse 133 of
Suratul Anʿam (6) where we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ رَبُّكَ الْغَنِيُّ ذُو الْرَحْمَةِ إِنْ يَشَأْ يُذْهِبْكُمْ وَ
يَسْتَخْلِفُ مِنْ بَعْدِكُمْ مَا يَشَآءُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And your Lord is the Self-Sufficient, Possessor of Mercy. If He
wishes, He would remove all of you and bring others in your place.***

The next verse combines all of the discussions which have taken place in
this chapter up until this point which make up a complete program for
happiness in life:

***Surely this is a reminder, so whoever pleases may take a way to his
Lord.***

This verse tells us that: “It is Allah‘s responsibility to show the true
path - however, there is no compulsion to choose this path.

It is us ourselves who, with our intellect and reasoning, must
distinguish between truth and falsehood and through our own decision
making process, make the choice.” In reality, this point merely
emphasizes what was mentioned in the beginning of this chapter in the
third verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا هَدَيْنَاهُ السَّبِيلَ أَمَّا شَاكِراً وَ أَمَّا كَفُوراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely We have shown him the way: he may be thankful or
unthankful.***

At this point, it is possible that simple-minded people may take the
previous verse as implying that human beings have been given complete
free-will (to do as they please), however in the verse which follows,
this incorrect notion is rejected:

***And you do not will except that Allah wills, surely Allah is
Knowing, Wise.***[^55]

This is definitely the case since***:*** ***Surely Allah is Knowing,
Wise.***

In reality, this proves the well-known belief of ‘**أَلْأَمْرُ بَيْنَ
الأَمْرَينِ’** or ‘a command between the two commands’. From one aspect
we are told that: “Now that Allah has shown you the path, the choice is
up to you.”

At the same time we are told: “Your choice is dependent upon the will of
Allah.” This means that we do not have complete free-will. Rather, the
power, ability and freedom to choose is granted to us through the
permission of Allah and anytime He wishes, He can take away our power of
free choice! Thus, there is no ‘complete freedom’ nor is there ‘complete
compulsion’ – rather there is a fine and subtle truth between these two
states.

In other words, there is a form of freedom which is related directly to
the will of Allah which can, at any time, be taken away so that the
servants can fulfill the responsibility and accountability on their
shoulders, and in which lies the secret of how they can reach
perfection, and through which they realize that they are not completely
needless of Allah .

In brief, this verse shows us that the servants must realize that they
are not completely free of need of guidance, help, success and His
assistance; while at the same time, when they decide to do something,
they submit themselves to Him and work with His assistance.

From this discussion, it is clear that when some exegetes of the Qur’an,
such as Fakhr ad-Din al-Razi subscribe to the belief of compulsion in
all affairs, they do so by holding onto this verse due to some
pre-conceived notions they have in regards to this issue. Actually, he
himself (Fakhr ad-Din al-Razi) has been quoted as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اعْلَمْ أَنَّ هٰذِهِ الأَيَةِ مِنْ جُمْلَةِ الأَيَاتِ الَّتِي
تَلاَطَمَتْ فِيهَا أَمْوَاجٌ الْجَبْرِ وَ الْقَدْرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Know that this verse is one of those verses in which the rough waves of
compulsion and predestination ride![^56]

Indeed, if this verse is separated from that which came before it, then
this baseless belief could be accepted, however by keeping in mind that
there is a discussion of free-will, while in another verse there is a
discussion of the will of Allah, thus this issue of ‘**ألأمر بين
الأمرين’** or – ‘A command between the two affairs’ becomes
understandable.

It is remarkable to see the supporters of the belief of free-will also
hold on to this verse of the Qurʼan and speak about complete free-will,
while those who believe in compulsion in all actions are only able to
perceive this belief of theirs - each party wanting to justify their
pre-conceived notions and beliefs through the use of these verses!

In reality, we see that the correct understanding of the Word of Allah
(and any other speech) always necessitates passing of judgment by
looking at whatever is spoken as one unit without any prejudice or
pre-judgments.

The end of this verse tells us that: ***Surely Allah is Knowing,
Wise.***

This may refer to the same thing stated above because the knowledge and
wisdom of Allah demand that the servants freely travel the path towards
perfection. If this was not the case, then perfection which comes
through compulsion and force is in actuality, not really perfection!

In addition, the knowledge and wisdom of Allah does not permit a person
to be forced to do good or bad deeds and then reward the good doers (who
were forced to do good deeds) and punish the bad doers (who were forced
to perform bad deeds).

Finally, in the last verse of this chapter, we see the outcome of the
good and bad doers as has been mentioned in one short, yet meaningful
sentence:

 ***He makes whom He pleases to enter into His mercy; and (as for) the
unjust, He has prepared for them a painful chastisement.***

The beginning of the verse tells us that He makes those He wishes to
enter into His mercy, however at the end we read that the punishment
will surround the oppressors and this clearly shows us that His
prerogative to punish follows mankind’s desire to commit oppression and
sins!

By taking the opposite of this analogy, it becomes clear that His
intention to shower mercy on humanity follows the intention of humanity
to bring about true faith, perform righteous actions and enact justice
(in their daily life) – and this cannot be expected from anyone except
one who performs his actions with wisdom!

It is interesting to note that even with this clear analogy that has
been given, people still exist, such as Fakhr ad-Din al-Razi, who have
stated that the beginning of this verse was proof for the existence of
compulsion, without realizing that the end of this verse proves the
freedom of intention and action of the oppressors![^57]

O’ Allah! Enter us into Your Mercy and distance us from the painful
punishment which awaits the oppressors!

O’ Allah! You have shown us the path and we too have made the intention
to follow this path, therefore, please help us in this!

O’ Allah! If we are not among the righteous people, then at least we are
of among those who love these individuals, thus join us with them in the
eventual abode!

…So be it, O Lord of all the Worlds

[^1]: Tafsir al-Qurtubi, vol. 10, pg. 6909

[^2]: Majmaʽ al-Bayan, vol. 10, pg. 405

[^3]: Ibid.

[^4]: Tarikhul Qurʼan, pg. 55

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Qurʼan, vol. 20, pg. 221

[^7]: Ibid.

[^8]: Tafsir al-Kashshaf, vol. 4, pg. 670

[^9]: Ahqaqul Ḥaqq, vol. 3, pg. 157 to 170 (which has narrated the names
of the scholars and the works in which they have written this
information).

[^10]: Ibid., pg. 158

[^11]: Majmaʽ al-Bayan, vol. 10, pg. 402

[^12]: Ibid.

[^13]: Is the word ‘هلʼ which has been mentioned in this verse in the
meaning of ‘قدʼ or is in it the meaning of a rhetorical question, a
negating question? In this regards, there are many different opinions
given, however the apparent reading of this verse gives us the
understanding that it is indeed a rhetorical question and thus the
meaning of this verse would be: أَلَيْسَ قَدْ أَتـى عَلَـى الإِنْسَانِ
حِينَ مِنَ الدَّهْرِ لَمْ يَكُنْ شَيْئاً مَذْكُوراً؟ Has there not come
a time upon the human being when he was a thing not worth mentioning!?

[^14]: Majmaʽ al-Bayan, vol. 10, pg. 406

[^15]: Ibid.

[^16]: Please note that whereas the word ‘نطفةʼ - ‘spermʼ has been
mentioned in the singular, however its characteristic of ‘أمشاجʼ -
‘mixedʼ has been mentioned in the plural and this is due to the fact
that the sperm itself is made up of various things and actually falls
under the ruling of the plural. Scholars, such as al-Zamkhshari in his
work, al-Kashshaf have stated that the word ‘أمشاجʼ is the singular form
of the word, even though it is based on the pattern of the plural.

[^17]: According to a majority of exegetists of the Qurʼan, the words
‘شاكراًʼ - ‘thankful’ and ‘كفوراًʼ - ‘ungrateful’, are expressional
words for the objective pronoun contained in ‘هَدَيْنَاهُʼ - ‘We have
guided himʼ. Another possibility exists which states that the predicate
‘يَكُونُʼ may be assumed to be contained in the verse, however is not
expressly mentioned. This would render the verse to be interpreted as
stating: إِمَّا يَكُونُ شَاكِراً وَ إِمَّا يَكُونُ كَفُوراً He is either
thankful or he is unthankful.

[^18]: For a deeper explanation in regards to the meaning of ‘أغلالʼ,
please refer to verse 8 of Surat Yasin (vol. 18, pg. 321 of Tafsir
Namuna).

[^19]: Information for the data mentioned in this section has been taken
from volume 1 of the work, The First University and the Last Prophet,
and other books.

[^20]: Refer to al-Ghadir, vol. 3, pg. 107 to 111; Ahqaqul Ḥaqq, vol. 3,
pg. 157 to 171 in which the above quoted tradition has been narrated
from 36 scholars and leaders of the Ahlus Sunnah including their sources
of reference.

[^21]: Durr al-Manthur, vol. 6, pg. 297

[^22]: Ibid.

[^23]: Some of the information from this Russian author can be found
at:http://tasbeha.org/content/hh\_books/fasting/index.html (Tr.)

[^24]: Ruhul Maani, vol. 29, pg. 158

[^25]: Refer to al-Ihtijaj of al-Tabrisi and al-Khisal of as-Saduq (as
has been quoted in al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, vol. 20, pg. 224)

[^26]: Ruhul Maani, vol. 29, pg. 158

[^27]: One may wonder why the word ‘عَيْناًʼ in this verse is the
accusative form? There some very strong possibilities mentioned by the
scholars. Perhaps the most appropriate of these is to state that the
word “عَيْناً” is in a state of being the accusative due to the rule in
ʿArabic grammar of removal and it can be presumed that the phrase “مِنْ
عَينٍ” is the actual meaning. Some other scholars have stated that the
rule of something which stands in the place of something else is at play
here, which in this case is the word ‘كاَفُورٌʼ or camphor; or that it
is in the accusative state due to it being regarded as a word denoting
specification or extending praise. It is also possible that it refers to
the passive participle which is not expressly mentioned, however is
taken as being understood and thus, can be understood as being
‘يَشْرَبُـونُ عَيْناًʼ, however just as we previously stated, the first
opinion given is more appropriate.

[^28]: The word ‘يَشْـرَبُʼ or ‘he will drinkʼ can become transitive
through the ‘بَاءʼ or even without it and it is possible that as it has
been mentioned in the word (بِــهَا), it would be in the meaning of
‘مِنْʼ or ‘fromʼ.

[^29]: Nur al-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, pg. 477; Ruhul Maani, vol. 29, pg. 155

[^30]: For a detailed explanation on this issue, please refer to the
book, Rulings for Prisons in Islam.

[^31]: al-Kamil of Ibne Athir, vol. 2, pg. 131

[^32]: al-Mufradat of al-Raghib; Lisan al-ʿArab; al-Munjid; Tafsir
al-Qurtubi and Majmaʽ al-Bayan.

[^33]: al-Kafi,, vol. 2, Section on Feeding a Believer, no. 3

[^34]: Ibid., no. 6

[^35]: Ibid., no. 18

[^36]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 74, pg. 369. It is important to note that the
late ʿAllamah Majlisi has actually presented an entire section which
comprises 113 traditions in regards to feeding and clothing a true
believer. In addition, he has compiled traditions which speak about
paying another person’s debts and some of the traditions mentioned in
the chapter of his magnum opus are very general (not specifically
related to feeding or clothing a believer – rather any human being).

[^37]: Ibid.

[^38]: Durr al-Manthur, vol. 6, pg. 300

[^39]: Ruh al-Maani, vol. 29, pg. 159

[^40]: The word ‘قطوفʼ is the plural of ‘قِطفʼ with a ‘fathaʼ on the
first letter or a ‘kasrahʼ on the first letter. The meaning of the first
form is the actual trait, while the second word has the infinitive
meaning of the word – thus either a fruit which has been picked from a
tree or to pick a fruit from a tree.

[^41]: Majmaʽ al-Bayan, vol. 10, pg. 411

[^42]: Majmaʽ al-Bayan, vol. 10, pg. 410

[^43]: Ruh al-Maani, vol. 29, pg. 159

[^44]: In regards to the state of the word ‘عيناًʼ, it follows the same
pattern and the same word a few verses previous in which ‘عيناًʼ was
also mentioned. It is accepted that it is in the accusative state with a
type of removal present.

[^45]: Some exegetists of the Qur’an have stated that the word ‘سلسبيلʼ
is indeclinable according to the rules of Arabic language since there is
both a specific noun and also it is a non-Arabic word and thus, it has
taken its own double-diacritics for it to fit in the same pattern as the
end of the other verses of this Surah.

[^46]: Some exegetes of the Qur’an have clearly stated that the particle
‘ثـمʼ found in this verse is the adverb of the place, while the word
‘رأيتʼ is in the meaning of the intransitive verb and thus the meaning
of this verse would be, ‘إذا رميت ببصرك ثـم رأيت نعيما و ملكاً كبيراًʼ
or that ‘When you see with your eyes, you will see the blessings and a
great kingdom.ʼ Another possibility has also been mentioned which states
that the ‘ثـمʼ in this verse is the demonstrative pronoun for something
far away and is the object for the transitive verb ‘رأيتʼ.

[^47]: Majmaʽ al-Bayan, vol. 10, pg. 411

[^48]: In regards to the grammatical states of the word ‘عَالِيَهُمْʼ,
there are two possibilities: the first is that it is the pronoun
denoting spatial situations in the meaning of ‘aboveʼ. If we take this
meaning then the verse would be understood as saying, ‘فَوْقَهُمْ
ثِيَابُ سُنْدُسٍʼ or ‘above them are clothes of silkʼ. The second
possibility is that it is the accusative for the pronoun ‘هُمْʼ which
came in the previous verse and refers back to ‘أبرارʼ and if we accept
this possibility, then the meaning of this verse would be ‘حالكونهم
يعلوهم ثياب سندس خضرʼ.

[^49]: Majmaʽ al-Bayan, vol. 10, pg. 411

[^50]: Nur al-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, pg. 485, no. 60

[^51]: In reality, there is a sentence which should be taken as being
intended but not expressly mentioned which reads, ‘يقال لهمʼ or ‘It was
said to themʼ or ‘يقول الله لهمʼ or ‘Allah will say to them.ʼ

[^52]: Majmaʽ al-Bayan, vol. 10, pg. 413

[^53]: In the commentary, Ruh al-Bayan, vol. 8, pg. 439, it has been
mentioned that if ‘وراءʼ is annexed to a verb then it carries the
meaning of ‘behindʼ, however if it is annexed with an object, then it is
in the meaning of ‘in frontʼ.

[^54]: This verse has a sentence which must be taken as being intended
(by Allah) but not expressly mentioned and can be presumed as being:
‘بَدَّلْنَاهُمْ أَمْثَالَهُمْʼ. It must be noted that the verb ‘to
changeʼ (تَبْدِيلٌ) usually takes two objects and thus in this case, the
pronoun in ‘هُمْʼ is the first object, while ‘أَمْثَالَهُمْʼ is the
second object.

[^55]: As for what is the inflection of ‘إن يشاء اللهʼ? A group of
exegetes of the Qurʼan have stated that it is in a state of the
‘accusative or ‘subjunctive caseʼ due to it being the pronoun denoting
time and thus, this phrase would mean, ‘مَا تَشَاوُن َإِلاَّ وَقْتُ
مَشِيَّةِ اللِهʼ - ‘You will not desire except when the time comes for
when Allah decides’ - however another supposition also exists which
states that ‘شيئاʼ is in an elliptical and thus, this phrase would mean,
‘وَ مَا تَشَاؤُنَ إِلاَّ شَيْئاً يَشَآءَ اللهُʼ - ‘You will not desire
anything except that Allah (first) decides that thing (before-hand).”

[^56]: Tafsir of Fakhr ad-Din Razi, vol. 30, pg. 262

[^57]: A detailed discussion on the issue of this verse which deals with
the intention can be seen in vol. 19 of Tafsir Namuna, pp. 461-468
(under the commentary of verse 37 of Suratul Zumur) of Tafsir Namuna.


