Suratul Qadr, (The Night of) Ordainment or Power
================================================

This chapter was revealed in Mecca and contains 5 verses

**In the Name of Allah, the All-Beneficent, the All-Merciful**

Contents of Suratul Qadr
------------------------

As it is understood from the name, this chapter refers to the revelation
of the Noble Qur’an on the Night of Ordainment (al-Qadr) and then it
describes the importance of the night and the blessings within it.

Was this chapter revealed in Mecca or Medina? Amongst the commentators
it is widely known as a Meccan chapter, although some hold that it was
revealed in Medina as a narration states that the Noble Prophet  dreamt
that the Ummayads were climbing his pulpit (mimbar).

It disturbed the Prophet to have such a dream and thus Suratul Qadr was
revealed to comfort him. (Therefore, some believe that the verse: “The
Night of Ordainment is better than a thousand months” refers to the
length of time that the Ummayads governed, which was about one thousand
months). In addition, we know that the masjid and mimbar (pulpit) were
established in Medina and not in Mecca.[^1]

However as it has been stated above, the chapter is known as Meccan and
the opinion may be a kind of application and not related directly to the
occasion of revelation.

The virtue of studying this chapter
-----------------------------------

In regards to the virtue of studying this chapter, there is a narration
from the Noble Prophet which states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ قَرَأَهَا أُعْطِىَ مِنَ الأَجْرِ كَمَنْ صَامَ رَمَضَانَ وَ
أَحْيَا لَيْلَةَ الْقَدْرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

He who recites it (Suratul Qadr) will be rewarded like the one who has
fasted the whole month of Ramadhan and has kept vigil the entire night
of al-Qadr.[^2]

A narration from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ قَرَأَ إِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَاهُ بِجَهْرِ كَانَ كَشَاهِرِ سَيْفِهِ
فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ وَ مَنْ قَرَأَهَا سِرّاً كَانَ كَالْمُتَشَحِّطِ
بِدَمِهِ فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

He who recites Indeed We have revealed it (Suratul Qadr) in an audible
voice is like a person who fights in the way of Allah with his sword
drawn, and he who recites it in an audible whisper is like a person who
drowns in his own blood for the sake of Allah (due to being killed in
the battle field).[^3]

It is obvious that these rewards are not for that person who merely
recites the chapter and does not comprehend its real meaning; rather,
such rewards are reserved for that person who recites this chapter,
understands its contents, and then embellishes all of his daily actions
with its comprehensive teachings and considers the Qur’an as something
important and implements its verses in one’s daily life.

Commentary of the Verses
------------------------

In the Name of Allah, the All-Beneficent, the All-Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَاهُ فِي لَيْلَةِ الْقَدْرِ ۞ وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا
لَيْلَةُ الْقَدْرِ ۞ لَيْلَةُ الْقَدْرِ خَيْرٌ مِّنْ أَلْفِ شَهْرٍ ۞
تَنَزَّلُ الْمَلَائِكَةُ وَالرُّوحُ فِيهَا بِإِذْنِ رَبِّهِمْ مِّنْ
كُلِّ أَمْرٍ ۞ سَلَامٌ هِيَ حَتَّى مَطْلَعِ الْفَجْرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful**

***“Surely, We sent it (the Qur’an) down on the Night of Ordainment***
****** ***And what will make you know what the Night of Ordainment
is?*** ****** ***The Night of Ordainment is better than a thousand
months.*** ****** ***The Angels and the Spirit descend therein by their
Lord’s leave for every affair.*** ****** ***Peace! It is until the
rising of the dawn.”***

**Commentary:** The night when the Qur’an was revealed

From a review of the verses of the Noble Qur’an, it is clearly evident
that this book was revealed in the blessed month of Ramadhan:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَهْرُ رَمَضَانَ الَّذِي أُنْزِلَ فِيهِ الْقُرْآنُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ramadhan is the (month) in which the Qur’an was sent down...[^4]

From the apparent reading of this verse (just mentioned), the entire
Qur’an was revealed in this month and in the first verse of Suratul Qadr
we are additionally told:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أَنزَلْنَاهُ فِي لَيْلَةِ الْقَدْرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely We sent it (the Qurʾan) down on the Night of al-Qadr.***

Even though in the above mentioned verse, the word ‘Qur’an’ is not
explicitly mentioned, however it is certain that the objective pronoun
existing in the phrase **“إِنَّا أَنزَلْنَاهُ”** refers to the Qur’an
and its being mentioned in this format is to show its greatness and
importance.

The phrase **“إِنَّا أَنزَلْنَاهُ”** – “Surely We sent it” is another
indicator which shows the importance of this great Heavenly-Sent book
for which Allah(s) has attributed its descent to Himself – and that too
by using the plural pronoun, ‘We’, which further shows the Qur’an’s
greatness.

The descent of the Qur’an on the Night of Ordainment, the very night on
which the fate of each and every human being is decided, is another
reason to show the importance of this Divine Book in its role in forging
the destiny of people in this world.

With the combination of the meaning of this verse, as just stated, and
the above verse from Suratul Baqarah, we can conclude that the Night of
Ordainment is in the month of Ramadhan – however which of the nights is
it?

It is not clearly understood from the Qur’an which of the nights of the
month of Ramadhan is the Night of Ordainment, and indeed this has been
left as a mystery for us, however there are many indicators about it in
the narrations which will be dealt with later in the exegesis of this
chapter.

Here, a question arises regarding the history and the content of the
Noble Qur’an in connection with the events in the life of the Noble
Prophet .

Most clearly, this Heavenly Book was gradually revealed over the period
of 23 years, so then how does this fit with the above verse which says:

***Surely We sent it (the Qur’an) down on the night of al-Qadr***
***during the month of Ramadhan?***

The reply to this question, as many scholars have said, is to say that
the Qur’an has two kinds of revelation:

The first is the revelation of the entire Qur’an at one time, in one
night to the blessed heart of the Noble Prophet or to Bayt al-Mamur, or
from the Lawh al-Mahfuẓ (the Preserved Tablet) to the lowest sky of this
world.

The second kind of revelation is that the Noble Qur’an came down in
portions, gradually, during the entire period of the call which lasted
23 years.[^5]

Some have also said that the initiation of the revelation of the Qur’an
began on the Night of Ordainment and that it was not the entire book
which was revealed on this night, however this idea does not fit with
the apparent meaning of the verse which says:

***Surely We sent it (the Qur’an) down on the Night of Ordainment.***

It should be noted that in regards to the descent of the Qur’an, some of
the verses have made use of the notion of **“إِنْزَالٌ”,** while other
verses have spoken about **“تَنْزِيلٌ”** and from a review of some
Arabic dictionaries, we understand that the difference between these two
Arabic terms is that **“إِنْزَالٌ”** has a broad meaning, and here it
implies ‘bringing down all at once’ while “**تَنْزِيلٌ”** implies
‘bringing down gradually’.[^6]

This difference, which is seen in various verses of the Qur’an, can be
taken as an indication to the above mentioned two types of descent.

In the next verses, referring to the greatness of the Night of
Ordainment it says:

***And what will make you know what the Night of Ordainment is?***

Right after this we are told, ***The Night of Ordainment is better than
a thousand months.***

This phrase shows that the importance of this night is so great that
even the Noble Prophet, with his vast knowledge, did not know the status
of this night prior to it being revealed to him!

We know that one thousand months is equal to more than eighty years and
truly, what a great night it is whose worth and value is as much as the
length of a fairly long blessed life (which a person could have).

It is cited in some commentaries that the Noble Prophet has said: “One
of the members of the Children of Israel (the Israelites) had spent one
thousand months with his fighting armor on and was always prepared for
war in the path of Allah.

The companions of the Prophet  became surprised and wished that there
might have been that sort of virtue and honor for them too and it was at
this time that the above verse came down and said,

***The Night of Ordainment is better than a thousand months.”***[^7]

In another tradition, the Noble Prophet has been quoted as speaking
about four individuals from amongst the Children of Israel who had
worshipped God for a consecutive span of 80 years each, and during this
time committed no acts of transgression (against His orders). The
companions of the Prophet , upon hearing this all wished that they too
could have been so fortunate and it is at this time that the above
quoted verse was revealed.’[^8]

A question comes up that: Is the amount of ‘one thousand’ which is
mentioned in this verse in the meaning of the actual number of 1,000 or
does it refer to a “multitude”?

Some have said that the figure given of ‘one thousand’ mentioned in this
verse is for augmentation denoting that the value of the Night of
Ordainment is more than thousands of months, but the above said
narrations indicate that the figure is used in order to show the amount,
and generally figures are used to show numbers, except for the time when
clear evidence for augmentation is available.

Then, describing the Night of Ordainment in greater detail, it says:

***The Angels and the Spirit descend therein by their Lord’s leave for
every affair.***

Regarding the term **“تَنَزَّلَ”** which is a future tense verb with the
sense of continuity and comes from the root “**تَتَنَزَّلَ”,** this word
makes it clear that the Night of Ordainment is not only for the period
of the time of the Noble Prophet and the era in which the descent of the
Qur’an was taking place, rather, it is a permanent fixture in this
religion and it is a night that will repeat every year.

As for the meaning of **“أَلرُّوحُ”** or “The Spirit” some have said
that it refers to Gabriel, the trustworthy, who is also called “**رُوحُ
الأَمِينُ**” – “Ruh al-Amin”. Other scholars have rendered the meaning
of **“أَلرُّوحُ**” to mean “**وَحِيٌّ”** or ‘Divine revelation’ and have
used verse 52 of Suratul Shura to prove this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَكَذٰلِكَ أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ رُوحًا مِنْ أَمْرِنَا…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Thus have We revealed to you the spirit of Our dispensation…*** [^9]

Therefore, the meaning of the verse becomes:

***“The Angels along with the Divine revelation descend therein for
every affair.”***

There is also a third commentary which seems the most appropriate of all
which states that **“أَلرُّوحُ”** – ‘The Spirit’ is an important
creation (of Allah s) which is greater than the angels; just as it has
been mentioned in a tradition from Imam Jafar as-Sadiq in which a person
asked him whether ‘al-Ruh’ was the same as (angel) Gabriel and he
replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جِبْرَائِيلُ مِنَ الْمَلآئِكَةِ وَ الرُّوحُ أَعْظَمُ مِنَ
الْمَلآئِكَةِ. أَلَيْسَ أَنَّ اللهَ عَزَّوَجَلَّ يَقُولُ: تَنَزَّلَ
الْمَلاَئِكَةُ وَ الرُّوحُ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

Gabriel is one of the angels and al-Ruh (Spirit) is even greater than
the angels. Has Allah, the Exalted, not said:

***The Angels and the Spirit descend***?[^10]

This means that in the sequence of comparison, those two are different
entities.

There are also other commentaries cited on the word ‘al-Ruh’, but as
they do not have any supporting evidences, we will not mention them
here.

The meaning of **“مِنْ كُلِّ أَمْرٍ”** - ‘for every affair’ is that the
angels descend to proportionate and assign the fates and to bring the
blessing and goodness on that night and it is the fulfillment of these
actions which is the purpose of their descent; in addition, it may be
stated that they also bring any good affair and any fate (for
humanity).[^11] Other scholars have opined that the meaning is that they
descend by the command of Allah , however the very first meaning is
more fitting.

The meaning of **“رَبِّهِمْ”** or ‘their Lord’ of which the emphasis is
on the subject of Lordship and management of the world, has a close
relationship with the action of these angels, saying that they descend
to proportionate and assign the affairs, and their accomplishment is a
part of the Lordship of Allah .

In the last verse of the chapter, it says***:*** ***Peace! It is, until
the rising of the dawn.***

It is a night on which both the Qur’an descended, and worship and
spiritual vigilance therein is equal to a thousand months; in addition,
it is a night in which Divine Blessings come down and one in which His
special mercy covers all of the creatures; lastly, it is also a night in
which the angels and the Spirit descend.

Thus, it is a night full of peace - from the beginning to the end - in
which, according to some narrations, even Satan is fastened in chains,
and from this point of view, this night is also a night of (spiritual)
security.

Therefore, the use of **‘سَلاَمٌ’** - ‘peace’ which means peace and
safety (instead of the word **سَالِمٌ** – ‘safe’) has been employed,
because a kind of emphasis is also contained in this - just as it is
sometimes said that, ‘Such and such a person is the epitome of justice.”
(Thus, Allah is saying that this night is the complete manifestation of
“peace and safety”)

Some have also said that using the word **‘سَلاَمٌ**’ - ‘peace’ in
regards to that night is because on this night, the angels greet one
another; or that they greet the believers, or that they are present with
the Prophet and his sinless successors and greet them – and to combine
these commentaries together is also possible.

In any case, it is a night filled with Divine light, grace, mercy,
blessings, goodness, spiritual safety and felicity which is unique in
all aspects!

It is cited in a tradition, that Imam Muhammad al-Baqir was asked if he
knew which night the Night of Ordainment was and he replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَيْفَ لاَ نَعْرِفُ وَ الْمَلآئِكَةُ تَطُوفُ بِنَا فِيهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***How can we not know it whereas the angels go round us
therein?***[^12]

In the story of (prophet) Abraham we find that a few of the angels of
the Divine came to him and greeted him, and gave him the glad tidings of
a son:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ جَاءَتْ رُسُلُنَا إِبْرَاهِيمَ بِالْبُشْرَى قَالُوا سَلاَمًا
قَالَ سَلاَمٌ فَمَا لَبِثَ أَنْ جَآءَ بِعِجْلٍ حَنِيذٍ ۞ فَلَمَّا
رَأَى أَيْدِيَهُمْ لاَ تَصِلُ إِلَيْهِ نَكِرَهُمْ وَأَوْجَسَ مِنْهُمْ
خِيفَةً قَالُوا لاَ تَخَفْ إِنَّا أُرْسِلْنَا إِلَى قَوْمِ لُوطٍ ۞
وَامْرَأَتُهُ قَائِمَةٌ فَضَحِكَتْ فَبَشَّرْنَاهَا بِإِسْحَاقَ وَمِنْ
وَرَاءِ إِسْحَاقَ يَعْقُوبَ ۞ قَالَتْ يَا وَيْلَتَا أَأَلِدُ وَأَنَا
عَجُوزٌ وَهٰذَا بَعْلِي شَيْخًا إِنَّ هٰذَا لَشَيْءٌ عَجِيبٌ ۞ قَالُوا
أَتَعْجَبِينَ مِنْ أَمْرِ اللهِ رَحْمَةُ اللهِ وَبَرَكَاتُهُ
عَلَيْكُمْ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ إِنَّهُ حَمِيدٌ مَجِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Certainly Our messengers came to Abraham with the good news, and
said, ‘Peace!’ ‘Peace!’ He replied. Presently he brought [for them] a
roasted calf. But when he saw their hands not reaching for it, he took
them amiss and felt a fear of them. They said, ‘Do not be afraid. We
have been sent to the people of Lot.’ His wife, standing by, laughed as
We gave her the good news of [the birth of] Isaac, and of Jacob, after
Isaac. She said, ‘Oh, my! Shall I, an old woman, bear [children], and
[while] this husband of mine is an old man?! That is indeed an odd
thing!’ They said, ‘Are you amazed at God’s dispensation? [That is]
God’s mercy and His blessings upon you, members of the household. Indeed
He is All-Laudable, All-Glorious.’***[^13]

It is said that all that is contained in this world was worthless in
comparison with the delight that Abraham took in that greeting (of the
angels).

Now if we consider that the Night of Ordainment is one in which angels
come to the believers in groups and greet them - how delightful it would
be (for the believer)!

When Abraham was thrown into the fire which Nimrod ordered to be fuelled
to persecute him, the angels came and greeted him and he remained safe.
Can the fire of hell, under the grace of the angel’s greeting to the
believers on the Night of Ordainment, not become cool and a means of
safety for the believers?

Yes, this is the sign of the greatness of the nation of Prophet Muhammad
that in that first example, the angels descended to Prophet Abraham but
here, the angels descend upon the believers in Islam![^14]

### 1. Which affairs are predetermined on the Night of Ordainment?

To answer this question on why this night is called the Night of
Ordainment, various opinions have been expressed, including the
following:

It is called the Night of Ordainment because all of the affairs and the
destinies of humanity for the following year are determined; and the
third and fourth verses of Suratul Dukhan (chapter 44) serve as witness
to this idea, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“فِيهَا يُفْرَقُ كُلُّ أَمْرٍ حَكِيمٍ. أَمْرًا مِنْ عِنْدِنَا إِنَّا
كُنَّا مُرْسِلِينَ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We sent it down during a night: For We (ever) wish to warn (against
evil). On that (night) is made distinct every affair of wisdom***…

This meaning is in harmony with numerous narrations which state: On that
night the affairs and destinies of humanity are determined - sustenance,
the end of lives, and other affairs are made distinct and clear.

This matter of course does not contradict the free-will which humanity
has been given because Divine Wisdom is carried out by the angels based
on humanities’ efficiencies and abilities on the level of their faith
and virtue and purity of their intentions and actions - meaning that
everyone is sustained with what he deserves, or in other words, the path
is paved by the person himself; and not only does this belief not
contradict his ‘free-will’, but rather it emphasizes it.

Some have also mentioned that the night is called the Night of
Ordainment because it is of great importance and honour (beyond
comprehension), like the case that is stated in Suratul Hajj (22) verse
74:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَمَا قَدَرُوا اللهَ حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They do not regard Allah with the regard that is due to Him.***

Some others have said that it is called the Night of Ordainment because
the Noble Qur’an, with all its of grandness, descended to the grand
Apostle of Allah by the means of His grand angel.

Another meaning is that it is a night in which the descent of the Qur’an
was appointed.

Yet another meaning is that the person who keeps vigil on that night
obtains a grand rank.

The final meaning is that therein descend so many angels on that night
that the expanse of the Earth is restricted and does not have enough
room for all of them – as one of the meanings of **“التقدير”** is
‘restricting’ – just as we see in Suratul Talaq (65), verse 7:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“...وَمَنْ قُدِرَ عَلَيْهِ رِزْقُهُ فَلْيُنفِقْ مِمَّا آتَاهُ
اللهُ...”
  </p>
</blockquote>

…***and let he whose provision has been tightened spend out of what
Allah has given him***…

The combination of all of these commentaries on the vast meaning of the
Night of Ordainment is quite possible; however the first commentary is
the most appropriate and commonly known and accepted one.

### 2. Which night is the Night of Ordainment?

No doubt the Night of Ordainment is taken to be a night in the month of
Ramadhan since the combination of the verses of the Qur’an attests to
this very fact. From one angle, we see in Suratul Baqarah (2), verse 185
that it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“شَهْرُ رَمَضَانَ الَّذِي أُنزِلَ فِيهِ الْقُرْآنُ...”
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ramadhan is the (month) in which the Qur’an was sent down ...

and in the chapter under discussion we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِنَّا أَنزَلْنَاهُ فِي لَيْلَةِ الْقَدْرِ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely We sent it (the Qur’an) down on the Night of Ordainment***.

But which night of the nights of the Month of Ramadhan does this refer
to? In this regards, many commentators and opinions have been stated
which include the following nights of the Month of Ramadhan: 1st, 17th,
19th, 21st, 23rd, 27th, or 29th.

However the most popular in the narrations is that it is in the last ten
nights of the month, emphasizing on the 21st or 23rd night, as we read
in a narration which says that the Noble Prophet kept vigil and was busy
praying all of the nights of the last ten nights of the Month of
Ramadhan.

A narration from Imam Jafar as-Sadiq denotes that the Night of
Ordainment is the 21st or 23rd night of the Month of Ramadhan, and when
a person insisted and asked that if one cannot worship on both of them,
then which one should he choose and the Imam replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا أَيْسَرَ لَيْلَتَينِ فِيمَا تَطْلُبُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***How easy is it (to spend) two nights for what you seek!***[^15]

However, in numerous narrations from the Ahlul Bayt , the 23rd night is
emphasized, while the narrations of Sunni scholars tend toward the 27th
night.

Further, a narration from Imam Jafar as-Sadiq also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلتَّقْدِيرُ فِي لَيْلَةِ الْقَدْرِ تِسْعَةُ عَشْرَ وَ الإِبْرَامُ
فِي لَيْلَةِ إِحَدى وَ عِشْرِينَ وَ الْإِمْضَاءُ فِي لَيْلَةِ ثَلاَثُ
وَ عِشْرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Determining the proportions (taqdir) is in the Night of Ordainment - the
19th night; its confirmation (ibram) is on the 21st night, and its
signing (imdha) is on the 23rd night.[^16]

Thus through this tradition we see that all of the explanations have
been combined - however, a kind of mystic ambiguity covers the Night of
Ordainment and the reason for this will be discussed later.

### 3. Why is the Night of Ordainment kept hidden from us?

Many commentators believe that the Night of Ordainment, being hidden
among the nights of the year or in the nights of the Month of Ramadhan
is for the reason that people should consider all of the nights as
important, because Allah has:

Hidden His pleasure in various kinds of obedience and worship such that
people practice all of them;

Hidden His wrath in sinning in general, so that people avoid all kinds
of sin;

Hidden His special friendship among all of humanity so that everyone
will be honored;

Concealed the supplication to which He listens (and will directly accept
and fulfill), among all supplications, so that one will refer to all of
the supplications when they call upon Him;

Hidden the **“إسم الأعظم”** or His Greatest Name, among His universal
names so that people will remember and consider all of the Divine names
of the Lord;

Kept hidden the time of death so that mankind will always be prepared.

and indeed this is a fitting philosophy!

### 4. Was there a Night of Ordainment for former nations?

The verses of this chapter apparently show that the Night of Ordainment
was not specifically restricted to the time of the descent of the Qurʾan
and the period of the call of the Messenger of Islam , but rather that
it repeats annually until the end of this world. The application of the
verb **“تَنَزَّلَ**” in the chapter, which is in the future tense and
indicates an act of continuity and also by using the phrase:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“سَلاَمٌ هِیَ حَتَّی مَطْلَعِ الْفَجْرِ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Peace! It is until the rising of the dawn***

which is a nounal phrase, shows perpetuity - and both of these conform
to this idea.

In addition, there are also many narrations which reach to a level of
‘tawatur’ – a frequency of successive transmission – which also attests
to this belief.

Now, a question arises whether the previous communities also had such a
night?

Many narrations clearly indicate that this is a Divine blessing endowed
only to the Muslims and in a tradition, the Noble Prophet is narrated to
have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ وَحَبَ لِأُمَّتِي لَيْلَةَ الْقَدْرِ لَمْ يُعْطِهَا مَنْ
كَانَ قَبْلَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Surely Allah has bestowed on my community the Night of Ordainment which
He did not give to any of those (peoples) who were before them.[^17]

In commenting on the above verses there are some other narrations that
indicate the same opinion.

### 5. How is the Night of Ordainment better than a thousand months?

Apparently, this night being better than a thousand months is for the
value of worshipping and keeping vigil on that night. The narrations on
the virtue of the Night of Ordainment and the virtue of worship in it
are abundantly mentioned in the books of both the Shia and Sunni that
confirm this meaning.

Furthermore, the descent of the Qur’an on that night and the descent of
the Divine blessings and grace in it causes the night to be better than
a thousand months!

A tradition says that Imam Jafar as-Sadiq told ‘Ali. Abu Hamzah Thumali:
“Seek the virtue of the Night of Ordainment on the 21st and 23rd night
and say one hundred rakʿat salat on either of them and if you can, do
keep vigil on both of the nights until the break of dawn, and perform
ritual bathing therein.”

Abu Hamzah says that he asked Imam Jafar as-Sadiq that if he cannot pray
that many prayers in the standing position, what should he do and the
Imam replied: “Pray in the sitting position.”

Again, he asked that if he cannot do that, then what should he do and
the Imam answered: “Pray in bed, and it does not matter if you sleep a
little at the beginning of the night and then begin praying, because in
the Month of Ramadhan, the gates of Heaven are open, Satans are bound in
chains and the deeds of the believers are accepted. What a good month
Ramadhan is!”[^18]

### 6. Why was the Qur’an revealed on the Night of Ordainment?

This book was revealed on the Night of Ordainment because the destiny of
humanity for the next year is determined based on our worthiness, and
thus, we should keep vigil the entire night and repent for our sins,
practice self-perfection, and turn to Allah to gain a great share of an
even higher amount of worthiness for His mercy.

We need to be aware of the moments that our fate forms and not spend the
time in spiritual negligence, otherwise our destiny will be nothing but
regret.

Since the Qur’an is a book of forging one’s destiny and leads to the
path of happiness and guidance for humanity, it should be sent down on
the Night of Ordainment - the night of determining the fates of mankind.

What a nice connection there is between the Qur’an and the Night of
Ordainment and how meaningful their relationship is to one another!

### 7. Is the Night of Ordainment the same night in different regions?

We know that the beginning of the lunar month is not the same in all
parts of the world; for example, in one region today it may be the first
day of a month, but in another region that same day may be the second
day of the month.

Therefore, the Night of Ordainment cannot be a definite night in the
year for everyone because the 23rd of a month in Mecca may be the 22nd
of that month in Iran or Iraq; but each of them must as a rule have a
Night of Ordainment for themselves according to the region they live in.

Does this fact fit with the meaning understood from the verses and
narrations that state that the Night of Ordainment is a definite night?

The answer to this question will be clear when we consider the following
point:

The words ‘rotation’ and ‘revolution’ mean nearly the same thing. But in
describing the Earth’s movements, each word is used for a different kind
of motion.

Revolution refers to the motion of the Earth in its yearly orbit around
the Sun. Rotation refers to the spinning around of the Earth on its own
axis every 24 hours in relation to the Sun. It is 24 hours from high
noon on one day to high noon on the next.

In its permanent rotation on its axis, half of the surface of the Earth
is towards the sun, whereupon it is day, and on the opposite part at the
same time, it is night.

The night, which is the shade of the Earth, itself turns around in a
complete circle for 24 hours all over the Earth. Therefore, the Night of
Ordainment may be a night of a complete circle around the Earth; that is
during 24 hours, where darkness covers all of the points of the Earth,
itself is the Night of Ordainment whose beginning starts from a point
and it ends at another one.

Addendum: Fatima Zahra’ is Laylatul Qadr
----------------------------------------

**Addendum: Fatima Zahra’ is the Night of Ordainment (Laylatul
Qadr)**[^19]

Muhammad b. Qasim said that Imam Jafar as-Sadiq said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَاهُ فِي لَيْلَةِ الْقَدْرِ أَللَّيْلَةُ فَاطِمَةُ
وَ الْقَدْرُ اللهُ. فَمَنْ عَرَفَ فَاطِمَةَ حَقَّ مَعْرِفَتِهَا فَقَدْ
أَدْرَكَ لَيْلَةَ الْقَدْرِ. وَ إِنَّمَا سُمِّيَتْ فَاطِمَةَ لِأَنَّ
الْخَلْقَ فُطِمُوا عَنْ مَعْرِفَتِهَا.”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed We revealed it (the Qurʾan) on the Night of Ordainment.***

***‘***The in-depth (tawil) interpretation of ‘The Night (al-Layl)’ is
Fatima and the in-depth (tawil) interpretation of ‘Ordainment (al-Qadr)’
is Allah. Therefore, a person who has truly grasped a deep understanding
of Fatima (and who she is) has actually witnessed and experienced the
Night of Ordainment.

Indeed Fatima was called by this name as the creations have been
prevented from truly knowing and having a deep understanding of Fatima
(we are not able to know her true stature with Allah).[^20]

### Explanation

If we have accepted the fact that the Noble Qur’an descended onto the
(heart of the) Messenger of Allah on the Night of Ordainment (Laylatul
Qadr) in one instance and not in portions just as the researchers from
amongst the exegetes of the have Noble Qur’an have stated, then the
challenges which this tradition and other such traditions pose in
regards to the Blessed Night (Laylatul Mubaraka) and the ambiguities on
how both of these are related and refer directly about Fatima Zahra’ are
resolved:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَاهُ فِي لَيْلَةٍ مُباَرَكَةٍ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed We have revealed it on the blessed night.***[^21]

This is the case as the Noble Qur’an which descended upon the heart of
the Messenger of Allah is not the written, apparent (physical) Qur’an
which we have [today]; rather, it is the reality (haqiqat) of the Qur’an
for which the Prophet enjoys the station of Divine Celestial Light
(maqam-e-nuraniyat) and Complete Authority (wilyat-e-mutlaqah), and
which is a station of absolute authority and is not autonomous with that
of the Divine Authority (of Allah ), which he (the Prophet ), in the
form of a human being and possessing his humanistic element has been
referred to in these verses with the word **“لَيْلَةُ”** – ‘night’.

Thus, by keeping in mind this point that the Prophet of Islam, with his
status of being the station of the Divine Celestial Light and also his
possessing the Complete Authority and that he is indeed the
manifestation of the reality (haqiqat) of the Qur’an, and in addition
keeping in mind that with the blessings of the infallible leaders (of
which Fatima Zahra’ is also considered as being a part of) and that they
too are all blessed with being the station of the Divine Celestial Light
and also possess Complete Authority which is not separate from that of
the Messenger of Allah , what problem is there in stating that this
meaning can be applied to each and every one of the [fourteen]
infallible leaders and that either of these two verses can be
interpreted as referring to them!?

Therefore, there is no problem in stating that Fatima Zahra’ is the
spiritual interpretation of **“لَیْلَةٌ”** – ‘the night’ which has been
mentioned in both Suratul Qadr and also Suratul Dukhan and that this
woman, with her Divine Celestial Light, is the true reality (haqiqat) of
the Qur’an as:

• She is one of the [fourteen] infallibles;

• She is at the station of the Divine Celestial Light;[^22]

• She is at the same ranking as the Messenger of Allah and the [twelve]
Pure Imams ;

• From the point of view of her physical creation she can be referred to
as **“لَيْلَةٌ”** – ‘the night’[^23]. Thus, it is no problem for us to
state that “The spiritual interpretation of ‘**لَيْلَةٌ’** – ‘the night’
is Fatima and that the Qur’an was revealed within her (in regards to her
Spiritual Divine Celestial Light).

However as to why the word **“أَلْقَدْرُ”** has been related to Allah in
this tradition, it may be due to the overall universality of this grand
woman (Fatima Zahra’ ) being the manifestation of the Divine (His
titles, traits and essence). The proof of this point and the previous
points are contained in a part of the tradition which reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ عَرَفَ فَاطِمَةَ حَقَّ مَعْرِفَتِهَا...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Therefore, a person who has truly grasped the deep understanding of her
(Fatima)…

Even though it is possible to state that the augmentation of the word
**“لَيْلَةُ”** to the word **“أَلْقَدْرُ**” in its apparent reading from
the actual words and its reference to Allah in its meaning and
interpretation is done in the genitive ceremonial case, for example just
as we see in the Qur’an where the word ‘hand’ **(يَدٌ)** and ‘house’
**(بَيْتٌ**) are attributed to Allah, and as such we see passages in the
Qur’an which speak about “Allah’s hand” **(يَدُ اللهِ**) or “The House
of Allah**” (بَيْتُ اللهِ).**

Fatima is the very Night of Divine Decrees. Anyone who really knows
Fatima as she is has understood the Night of Divine Decrees. Very few
people know this great Lady in this way.

Imam Jafar as-Sadiq (peace be upon him) once said in a tradition
recorded in the commentary of Furat ibn Ibrahim, speaking about the
meaning of the Qur’anic verse: “The Night of Divine Decrees (Laylatul
Qadr) is Fatima, therefore whoever knows Fatima well has understood the
Night of Divine Decrees, and the reason for Fatima being named
Fatima[^24] is that mankind has been ‘prevented from obtaining’ her
acquaintance! (or knowing her real status)”[^25]

We know that Qur’anic verses have a literal meaning and a figurative
meaning, and many interpretations within them.

Without a doubt, the literal interpretation of the chapter of Qadr tells
us about the night in which the Holy Qur’an descended upon the pure
heart of the Prophet, and in which the Divine Decrees (destinies) of
human beings are ascertained for a year, according to Divine Wisdom. As
such, what was said in the tradition above is a figurative
interpretation of this chapter’s meaning, or the second meaning of
Suratul Qadr.

What a close relationship there is between the existence of the Lady of
Islam and the Night of Divine Decrees! Some of the points we can derive
from this connection are as follows:

The Night of Divine Decrees – the disguised, unknown night of Qadr – is
undoubtedly this great Lady, whom the Prophet would refer to as a part
of his flesh and reckoned her pleasure to God’s pleasure, and her anger
God’s anger. She is also the disguised and unknown meaning of Qadr.  
 The Night of Qadr is hidden among the nights of the year. The grave of
the Lady of Islam is unknown among the graves of the great Personages of
Islam.

Those who wish to pay pilgrimage to her and enter Medina, visit the
shrines of all of the other great ones, and seek her grave but only to
be unable to find it, will well understand the heavy load of this
sorrow.

The Night of Qadr is better than 1,000 months of worship –and the virtue
of its worship is greater than that of a long life of 80 years. The
virtue of this great Lady is also greater than thousands upon thousands
of virtuous persons and her rank is more superior than them.

The Night of Qadr was the time in which the Qur’an descended upon the
pure heart of the Prophet of Islam, and it was a sudden, all-together
revelation even though its gradual descent took over 23 years. The
“Night of Qadr” may also therefore be named as the Night of the Descent
of Virtue, Perfection, Knowledge and Wisdom.

The being of Fatima is also the source of luminosity of the guardianship
and Imamat; divine knowledge and wisdom. The written Qur’an descended on
the Night of Qadr, but Fatima is the one from whom 11 speaking Qur’ans
(Qur’an-e-Natiq) have descended!

The Night of Qadr is the night in which, by the command of Allah, the
Angels ascertain the destinies of all human beings and present them to
the Wali al-Amr, the Guardian of His Command. It is a night of peace and
good in its entirety:

***“Peace! It is until the rising of the dawn.” (97:5).***

The brief life of this Lady of Islam was also goodness, soundness and
blessed from the beginning to the end, and was given the attention and
interest of the Angels.

The close relationship between the Night of Qadr and the being of Fatima
 deems it necessary for all of us to strive harder to know her and
obtain greater benefit from the blessings of her radiance.

O Lord! Bestow on us such a spiritual awakening that we take sufficient
benefit from the virtue of the Night of Ordainment.

O Lord! We hope only that our predestined fates are determined based on
Your Grace.

O Lord! Do not put us among those who are deprived from this month,
because it is the worst deprivation.

…So be it, O Lord of all the Worlds

[^1]: Ruh al-Maani, vol. 30, p. 188; and Durr al-Manthur, vol. 6, p. 391

[^2]: Majmaʿ al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 516

[^3]: Majmaʿ al-Bayan, vol. 30, p. 516

[^4]: Suratul Baqarah (2), verse 185

[^5]: A deeper explanation of this division of the method of revelation
has been covered under the exegesis of verse 3 of Suratul Dukhan
contained in volume 21 of Tafsir Namuna on page 148 and beyond.

[^6]: Al-Mufradat of Raghib, under the letters “نزل”

[^7]: Durr al-Manthur, vol. 6, p. 371

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: Suratul Shura (42), verse 52

[^10]: Tafsir al-Burhan, vol. 4, p. 481

[^11]: According to the first explanation, the meaning of the first
“مِنْ” is that conveyed in the particle “لام” and thus, the
interpretation of “من كل أمر” is “لأجل كل أمر” – and according to the
second explanation, the meaning of the first “مِنْ” is that conveyed in
the particle “باء مصاحبة”.

[^12]: Tafsir al-Burhan, vol. 4, p. 488, tradition 29

[^13]: Suratul Hd (11), verse 69-73

[^14]: Tafsir Fakhr ad-Din al-Razi, vol. 32, p. 36

[^15]: Tafsir Nur ath-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 625, Tradition 58

[^16]: Tafsir Nur ath-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 626, Tradition 62

[^17]: Tafsir Durr al-Manthur, vol. 6, p. 371

[^18]: Tafsir Nur ath-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, pg. 625, tradition 58
(summarized).

[^19]: This section is not from Tafsir Namuna; rather, it has been
translated from the book, “Manifestation of the Divine Light” written by
Shaykh ‘Ali Sa’adat Parvar and translated specifically for this booklet.
(Tr.)

[^20]: Tafsir Durr al-Manthur, vol. 6, p. 371

[^21]: Suratul Dukhan (44), verse 3

[^22]: The meaning here is that of the Spiritual Divine Celestial Light
and not her creation from Divine Light; the explanation between the
difference which exists between these two has been mentioned in the
first chapter of this book [The Manifestation of the Divine Light]. For
a further explanation, please refer to section 2 of the book, ‘The
Branches of Martyrdom’.

[^23]: It goes without saying: Why the use of the word “night” and its
darkness? The response to this is that attribute of manifestation (of
Fatima Zahra’ ) in the face of the Pure Light (of Allah) and Divine
Authority (of Allah ) is nothing other than a shadow and obscurity.

[^24]: Fatima is from the root fa-ta-ma, originally meaning “weaning
from milk”. Among the reasons that have been mentioned for the
appropriate choice of this name for this Lady of Islam, the above
meaning has also been included.

[^25]: Bihar al-Anwar


