Suratul Kawthar, Abundant Good
==============================

This chapter was revealed in Mecca and contains 3 verses

Contents of Suratul Kawthar
---------------------------

**In the Name of Allah, the All-Beneficent, the All-Merciful**

It is commonly held that this chapter was revealed in Mecca, however
there are some scholars who believe that it may have been revealed in
Medina. Another opinion states that this chapter was revealed twice –
once in Mecca and once in Medina.

However the narrations cited on the occasion of its revelation attest to
the first idea which says that it is a Meccan chapter.

In regards to the occasion of revelation, the following story has been
narrated:

As b. Wail, who was one of the chiefs of the pagans, met the Noble
Prophet as he was coming out of the Sacred Masjid (Masjid al-Haram). As
b. Wail proceeded to speak with the Prophet during that short time, a
group of leaders of the Quraysh were sitting in the masjid watching him
from a distance.

When As b. Wail entered the masjid they asked him: “Who were you
speaking to?” He answered: “With the ‘abtar’ one.”

As b. Waill used this (derogatory) word (abtar) for the Noble Prophet to
taunt him, because he knew that the Noble Prophet had a son named
ʿAbdullah who had died in his infancy, and in the language of the Arabs,
a person who had no male offspring was referred to as “abtar” – meaning
one who has no posterity to follow after him. Thus, the Quraysh gave the
Noble Prophet this nickname after the death of his son.

To condole the Noble Prophet , this chapter was revealed with the glad
tidings of the greatest amount of grace (al-Kawthar – an abundance of
goodness) from Allah and that the Prophet’s  opponents would be ‘abtar’
or have no posterity.[^1]

In summary: The Noble Prophet had two male children from his first wife
Khadijah - one named Qasim and the other one named Tahir (who was also
known as Abdullah) and both of them passed away in Mecca, and thus the
Prophet did not have any son who lived.

This tragic event gave the Quraysh the opportunity to hurl insults at
the Prophet and refer to him as ‘abtar’ or one who has no (surviving)
male children.[^2]

According to their traditional ways, the Arabs gave a great deal of
importance to male children and considered the son as being an extension
of their father.

Thus, after the death of his two sons, they thought that with the
eventual death of the Noble Prophet , his mission (of spreading Islam)
would also cease to exist as he had no male children (to carry on his
message) and this greatly pleased the polytheistic Arabs greatly!

The Noble Qur’an was revealed and through a miraculous message in this
chapter, replied to these individuals and let them know that: It is the
enemies of the Prophet who will actually be ‘abtar’ or cut off in
progeny, and that the program of Islam and the Qur’an will never come to
a halt!

The revelation of this chapter was in fact, an answer to the enemies of
the Apostle of Allah to inform them that Islam and the Qur’an would
remain and continue forever. From another point of view, it was also a
consolation to the Messenger of Allah that after he had heard this
despicable nickname which they gave him, and knew of their plots against
him, that his heart was brought to tranquility through this news.

The virtue of studying this chapter
-----------------------------------

In regards to the virtue of the recitation of this chapter, a tradition
from the Noble Prophet says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ قَرَأَهَا سَقَاهُ اللهُ مِنْ أَنْهَارِ الْـجَنَّةِ وَ أَعْطي مِنَ
الأَجْرِ بِعَدَدِ كُلِّ قُرْبَانٍ قَرَّبَهُ الْعِبَادِ فِي يَوْمِ
عِيدٍ وَ يَقْرَبُونَ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ وَ" الْمُشْرِكِينَ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

One who recites it (Suratul Kawthar), Allah will quench their thirst
from the streams of heaven and will recompense them good rewards as many
as the number of every sacrifice which the servants of Allah make on the
day of the Feast of Sacrifice, together with those sacrifices which are
of the People of the Book and the pagans.[^3]

The name of this chapter, al-Kawthar, is taken from the first verse of
the chapter.

Commentary of the Verses
------------------------

**In the Name of Allah, the All-Beneficent, the All-Merciful**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِنَّا أَعْطَيْنَاكَ الْكَوْثَرَ ۝ فَصَلِّ لِرَبِّكَ وَانْحَرْ ۝
إِنَّ شَانِئَكَ هُوَ الْأَبْتَرُ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely We have given you (Muhammad) abundance of good
(al-Kawthar).*** ****** ***Therefore turn to your Lord in prayer and
sacrifice.*** ****** ***Indeed your enemy is the one who will be
without offspring.”***

### We have given you (Muhammad) much goodness!

In this chapter, similar to what is seen in Suratul Ḍuha and Suratul
Inshirah, the Noble Prophet is the focal point of the address, and one
of the prime objectives in all three of these chapters is to grant
consolation to the Prophet in relation to the continuous painful
incidents and numerous taunts of his enemies and their harsh language
(towards him).

We first read***:*** ***Surely We have given you (Muhammad) an
abundance of good (al-Kawthar).***

The term **“أَلْکَوْثَرُ”** is the descriptive case derived from the
(Arabic word) **“كَثْرَتٌ”** which means “ample goodness or blessings”
and those individuals who are extremely generous are also referred to as
“al-Kawthar”.

### What is the purpose of using the term “al-Kawthar”?

It is mentioned in the narrations that: When this chapter was revealed,
the Noble Prophet ascended the pulpit (mimbar) and recited it. His
companions asked him what it was that Allah had given him and he
answered: “It is a stream in paradise, whiter than milk, more clear than
a goblet (made of crystal), and on either side are domes decorated with
pearls and rubies.”[^4]

In a tradition from Imam Jafar as-Sadiq he says: “Al-Kawthar is a stream
in paradise which Allah has granted to His Prophet in exchange for his
infant son (ʿAbdullah) who passed away during the life of the Prophet.”

Some scholars have stated that “al-Kawthar” is a ‘Pool of Abundance’
which belongs to the Prophet from where the believers will quench their
thirst when they arrive in paradise.[^5]

Other opinions of ‘al-Kawthar’ include the following:

Some have commented on it as being ‘prophecy’;

Others mention that it is the Qur’an;

Another opinion is that it refers to an abundance of companions and
followers of the Prophet ;

Yet another interpretation is that it refers to the abundance of
descendants all of who will come from his daughter, Fatima Zahra’, and
will increase to such an extent that it will be impossible to count
them.

They do not only exist today, but in fact will continue to remain until
the hereafter as reminders of the Noble Prophet ;

Some have also commented on this term referring to ‘intercession’ and
have narrated a tradition from Imam Jafar as-Sadiq in this regards.[^6]

Even the Sunni scholar, Fakhr ad-Din al-Razi has narrated fifteen
different narrations on the meaning of ‘al-Kawthar’, however most of
them are merely statements of the clear examples of this broad concept,
because as was mentioned before, ‘al-Kawthar’ means ‘goodness and
blessings in abundance’, and we know that Allah the Grand, granted the
Noble Prophet so many blessings such that each of the ones mentioned
above is but one clear example of them.

There are many other examples that may be cited as commentaries for the
verse; however we will mention them here.

All of the Divine gifts granted to the Noble Prophet in every aspect –
such as the victories in his expeditions against his enemies; the
scholars of his community who in every era and age, guard the
illuminated torch of Islam and the Qur’an and carry it throughout the
world - all in all are contained in this ‘abundance of goodness’.

It should not be forgotten that Allah revealed these verses to His
Prophet’s blessed heart at a time when the manifestations of this
‘abundance of good’ had not yet appeared.

It was a miraculous piece of news which he was informed about and was to
transpire in the near and remote future to confirm the legitimacy of the
Noble Prophet .

This great blessing and the ‘abundance of good’ should have a lofty
level of thanks (to be given to Allah ), although creatures can never
entirely thank the Creator for His blessings because even the ability to
be thankful is another blessing from Him which needs thanks. Therefore,
Allah

***says,*** ***Thus, turn towards your Lord in prayer and (offer the)
sacrifice.***

He is the One who grants these blessings, therefore prayer, worship and
sacrifice - which is also a kind of worship in itself - has no meaning
unless it is done solely for the sake of Allah , particularly in regard
to the meaning of the term Lord **(رَبِّ)** which indicates the
constancy of grace and providence.

Briefly it can be stated that: ‘worship’ – whether it be in the form of
the salat (prayer) or making a sacrifice of an animal, is only the
Lord’s and Benefactor’s privilege, and it is exclusively for the Pure
Supreme Being – Allah - to be directed towards.

This portion of the verse refers to the behavior of the pagans who used
to prostrate and sacrifice animals to the idols, while they knew their
thanks for all of the blessings that they had been given truly belonged
only to Allah, and the phrase ‘your Lord’ **(لِرِبِّكَ)** used in this
verse, is a clear evidence for the necessity of pure intentions in all
acts of worship.

Many commentators believe that the meaning of salat in this verse is the
salat on the Day of the Feast of Sacrifice (Eid al-Qurban), and making
the sacrifice of an animal on that day. However, the meaning of the
verse is apparently general in its scope and inclusive of many other
types of prayers, even though salat and the sacrifice of the Day of the
Feast of Sacrifice are clear examples of this term.

Perhaps the use of the term **“وَانْحَرْ”** or ‘offer sacrifice’ which
comes from the root **‘نَحَرَ’** and is specific to the process of
slaughtering a camel has been employed because among all of the animals
which can be slaughtered (on the Day of the Feast of the Sacrifice and
also in general), the camel is the best of them, and among the early
community of Muslims, we know that they had a great fondness of
slaughtering (and eating) the camel and that slaughtering a camel was
not possible without a show of generosity (due to its great worth and
value).

Here are two more commentaries which have been offered on the above
verse:

1. The implied meaning of the phrase **“وَانْحَرْ”** is to face the
qiblah (the Kaʿbah) when performing the salat. This interpretation is
given because the word **“نَحَرٌ”** originally meant the ‘throat’, and
then later on it was used by the Arabs to mean the act of ‘standing in
front of anything’.

It is for this reason that the Arabs say, **“مَنَازِلُنَا تَتَنَاحَرُ”**
meaning that “Our stations are opposite of one another.”

2. Another meaning is the raising of the hands up to the face and neck
when pronouncing the ‘takbir’ (to begin the salat).  
 In a tradition we read that when this chapter was revealed, the Noble
Prophet asked Gabriel : “What is this **“نُحَيرَة”** that my Lord has
commissioned me to do? Gabriel said: “This is not **“نُحَيرَة”**; rather
Allah has commanded you to raise your hands at the beginning of prayer
when you say “**أَللهُ أَكْبَرُ”** and also every time when you are
going to perform the ruku or sajdah and after that (particular act),
because our prayer (salat) and that of the angels in the seven heavens
is exactly like this. Everything has an adornment and the adornment of
prayer is raising the hands at the time of saying **“أَللهُ
أَكْبَرُ”**.[^7]

In another tradition, this one from Imam Jafar as-Sadiq who on the
commentary of this verse, indicated with his hands and said: “The
meaning of this verse is that you raise your hands in such a way that
your palms face towards the qiblah (the direction of the Kabah).”[^8]

However the first commentary given is the most appropriate in regards to
what this verse means, since its meaning was to negate the actions of
the idolaters who used to perform acts of worship such as the sacrifice
of animals for other than Allah .

However with this said, there is also no problem in combining all of
these meanings together and in particular, there are many narrations
about raising the hands at the time of saying **“أَللهُ أَكْبَرُ”** and
there are traditions in the books of the Shia and the Ahlus Sunnah in
this regards, and therefore this verse can have such a vast meaning that
it covers all of them.

In the last verse of this short chapter, keeping in mind the taunts made
by the chiefs of the pagans towards the Noble Prophet, we read,

***Surely your enemy is the one who will be without offspring.***

The term **“شَانِي”** or ‘enemy’ is derived from the word
**“شَنَئَآنٌ”** which means ‘enmity, spitefulness, and bad manners’;
thus, the word “**شَانِي”** is the one who possesses these
characteristics.

It is worthy to note that the word **“أَبْتَرُ”** originally meant ‘an
animal whose tail is cut off’ and the enemies of Islam taunted the Noble
Prophet by using this word.

In reality, the usage of the term **“شَانِي”** clearly shows that in
their desire to express their enmity towards the Prophet , these people
did not even display the smallest amount of respect or dignity – meaning
that their enmity was interwoven with hard-heartedness and the use of
shameful words! In reality, the Qurʾan retorted to such individuals and
told them, “It is actually you who have this characteristic (of being
cut off of your posterity) and not the Noble Prophet!”

In addition, just as has been mentioned in regards to the history of
revelation of this chapter, the Quraysh were waiting for the death of
the Prophet to transpire as they felt that with his departure from this
world and since he had no son to inherit his position, the dissolution
of the rule of Islam would happen.

But the Qur’an, consoling the Noble Prophet told him that it is not him
who will be without offspring, but surely his enemy is the one who will
not continue on!

### Points of Interest

#### 1. Lady Fatima and al-Kawthar

It was said earlier that ‘al-Kawthar’ has a vast, inclusive meaning
which is ‘goodness in abundance’ and the examples are many.

A large number of scholars of the Shia school believe that one of the
most clear examples of this word is the auspicious existence of Fatima
Zahra, because the occasion of the revelation of the verse indicates
that the enemies accused the Noble Prophet of being without offspring to
which the

Qur’an replied***:*** ***Surely (Muhammad) We have given you abundance
of good (al-Kawthar).***

From this verse we understand that this ‘abundance of good’ is that very
Lady Fatima Zahra’.

In addition, not only is it the physical and biological offspring of the
Prophet which will increase, rather it is these abundant number of
offspring scattered which continue his religion and are responsible for
the preservation of all of the values of Islam and continue to convey it
to the future generations!

This is not only limited to the infallible Imams of the Ahlul Bayt who
have a literal number that we can enumerate (12), rather it is the
thousands and thousands of children of Fatima which have spread around
the entire world from whom so many great scholars, scientists, writers,
exegetists, jurists, narrators of the Prophet’s sayings and leaders have
come from – individuals who have left outstanding works and unmatched
fame in this world, and have protected Islam with their selfless giving
(of themselves and their efforts) and their hard work and devotions.

Here, we encounter a very interesting discussion from Fakhr ad-Din
al-Razi who along with other commentators on ‘al-Kawthar’, says:

The third statement of the meaning of this chapter is that it was
revealed to reject those who criticized the Noble Prophet for his lack
of progeny.

Therefore the meaning of this chapter is that Allah will give him a
generation which will remain throughout all of the ages.

Considering the fact that how many members of the Ahlul Bayt have been
martyred, we still see that the world is replete with them, whereas the
Umayyads (who were the enemies of Islam) there remains no mentionable
figure in the world.

Then, behold and see how many of the great men of leadership such as
al-Baqir, as-Sadiq, al-Ridha, and Nafs al-Zakiyyah [^9], etc… are found
among them (the household)!”[^10]

#### 2. The miracle of this chapter

In reality, this chapter contains three important miraculous
predictions:

On one hand, it informs the Prophet of the glad tidings of the
‘abundance of good’, (although the verb **“أَعْطَيْنَا**” is in the past
tense form), it may definitely be considered as meaning the present and
future which has been stated in the form of the past tense and this
‘abundance of good’ encompasses all victories and successes that were
obtained later by the Noble Prophet however which were not predictable
in Mecca at the time of the revelation of this chapter.

On the other hand, the chapter foretells that the Noble Prophet will not
be without posterity, and his generations and descendants will exist
abundantly all over the world.

The third thing which this chapter foretells is that the enemies of the
Prophet will be ‘abtar’ - without posterity. This too actually happened
and those enemies were so rooted out that no trace of their generations
can be seen today.

We see that today, tribes such as the Umayyads and Abbasids, who opposed
the Prophet and his prophecy and who enjoyed such a population in the
past, today their family and children cannot even be counted and they
not even present anywhere!

#### 3. Allah and the plural pronoun

It is noteworthy that here and in many other verses of the Noble Qur’an,
Allah introduces Himself by the first person plural pronoun and says:

***‘We’ have given you an abundance of good (al-Kawthar).***

This wording and others like it are for the expression of Glory and
Power, as when the noble talk about themselves, they announce not only
themselves, but also their commissionaires, and this refers to their
power and nobility, as well as to the presence of those in obedience,
along with the commands.

In the verse under discussion the term **“إِنَّ”** is also another
emphasis on this meaning, and the phrase **“أَعْطَيْنَاكَ”** - ‘We have
given you’, rather than **“آتَيْنَاكَ”** is evidence to the fact that
Allah has awarded the Noble Prophet “al-Kawthar” which itself is a great
glad tiding to the Prophet in order to keep his heart aloof from
annoyance resulting from the nonsensical remarks of the enemies; and
consequently, languor does not affect his firm determination, and for
him to know that Allah is his support and that He is the source of all
welfare and grace in abundance.

O Lord! Do not deprive us from the blessings of that ‘abundance of good’
that You granted to Your Prophet.

O Lord! You know that we truly love Your Prophet and his pure progeny;
therefore include us among their ranks.

O Lord! The glory of Your Prophet’s essence and the religion which he
taught us is much notable; add to this grandeur, majesty and honor.

…So be it, O Lord of all of the Worlds

End of Suratul Kawthar

[^1]: Majmaʿ al-Bayan, vol. 10, pg. 549

[^2]: The Noble Prophet had other male children as well – namely
Ibrahim, from his wife Mariyah al-Qubtiyyah, and who was born in Medina.
Coincidentally, he too passed away before reaching the age of two and
his death also weighed heavily on the heart of the Prophet.

[^3]: Majmaʿ al-Bayan, vol. 10, pg. 548

[^4]: Majmaʿ al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 549

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: Ibid.

[^7]: Majmaʿ al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 550

[^8]: Majmaʿ al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 548

[^9]: Nafs al-Zakiyyah is another name for Muhammad b. ʿAbdullah, the
grand-son of Imam Ḥasan al-Mujtaba who was martyred by Mansur
al-Dawaniqi in 145 ah.

[^10]: Tafsir of Fakhr ad-Din al-Razi, vol. 32, p. 124


