Preface
=======

Does this world have a Creator and God or has it been created by itself
without any cause? If there is a God then what are His attributes and
works? Does God assign an obligation for us, or are we not without some
form of responsibility? Were the messengers truthful in their claims or
not? Is it possible that after this world there exists another world
whereby a human being would see punishment for his/her deeds?

The human faculty of reason, in accordance with his primitive nature and
special creation, desires to find out about these realities, remove
curtains from these mysteries; provide correct answers for these
inquiries and many more alike. The human faculty of reason possesses
this distinction in it whereby it can distinguish between truth and
falsehood and naturally is inclined to discover the realities and causes
of things, and until it rests upon an absolute certainty, it does not
feel comfortable.

These sorts of topics are called principles of religion (’usul-e-din).
The principles of religion are topics which are relevant to the thought
and soul of human beings, reason and intellect follow it, and deeds and
movement of human beings spring forth from its fountainhead accordingly.
In the principles of religion (’usul-e-din) imitation or following is
not allowed and everyone is obliged to discover them through his reason
and intellect. If a human being, for his beliefs, succeeds in creating a
stable and firm groundwork, his intellect and soul feel at ease; he
rescues it from internal anxiety, bewilderment, and wandering, and in
that case he could continue his life with his conscience at ease and in
comfort.

Childhood and Youth
-------------------

The best time for nourishment is the period of childhood and
adolescence. The fresh page of a mind of a child and a youth is like a
photographic film that has not yet been exposed to the light of
illumination and is therefore ready for acceptance of any picture upon
it.

These simple minds, if they could be nourished in a correct manner and
if correct thoughts and beliefs could be presented to them with reason
and logic, would make a dent upon their sensitive soul and thus would
become a permanent temperament of their essence. Such individuals, no
matter what environment they are encountered with and whomever they
socialized with, would not become deviated and lost.

If they happened to be in an impious environment, they would not accept
the color of that community; instead they would try to change it to
their own color. Unfortunately, this large group has been deprived of
correct religious nourishment, and has not yet been paid attention to
the way they deserve. Normally they have acquired the religious beliefs
from their parents without reason, logic, and program. It is due to this
very reason that their faith and belief has not been laid down upon a
solid foundation and they do not possess a stable groundwork.

Secondly: They have assumed some of the matters which are baseless and
futile as definite religious realities, believed in them, and with the
same illogical and initial beliefs and thoughts, enter in primary
schools, higher secondary schools and from there into the university
environment where they associate with the people of different belief and
thoughts. Since the basis of their faith is not firm, or with a slight
doubt and criticism, they become easily confused and perplexed, and from
the point of knowledge and wisdom have not reached to the extent that
they could distinguish truth from falsehood and could separate good from
bad.

Therefore due to this reason they become cynical with respect to the
real religion and remain in the state of bewilderment not knowing what
their obligation is supposed to be. Then in that case either they turn
their face completely away from religion or at least the basis of their
moral ethics or deeds start trembling, causing them to act reckless with
respect to their religion. The result of this negligence and incorrect
nourishment could be seen explicitly by all and there is no one who
could think of a solution in rescuing these innocent individuals from
the valley of deviation.

Everyone is Responsible
-----------------------

Against this greatest danger that threatens the forthcoming generations
into irreligiousness and weakness of belief, all individuals of the
community are responsible. Guardians of religion, clergies, fathers,
mothers, teachers and scholars, speakers, writers and wealthy people,
all are responsible.

Yes, we are all responsible and if we do not discharge our obligation in
this regard, the future generation would send curses upon us and we
would be held accountable on the Day of Judgment.

We must draw a comprehensive plan and perfect program of implanting
correct beliefs with reason and logic inside the brains of the simple
minded; and must wage a campaign of confrontation against deviated and
wrong beliefs. Educational books with simple language should be prepared
for them; libraries must be established for this task; books freely or
inexpensive should be provided to them and they should be motivated to
read these books.

The Present Book
----------------

The present book has been especially written for the young generation
and youths to teach them religious education and the following points
have been considered in this book:

1. The contexts while being simple are based upon reason and rationale.
Regarding intellectual matters rational reasons have been presented;
topics regarding obedience and religion have been presented in
accordance with narrations and verses of the Holy Qur’an; if required
the source of reference has been mentioned in footnotes, but for the
sake of brevity in some topics the sources have not been mentioned.

2. Regarding the date of births and demises of the Holy Prophet (S) and
Infallible Imams (a.s.) there are differences of opinion but for the
sake of concision one of the quotations has been selected and others
have not been mentioned.

3. The writer has tried his best to make the intellectual matters
relatively simple so they could be comprehended by all; efforts have
been made to avoid usage of philosophical terminology and description of
lengthy and tiring arguments.

4. Doubtful, weak and tempered, and less useful matters have not been
mentioned.

5. In this book matters have been written whose knowing is compulsory
upon every Muslim and whereby the Religion of Islam has been described
in a summarized manner in order to prepare the minds of readers to refer
to more comprehensive books and journals of the religious authorities
(ris’alah ‘Amaliyah written by mar’aji‘). Especially regarding branches
of the religion (furu‘e-din) all of them have not been mentioned or have
been mentioned in summary. The context of the book could be classified
into the following three categories:

First: The beliefs (Aqa’yid) i.e. matters and affairs which are related
to the intellect and faculty of reason a human being, rational reasons
rule over them and imitation is not allowed.

Second: Moral ethics (’Akhl’aq), i.e. the matters which are relevant to
the human self and sentiments, controlling desires of the self, making
one’s self moderate and placing one’s self upon the straight path of
humanity.

Third: Branches of the Religion (Fru‘-e-din): i.e. mandatory obligations
and practical instructions, which are relevant to the human body and
what should be done.

In the end I request the readers and intellectuals that if they have
opinions or find faults in the book, they should inform the writer so
that it could be utilized in the next edition.

**Ibrahim Amini**  
 Qum, Islamic Seminary  
[www.Ibrahimamini.ir](http://www.Ibrahimamini.ir)


