Chapter 2: Prophethood
======================

2.1. Prophethood
----------------

It is incumbent upon God that for the admonishment and guidance of human
beings, He should appoint messengers and necessary commandments and laws
should be provided to them.

### Reason of this Matter

The purpose of creation of the human being is not only limited so that
he should live in the world, utilize divine bounties and with thousands
of efforts and endeavors, tolerance of different sorts of hardships;
that he should complete the short and limited portion of his age and
then die and disintegrate. If it is so then the creation of human beings
and the world would be nonsense and void and the sacred threshold of
God, the Wise, is glorified from undertaking nonsense and void acts.[^1]

Instead the human being has been created with the intention of being
higher and the most exalted one in the creation of existence. God has
created human beings in order to learn distinctions and perfections of
humanity in order to acquire the decency and worthiness that he should
be able to achieve ranks, positions, and rewards in the hereafter.

Therefore a human being is needy for a complete program, commandments,
and laws that one side should organize his worldly life and should
prevent from transgressions and threats upon him through assuring his
freedom, comfort, and rights. While on the other side should provide him
the path of human perfection, straight path, honesty, and return to God
and should teach his perfections and distinctions of his self, make him
aware of evil conducts and deviated factors; but the short and limited
faculty of reason of a human being is unable to create such complete
commandments and provide to a nation because

**Firstly:** knowledge and information of human beings is limited and
incomplete, it does not have sufficient information regarding different
sort of needs of human beings, dimensions of good and evil, and how to
encounter with limitations and laws.

To prove the correctness of this statement that human being from birth
until, now has endeavored to create complete laws for the management of
the society, plenty of hardships have been done in this path and a
significant amount of budget has been spent but until now has not been
able to obtain desired laws. Every day he passes a law but it does not
take very long that he discovers its defects, and therefore either
decides overall to void it or through ratification of a note tries to
reform it.

**Secondly:** The motivation of self-interest and egotism of human
legislatures never permits them to close their eyes from their own
interest as well as the interest of their associates and to look at all
human beings with the same scale, or to consider the interests and
benefits of a general people. And whenever they decide to disregard
their self-interests and prejudice and do it for the sake of pretending,
eventually this stubborn nature dominates upon them and whether
intentionally or unintentionally forces them to follow the path of their
own selfish interests.

**Thirdly:** human legislatures are ignorant of spiritual perfections
and virtues and do not have any information regarding spiritual life;
they do not consider the prosperity of human beings except through the
dimensions of material means; while the worldly life of a human being is
not separate from his spiritual life and a very profound relation exists
between them.

It is only the Creator of men and worlds Who encompasses all dimensions
of good and bad for the human being and knows well the path of
perfection and prohibition from dangers. He is able to provide
commandments and laws which assure the prosperity of world as well as of
the hereafter for a human being. It is because of this reason that we
could say: A wise God never releases a human being in the valley of
distress and ignorance; instead his infinite benevolence requires that
through means of his appointed messengers from the race of human beings,
to provide them required commandments and a program.

The messengers are distinguished appointed persons who are in a position
to establish communications with the God of worlds and could receive
realities; and could declare to the people accordingly, such type of
communication is called a revelation that is unique and a special
communication which is established between His messengers and God. A
messenger through the means of esoteric eyes witnesses the realities of
the world of existence, with his heart’s ears hears words from the
unseen and announces them to the people accordingly.

2.2. Conditions of Prophethood
------------------------------

### A. Infallibility

The prophet must be infallible i.e. should have unseen power that should
allow him not to commit sins and should remain immune from mistakes so
that God’s commandments that have been sent for guidance of the people
without more or less should be provided to them. If the prophet himself
commits sins and should act in opposition to his own words, his words
would lose the essential credit and worthiness.

If through his own deeds he makes his own words null and void and
practically leads people towards sin and opposition of God’s
commandments and this matter cannot be contradicted, that propagation
with deeds is more effective than the propagation of words. If the
prophet happens to be negligent and makes mistakes, he would not be
trusted and his words would become worthless.

### B. Knowledge

The prophet should be knowledgeable about all commandments and laws,
which are necessary for the prosperity of the world and hereafter of
human beings. And he should not be ignorant about any topic which is
necessary for the guidance and admonishment in order to be able to
present them the real path of perfection and programs for the prosperity
of human beings in a complete form; and could introduce the straight
path of human prosperity - that is not more than one and among its
components there exist very profound communications.

### C. Miracles

The miracle is an outstanding act, which occurs through means of other
than natural causes, and human powers are helpless in the creation of
such an act. Since a prophet claims that which is opposite to the
natural trend, he is able to communicate with the unseen worlds and the
God of the worlds and could obtain knowledge and learning; and claims
that he has an assignment from God to perform the task of guidance of
the people, he should introduce commandments and laws of God, he must do
something to prove his claim.

That should not be the normal tasks of human beings and their power
should be helpless in producing a similar act, so that through this
means he could prove his task of prophethood and communication with the
God of worlds that in itself is an abnormal act; such an act is called a
miracle. In summary since a prophet claims communication with God,
therefore he must show types of Godly acts, in order to prove his claim
that he has the power of communicating with God.

However, let it not remain unsaid that programs of prophets were not
that they should have completely taken off their hands from the natural
causes and resources and should have only resorted to miracles for every
task; rather wherever they thought it was expedient to prove their
prophethood through performance of a miraculous act, in such cases they
did perform miracles.

### 2.2.1. Path of Identification of a Prophet

It was proved that a messenger or prophet possesses an outstanding
position and rank that he could communicate with God and through means
of revelation could receive realities; the prophet possesses
extraordinary, special infallibility and is immune from sins and
mistakes, and it is obvious that identification of this important
mysterious position is not the task of everyone. It was due to this
reason through the means of one of these two paths one could identify
the prophet and could conclude his being as truthful:

#### First Path

That another prophet had already proved his Prophethood, through his
testifying or should predict about his arrival in advance and should
describe his indications and effects.

#### Second Path

That in order to prove his truthfulness of his word he should be able to
bring a miracle that human beings should be helpless in creating of its
like. When human beings saw that a person claims prophethood and says
that he is appointed by God for your guidance; in order to prove the
truthfulness of his words he performs an act that could not be performed
through a human being, seeing that act they attain certainty of his
being truthful.

If he was a liar, God would not have supported him through the means of
a miracle, since the testifying of a liar is relevant to ignorance and
indecency and God does not indulge in indecent acts. Therefore in order
to diagnose the position of infallibility and Prophethood another path
does not exist except these two paths.

However let it not remain unsaid: For intellectuals and researchers
another path remains open, they could study commandments and laws and
investigate them profoundly and then should compare these laws with laws
and could appreciate their distinctions and benefits. In the conduct of
words and deeds of a person claiming prophethood they should show
serious and precise curiosity and through these means of witnessing and
testifying should acquire the facts about his being truthful.

But perusing of such a path is not possible for every one and except for
testifying the position of prophethood and strengthening the power of
belief; it does not have any worth. In the Holy Qur’an regarding a group
from prophets, miracles have been mentioned: Whoever considers the Holy
Qur’an as a heavenly

book, inevitably must accept about the story of Prophet Moses’ (a.s.)
staff turning into a serpent, and the dead coming back to life and the
return of sight to a blind person since birth through the means of Jesus
(a.s.); the story of speaking in the cradle by Jesus (a.s.) is certainly
a part of the Holy Qur’an.

### 2.2.2. Number of Prophets

It has been mentioned in the narration that 124,000 have been sent by
God for the guidance of human beings, the first one of them was Adam
(a.s.) and the last one of them was Muhammad ibn Abdullah (S).[^2] The
prophets could be divided into several categories as follows:

Some of them received their duties through the means of revelation but
were not assigned the responsibility of propagation. Another group was
assigned the responsibility of propagation; some of them possessed
special religious laws and religion while others didn’t bring special
religious laws instead propagated the religious laws of another prophet
and very often many prophets were busy in undertaking their duties in
various regions and cities.

Noah (a.s.), Abraham (a.s.), Moses (a.s.), Jesus (a.s.), and Muhammad
(S) were distinguished prophets and brought special religious laws and
were called as men of decision (ulul-azm) prophets. A group of prophets
have the book, like Noah (a.s.), Abraham (a.s.), Moses (a.s.), Jesus
(a.s.) and Muhammad (S). Some of them were appointed for the entire
humanity while some of them were appointed for a particular group of
people.[^3]

2.3. Muhammad (S) - Seal of the Prophets
----------------------------------------

Muhammad son of Abdullah (S) was one of the great and most distinguished
among them and is a prophet of Muslims. When he was appointed for his
prophethood, due to the continuous and prolonged hardships and the
painful endeavors of past prophets, the religious learning level of
human being reached to the point whereby they were in a position to
receive the best and most perfected laws and could comprehend the
highest leanings; they should guard forever the trust of knowledge of
all prophets, then the Prophet of Islam was appointed and he presented
the most complete program and comprehensive commandments for the human
beings.

If the commandments of Islam been implemented, the prosperity of the
world and hereafter would have been assured as they were sufficient for
guidance of humanity during the period of the Holy Prophet (S); likewise
they are sufficient for the prosperity of the present period as well as
for more progressive forthcoming generations.

Everyone who would conduct research with accuracy and precision
regarding Islamic commandments and learning and would compare them with
other commandments; the distinction of Islamic commandments would become
explicitly clear upon him. And it was because of this reason that he is
the last prophet and after him no prophet would come. The matter of
being the Seal of the Prophets for Muhammad (S) is a necessary
requirement and whoever denies it would not be considered as a Muslim.

2.4. Eternal Miracle
--------------------

The Prophet of Islam possessed miracles that occurred during his life
period and they have been pointed out in the books of history and
narrations; in addition to that the Holy Qur’an is an eternal

miracle and absolute certification of his prophethood. The Holy Qur’an
itself introduces it as a miracle and declares officially to the people:

***“And if you are in doubt concerning that which We reveal unto Our
servant (Muhammad), then produce a surah of the like thereof, and call
your witnesses beside Allah if ye are truthful.” (The Holy Qur’an,
2:23)***

And says:

***“Say: Verily, though mankind and Jinn should assemble to produce the
like of this Qur’an, they couldn’t produce the like thereof though they
were helpers one of another.” (The Holy Qur’an, 17:88)***

Although the enemies of Islam didn’t stop from taking any sort of action
in their confrontation against Islam and readied them for the dangerous
and bloody wars, and in this path suffered plenty of financial and
physical losses, but in spite of that were unable to confront with the
Holy Qur’an of Muhammad (S) and could not produce a similar verse. While
if such an act was possible, for them they certainly would have
preferred it to difficult confrontations in order to rescue them from
all those headaches and hardships.

The blessed Holy Qur’an was descended gradually during a period of
twenty-three years upon prophet Muhammad (S). His companions wrote exact
revelation called signs (a’ayat) that were collected later on and was
then presented as it is in the current form.

The Holy Qur’an is the only heavenly unique book in which any sort of
changes or deviations have not been made, and without more or less is
available for mankind; the Holy Qur’an is a book of deeds. If the
Muslims desire to be prosperous and could raise their heads in dignity,
to acquire back their lost majesty and grandeur; they do not have any
other option except to follow the steady and firm program of the Holy
Qur’an, and its implementation should cure their untreatable pains and
social problems.

2.5. A Brief History of Holy Prophet’s (S) Life
-----------------------------------------------

His father’s name was Abdullah and his mother’s name was A’aminah. He
was born on the seventh day of Month of Rabi al-Awwal in the year called
the Year of Elephant (A’am al-Feel) in the Holy City of Mecca; he was
appointed to prophethood at the age of forty years. He remained in Mecca
for thirteen years and during this period he invited people towards
Islam openly and secretly, during this period a group of people believed
in him but the pagans and idol-worshippers with their complete
stubbornness interfered and prevented the advancement and progress of
the Islam.

They made serious efforts and endeavors in torturing Muslims and the
Holy Prophet (S) to the extent that his own life was threatened with
danger, then he was forced to migrate to the Holy City of Medina;
gradually little by little the Muslims too joined him there and
eventually the Holy City of Medina was turned into the prime capital of
the Islamic Government and its military garrison. The Holy Prophet (S)
continued propagation of commandments, guidance of the people and
administering social affairs for a period of ten years; the Islamic Army
continuously remained at the alert position for defense and war.

The Holy Prophet (S) lived in this world for a period of sixty three
years; he passed away on the twenty-eighth of the Month of Safar in the
eleventh year of migration, and was buried in the Holy City of Medina.
Since his childhood, he was well mannered, truthful and righteous and
due to this reason he was called as Muhammad, the trusted one (amin);
from the point of view of good moral ethics he was the most famous among
the people of his period.

Treachery and lying were never noticed with respect to him, he never
oppressed any one, never performed indecent acts, treated the people
with respect, was well mannered and courteous, showed favor and
compassion towards the destitute and distressed; whatever he said, he
acted upon it accordingly and it was due to the means of his loveable
manners that people were inclined towards Islam and became Muslims with
their own determination.

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: “A beggar came near the Holy Prophet (S) and
asked for help, he got a little amount of dates from a helper as a debt
and gave it to him; a little time passed but the means of paying the
debt were not available to him. One day the person to whom he was
indebted came and demanded his dates, he replied: ‘Right now I do not
have them, whenever I am in a position to do so I would return them to
you.’ He came again and heard the same reply from him. At the third time
when he arrived and heard the same reply, he said: ‘O Prophet of Allah!
Until when will you keep saying, God-willing, I would pay?’ The Holy
Prophet (S) while encountering his impolite reply smiled and said: ‘Is
there anyone who would give me dates as a debt?’ A person replied: ‘O
Prophet of Allah, I would give you.’ He said: ‘Pay this man such amount
of dates, the creditor said: ‘I do not demand more than half of this
quantity; the Holy Prophet (S) replied: ‘I have bestowed the remaining
half quantity upon you.’”[^4]

2.6. Islamic Laws

The Islamic laws are not only limited to worshipping, commandment and
individual obligations, rather it consists of a comprehensive social
order and has commands and a program in various arenas of human beings;
it has laws and programs regarding social, political, legal, and civil
affairs. The Holy Prophet (S) and the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali
ibn Abu Talib (a.s.) governed the Muslims through the execution of the
same laws; Muslims in the beginning of Islam through means
implementation of the same programs were able to achieve all those
advancements and astonishing progress, and established a powerful and
magnificent government. We believe that the laws of Islam are better and
more perfect than all the laws; if they could be executed completely
between mankind and if they could be utilized for administering society,
mankind would attain prosperity and goodness, oppression and tyranny
would be completely rooted out, piece and coexistence would replace wars
and confrontation; and poverty and unemployment would be totally
eliminated.

We believe that: The laws of Islam are not defective and do not require
reformation and completion. We know that the sacred Islamic ideology
understands real interests of the people and has provided them the very
best laws. We believe that every law that is against the Holy Qur’an is
not in the interests of the people and does not have any worth. We
believe that we should follow the Islamic commandments and the Holy
Qur’an in all areas of life in order to become prosperous.

We know that the horrible state of affairs of Islamic nations has not
been created because of the effect of Islam; instead their entire
affliction is because of their refusal of the implementation of Islamic
laws. Since, we left the Islamic laws behind and required medicines of
sickness for our social problems from others, and only sufficed
ourselves in the name of Islam, we have fallen into such a dark day.

We believe that if Muslims want to regain their lost prestige, dignity
and grandeur and join the lines of progressive and advanced nations,
they have no options except to become the real Muslims, and should
implement all commandments of the Holy Qur’an and should take
inspiration from its social programs. But so far the laws and programs
of Islam remain only written with ink upon paper, and have not been
implemented in their totality; we should not wait for progress and
grandeur.

[^1]: Did you think that We had created you for a playful purpose and
that you were not to return to Us?” (The Holy Qur’an, 23:115)

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, v. 11, p. 30.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, v. 11, p. 1-61.

[^4]: Hayat al-Qulub, v.2, p-168.


