Chapter 3: Imamate (Leadership with Divine Authority)
=====================================================

3.1. Imamate (leadership with Divine Authority)
-----------------------------------------------

In the discussion of prophethood, it was proven that it was essential
that God, the Wise, should dispatch messengers for the guidance of
mankind, should provide them with the laws and commandments so that they
could achieve prosperity and perfection; now we say that: Since the life
of messenger is not eternal in the world and through his demise it is
quite possible that divine commandments which came for the guidance of
mankind might have been destroyed.

Therefore, after the prophet there must be someone so that divine
commandments without any less or more addition should remain preserved
near him; he should make efforts and endeavor in guarding and
preservation of those commandments; he should guard the religion and
execute the divine commandments, which guarantee the prosperity of
mankind. He should look after for the worldly and religious deeds of the
people, so that the path of achieving the prosperity and perfection for
the human beings remains open and the link between God and the people
should not be disconnected; such a person is called an Imam or
successor.

The Imam is a protector of the treasure of knowledge of the Prophet; the
Imam is the most perfect manifestation of a human being as well as of
religion. He is leader of the people; he himself takes a spiritual
journey of perfection and prosperity as well as guides others.

3.2. Characteristics of an Imam
-------------------------------

### A. Infallibility

The Imam too, like a prophet, should be immune from making any mistake
or negligence in remembering commandments, their propagation, and
execution so that the divine commandments should remain with him without
any less or more; and he should not allow the people to deviate from the
straight path of honesty in execution of commandments and administration
of the society; the main road of perfection−which is not more than
one−should not be obstructed.

The Imam should be infallible and immune from the performance of any sin
and rebellion. And his deeds should be in compliment with his words, so
that his words and values should not lose credit and should not lose his
confidence and trust from the people. If he would commit sins, deeds
opposite to the religious commandments, he would become as an example
for the people and through means of his character would invite them to
oppose religious commandments. Thus, the Imam must be infallible i.e. he
should act upon all religious commandments and should be decorated with
the esoteric essence of the religious commandments.

### B. Knowledge of Imam

An Imam must know all divine commandments of the religion. He must be
thoroughly knowledgeable with respect to every aspect relevant to his
spiritual position and leadership. He should be a learned scholar
(a’lim) to possess all religious commandments with him, so that in
guidance and administration of the people, he should not be helpless and
incompetent; he should be able to keep the straight path of prosperity
open.

### C. Distinctions and Perfection

Earlier it was proven that an Imam acts upon all religious commandments
and undertakes his journey in the context of religion. Therefore, he
should be the most superior and most perfect human being. He journeys
upon the straight path of religion and accompanies others with him and
guides them. An Imam is a total manifestation of the religion, and in
his blessed existence all realities and divine learning could be
witnessed.

### D. Miracles

It could be utilized from history and narrations that the infallible
Imams (a.s.) like Prophets had miracles and were capable of performing
acts which were not possible by ordinary human beings. Occasionally the
circumstances required that proof of their position of infallibility and
imamate depended upon their performance of a miracle.

Whoever would refer to the books of narrations, their excellent virtues,
history, and with unprejudiced intellect should review the abundance of
miracles that have been attributed to the Infallible Imams (a.s.) and
would attain the certainty that overall they had possessed miracles and
outstanding works. Of course it is not our intent that all miracles that
have been related to the Infallible Imams (a.s.) are true and correct;
instead perhaps among them some false and unknown matters might have
been existed.

### E. Imam’s Identification

An Imam could be identified through two paths:

#### First Path

The Prophet or the previous Imam should introduce him and appoint him as
his successor and leader of the people. If he is not introduced by God,
Prophet and previous Imam, the people by themselves could not identify
the Imam, and could appoint him as their leader for their governmental
affairs; because it was proven earlier that an Imam and leader of the
people should be infallible, most distinguished and learned scholar of
the community.

Other than God no one else has knowledge about the position of his
infallibility. Ordinary people are not in a position to diagnose the
infallible from the non-infallible. Regarding perfection of his holy
essence and divine knowledge no one knows except God and Prophet.

#### Second Path

In order to prove his Imamate, if an Imam has performed an outstanding
act or miracle, his imamate would be proven because had his claim been a
lie, God would not have certified his credibility through the means of a
miracle.

### Difference between an Imam and Prophet

Imam and Prophet have differences between them from the following point
of views:

#### First

A Prophet is the founder of a religion and is a bringer of the religious
commandments while an Imam is the guardian of commandments and is
responsible for their execution.

#### Second

A Prophet receives the religious laws and commandments through the means
of revelation and has direct communication with God; but an Imam is not
a receiver, i.e. the laws and commandments are not revealed upon him
instead he receives them from the Prophet and has a vital role in the
guidance, and admonishment of prophetic knowledge.

3.3. Appointment of a Successor and Number of Imams (a.s.)
----------------------------------------------------------

Whoever in the society possesses a position and rank and is responsible
for its ruling affairs, if he wants temporarily not to go to work,
without any doubt, he appoints a successor for himself and assigns
responsibility of ruling affairs of the society upon him. He would never
be ready to leave that congregation or community without assigning a
supervisor or manager. The Holy Prophet (S) of Islam too paid a serious
attention about this task and assigned plenty of emphasis regarding this
matter.

Every village or city that was conquered at the hands of Muslims, he
immediately appointed a ruler and governor for it. When he dispatched
soldiers to the war-front, he assigned a commander for them and also he
occasionally assigned his replacement in case of his martyrdom or
sickness. Whenever he journeyed or participated in a war, he appointed
his successor and assigned the ruling affairs of the community in Medina
to him.

The Holy Prophet (S) was the ruler of the Muslims, he was not negligent
about this matter that after his demise the Muslim society requires an
infallible ruler, who through means of execution of divine laws and
commandments should administer them and should make efforts and
endeavors towards the advancement of his cherished objective. The Holy
Prophet (S) knew well that Islamic nation could not remain as a living,
powerful, and Islamic nation without an infallible ruler.

Due to this reason it could be said with absolute certainty that: The
Holy Prophet (S) with all that compassion that that he had for overall
discipline and order of the Islamic community and survival of Islam; it
was impossible that he would leave the world without appointing a
successor or leader for ruling affairs of the young Islamic nation.
Apart from that it was proven earlier that an Imam should be appointed
through God and Prophet because except God and His Prophet, no one else
could testify to his infallibility.

Therefore it is absolute duty of the Prophet to introduce an infallible
Imam to the people and if he has acted negligently in this regards, he
has left the matter of prophethood and propagation of religion as
incomplete. It is because of this reason that we are certain that the
Holy Prophet (S) has declared his successor and Imam of the Muslims.

The Holy Prophet (S) not only appointed the successor immediately after
him, instead he also introduced the forthcoming Imams after him. In
plenty of traditions that have reached to us through the Holy Prophet
(S) the numbers of the Imams have been declared as twelve. The Holy
Prophet (S) said: “There would come twelve caliphs after

me and all of them would belong to Qureshite. The first person of them
would be Ali (a.s.) and last one would be the promised Mahdi (a.s.). And
in some of narrations the names of all twelve persons have been
mentioned.”[^1]

3.4. First Imam (a.s.)
----------------------

The Holy Prophet (S) from the beginning of his appointment until his
death has introduced at several occasions Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (a.s.)
as his successor and an Imam. In the last year of his life he was
blessed of performance Hajj-pilgrimage in Mecca. While, he was returning
from the journey, and reached at a place called: Ghadir-e-Khum, a verse
was revealed upon him:

***“O Messenger! Make known that which hath been revealed unto thee from
thy Lord, for if thou do it not, thou will not have conveyed His
message. Allah will protect thee from mankind. Lo! Allah guides not the
disbelieving folk.” (The Holy Qur’an, 5:67)***

The Holy Prophet (S) stopped his journey right there and ordered that
all Muslims should stop their journey. More than twenty thousand people
gathered around him; he ordered that a pulpit should be made; he went
upon the pulpit and took Ali ibn Abu Talib (a.s.) in his hands and
raised him so that the people could see him. He delivered a sermon and
said: “Upon whomsoever I am the master and guardian, Ali too is his
master and guardian, O Allah whoever likes Ali, Thou should be his
friend and whoever does enmity with him You too should do enmity with
him.”

Omar was the first person who made allegiance with Ali and said: “O Ali!
Congratulations you have become my master and guardian as well as of
other believers.” After Omar, other Muslims too made allegiance with
Imam Ali (a.s.). It was in this manner that under extreme heat and
burning sun of Hejaz, that important task was materialized, and Imam Ali
(a.s.) was officially appointed to caliphate and Imamate.[^2] This
important incident was held on the nineteenth of Dhu al-Hijjah in the
tenth year of migration, and in order to remember this historical day,
we Shi’a celebrate that day as a feast called: Eid-e-Ghadir.

Imam Ali (a.s.) was born on thirteenth of the Holy Month of Raj’ab, in
Mecca twenty three years before the migration; his father’s name was Abu
Talib and his mother’s name was Fatimah. Since his childhood, he was
placed under the direct care of the Holy Prophet (S) and was the prime
individual who believed in him. The Holy Prophet (S) married his
daughter Fatimah al-Zahra (SA) and thus he became his son in law. His
distinctions and services are so vast that it is impossible to describe
them.

He was matchless and unique in bravery and manhood; participated in wars
and was always in the forefront and never feared any one waged war in
support of Islam, and motivation of God’s worship; while encountering
severe hardships and dangerous incidents, never spared himself from
showing self-sacrifice and risking his life.

He was unique in worshipping and piety; was matchless in wisdom and
knowledge and was the treasure of the Holy Prophet’s (S) knowledge. So
far it was possible, he confronted with oppression and injustices and
defended the oppressed, showed compassion and kindness towards destitute
and helpless ones. Imam Ali (a.s.) loved agriculture and engaged himself
in tree plantation, habitation of uncultivated lands, and construction
of aqueducts.

When the Holy Prophet (S) left this world a group of hypocrites decided
to dismiss Imam Ali (a.s.) from the caliphate. They disregarded and
ignored his personal perfections and distinctions and remained naïve
with all those recommendations of the Holy Prophet (S) and removed Imam
Ali (a.s.) from the caliphate and succession.

Taking the excuse that Imam Ali (a.s.) was young and not suitable for
the caliphate; had killed plenty of groups in the wars and due to this
reason people had grudges against him, and therefore would not tolerate
his caliphate. During the caliphate of Abu Bakr, Omar, and Othman, which
went on for twenty-five years, Imam Ali (a.s.) was forced to sit alone
in a corner where he trained and nourished worthy individuals.

After the killing of Othman, people took allegiance with him and for
approximately four years and nine months he ruled the Muslims. He lived
in the world for sixty three years and on the night of nineteenth of
Holy Month of Ramadan in the fortieth year of migration, was struck a
blow upon his head by Ibn Muljim’s hands in the Mosque of Kufa and
martyred on the night of twenty first of the same month and was buried
in the Holy City of Najaf in Iraq.

### A Story from Imam Ali (a.s.)

The person in charge of the treasury of the Islamic Government said: “A
necklace of pearls was present in the treasury. One day a daughter of
the Commander of the Faithful, approached me and borrowed the necklace
and said: ‘I am celebrating the feast of Eid al-Adha, would return it
after three days, and in case it get lost I would pay you its cost.’

The Commander of the faithful saw the necklace in the neck of his
daughter and recognized it and asked me: ‘Why have you committed a
treachery regarding general wealth of the community?’ I explained him
the matter and said: ‘Your daughter assured me that it wouldn’t be lost,
and I myself also guarantee about its return; he said: ‘Right now take
it from my daughter and if after that you would do so I would punish
you’; the daughter said: ‘O my dear father! Do not I have that much
right to borrow the necklace for three days to celebrate the days of Eid
al-Adah?!’ Imam Ali (a.s.) replied: ‘O daughter of Ali, do not
transgress from your right! Do all immigrant women have such a necklace
to decorate themselves with it during the days of Eid al-Adha?’”[^3]

### Another Story

One day Imam Ali (a.s.) saw a woman who was carrying a water skin upon
her shoulders to her home. He said: “Give the water skin to me so that I
could bring it to your home, in between the path to her house he asked
that woman how she had been; she replied: ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib dispatched
my husband to one of the frontiers of the country where he was killed. A
few orphan children have remained from him, and do not have the food and
clothing, I am forced to work as a maid to earn a living for them; Imam
Ali (a.s.) carried that water skin to her house and then returned, and
spent the night in anxiety and sorrow.

In the morning he carried a bag full of food to her home and said to
that woman: ‘Open the door, I have brought food for the children.’ She
replied: ‘May God be pleased with you and judge between me and Ali.’
Imam Ali (a.s.) entered inside home and said to the mother of the
children: ‘Do you want to cook the bread and let me take care of the
children or vice versa?’ The women replied that I am more familiar with
cooking of the bread and you take care of the children.

Imam Ali (a.s.) kept the children amused and as well-cooked the meat;
when the bread was cooked Imam Ali (a.s.) with his own blessed hands put
the bread and dates into the mouths of the orphaned children and said:
‘O the light of my eyes eat and be contended with Ali.’ A woman from the
neighborhood identified that honorable one and said to the widowed woman
that: ‘This man is the Commander of the Faithful.’ That woman came near
Ali (a.s.) and said: ‘O Commander of the Faithful! I am ashamed from
you.’ Imam Ali (a.s.) replied: ‘I am ashamed from you because until now
I was negligent about yours affairs.’”[^4]

3.5. Second Imam (a.s.)
-----------------------

Imam Ali (a.s.) because of God’s command appointed his son Imam al-Hasan
(a.s.) for Imamate.[^5] Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) was born on the fifteenth
of the Holy Month of Ramadan in the Holy City of Medina in the third
year of migration. His father was Ali (a.s.) and mother was Fatimah
al-Zahra (SA) −daughter of the Holy Prophet (S). The Holy Prophet (S)
loved al-Hasan (a.s.) and al-Husain (a.s.) very much and said about them
that: “al-Hasan and al-Husain are best youths of the Paradise.[^6]

After the demise of his exalted father Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) reached to
caliphate and Imamate but was encountered with serious opposition from
Mu’awiyah who was the ruler of Syria. Eventually his opposition lead to
military confrontation and the armies of Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) and
Mu’awiyah stood against each other; when Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) reviewed
the general affairs of his soldiers, he witnessed treachery from a
majority of his commanders. Therefore he avoided war and was forced to
have a peace with Mu’awiyah. The basic reason of peace of Imam al-Hasan
was due to two reasons:

**Firstly:** Although the number of the soldiers was significant, they
were divided and disorganized. Among them there were plenty of
individuals who were hypocrites and were supporters of Mu’awiyah; they
had even promised to arrest Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) and hand him over to
Mu’awiyah. Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) realized that if he wage a war with a
disorganized and hypocrite army, defeat was absolutely certain; apart
from that through the means of severe internal warfare, bloodshed and
continuous confrontations, plenty of groups who were supporters were
getting killed and the Muslim manpower was weakening.

**Secondly:** Mu’awiyah with his shrewdness tricked the people and
through means of pretending and cheating, presented himself as
supporters of the religion and defenders of the oppressed and said: “I
do not have any other objective except advancement of Islam and
implementation of commandments of the Holy Qur’an.” But Imam al-Hasan
(a.s.) knew that: “Mu’awiyah is lying and does not have any other aim
except continuation of his rule, but was it possible to make people
comprehend this matter easily?!”

It was due to this point and other considerations that Imam al-Hasan
(a.s.) decided for peace in order to expose the filthy personality of
Mu’awiyah and his dangerous plots to the people so that the nation could
understand very well about Mu’awiyah and the institution of Bani Umayyah
so that ultimately the grounds for a revolution could be made readied.

Imam al-Hasan (a.s.), for the protection of the fundamentals of Islam
made peace with Mu’awiyah and in the peace treaty mentioned these
conditions, but Mu’awiyah did not respect any one of them. Imam al-Hasan
(a.s.) lived in this world for a period of forty-seven years. Eventually
with the encouragement of Mu’awiyah with the hand of his wife Ju'adeh
binte Ash‘ath, he was poisoned and martyred on twenty-eight day of the
Month of Safar, and was buried in the Jannatul Baqi‘ Cemetery in Medina.

### A Story from Imam al-Hasan (a.s.)

A Syrian man saw Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) in the path and started calling
him with insults. When he ultimately became silent, Imam al-Hasan (a.s.)
paid attention towards him, saluted, smiled and said: “I assume that you
are a stranger in the town, perhaps you have misunderstood the facts, if
you offer an apology, I would be contended with you, if you need
anything I would provide it to you, if you are a destitute I would make
you needless, if you are exiled I would provide shelter for you, if you
have any special need, I would bestow upon you; I have plenty of wealth
and a large house, if you enter into my home and be my guest, it would
be better for you.”

After the Syrian man heard these words, he wept and said: “I testify
that you are the Caliph of God and Imam. God knows better where to place
the Caliphate and Imamate. O son of the Holy Prophet (S), before our
meeting you and your father were the worst enemies near me; but at
present I consider you as the most superior creatures of God, then he
entered into his house and as long as he lived in Medina, was the guest
of that noble one.”[^7]

3.6. Third Imam (a.s.)
----------------------

Imam al-Husain (a.s.) was born on the third of the Holy Month of Sh’aban
in forth year AH in Medina, his father[^8] was Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib
(a.s.) and his mother was Fatimah al-Zahra (SA), daughter of the Holy
Prophet (S).

Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) through God’s command appointed his brother Imam
al-Husain (a.s.) to Caliphate and Imamate. During Mu’awiyah’s Caliphate;
he lived under very severe and harsh conditions because the commandments
and laws of religion were not executed, and God and the Holy Prophet’s
(S) commandments were replaced with Mu’awiyah’s personal whims and
desires.

Mu’awiyah’s institutions did not leave any stone unturned in the
destruction of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) and Shi’a of Imam Ali (a.s.). With all
these unpleasant circumstances, he practiced patience and self-restraint
until Mu’awiyah died and his son Yazid became his successor. Yazid
ordered the Governor of Medina to seek his allegiance from Imam
al-Husain (a.s.) and in case of his refusal, he should be executed.

The Governor of Medina announced Yazid’s orders to that noble one; Imam
al-Husain (a.s.) requested permission of one night in order to think
about the situation. But since he did not consider the allegiance and
signing of Caliphate in the interest of Islam and his life was in
danger, he was forced to move towards Mecca and to stay inside the
immune sacred sanctuary of God; thus he moved towards Mecca and entered
it on the third of the Holy Month of Sh’aban.

The story of Yazid and Imam al-Husain (a.s.) and his movement was
circulated among the cities. The people of Iraq who were opposed to the
Government of Mu’awiyah and Yazid, especially the people of Kufa, wrote
a significant number of letters to Imam al-Husain (a.s.) and invited him
to Iraq.

On the other hand Imam al-Husain (a.s.) realized that Mu’awiyah and
Yazid had trampled all commandments of the Islam. In order to secure
their rule and position they had not hesitated to commit all sorts of
illegitimate acts, tyranny and oppression. They ruled in the name of
Islam and considered themselves as successors of the Holy Prophet (S);
there was a fear that they would completely turn fundamentals of Islam
as upside down. Now they wanted of him that he should testify the
authenticity of their government officially; on the other hand Yazid has
secretly assigned a group to murder the Imam al-Husain (a.s.) in Mecca,
or they should arrest him alive.

It was under these circumstances that Imam al-Husain (a.s.) decided that
in order to secure the basic essence of Islam, confront the injustice of
Bani Umayyah, and guard the sanctity of the House of God, he should
leave Mecca and should rise up against Yazid’s tyrannical institution.
Thus, he moved towards Kufa which was the center of the Shi’a, they had
promised their support and cooperation, and perhaps to achieve his lost
rights to confront Bani Umayyah. Yazid’s Army besieged and didn’t allow
him to reach Kufa.

Then the order arrived from Yazid that if Imam al-Husain (a.s.)
surrenders take allegiance with him, dispatch him towards me so that I
could decide about him, and in case if he did not surrender, fight with
him. Imam al-Husain (a.s.) did not give himself to wretchedness, he did
not make compromise with the tyrant Government of Yazid; instead he
fought, and with his small army stood up against the huge army of Yazid.
He fought with perfect valiancy and bravery and killed a group of his
enemies. Ultimately, he himself, his brothers, and sons drank from the
chalice of martyrdom; they were killed on the tenth of Muharram in the
year 61 AH, and were buried in Karbala, Iraq. Imam al-Husain (a.s.)
lived in this world for a period of fifty-seven years.

We Shi’a consider the Day of ’Ashura as day of sorrow and lamination and
for the remembrance of epic and valiant martyrdom, organize large
congregational assemblies so that the spirit of self- sacrificing and
confrontation against injustice and oppression should remain alive among
the nations. The objective of Imam al-Husain (a.s.) was defense of
religion and confrontation with oppression, we too never forget about
this sacred objective. Imam al-Husain didn’t surrender his body to
degradation and wretchedness and taught Muslims to offer
self-sacrificing and extreme devotion.

Imam al-Husain (a.s.) was killed but was not defeated. He made the
supreme and distinguished virtues of human beings alive forever;
practically taught the people self-sacrificing, extreme devotion,
righteousness, and confrontation with injustice and tyranny. He was able
to expose and degrade Yazid and Bani Umayyah who were ruling in the name
of Caliph of the Holy Prophet (S), and proved their shameful deeds as
false. He made the pillars of Umayyad Governments tremble and destroyed
their dangerous plot against the Islam.

Organization of assemblies of crying and lamination only in itself does
not insure the exalted objective of Imam al-Husain (a.s.), instead his
sacred objective must be identified and efforts and endeavors should be
made for its pursuit accordingly.

3.7. Fourth Imam (a.s.)
-----------------------

The fourth Imam, Imam Ali ibn al-Husain (a.s.), was born on the
fifteenth of Jamada al-Thani 38 AH in the Holy City of Medina. His
father was Imam al-Husain (a.s.) and mother was Shaher Bano, daughter of
the Yazdgerd, Emperor of Iran. Imam al-Husain (a.s.) appointed him for
Caliphate and Imamate through God’s command.[^9]

Imam al-Sajjad (a.s.) made so many efforts and endeavors in prostration
and worshipping that he was called al-Sajjad and Zain al-A’abidin. He
was present in the incident of Karbala but since he was sick, he was not
killed (in battle); during his journey from Karbala to Kufa and Damascus
he delivered eloquent speeches and proved the sacred objective and
truthfulness of his exalted father and the heart-burning, horrible
tragedy of the Martyrs of Karbala and their path of honesty to the
attention of the general masses.

Since Imam al-Sajjad (a.s.) did not have freedom and was not in a
position to propagate Islamic learning and knowledge and commandments of
religion among the people, he was forced to sit in isolation. He kept
himself busied in worshipping God and utilized opportunities to nourish
and train the individuals. In order for the publication of religious
learning he pursued another path; i.e. he presented religious learning
in the form of prayers.

Excellent prayers have remained from him; one of this most precious
works consists of the book of: Sahifeh Sajjadiyeh; Imam al-Sajjad (a.s.)
lived in this world for 57 years and on twenty-fifth of the Month of
Moharram in the year 95 AH, he was martyred in Medina and was buried in
the Baq’i Cemetery. Imam al-Sajjad (a.s.) liked that orphaned children,
blind, crippled, and the destitute should appear at his table-spread and
many times he gave them food by his own blessed hands; he provided food
and dress for many poor people of Medina. During the night when the
people were sleeping he carried the food upon his back and covered his
face so that no one could identify him.

He went to the doors of poor and destitute and distributed food among
them; it happened very often that the deserving ones were standing upon
doors of their house waiting for the arrival of Imam al- Sajjad (a.s.).
When they saw him, they gave the glad tidings of his arrival to each
other but no one identified him and knew who the source of their food
was. When Imam a-Sajjad (a.s.) died the poor of Medina understood that
unidentified man was Imam Zain al-A’abedin (a.s.) and it was only then
that the sound of their loud cries were raised.[^10]

3.8. Fifth Imam (a.s.)
----------------------

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) was born on third day of the Month Safar
in the year 75 AH in Medina. His father was Imam Ali ibn al-Husain
(a.s.) and his mother was Fatimah, the daughter of Imam al-Hasan
Mujataba (a.s.). Imam al-Sajjad with God’s command appointed Imam
al-Baqir (a.s.) to the Caliphate and Imamate.[^11]

His education and knowledge was so much that he was titled as the one
who reaches the depth of knowledge (Baqir al-Uloom). The great scholars
recognized his intellectual position and were humbled in front of him
and respected him in a manner like that of a school child who sits
respectfully before his teacher; they asked their problems from him and
received sufficient answers.

For Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) an opportunity arose that was not provided to
all of his predecessors. Due to internal conflicts and confrontations of
the caliphs, he had relatively more freedom and seriously endeavored in
the publication of Islamic learning, religious commandments and laws,
and left thousands of educational contexts and narrations as his legacy.

Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) lived in this world fifty-seven years and was
martyred on the seventh day of the Month of Dhu al-Hijja in the year of
114 AH, and was buried in the Baq’i Cemetery. Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) loved
agriculture and worked hard to earn his livelihood. Muhammad ibn
Mankader said: “On a very hot day I met Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) in the
vicinity of Medina, I saw that he had gone out for agricultural affairs
and sweat was dripping from his body.

He said to himself that: ‘For an honorable and exalted person like Imam
al-Baqir (a.s.) who is an offspring of the Holy Prophet (S), it is not
decent to come out of his home in this heat, I better admonish him. I
went near him and offered salutations upon him, while taking deep
breaths and while his sweat was dripping he answered my salutations. I
said: ‘O Son of the Holy Prophet (S)! Is it not insulting that at such a
time you are busy in seeking the world? If your death arrives right now
what would you do?

That honorable one rested his back against some support and said: ‘If my
death arrives right at this time, I would die in the state of
worshipping; because I am working so that I do not stretch my hand from
begging near you or other people. If I am in a state of sinning against
God, then in that case I must be scared from death.’ I said: ‘O the Son
of the Holy Prophet (S), I wanted to admonish you but I become
admonished from your words.’”[^12]

3.9. Sixth Imam (a.s.)
----------------------

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) was born on seventeenth day of the Month of
Rab’i al-Awwal, in the year 83 AH. His father was Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
(a.s.) and his mother was Umme Farwah, the daughter, of Qasim ibn
Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr. Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) with the command of God
appointed Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) for the position of Caliphate and
Imamate.[^13]

During Imam al- Sadiq’s (a.s.) period the confrontation between Banu
Umayyah and the Abbasids had intensified significantly and as a result
the power of the current government was rather weak. Banu Abbas too, in
their opposition with Banu Umayyah, supported Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.). Imam
al-Sadiq (a.s.), utilized this opportunity and endeavored in education
of religious learning and publication of commandments and laws; through
organizing educational assemblies, he nourished distinguished pupils and
intellectuals; and succeeded in introducing education of issues relevant
to legitimate (halal) and illegitimate (har’am) among the people.

Approximately four thousands[^14] pupils were trained in the School of
Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.); books consisting of precious treasurers were
written from traditions.

Due to this reason the Shi’a School of Thought is called as the Ja’fari
School of Thought. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) lived in this world for a period
of 65 years and was martyred in the Holy City of Medina in middle of the
Month of Raj’ab or twenty-fifth of the Month of Shawwal in the year 148
AH and was buried in the Baq’i Cemetery.

3.10. Seventh Imam (a.s.)
-------------------------

The seventh Imam Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (a.s.) was born on seventh of
the Month of Safar in the year 128 AH in Abw’a that has been located in
between Mecca and Medina. His father was Imam al- Sadiq (a.s.) and his
mother was Hamideh. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) with the Command of God,
appointed his son Musa to Caliphate and Imamate. His worshipping and
piety was to the extent that he was called Righteous Servant (Abd
Saleh); he was very mature and compassionate and never lost his temper
while encountering severe hardships, and due to this reason he was
called repressor of anger (al-Kazim).

In spite of the fact that the Imam (a.s.) lived in a very difficult
period, there was no opportunity for the publication of narration, even
then, plenty of people acquired knowledge from his presence and plenty
of narrations have been left from him.

He lived in this world for 55 years; in the year 179 AH, Caliph Harun
ordered that he should be taken from Medina to Iraq. He was imprisoned
for years in Baghdad and Basra and ultimately was poisoned and martyred
on twenty-fifth of the Month of Rajab in the year 183 AH. He was
martyred in prison of Sindi ibn Sh’ahak in Bagdad and was buried in the
Holy City of Kazmain.

A man in Medina continuously bothered Imam al-Kazim (a.s.) and cursed
Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (a.s.); some of companions of the Imam (a.s.)
said: “Please permit us to kill this wicked person, he refused them to
do that and instead asked them where that person was?’ They replied: ‘He
is busy in agriculture in the vicinity of Medina.’ Imam (a.s.) started
moving in the direction of his agriculture farm; he reached near him,
sat near him, with a smiling and pleasant face asked him: ‘How much have
you spent on this farming?’ He replied one hundred dinars.’ He asked:
‘How do you expect your return?’

He replied: ‘Two hundred dinars.’ He asked how much do you want to earn
from it.’ He replied: ‘Two hundred dinars.’ Then Imam (a.s.) gave him a
sack containing three hundred dinars and said to him: ‘The product of
this farming also belongs to you.’ That man who saw such sort of
benevolence against his annoying of Imam (a.s.), stood from his place
and kissed Imam’s (a.s.) forehead and asked pardon from his previous
insults; Imam (a.s.) pardoned him and returned towards Medina. The next
day they saw that man in the mosque, and his eyes fell upon Musa ibn
Ja’far (a.s.) he said: ‘God knows better where to place His Prophethood
and Imamate. The people were amazed and wanted to find out the reason of
change in his behavior, that man started talking about the virtues and
distinctions of Imam Musa ibn Ja’far. Then Imam Musa ibn Ja’far (a.s.)
said to his companions: ‘Was this act better than your decision? Through
the means of an insignificant amount of money I have removed his evil
and have changed him into a friend of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.).”[^15]

3.11. Eighth Imam (a.s.)
------------------------

Imam Al-Ridha’ (a.s.) was born on the eleventh day of the Month of Dhu
al-Q’ada in the year of 148 AH. His name was Ali, his father was Imam
Musa ibn Ja’far (a.s.) and his mother’s name was Najmah. With God’s
Command Imam Musa ibn Ja’far (a.s.) appointed his son Ali to Caliphate
and Imamate.[^16]

The knowledge and learning of Imam Al-Ridha’ (a.s.) was superior with
respect to all of the people of that period. Students for acquiring
knowledge came to his threshold and utilized from his presence; a large
number of narrations about Islamic learning and religious laws and
commandments have remained as his legacy. He had very interesting
debates and arguments with the scholars of other religions. He
participated in the debate assemblies and answered criticisms of all,
and was not helpless in answering about each issue whatsoever.

His vast learning and knowledge made the people present amazed and
causing them to offer him praise and compliments; he was regarded among
the people extremely honorable, and was called as Scholar of Holy
Progeny of the Holy Prophet (S). Caliph Mamun al-Rashid in the year of
200 AH called Imam Al-Ridha’ (a.s.) from Medina to Marv, located in the
Khorasan Province of Iran.

When Imam Al-Ridha’ (a.s.) entered into Marv, Mamun suggested that Imam
(a.s.) should accept the Caliphate, but he didn’t accept; with a great
deal of insistence he suggested that he should accept becoming the
successor! He, with this act, had two intentions:

1. He wanted, by appointing Imam Al-Ridha’ (a.s.) as successor, to
acquire a religious and spiritual pretense in order to attract the
attention of Shi’a and Alawite S’adat towards him and through this
means, make him at ease from their opposition and rebellion.

2. He wanted Imam Al-Ridha’ (a.s.) to accept becoming his successor to
become close to the Institution of Caliphate and become involved in the
affairs of the country and through this means sacrifice his prestige and
dignity to lessen Shi’a inclination, attachment toward him.

Imam Al-Ridha’ (a.s.) was well-informed with respect to Mamun’s
intentions and knew that: Someone, in order to secure his caliphate,
does not even hesitate to kill his own brother; it is not possible that
with pure intentions, he would offer caliphate or the position of
successor to someone else; however due to these illegitimate reasons he
refused to accept becoming his successor, but with the intense pressure
of Mamun, he had no other option except to accept it. However, he did so
with the condition that he would not interfere in affairs of the country
and in appointments and terminations of the rulers. Later on Mamun
realized that Imam Al-Ridha’ (a.s.) had not given up his honor and
dignity, instead, the inclination and attachment of the people with
respect to the Imam was increasing day by day. It was due to this reason
that he decided to kill him.

Imam Al-Ridha’ (a.s.) lived in this world for 55 years then he was
poisoned through Mamun and in the last Month of Safar in year 303 AH,
was martyred in Tus and was buried in the same place which is now called
the Holy City of Mashhad.

3.12. Ninth Imam (a.s.)
-----------------------

The ninth Imam (a.s.) was born on the tenth of the Holy Month of Rajab
or on the nineteenth of the month of Ramadan in the year 195 AH in
Medina. His name was Imam Muhammad al-Taqi (a.s.), his father was Imam
Al-Ridha’ (a.s.) and his mother was Sabikah. Imam Al-Ridha’ (a.s.) with
God’s Command appointed Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s.) for Caliphate and
Imamate. Imam Muhammad al- Taqi (a.s.) attended the Imamate after his
father.

Although at that time he was in his childhood and had not attained the
age of the puberty, God’s given knowledge was so much that that he was
able to answer all the religious problems of the people. The difficult
religious questions that were asked for his testing were replied to very
well; in a manner that his knowledge and distinctions became explicit
for the ordinary people and they were all amazed with his power of
knowledge.

His piety and piousness was to the extent that he was called as the most
virtuous (al-Taqi). Imam al- Jawad (a.s.) lived in this world only for
twenty-five years; the Abbasid Caliph Motasam called him from Medina to
Baghdad, in the 220 AH, where he was martyred on the last day of the
Month of Dhu al-Q’ad’a in the same year in Bagdad and was buried near
the grave of his grandfather Musa ibn Ja’far (a.s.).

3.13. Tenth Imam (a.s.)
-----------------------

Imam Ali al-Naqi (a.s.) was born on the fifteenth of the Month of Dhul
Hijj’a or second of Raj’ab in the year 212 AH in Sariya in vicinity of
the Holy City of Medina; his father was Imam Muhammad al- Taqi (a.s.)
and his mother was Sam’anah. Imam Muhammad al-Taqi (a.s.) with God’s
command appointed his Imam Ali al-Naqi (a.s.) to Caliphate and
Imamate.[^17]

He was only eight years old when his father left the world; and at the
same young age acquired Imamate, but was completely aware of divine
knowledge. He was unique and matchless in knowledge and wisdom. His
decent conduct, vast knowledge, and piousness of that noble one absorbed
and attracted the people towards him.

The Abbasid Caliph Muttawakil was afraid that people would be inclined
towards him and would gather around him thus causing a threat to his
government; due to this reason he called the Imam (a.s.) from Medina to
Samara in the year 243 AH and kept him under his severe vigilance. Imam
Ali Naqi (a.s.) lived in this world for a period of only forty two years
and was continuously under the pressure of Abbasid Caliphs and was
martyred on the twenty-seventh day of Jum’ada al-Thani or third of the
Month of Raj’ab in the year 254 AH, in Samara and was buried there.

3.14. Eleventh Imam (a.s.)
--------------------------

The eleventh Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) was born on the eighth or
fourth of the Month of Rabi al- Thani in the year 232 AH in the Holy
City of Medina. His father was Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s.) and his mother
was Hudeth. Imam Muhammad al-Taqi (a.s.) with God’s Command, appointed
his son Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) to Caliphate and Imamate.[^18]

Imam al-Askari (a.s.) too like his father was under severe vigilance in
the City of Samara and was also in prison for a period of his blessed
life. People were not able to see him freely in order to benefit from
his knowledge and wisdom. But in spite of that narrations have remained
from him as his legacy; his pleasant conduct, virtues and knowledge are
not hidden from anyone. Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) lived in this world
for only twenty eight years and was martyred on the eighth day of the
Month of Rabi al-Awwal in the year 260 AH and was buried there.

3.15. Twelfth Imam (a.j.)
-------------------------

The twelfth Imam of Shi’a, Muhammad ibn al-Hasan (a.j.) was born in
Samara on the fifteenth of Sh’aban in the year of 255 AH; his titles are
al-Mahdi, the one who would rise up (Qa’im) and Lord of the Age (Sahib
al-Zaman) and Proof of God (al-Hujjah). His father was Imam Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.) and mother was Narjis. Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) with
God’s Command appointed his son Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi (a.j.) to
Caliphate and Imamate. In many of the narrations that have reached us
through the Holy Prophet (S), he said: “The ninth son from the lineage
of Imam al- Husain (a.s.) would have my name and would be the Promised
Guide (Mahdi M’aood).”

The Holy Prophet (S) and Infallible Imams (a.s.) have informed that that
the son of Imam Hasan al- Askari (a.s.) is the Promised al-Mahdi (a.j.),
and he would remain hidden for a prolonged period from our sights. When
God would deem it to be expedient, he would appear and would reform the
world through expanding justice and equality; he would rule over the
entire earth, would make Monotheism and God’s worshipping as general and
would officially declare the sacred religion of Islam for all of
mankind.

In accordance with the forecast of the Holy Prophet (S) and information
and narrations from the Infallible Imams (a.s.), God gave a son to Imam
Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) named, Muhammad (a.j.); a group of very close
companions and a number of people in his inner circle who were trusted
by Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) have seen that child and testified about
his presence. The Imam of the Age (a.j.) at the time of the demise of
his father was only five years old and acquired Imamate after him.

Since the Abbasid Caliphs had heard about the indications of Imam
al-Mahdi (a.s.) and were learned about the Holy Prophet’s (S) traditions
that the son of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) is the promised savior who
would confront oppression and injustice and would make the government of
tyrants upside down; they had a serious determination that if there is a
child from Imam Hasan al- Askari (a.s.) they would kill him in order to
remove the great danger from their path.

It was due to this reason as well as other considerations, the Imam of
the Age (a.s.) was forced to remain hidden from sights and should live
secretly, but his link with the people was not completely severed,
rather it was possible that through the means of specially appointed
people who were called as his deputies (wakil or nayab), people could
have communicated with the Imam of the Age (a.j.) and could have
obtained the answer to their requests. His famous deputies are four
people as follows:

1. Othman ibn S’aeed

2. Muhammad ibn Othman

3. Husain ibn Rooh

4. Ali ibn Muhammad Samari

These four people were appointed as his deputies one after another, then
his smaller occultation (gheebat-e-sughra) was completed and official
communication with Imam (a.j.) was terminated and greater occultation
had begun. Currently Imam (a.j.) lives in greater occultation
(ghaybat-e-kubra); he moves among the people, participates in
congregations but does not introduce himself. This condition will
continue until the general circumstances of the world become suitable,
and the ground for the establishment of a single Islamic Government of
the world becomes readied.

And a majority of the people would be inclined from the profundities of
their heart and soul for the ruling of a system based upon monotheism,
and would consider a solution of their problems only through obedience
of God’s Commandments after becoming completely disappointed from
everywhere, and with severe intensity of their infliction with tyranny
and injustice would be put out of patience by harassment.

At that time the Lord of the Age, Imam al-Zaman (a.j.), will appear and
through mighty power that he would have at his disposal; he would turn
the institution of oppression and injustice upside down and through the
execution of the divine commandments would fill the world with justice
and equality. We Shi’a during the period of his occultation have the
obligation of waiting for his arrival: We abstract the most subtle
programs of social commandments of the Holy Qur’an and introduce them to
the attention of mankind; prove distinctions and advantages of divine
laws to mankind.

We bring attention of mankind towards the divine programs and laws;
confront with false ideologies and fallacies; endeavor to provide the
required preparations and preliminaries for establishment of Islamic
Government for the entire world. Meanwhile through abstracting design
and plans of solutions of the world’s problems from the Holy Qur’an and
narrations, provide them to reformers of mankind; through making the
thoughts of human beings enlightened, accordingly prepare ourselves for
the Imam’s (a.j.) appearance and the formation of the government of
justice and equity.

### 3.15.1. Our Belief Regarding Imams (a.s.)

1. The Imams (a.s.) are completely immaculate from sins, mistakes and
blunders.

2. They are thoroughly knowledgeable about all divine commandments and
laws; knowledge and information which are required for guidance and
spiritual instructions have been provided to them.

3. None of the commandments are introduced by them nor are they its
commentators.

4. They practice all religious commandments and believe truthfully in
them; they are decorated with decent, righteous conduct and are the best
individuals of humanity and are the complete manifestation of the
religion.

5. They are human beings and are servants of Allah, the Most High, just
like any other human beings; they are His creatures susceptible to
sickness and death; they are not gods and creators of existences.

6. Eleven of them were martyred. The Twelfth Imam (a.s.) is the
immediate son of Imam Hasan al- Askari (a.s.); he is still alive and his
appearance is awaited.

3.16. Shi’a
-----------

Those who consider Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (a.s.) as immediate caliph and
successor of the Holy Prophet (S) are called Shi’a. The Imamiyeh Shi’a
regard Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (a.s.) and his eleven infallible sons as
Imam and leaders and obey their sayings and deeds. A true Shi’a is
someone who follows Imam Ali (a.s.) and infallible Imams (a.s.) and
their narrations and deeds as their model. Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) said to
Jabir: “O Jabir! Is it sufficient for a person only to say this much
amount that: ‘I am a lover of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.)?’

By God he is not our Shi’a but that he should be pious and obey God. O
Jabir earlier, my Shi’a were identified for these characteristics:
Hospitability, being trustworthy, remembering God, prayer, fasting,
goodness towards parents, helping neighbors and the destitute, orphans
and those who were under debt, righteousness and being reciters of the
Holy Qur’an. They did not say a thing about the people except goodness;
they were trustworthy of the people.’

“Jabir replied: ‘O son of the Holy Prophet (S)! At this time I do not
know any one possessing these characteristics.’ Imam (a.s.) replied: ‘O
Jabir different beliefs should not make you confused and to fall down to
commit a mistake. Is it sufficient for the prosperity of a person that
he should hold to this much that: I am lover of Imam Ali (a.s.), but
does not do God’s commandments? If someone says that: I am lover of the
Holy Prophet (S) but does not follow his words and deeds, the friendship
of the Holy Prophet (S) should not become the means of his prosperity
while the Holy Prophet (S) was superior to Imam Ali (a.s.). O Shi’ah! Be
afraid of God, and obey His commandments. God does not have family ties
or relationship with anyone; the most honorable person near God is the
person who is the most pious and foremost in performance of deeds. O
Jabir! By God, there is no means of God’s nearness except obedience to
His Commandments. Freedom from hell is not in our hands, whoever is
obedient to God is our friend, and whoever rebels against God’s
Commandments is our enemy. Our vicegerency (vilayat) is not obtained
except through the means of righteous deeds and piousness.’”[^19]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: “Be pious and righteous; make endeavors in
self-purification and cleansing and the performance of virtuous deeds;
be truthful, trustworthy, and of pleasant conduct; treat yours neighbors
kindly; through the means of your conduct and deeds, invite people
towards the true religion. Be a source of our prestige and to keep our
head high. With wicked deeds do not provide the means of our shame and
degradation. Make your prostrations and genuflections prolonged; because
when a slave prolongs his prostrations and genuflections, Satan becomes
upset and cries: ‘O woe! They have done obedience and I have sinned,
they prostrate but I refused to do prostration.’”[^20]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: “Disciples and helpers of Jesus (a.s.) were
his Shi’a; but his helpers were not better than our Shi’a; because they
gave him the promise to help but didn’t deliver their promise and did
not fight in the path of God. But our Shi’a, since the demise of the
Holy Prophet (S) until now never refuse from our helping and offered
sacrifices for us; were burned in fire, were tortured and severely
punished, and were exiled from their homes but did not hold their hands
from our help and support.”[^21]

3.17. Our Beliefs about Other Muslims
-------------------------------------

While we have differences of opinion with Sunnis with respect to the
issue of caliphate and the succession after the Holy Prophet (S), we
still regard all Muslims as our fellow brothers; our God is one; our
book is the same and our Qiblah[^22] is the same.

We regard their dignity and progress as our own dignity and progress. We
account their victory and domination as our own domination and their
defeat and degradation is our own defeat and degradation. We are their
partners in sharing their happiness and sorrows. In this act we take
inspiration from our great leader Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (a.s.); if Ali
(a.s.) wanted to defend his legitimate right to take the caliphate he
was able to do so, but instead preferred the general interest of Islam
and preserving the religion. He not only confronted the caliphs, rather
at the sensitive and required moments rushed to their help, and never
refused from taking any step in the interest of Islam.

We believe that the Islamic world would only remain as a living and
powerful nation, could retake its grandeur and majesty, rescue itself
from the superimpositions of the aliens, only through taking distance
from differences, concentrating its energy toward one objective and all
of them should take giant steps in the path of advancement, grandeur and
progress of the Islamic world.

[^1]: Refer to Ghayat al-Mura'm, Ithbat al-Huda, Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah,
Sahhih Abu Da'wood, and Musnad-e Ahmad.

[^2]: Al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah, v. 5, p-208; a group of Holy Prophet’s
(S) companions have narrated the story of Ghadir-e-Khum, this narration
is continuous and certain and exists in the Shi’a and Sunni books. The
relevant narration in the book of Ghayateh al- Mur'am, has been
mentioned eighty nine ways from Sunnis and forty three times from Shi’a.

[^3]: Man’aqib A’le Muhammad, Ibn Shahr ’Ashub, v.2, p-108.

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, v.41, p-52.

[^5]: Ithbat al-Huda, v. 5, p-373.

[^6]: Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, p-373.

[^7]: Man’aqib A’le Muhammad, Ibn Shahr ’Ashub, v. 4, p-19.

[^8]: Ithbat al-Huda, v. 5, p-169.

[^9]: Ithbat al-Huda, v. 5, p-212; Irsh’ad of Shaykh Mufid, p-238.

[^10]: Man’aqib A’le Muhammad, Shahr ’Ashub, v. 4, p-153.

[^11]: Ithbat al-Huda, v.5, p-263; Irsh’ad of Shaykh Mufid, p-245.

[^12]: Kashf al-Ghummah, Printed in Tabriz, v. 2, p-337.

[^13]: Ithbat al-Huda, v.5, p-328; Irsh’ad of Shaykh Mufid, p-254.

[^14]: Irshad of Shaykh Mufid, p-254.

[^15]: Kashf al-Ghummah, v.3, p-18.

[^16]: Ithbat al-Huda, v.6, p-2; Irshad of Shaykh Mufid, p-285.

[^17]: Ithbat al-Huda, v. 6, p-208; Irshad of Shaykh Mufid, p-308.

[^18]: Ithbat al-Huda, v.6, p-269; Irshad of Shaykh Mufid, p-315.

[^19]: Wafi, v.1, part-3, p-38.

[^20]: Wafi, v.1, p-61.

[^21]: Safinatul Bihar, v.1, p-73.

[^22]: The direction of prayer i.e. Holy Mecca [Tr].


