Chapter 4: Resurrection or Hereafter
====================================

4.1. The Day of Judgment
------------------------

All divine Prophets and Holy Scriptures are unanimous about this point
that the life of a human being does not end at his death. After it
another world exists where human beings would see the rewards of their
deeds and character. The pious individuals would see a joyful and happy
life and would be blessed with dignity and plenty of divine bounties;
while the wicked and lewd would have a harsh and painful life and would
have a life of torture and punishment. The reality of Judgment and a
world after death is a necessity of all heavenly religions, and whoever
accepts the Prophets must also accept the Day of Judgment. In order to
prove this matter we would describe the following two simple arguments:

### First Argument

If you pay attention, proof of the Day of Judgment would become clearly
explicated for you:

1. None of the acts are without an aim and objective; whoever does some
work also has an objective and goal. The aim and ultimate objective is a
thing that motivates the subject to do his work, and in order to
accomplish it he makes efforts and endeavors.

2. Although each task is not without an aim and objective, the aims and
objectives are not similar; instead they vary with respect to
individuals and their tasks. The more a subject is knowledgeable,
powerful, and possesses a rational program; he pursues superior and
valuable objectives. A young child who peruses a goal in a childish play
would never be equivalent to the goals of an engineer, intellectual and
director.

3. The human beings whatever tasks they pursue, desire that through the
means of the objective and result of that task, to remove a defect from
them in order to achieve more perfection. For example when we eat food
it is because of the reason that we feel in ourselves a feeling of
hunger, we eat food in order to remove the defect caused by hunger. But
for divine acts this context is not valid, because God is not imperfect
so that through the means of a result or objective, a task should remove
His defect and achieve more perfection.

Therefore, it could be said that the result of a task is not applicable
to Him but it reaches to his creatures. The objective is not to achieve
perfection or to be benefitted rather it is to enrich and to bestow
perfection upon His creatures.

Persian Verse:

*“Man na kardam khalq ta sudi kunam,*

*Balkeh ta bar bandgan judi kunam.”*

English Translation:

*I did not create creation to be benefited*

*Instead it was to bestow mercy upon my servants.”*

4. God has created human beings with a most superior existence and in
the structure of his existence and has utilized thousands of delicacies
and sophistications that the intellectuals, no matter how hard they try
to comprehend it, they encounter extremely amazing mysteries in a manner
that it could be said:

God, the Wise, has made the small-world (jah’an-e-asghar) the human
being’s skeleton as a sample of the greater world’s (jah’an-e-akbar)
existence and has placed a vast universe in his limited body structure.
He has created water, earth, air, plants, animals, stars and other
existences to meet his requirements; has accumulated thousands of
amazing mysteries in the heart of the material world so that the human
being could utilize it.

Also he has equipped the human existence with amazing intellectual
thoughts in order to explore the hidden mysteries of the world of
existence, and to utilize the precious treasures of the material world
as well as to conquer it. Because of the above mentioned matters, now
let us think; could it be said that: The God, the Wise, created amazing
and mysterious human existence, and for his utilization commissioned a
most outstanding organization of the material world, only for an
insignificant period to live in this world and should simply change the
vast divine bounties into a different form, then should die and be
annihilated? If such is the case then is not the entire creation of God
nonsense, null and void?

Your faculty of reason would never believe about such an issue and the
sacred existence of God is too glorified for such a nonsensical task.
Non- existence and annihilation could not be the ultimate goal of
creation and ultimate result of the human being’s lives, because the
accomplishment of a cherished goal requires that the existence should be
made more perfect and precious instead of terminating his existence and
destroying the book of his age.

Our faculty of reason states that: Since God does not have any need of
creation of existences, He does not create them with the intention of
earning a profit, and a nonsensical and null and void act is not issued
by Him. Therefore, inevitably He has created human beings for the
objective of a higher, superior, and precious objective and their lives
are not limited to only a transient few days of life of this world and
through the arrival of his death, their lives are not ended and the book
of their deeds are not closed.

Our faculty of reason states that: After this world there should be
another world or hereafter; the period of his transient living in this
world with so many hardships should only be a preliminary for an eternal
life in the hereafter and achieving the prosperity and infinite ease and
comfort in the next world. God’s intentions were that a human being in
this world should make progress and should acquire for him perfections
and excellent habits in order to live a prosperous life full joy and
heavenly bounties forever in the eternal world.[^1]

### Second Argument

Some human beings are pious and righteous; they are well-farers of the
people, help their inferiors and fellow human beings, treat orphans with
compassion, do favors towards the destitute and distressed, their
conduct is good, they do not speak lies, cheat, oppress others, usurp
people’s belongings; they offer their prayers and fast, practice their
mandatory obligations and prevent others from committing sins.

Another group is wicked and indecent, they oppress and do injustice to
their fellow human beings, usurp rights of the others, are liars rude,
and traitors, do not offer divine mandatory obligations, neither do they
offer prayers nor do they fast, they do not feel the least embarrassed
from indulging in illegitimate and shameful acts, and like beasts day
and night are busy in oppression, transgression, and fulfilling their
carnal desires.

These two groups continuously had been existing and would remain always,
and do not see the punishment of their deeds in this world. We know so
many such persons that throughout their lives were engaged in the path
of oppression, transgression, usurpation of people’s belongings,
sinning, and perusing their carnal desires. They left the world in
affluence, luxuries, and joyful without seeing the retribution of their
evil deeds. On the other side there were many pious and righteous
individuals who remained in complete poverty and harsh conditions
without seeing rewards of their good deeds.

Therefore, should there not be another world where deeds of the people
could be scrutinized, where the righteous ones should obtain excellent
rewards for their good deeds and the wicked ones should be punished for
their evil deeds? If the age of the people would end in this very world
and their book of deeds becomes completely closed and annihilated then
in that case would not the creation of human beings be a nonsensical act
opposite to the justice and wisdom of God-Almighty?

Would your faculty of reason like it, that the righteous and pious
individuals would be treated similarly like the wicked and lewd people
and their deeds should not be scrutinized? Can such an indecent and
inappropriate thing be related to God?[^2]

If there is no Hereafter and the Day of Judgment of deeds, dispatching
of the divine messengers for implementation of divine Command of
encouraging good and forbiddance of evil would be irrational and without
any profit; if there exists no accounting of deeds and reward and
retribution then why should people obey the commands of God and heavenly
messengers?

4.2. Death
----------

Death means separation of the soul from the body; Islam tells us: A
human being is not annihilated through the means of death; instead it is
transferred to another world and from this life enters into another form
of life. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “You have not been created for
annihilation instead for eternal life; it is not but your transfer from
this world to another world.”[^3]

From the Islamic point of view the separation of the soul from the body
is not done for all human beings in a similar manner; individuals who
are sinners, their inclination is more towards the world are not linked
with the hereafter are hopeless, and give up their soul with hardship
and difficulty. But the individuals whose deeds are decent and do not
have much attachment with this world, instead they have more inclination
and attachments towards God and hereafter give their soul comfortably
and with ease.[^4]

4.3. Interval between Death and Resurrection
--------------------------------------------

Regarding the basic reality of Resurrection and life after death, our
faculty of reason proves it for us however regarding the quality and how
it is supposed to be, the reason cannot be our guide; instead we are
helpless but to benefit from verses of the Holy Qur’an and sayings of
divine messengers and religious saints. It could be understood from the
Holy Qur’an, traditions of the Holy Prophet (S) and Infallible Imams
(a.s.) that before the Day of Judgment and general resurrection, another
world exists where human souls live between death and resurrection
called barzakh which is a means between the world and hereafter.

When a person dies in the beginning he enters into barzakh, where he
would have some sort of special life. In the beginning of the spiritual
life that starts from the grave an overall questioning is conducted in
which a person’s faith and belief are reviewed; if his beliefs were true
and he had righteous deeds, a door from paradise opens and he is
assigned on the path of paradise. He utilizes bounties of paradise and
remains in waiting for the occurrence of resurrection and to receive
eternal heavenly bounties.

If a person happens to be with bad belief and deeds he is assigned to
the path of hell and a door from the door of hell opens for him. He
would remain in punishment and torture until the occurrence of the
resurrection and would suffer a bitter and unpleasant life and have fear
of the arrival of the Day of Judgment and severe punishment of hell; he
would remain in anxiety and horror.[^5]

4.4. Day of Judgment and General Resurrection
---------------------------------------------

The Holy Qur’an and traditions of the Holy Prophet (S) and Infallible
Imams (a.s.) describe the Day of Judgment in the following manner: “The
sun and moon would become dark and without illumination, mountains would
become scattered, oceans would become burnt and without water; the solar
system would be annihilated; the earth and heaven would be changed into
a different form; then all dead would be resurrected alive and would be
brought to accounting of their deeds. All accounts of deeds of the
people are proven and recorded in a book of deeds; even a tiny act of
theirs would neither be forgotten nor removed.

On the Day of Judgment curtains would be rolled up from human eyes, they
would witness their character and deeds personally; then the accounting
of deeds would begin and would be scrutinized with precise accuracy.
Unbelievers and sinners who are not pardonable would be sent to hell.
The believers and righteous persons would go to paradise.

“The sinners who are illegible for pardon, since they were under
punishment in the barzakh and have already tasted the result of their
evil deeds; through means intercession of the prophets and infallible
Imams would be pardoned, eventually the illumination of monotheism would
remove the darkness of their sins and they would enter into paradise.

For believers and righteous persons the accounting of deeds would be
done easily and they would be sent to the paradise sooner; but with
respect to the unbelievers and a majority of sinners, it would be very
hard. Even the smallest of their deeds and actions would be severely
scrutinized; they would remain stopped in resurrection for a prolonged
period and with a great deal of hardship and after passing through
various stages, would end up in their accounting.”[^6]

4.5. Paradise
-------------

Paradise is a place where decent and righteous individuals would be
taken; different kinds of blessing, bounties, resources and means of
comfort and joy are present there; whatever a human being could imagine
and desires is available therein.[^7]

The bounties of paradise are far superior and better to the bounties of
the world, and no one has ever heard or seen them. There is no
discomfort and hardship in them; whoever would enter paradise would have
eternal life and would remain therein forever. Paradise consists of
different ranks and positions and everyone in accordance to his virtues
and perfections of self and decent conduct would be assigned an
appropriate place accordingly.[^8]

4.6. Hell
---------

Hell is the place of unbelievers and wicked ones; every sort of horrible
punishment and torture is implemented therein. The individuals who would
go to hell would be under punishment with intense hardships and
discomfort; the punishments of hell are so severe that it is impossible
to describe them. The fire of hell not only burns the body but also the
burns souls and hearts of individuals, and it oozes from the
fountainhead of its essence and sets the entire existence ablaze.[^9]

The dwellers of hell consist of two groups: The first group consists of
unbelievers, who are completely deprived of the illumination of faith,
and God’s worshipping; this group would always remain in hell under the
intense punishment and torture. The second group consists of God
worshippers and faithful who indulged in sinning due to the weakness of
their belief and due to this reason deserved the punishment in hell.

This group would remain under hell’s punishment temporarily, but
eventually the illumination of Monotheism would be dominated over the
darkness of their sins and either through the direct pardon of God or
through intercession of the chosen prophets would be rescued from hell
and would enter paradise. Hell consists of different ranks of various
sorts of punishment; everyone would be assigned a place in
accordance[^10] to the degree of his sins and would be punished with
special sorts of punishment accordingly.

4.7. Intercession
-----------------

The issue of intercession has been mentioned in Holy Qur’an and plenty
of narrations have been issued by the Holy Prophet (S) and Infallible
Imams (a.s.) about it. In a manner that the reality of intercession
cannot be denied; in general it could be concluded from narrations that
the Holy Prophet (S) and Infallible Imams (a.s.) would act as an
intercessor with respect to some of the sinners and say: “O God!
Although this person is a sinner and deserves punishment but because of
the means of that particular outstanding virtue and goodness that he has
or through Your Own forgiveness and benevolence or through the dignity
that we have near You, we request to consider his sins as unseen and
delete the crime of his deeds with Your compassion.”

Their request of his intercession would be accepted and the relevant
person would be blessed with Compassionate God’s forgiveness and
benevolence. Because of the verses of the Holy Qur’an and narrations,
the reality of basic intercession cannot be denied, however some of the
points should not be neglected as follows:

1. The intercessors would not offer intercession without permission and
command of the God of the Worlds.

2. The place of intercession is at resurrection and after the accounting
of deeds. It is here that since the file of deeds is scrutinized its
obligation should be explicitly declared, and due to this reason the
intercessor requests for his intercession and sends him to paradise, who
was otherwise destined to go to hell because of his sins.

But in the barzakh, any intercession is not available and the sinning
person inevitably must see torture and punishment in accordance with his
deeds; although it is possible that there too due to intercession of the
Holy Prophet (S) and Infallible Imams (a.s.) he might be given some sort
of reduction in his punishment, but this does not constitute as an
intercession.

3. The intercessors themselves have said: “You should try your best to
appear in resurrection in the form of a human being so that we could do
intercession for you. Therefore, if the beastly sins reach to a point
that would metamorphose human essence entirely, thus making his
appearance in the form of a wild beast, there is no room for his
intercession. Anyhow for intercession merit and worthiness are
essential.”

4. Regarding some of the sins the intercessors, like renunciation of
prayers, have said: “Our intercession would not include this group.”

5. Therefore on the basis of the above mentioned matters a human being
should not feel proud because of the promise of intercession and do
sins; because someone who indulges in sinning with the hope of
intercession is like an individual who is poisoned and exposes himself
to the danger of hoping that the doctor and medicine would be able to
save him.

4.8. Repentance
---------------

It could be understood from the verses of the Holy Qur’an and narrations
of the Infallible Imams (a.s.) that a sinner, if before his death
repents and is ashamed of his evil deeds, his sins are forgiven and
wouldn’t be scrutinized for his deeds on the Day of Judgment.[^11]

Therefore, the door of repentance and return remains always open for all
sinners and none should be hopeless of God’s blessing; but lest we think
that whoever simply recites the phrase of: “O God forgive me
(Astaghfirullah)” and through the pressure of nerves sheds a tear from
his eyes, repents and would be blessed with forgiveness; instead, real
repentance requires conditions that Imam Ali (a.s.) has pointed out.
Imam Ali (a.s.) said: “There are six things necessary for repentance:

1. He must be really ashamed from the past sins.

2. He must seriously be determined that he would not commit sins in the
future.

3. If people owe something upon you; you must pay them all of their
dues.

4. The mandatory obligations not offered must be offered as make up
(Qad’a).

5. The flesh that has been grown upon the body through utilization of
illegitimate (har’am) food should be melted down completely through
means of sorrow and grief about the committed sins.

6. As you have tasted the sweetness of sinning, should also tolerate the
bitterness and hardship of worshipping, then you must recite the phrase
of forgiveness: O God forgive me (Astaghfirullah).[^12]

[^1]: God in the Holy Qur’an has pointed out about the same reason when
He says: “Did you think that We had created you for a playful purpose
and that you were not to return to Us?” (The Holy Qur’an, 23: 115)

[^2]: God in the Holy Qur’an has pointed about the same meanings and
says: “Shall We treat those who believe and do good works as those who
spread corruption in the earth; or shall We treat the pious as the
wicked?”(The Holy Qur’an, 38:28)

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, v. 6, p-249.

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, v. 6, p-145.

[^5]: God has said in the Holy Qur’an: “And behind them is a barrier
until the day when they are raised.” (The Holy Qur’an, 23:100) “And call
not those who are slain in the way of Allah ‘dead.’ Nay they are living,
only ye perceive not. (The Holy Qur’an, 2:154) “Think not of those who
are slain in the way of Allah, as dead. Nay, they are living. With their
Lord they have provision.” (The Holy Qur’an, 3:169) The Holy Prophet (S)
said that: “The grave is the prime station of hereafter, whoever is
rescued from that later on the task would become easier upon him, and
whoever is not rescued from it the later punishments are not easier than
it.” Bihar al-Anwar, v. 6, p-242. Imam al-Sajjad (a.s.) said that: “The
grave is either a garden from gardens of the paradise or is a trench
from trenches of the hell.” Bihar al-Anwar, v. 6, pp-214, 202-282.

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, v.7, pp, 54-237.

[^7]: “Therein are brought round for them trays of gold and goblets, and
therein is all that souls desires and eyes find sweet. And ye are
immortal therein.” (The Holy Qur’an, 43:71)

[^8]: Bihar al-Anwar, v. 8, pp, 71-322.

[^9]: “(It is) the fire of Allah kindled”. (The Holy Qur’an, 104:06)

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, v. 8, pp, 222-374.

[^11]: Wafi, 1, part-3, p-183.

[^12]: Nahj al-Balaghah (Printed in Egypt), Part-2, p-253.


