Chapter 5: Moral Ethics
=======================

The good and evil characteristics are called moral ethics; good
characteristics are the virtues that result in attaining perfection and
distinction of self (nafs) like: justice, hospitability, trust in God,
maturity, positive far-sightedness, well-wishing, truthfulness,
trustworthiness, being content with the will of God, thanking God,
pleasant conduct, contentment, benevolence, bravery, being enthusiastic
towards religion and chastity of the female members of the family,
equality, observation of bonds of relationship (silah-rahm), goodness
towards parents, pleasant behavior with respect to neighbors, good
conduct with respect to the people, controlling of selfish whims, and
love of God. It is incumbent upon each Muslim to identify good virtues
and moral conduct, and should make serious efforts and endeavors in
acquiring them.

The wicked and evil characteristics are the characteristics that cause
the loss and decadence of the self like: arrogance, egoism, self-praise,
oppression, not trusting in God, impatience, cynicism, malevolence,
incorrectness, not being content with God, jealousy, thanklessness,
tale- bearing, grudge-holding, wrath, immorality, greed, avarice,
miserliness, hypocrisy, duality, treachery, extravagance, cowardice with
respect to religion and female members of the family, injustice, cutting
of family ties, annoyance of parents, annoyance of neighbors, misconduct
with the people, love of position, faultfinding, backbiting, flattering,
and prolonged desires. It is incumbent upon each Muslim to identify evil
conduct and should make efforts and endeavors to remove it from his
self.

In order to be prosperous it is necessary to completely control our
selfish whims, we must utilize and practice the Islamic moral ethics
commandments; one should cleanse and purify one ’s self from evil and
wicked deeds, and should decorate one’s self with righteous conduct and
superior virtues.

Islamic moral ethics commandments are one of the most important chapters
in Islam; it has paid special attention towards moral ethics.

The Holy Prophet (S) has considered self-struggle as a greater struggle
(jihad-e-akbar)[^1]; he said: “I have appointed in order to complete the
righteous conduct among the people.[^2] Since all human deeds stem from
the characteristics of his self, therefore the first priority should be
to endeavor to reform one’s self.

[^1]: Was'a’il al-Shi’ah, The Book of Crusade, p-122.

[^2]: Muhajj’atul Bayd’a of Faiz Kashani, v.2, p-312


