Chastity and Abstinence
=======================

Chastity and abstinence are amongst the highest human values. They
provide the power to control man's natural instincts and to use them in
the path towards perfection. The closer man goes to the treasures of
chastity and abstinence, the closer he becomes to his own humanity and
the farther he distances himself from animalistic behavior. If it were
not for chastity and abstinence, man would know no boundaries while
seeking to please his carnal desires and as a result, he would sink in
the cesspool of corruption and sensuality.

Since pious men are the embodiment of virtue and perfection, the most
complete role model for mankind, the Noble Prophet of Islam (peace and
blessings be upon him and his family), was adorned with chastity and
abstinence of the highest nature. Not once did he become contaminated
with sins that contradict infallibility or chastity.

Rather, he was the manifestation of chastity and abstinence and this
state was so strong in him that he even refrained from permissible
actions containing even the slight possibility of a lack of chastity.
Imam as-Sadiq (peace be upon him), in a narration concerning the
Prophet's behavior, has said, "When the Messenger of God (peace and
blessings be upon him and his family) would sit with somebody, he would
not take of his clothes (outer garments) until the man would rise (and
leave).[^1]"

Similarly, Abu Sa'id Khidri has narrated that: "The Messenger of God
(peace and blessings be upon him and his family) was more chaste than
virgin women behind curtains and if he did not like something, we would
understand so from his facial expression (he would not tell us
anything).[^2]"

[^1]: Tafsir al-â€˜Ayashi, vol. 1, p. 203.

[^2]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1, p. 17.


