Forgiveness
===========

Forgiving others and overlooking their faults is a virtue that is held
in high esteem by all schools of thought and all nations. People
consider those who are willing to forgive others to be unparalleled in
value.

The Noble Qur’an, the Disciplinarian of all mankind, advises all of us
to adhere to this enlightened value, saying:

***"And they should pardon and excuse their faults. Do they not love
for God to forgive them? And God is very forgiving and merciful."***[^1]

The Noble Qur’an does not just consider forgiving the mistakes of others
to be desirable; rather, it considers doing good to one who has harmed
you to be of even more value and to be one of the attributes of true
believers:

***"And they ward off evil with good and they give in charity from that
which We have given them in sustenance."***[^2]

Doing good when one has been wronged is a fine art that only those with
strong (spiritual) foundations can accomplish. Regarding this, Khwajah
'Abdullah Ansari has said, "Doing bad in response to bad is dog-like
behavior. Doing good in response to good is donkey-like behavior. Doing
good in response to bad is the work of Khwajah 'Abdullah Ansari."

In other words, responding to evil and good in kind are natural and
normal. But doing good in response to bad is superior to the behavior of
animals and is a quality to which only humans can aspire.

The Noble Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and his family), who
derived his discipline from the Qur’an, was always forgiving and he
would also do good (*ihsan*) when he was wronged. This was also true of
the other infallibles (peace be upon them).

Concerning the Prophet's virtues, it has been related that: *"The
Messenger of God (peace and blessings be upon him and his family) would
never take revenge (on someone) for (having wronged) him. Rather, he
would pardon and excuse."*[^3]

The following story is an example of the Prophet's tendency to pardon
others: "One day a Bedouin man came to the Prophet (peace and blessings
be upon him and his family) and requested something from him. The
Messenger of God (peace and blessings be upon him and his family) gave
it to him and asked, 'Have I done good to you?' The man replied, 'No,
you've never done good to me.' His companions got upset as a result of
the man's ungratefulness and intended to harm him. The Prophet, however,
prevented them from showing aggression. At that point, the Prophet
(peace and blessings be upon him and his family) went home and gave the
man even more and asked, 'Now have I done good to you?' The man said,
'Yes, may God reward you with goodness.'

The Messenger of God said, 'As a result of what you said in front of my
companions, it is possible that they may think negatively about you. If
you like, go to them and announce your contentment.' The man went to the
Prophet's companions and the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him
and his family) said: 'This man has become satisfied with me, hasn’t
you?'

The man responded, 'Yes, may God reward you and your family with
goodness.'

Then the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and his family) said,
'This man and I are like one whose she-camel has run away, others follow
it but the camel only runs further away. But the owner of the camel
says, 'Let her go. I know how to tame her.' The camel comes back and he
pats her head and face and dusts her body and face and takes her bridle
in his hand. Yesterday, if I were to have given you (speaking to his
companions) permission, you would have killed this man due to his foul
tongue and (if he had died) in such a state he would have entered
Hell.'"[^4]

In addition to being the type of person who overlooked the faults of
others, the Noble Prophet of Islam also made others conscious of this
eminent, spiritual and humanistic principle and he said, *"You must
pardon others for verily pardoning others only increases the servant (of
God) in might. So be forgiving so that God may make you mighty."*[^5]

Similarly, on another occasion he stated eloquently: *"Shall I inform
you of the best (most beneficial) traits for this world and the
Hereafter? They are pardoning one who has done injustice to you, bonding
with one who has cut off ties with you, doing good to one who has
wronged you and giving to one who has withheld from you."*[^6]

[^1]: Surah an-Nur 24: 22.

[^2]: Surah al-Qisas 28: 54.

[^3]: Mustadrak al-Wasa'il, vol. 2, p. 87.

[^4]: Safinah al-Bihar, vol. 1, p. 416.

[^5]: Mir’at al-‘Uqul, vol. 8, p. 194.

[^6]: Mir’at al-‘Uqul, vol. 8, p. 192.


