Courteousness
=============

Being polite and showing others respect are admirable traits that both
Islamic law [*shari‘ah*] and the methodology of religious leaders have
advised us to follow. The Prophet of Islam (peace and blessings be upon
him and his family) placed great importance on such principles and
always preserved the dignity of others by treating them with respect.
There are numerous instances of the Prophet's behavior that teach us to
honor others. Here reference is made to a few of such instances:

1. *"Whenever a man would sit next to the Prophet (peace and blessings
be upon him and his family), he would not get up until that man got
up."*[^1]

2. *"He (peace and blessings be upon him and his family) would address
his companions by their kunyah (referring to one as the father of
such-and-such or the mother of such-and such which was a sign of respect
in Arab culture), in order to show them respect and win their hearts.
And he would give a kunyah to whosoever did not have one and,
thereafter, such a person would be addressed by this kunyah. Similarly
he would give kunyahs to women who had children as well as those who did
not. He would also give kunyahs to children."*[^2]

3. One of the memorable things the Commander of the Faithful (peace be
upon him) reported about sitting with the Prophet (peace and blessings
be upon him and his family) was that: "The Messenger of God (peace and
blessings be upon him and his family) would never stretch his legs
towards anyone."[^3]

4. The Prophet of Islam (peace and blessings be upon him and his family)
would even treat his servants with courteousness. Anas ibn Malik is
quoted as saying, *"I swear by the One who dispatched him (peace and
blessings be upon him and his family) with truth! Never would he say,
'Why did you do that?' if I did something he didn't like. And whenever
one of his wives would blame me for something, he would say, 'Leave him
alone. This was prescribed and (divinely) ordained."*[^4]

5. He (peace and blessings be upon him and his family) would show
extraordinary respect to guests. Escorting his guests to the door is one
of the customs of the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and his
family). Similarly, when the Messenger of God (peace and blessings be
upon him and his family) entertained guests, he would eat with them and
he would continue to eat so long as his guests had not finished
eating.[^5]

[^1]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1, p. 15.

[^2]: Ihya’ al-‘Ulum, vol. 2, p. 363.

[^3]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p. 22.

[^4]: Ihya’ al-‘Ulum, vol. 2, p. 361.

[^5]: Sunan an-Nabi, p. 67.


