Kindness
========

Since Islam is the religion of love and friendship and the Most Noble
Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and his family) is the one
entrusted with developing this school, love and affection were
constantly flowing in the ocean of his existence. The scope of his
kindness was so broad that it encompassed his closest family members,
companions, supporters, children, orphans, those who had been taken
captive and those who were lost. This was but an example of the radiance
of God's mercy that had been cast in his existence (as supported by the
Qur’an ic verse stating) ***"Due to a mercy from God, you were kind to
them."***[^1]

Here reference will be made to some examples of the far-reaching mercy
of the Messenger of God (peace and blessings be upon him and his family)
that have been mentioned in books about his life:

1. His loving attitude towards servants and subordinates is a
manifestation of his kindness. Anas ibn Malik has said, "I worked for
the Messenger of God (peace and blessings be upon him and his family)
for ten years and not once did I even hear him say '*uff*' to me and he
never asked me, 'Why did you do this?' or, 'Why didn't you do that?'.
The Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and his family) would have
something to drink for *ift'ar* (breaking the fast) and something to
drink for *sahar* (the meal before dawn) and sometimes he would have one
drink for both.

Sometimes that drink was milk and sometimes it was bread that had been
mixed with water. One night, I prepared a drink for him, but he (peace
and blessings be upon him and his family) came home late that night. I
thought that some of his companions had invited him [*for ifṭar*] so I
drank that which I had prepared for him. An hour later, the Messenger of
God (peace and blessings be upon him and his family) came home and I
asked one of his companions if the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon
him and his family) had eaten *ift'ar* or if someone had invited him.

The companion replied in the negative. I came to regret what I had done
very much and that night, God knows, I was very upset right until
morning. This was because I was expecting the Prophet (peace and
blessings be upon him and his family) to look for his drink any moment
and not find it. The Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and his
family) spent the whole night until morning without eating anything even
though he had been fasting. Afterwards, he never asked me and he never
mentioned anything about the drink."[^2]

2. The Noble Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and his family)
had particular affection for those who believed and loved the message he
brought. "He constantly enquired as to how his companions were doing and
would speak to them in an affable and encouraging manner. If he had not
seen one of them for three days, he would ask about him. If they told
him that he had gone on a journey, he (peace and blessings be upon him
and his family) would pray for him. And if he had not gone on a journey,
he would go and see him. If he was sick, he would go and visit him."[^3]

3. Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (peace be upon him) has said, "A man named
Thamamah ibn Uthal, who was being held captive, was brought to the
Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and his family). He was the
leader of Yamamah people and it was said that his rulings were
influential amongst the people of Tayy and Yemen. The Prophet (peace and
blessings be upon him and his family) recognized him and ordered that he
be treated well. The Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and his
family) would send him food from his home every day. He (peace and
blessings be upon him and his family) would go and see him and invite
him to accept Islam. One day he (peace and blessings be upon him and his
family) went to him and said, "I will give you the opportunity to choose
one of three courses of action: The first is that I kill you." He
replied, "If you do that, know that you would have killed a great
personality."

"The second is that you give money in exchange for your freedom." He
said, "In that case, it would have to be a very large amount since my
price is very high (my people would have to pay a large sum since I am a
great personality)."

Then the Messenger of God (peace and blessings be upon him and his
family) said, "The third course of action is that I should be kind to
you and free you (without receiving anything in return)."He replid, "If
you do that, you will find me to be a grateful individual."

Then the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and his family)
ordered that he be set free. The man accepted Islam and said, "I swear
by God, when I saw you, I knew you were a prophet but I considered you
my greatest enemy in the world. Now, you are the most beloved person to
me." [^4]

4. It was a difficult time for the Prophet's companions when his teeth
were broken and his blessed face wounded and stained with blood during
the Battle of Uhud. They requested to be allowed to curse the
disbelievers and the enemies. But he (peace and blessings be upon him
and his family) said, "I was not appointed (as a prophet) for cursing.
Rather, I am the Prophet of Mercy and I will pray for them, so that God
may guide my people, for they are ignorant."[^5]

5. His method of dealing with the enemy in times of war and dealing with
army personnel, demonstrated the magnificence of the soul of this
ambassador of God, a soul full of kindness. Imam as Sadiq (peace be upon
him) has said, *"Whenever the Messenger of God (peace be upon him and
his family) wanted to dispatch an army, he would request at them to come
to him and he would tell them: 'Go in the name of God, the Exalted. Seek
perseverance from Him and fight for His cause. Do not steal from the war
booty. Do not mutilate the disbelievers. Do not kill old men, children
or women. Do not kill monks who live in caves. Do not uproot trees
unless you are forced to do so. Do not burn palm trees nor destroy them.
Never poison the water of the idol worshippers. Do not be deceptive nor
treacherous. If a Muslim gives asylum to an idol worshipper, he is a
refugee until he hears the word of God and Islam is presented to him. If
he accepts, he is your brother in faith. If he does not accept, he is to
be returned to a safe place (amongst his own people).’*”[^6]

6. The scope of the Prophet's mercy and affection was so wide that he
would not even take part in hunting birds. If a bird had been hunted, he
would make use of it. But he would never hunt birds himself: "The
Messenger of God (peace and blessings be upon him and his family) would
eat the meat of birds that had been hunted but he would not pursue them
himself nor would he hunt them."[^7]

[^1]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:159.

[^2]: Muntaha al-Amal, vol. 1, p. 18.

[^3]: Sunan an-Nabi, p. 51.

[^4]: Sirah Rasul Allah, vol. 2, p. 1092.

[^5]: Muhajjah al-Baydha’, vol. 4, p. 129.

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 19, p. 177.

[^7]: Ihya’ al-‘Ulum, vol. 2, p. 369.


