Opposition to Negative Asceticism
=================================

Negative asceticism refers to behaving in an extreme manner or living in
an austere way that is opposed to the common practice of Muslims. For
example, one might refrain from bounties that are deemed permissible,
one might behave abnormally in social settings, one might behave in a
very dry and pseudo-pious fashion or one might not speak to others and
behave as if he alone existed in this world. These sorts of behaviors
have been seen amongst some proponents of pseudo-asceticism and amongst
some *Sufi* sects.

Without a doubt, the Islamic legal system is a complete and
comprehensive one. Its principles for life are based on man's innate
nature as well as on his natural needs and desires. For this reason, any
form of thinking or behavior that opposes man's innate nature is not to
be considered Islamic.

Those who imagine that they can reach gnosticism (‘*irfan*) and
perfection by means of negative asceticism are making a great mistake.
The greatest personality that this world has ever known is the Prophet
of Islam (peace and blessings be upon him and his family) who, not only
did not behave in such a manner, but also strongly opposed such
thinking.

That which Islam and religious leaders are constantly warning us about
consists of two things. The first thing we are warned to avoid is being
attached to this world and to material possessions. The second is
drowning ourselves in pleasure and lust. Making appropriate use of that
which God has bestowed upon us while refraining from unnecessary
luxuries, however, is the way of the Prophet (peace and blessings be
upon him and his family) and our religious leaders.

The Prophet of Islam (peace and blessings be upon him and his family)
strongly opposed negative forms of asceticism and ignoring one's natural
desires:

1. The Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali, peace be upon him, has said, *"A
group from amongst the companions (of the Prophet) would abstain from
women, eating during the day and sleeping at night. Umm Salamah (the
Prophet's wife) informed the Messenger of God (peace and blessings be
upon him and his family) of this and so he went to these companions and
said, Do you turn away from women? For verily I approach (my) women and
I eat during the day and I sleep at night and he who turns away from my
way of life (sunnah) is not of me."*[^1]

2. One day, three women came to the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon
him and his family). One of them said, *"O Messenger of God, my husband
has decided not to associate with women anymore."*

Another one of them said, "*O Messenger of God, my husband has decided
not to eat meat anymore."*

The third one said, *"O Messenger of God, my husband has decided not to
use pleasant fragrances anymore."*

The Prophet of Islam (peace and blessings be upon him and his family)
became upset upon hearing this for he came to realize that deviant ideas
were becoming prominent amongst the Muslims. He went to the mosque even
though it was not the customary time. He was in such a hurry that his
blessed turban was partly on his shoulder and partly dragging on the
ground as he walked. He ordered that the people gather [to hear what he
had to say]. They came to the mosque. The Prophet (peace and blessings
be upon him and his family) went on the pulpit and said, *"I have heard
that erroneous ideas have become common amongst my companions. What sort
of mistaken way of life is this that has become apparent amongst
Muslims? I, being a prophet, eat meat. I consume tasty foods. I wear
good clothes. I use fragrances. I associate with my wives. So he whose
way is not my way of life is not of me."*[^2]

[^1]: Da‘a’im al-Islam, vol. 2, p. 191, as well as Jami' al-Akhbar, p.
118.

[^2]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 14, p. 74.


