Author’s Preface
================

Man's need for a virtuous role model stems from his need to be
influenced. Man has been created in such a way that he is influenced by
others. Such influence plays a great role in his development as well as
in the development of society. It is for this reason that the Noble
Qur’an, amongst its methods of instruction, strives to introduce
outstanding individuals, the most superior of them being the Noble
Prophet of Islam (peace and blessings be upon him and his family).

The Qur’an explicitly introduces the Prophet of Islam (peace and
blessings be upon him and his family) as the role model for all of
mankind and the best example for Muslims of all ages. Fortunately, a
precious treasure composed of the sayings (hadiths) and history of the
Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and his family) has recorded
the most minute details of his life, and this book, inspired by this
valuable treasure, is a brief look at his manner of living.

Even though the title of this book suggests that it offers an
explanation of the practices of the Messenger of God (peace and
blessings be upon him and his family), it is not completely out of place
for us to make reference to the spiritual stations of this eternal
example. Therefore, his spiritual stations have been summarized under
the following headings:

1. The Highest of All Creation
------------------------------

The Noble Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and his family) is an
individual unrivaled amongst all mankind for all time, and history will
never see another like him. Concerning this topic, the Commander of the
Faithful, ‘Ali, peace be upon him, said,

*"There is nothing God has created superior to Muhammad, peace and
blessings be upon him and his family."*[^1]

*Though Khidhr crossed the Water of Life,*

*Muhammad passed beyond the Spring of the Spirit,*

*And if Solomon set his throne upon the winds,*

*Muhammad refrained from playing with the wind.*

*If Moses’ enclosure was built from mountain rocks,*

*The palace of Ahmad was made of pure light*

*And if the cradle of Jesus reached the celestial sphere,*

*Muhammad leapt out of the cradle himself*[^2]

2. The First Among Creation
---------------------------

God has created in accordance with a particular system and in it He has
provided the order of "the most noble, then the most noble after that"
(*al-ashraf fal-ashraf*). He has made the first among creation "The
Muhammadan Truth"[*haqiqat-e Muhammadiyyah* ]. Sometimes this is also
referred to as "The First Manifestation" [*tajalli-e Awwal*], or "The
Far-Reaching Mercy" [*rahmat al-Wasi‘ah*]. Numerous traditions support
this concept. Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah has narrated,

*"I asked the Messenger of God (peace and blessings be upon him and his
family), 'What is the first thing God created?' He answered, 'The light
of your prophet, O Jabir! He first created it then from it He created
all other things.'"*[^3]

*The line from start to finish is one,*

*The whole of creation has become a journey to Him,*

*an this road prophets are like camel-drivers, being*

*conductors and guides of the caravan.*

*From among them our master has become chief,*

*Both first and last with regard to this affair,*

*With him, the end of this road has been reached;*

*Concerning him has been revealed:*

***"I invite others to God." [verse 108 of chapter 12 of the Holy
Qur’an]***

3. Favored with Support from the Unseen
---------------------------------------

Since God is aware of the future decisions people will make and the
deeds they will perform, He grants particular favors to individuals who
have the spirit of pursuing the truth and choosing the path of virtue.
For this reason, beginning in their childhood years, He places them
under the umbrella of His guardianship. Spiritual individuals in general
and the Prophet of Islam (peace and blessings be upon him and his
family) in particular, were the recipients of such gifts.

*"Verily, from the beginning of the Prophet's childhood (peace and
blessings be upon him and his family) God sent the greatest of His
angels to be his companion in order to familiarize him with the path of
noble traits and the virtues of universal ethics (akhlaq)."*[^4]

History books have recorded numerous instances where the Prophet (peace
and blessings be upon him and his family) received unseen support.

4. The All-Embracing Mercy [rahmat al-wasi‘ah]
----------------------------------------------

Another instance that shows the spiritual station of the Noble Prophet
(peace and blessings be upon him and his family) is that he was the
manifestation and fountain of God's providence. This station was granted
to him due to his inner purity. This trait was manifest in his blessed
existence from childhood and continued until the end of his life. For
this reason and due to his noble existence, God refrained from punishing
this community (*ummah*, the community of the Prophet).

***"God will not punish them while you are amongst them and God will not
punish them so long as they ask for forgiveness."***[^5]

In other words, just as the manifestation of God's mercy is to be found
in repentance and seeking forgiveness, it is also to be found in the
existence of the “Noble Prophet” (peace and blessings be upon him and
his family).

5. Favored with The Greatest Form of Infallibility [‘ismat al-Kubra’]
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Infallibility is a faculty of the soul that prevents man from sinning or
committing errors. If this is found in an individual in its highest
form, it is referred to as "the greatest form of infallibility". And if
a lower form of this faculty exists in an individual, it is called "the
lower form of infallibility"[*‘ismat al-sughra’*]. Without a doubt, the
Prophet of Islam (peace and blessings be upon him and his family)
benefited from the highest level of infallibility.

This is a matter that both Sunni and Shi'ah scholars have unanimously
agreed upon. A great number of verses of the Qur’an as well as
narrations (*hadiths*) make reference to his station of infallibility.
The following verse is one such reference:

***"God desires but to remove impurity from you, O People of the
Household (of the Prophet, peace be upon them), and to purify you
thoroughly (of all imperfection)."***[^6]

6. Favored with Closeness to the Divine
---------------------------------------

Though it is true that all of God's prophets (peace be upon them) had
very high spiritual capacities and for this reason, they were able to
communicate with the unseen world and receive the waves of revelation
which they caused to flow to the hearts of mankind, this ability and
attribute of perfection was found in the Noble Prophet of Islam (peace
and blessings be upon him and his family) with a particular intensity.
Even the angels drawn close to God could not comprehend this station.

The intensity of his ability meant that at certain times, he could form
a direct relationship with God. The Noble Prophet of Islam (peace and
blessings be upon him and his family) explained his capacity and great
existence as such, *"I have a particular time with God that not even an
angel drawn close (to God), a prophet sent (by God), nor a believing
servant whom God has tested his heart for faith can attain."*[^7]

That which was mentioned in this introduction was merely a drop in the
limitless ocean of the spiritual stations of the Great Prophet (peace
and blessings be upon him and his family) since only God, the Prophet
(peace and blessings be upon him and his family) himself and the
infallible Imams (peace be upon them) are truly aware of his spiritual
stations and it is not the purpose of this book to relate them.

Rather, this is a look into the ethical behavior and practices of this
great example. We hope that the *Islamic ummah*, the youth in
particular, will emulate his behavior and ways of life and quench the
thirst of their souls with the abundance of this fountain of ethics and
spirituality, God-willing.

*Himmat Suhrab Pur*
1377/8/15[^8]

[^1]: Al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 440.

[^2]: All poetry has been translated by ‘Ali Kashani.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 15, p. 24.

[^4]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 234.

[^5]: Surah al-Anfal 8:33.

[^6]: Sura al-Ahzab 33: 33.

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 18, p. 360.

[^8]: According to the Iranian calendar, a reference to the number of
solar years that have passed since the Prophet’s migration to Medina.


