Opposition to Superstition
==========================

Islam is the religion of knowledge, awareness and cognition. Seeking
truth is interwoven in its essence. Therefore, it cannot be in agreement
with ideas that are distant from reality, nor mere conjecture and
superstition. Islam does not promote such things, nor does it remain
silent concerning them. Rather, the message of this religion is
opposition to erroneous ideas that are distant from reality.

The Great Prophet of Islam (peace and blessings be upon him and his
family), who propagated this great message and implemented God's law,
spent his entire lifetime guiding people to reality. He cautioned them
of the danger of ideas that were not based on reality. His campaign
against idol worship and the superstitious belief that idols administer
the system of creation demonstrated that this prophet of God opposed
invalid ideas.

Prior to the Prophet's (peace and blessings be upon him and his family)
appointment to prophethood, superstitious beliefs had cast a shadow over
the land of Hijaz[^1] and had darkened the minds of its inhabitants.
With the rising of the sun of Islam, many of these superstitions were
removed from people's lives because abiding by the teachings of Islam
necessitates that one act in contrast to the previously mentioned
superstitions. Whatever remained of superstitious beliefs was removed
from the hearts and minds of the people by the efforts of the Noble
Prophet of Islam (peace and blessings be upon him and his family).

The following story has been mentioned in books of the Prophet's
narrations. Even Sunni Muslims have narrated this story which clearly
demonstrates the Noble Prophet's sensitivity towards superstition:

The Most Noble Messenger (peace and blessings be upon him and his
family) and his wife Mariyah Qibá¹­iyyah had a son named Ibrahim. The Most
Noble Messenger (peace and blessings be upon him and his family) loved
his son very much but the boy passed away when being eighteen months of
age. The Most Noble Messenger, a man full of affection, was moved by
this incident and he cried, "The heart burns, tears flow, O Ibrahim. We
are sad because of you (r loss) but we will never say anything that
contradicts contentment with the Lord."

The Muslims were upset that the dust of sadness had settled on his
blessed heart. Coincidentally, that same day, there was a solar eclipse.
The Muslims thought that this was a sign that the higher world was also
mourning. This idea spread amongst the people of Madinah and men and
women alike were saying: "The solar eclipse is due to the sadness that
has come over the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and his
family)."

Even though this caused the faith of the people to grow stronger, the
Prophet did not want to take advantage of their vulnerabilities and
ignorant thoughts so he went on the pulpit and proclaimed: "This solar
eclipse was not due to my son ('s death). Solar and lunar eclipses are
among God's signs."[^2]

[^1]: Modern Saudi Arabia.

[^2]: Seyri dar Sireh-ye Nabawi, p. 136.


