Supplication
============

Supplication (*du'a’*) and seeking God's help, which have been referred
to in some narrations as 'the weapon of the believer' and 'the reality
of worship', are important factors in overcoming difficulties and
crises. Supplicating strengthens the morale of the one who prays to God
and keeps hope alive in his heart. By means of supplication, man
connects with the Source of Existence. By seeking His help, man takes a
step towards perfection. The Noble Prophet (peace and blessings be upon
him and his family) maintained the spirit of supplicating and seeking
God's help in all his actions. He sought God's help in a particular
manner:

***"He (peace and blessings be upon him and his family) would raise his
hands when supplicating and would beseech (God) just as the poor who beg
for food."***[^1]

In this section, mention will be made of some instances of his prayers
in various circumstances:

1. When he would hear the call to prayer (*adhan*), in addition to
repeating the sentences of the *adhan*, at the end he would say,

*"O God, Lord of this complete invitation and established prayer, give
Muhammad that which he seeks on the Day of Judgment and allow him to
reach the rank of forgiveness in Paradise and accept his intercession
for his community."*[^2]

2. In the middle of the night, he would prostrate upon the soil and say,

*"O God, never entrust (leave) me to myself for even one moment (the
time it takes to blink)."*[^3]

3. When he would sit to eat, he would say,

*"O God, You are above (any imperfection), how great is that with which
You test us. You are above (any imperfection), how plentiful is that
which You give us. You are above (any imperfection), how often it is
that You protect us from sickness. O God, increase us (in sustenance)
and likewise (increase in sustenance) the poor amongst the
believers."*[^4]

4. When preparing to sleep, he would seek help from God in the following
manner:

*"In the name of God I die and I live and unto Him is the return. O God,
replace my fear with security, cover my faults and help me to fulfill
that with which I have been entrusted."*[^5]

5. When he would see the new moon (which heralds the beginning of a new
month in the Islamic calendar), he would raise his hands and say,

*"O God, accompany it (the new moon) with safety, faith and health for
us."*[^6]

6. At the start of the New Year, he would seek help from God in the
following manner:

*"O God, You are the infinitely pre-existing God, and this is a new
year, so I ask of you protection from Satan, the strength to overcome
this soul that commands to do evil and to be occupied with that* *which
brings me closer to You, O Generous One, O Possessor of Splendor and
Kindness, O Supporter of him who has no support, O Source of Provision
of him who has no provision, O Refuge for him who has no refuge, O
Helper of him who has no help..."*[^7]

[^1]: Sunan an-Nabi, p. 315.

[^2]: Da'aim al-Islam, vol. 1, p. 146.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 16, p. 218.

[^4]: Sunan al-Nabi, p. 323.

[^5]: Sunan al-Nabi, p. 322.

[^6]: Amali al-La‘ali, vol. 2, p. 109.

[^7]: Sunan an-Nabi, p. 339.


