Cooperation
===========

Cooperation and helping other members of society are the foundations of
social life. Providing help and removing the needs of one another bring
about both progress in social affairs and increase in friendliness
amongst the members of society. The Qur’an has drawn our attention to
these principles and advised us with the following:

***"Help one another in doing good and in piety and do not help one
another in sin and hostility"***[^1]

The Prophet of Islam (peace and blessings be upon him and his family),
in addition to ordering the Muslims to work together and support one
another, practiced what he preached and took part in laborious tasks.
Even though his companions offered and even insisted to work in his
place, he would not accept their offers. Some instances of the Prophet's
custom of providing help in social situations are mentioned below:

1. Prior to his appointment to prophethood, the people of Mecca suffered
great poverty and economic pressures. Even though Abu Talib (the
Prophet's uncle) was the most respected member of the tribe of Bani
Hashim, he also experienced great pressure in trying to support his
large family. When the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and his
family) saw his situation, he could not find comfort until he sought his
other uncle, 'Abbas, who was relatively better off and said to him, "O
'Abbas, your brother, Abu T'alib, has a large family and you can see
that people are under pressure (financially). Let us go together and
decrease (the load of) his family members. I will take one of his
children and you take another." 'Abbas accepted to do so. The Most Noble
Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and his family) took ‘Ali with
him and 'Abbas took Ja'far. By this deed that pleased God, (the economic
responsibility of) two members of the family of Abu Talib was
removed.[^2]

2. When the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and his family)
entered Madinah, it became apparent that a mosque was needed for
performing worship and handling the political and social affairs of the
Muslims. The Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and his family)
proposed that a mosque be built and the Muslims gladly endorsed this
proposal. Land was purchased for the mosque and excitement surrounded
its construction.

Everyone took part in building the mosque and the Prophet (peace and
blessings be upon him and his family) took part in this good deed as
well. Usayd ibn Hudhayr has said, "The Prophet picked up a stone and was
bringing it. I said, 'O Messenger of God, give me the stone to carry.'
He said, 'No, go and bring another stone.'"[^3]

3. On one of their journeys, as soon as the Most Noble Prophet (peace
and blessings be upon him and his family) and his friends dismounted
their animals and placed their belongings on the ground, they decided to
prepare a sheep to eat. One of the companions said, "I will slaughter
the sheep."

Another said, "I will take off its skin." A third said, "I will cook the
meat." And the Messenger of God (peace and blessings be upon him and his
family) said, "I will gather firewood from the desert."

The companions said, "O Messenger of God, do not burden yourself. Sit
comfortably. We will gladly do everything ourselves."

The Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and his family) said, "I
know you (are) will(ing to) perform them, but God does not like to see
his slave being distinguished amongst his friends such that he considers
himself to be privileged in relation to others." Then he went to the
desert and gathered some bristles and motes and brought them.[^4]

[^1]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:2.

[^2]: Sirah ibn Hisham, vol. 2, p. 263.

[^3]: Bih'ar al Anwar, vol. 9, p. 111.

[^4]: Kuhl al-Basar, p. 68.


