Health and Hygiene
==================

Islam is a religion that takes all aspects of mankind into
consideration. For this reason, the Noble Prophet (peace and blessings
be upon him and his family) gave great importance to personal hygiene
and he encouraged others to do so as well. There are numerous instances
concerning the emphasis the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and
his family) placed on health and here reference will be made to a few of
these:

1. *He (peace and blessings be upon him and his family) would not
breathe in his cup while drinking. If he wanted to take a breath, he
would remove the cup from his mouth."*[^1]

2. When asked why Muslims do not become ill as often as others he
replied, *"We are a people who do not eat until we become hungry and
when we eat, we do not fill ourselves."*[^2]

3. The Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali, peace be upon him, said, *"We
would soak raisins or dates in water for the Prophet (peace and
blessings be upon him and his family). The first and second days he
would eat from it, but when they started to putrefy, he would say to
throw it out."*[^3]

4. *"The Messenger of God (peace and blessings be upon him and his
family) was never seen to have used the restroom without performing the
ritual ablution (wudhu’) afterwards, and this he would begin with
brushing his teeth."*[^4]

By cutting his nails, applying oil to his body, using collyrium,
removing body hair and clipping his moustache which were all part of his
weekly routine of personal grooming, the Messenger of God (peace and
blessings be upon him and his family) made Muslims aware of the
importance of personal hygiene. His sayings concerning cutting one's
nails and clipping one's moustache clarify the physical and
psychological benefits as well as the benefits in this world and the
Hereafter. Amongst his sayings is the following: *"If one cuts his nails
on Friday, God will remove sickness from his fingers and put a remedy in
its place."*[^5]

Elsewhere he (peace and blessings be upon him and his family) said,
*"None of you should grow your moustache long, for Satan (perhaps a
reference to bacteria) takes it as a refuge in which he hides."*[^6]

[^1]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1, p. 32.

[^2]: Sunan an-Nabi, p. 181.

[^3]: Da‘a’im al-Islam, vol. 2, p. 128.

[^4]: Muhajjah al-Baydha’, vol. 1, p. 296.

[^5]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1, p. 123.

[^6]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1, p. 125.


