Outward Appearance
==================

Paying special attention to outward appearance was one of the perpetual
rituals of the Noble Prophet of Islam (peace and blessings be upon him
and his family). He saw no conflict in paying attention to the
inner-self while enhancing one's outward appearance. His attention
towards disciplining the soul and serving God did not prevent him from
maintaining an attractive physical appearance.

For example, he would use pleasant fragrances and comb his hair. His
clothes were always clean and attractive. When he wanted to leave home,
he would look in the mirror. And whenever he made the ritual ablution
(wudhu’) he would brush his teeth. His clothes and shoes would always
match. The turban he wore would elegantly compliment his stature and
would increase his attractive and imposing presence. He (peace and
blessings be upon him and his family) himself has said, *"Verily, God is
beautiful and He loves beauty."*[^1]

Numerous examples of the importance the Prophet (peace and blessings be
upon him and his family) placed on beauty have been mentioned in books
narrating his traditions. Here are a few of them:

1. Tabarsi has said, *"The Messenger of God (peace and blessings be upon
him and his family) would look in the mirror, straighten and comb his
hair. Sometimes he would look (at his reflection) in water to straighten
his hair. He would beautify himself for his companions as well as for
his family and he would say, 'Verily, God loves for his servant to
prepare himself and beautify himself when he sets out (to meet) his
brothers (in faith).'"*[^2]

2. Amongst the things that enhances a pleasant appearance is applying
perfume, something the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and his
family) liked very much: *"The Messenger of God (peace and blessings be
upon him and his family) would spend more on perfume than he would on
food."*[^3]

3. A disheveled man with long hair and a long beard that were both
uncombed, came to the Most Noble Prophet (peace and blessings be upon
him and his family). He (peace and blessings be upon him and his family)
asked, "Could this man not find oil with which to straighten his hair?
Some of you come to me with the appearance of Satan."[^4]

4. Imam al-Baqir (peace be upon him) has said, "Anytime the Messenger of
God (peace and blessings be upon him and his family) passed somewhere,
two or three days afterwards, people would understand that he had passed
by due to his fragrant smell. He would put on any sort of perfume that
was brought to him and he would say, 'The smell of perfume is nice and
pleasing and carrying it is not difficult'."[^5]

[^1]: Nahj al-Fasahah, p. 159.

[^2]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1, p. 36.

[^3]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1, p. 66.

[^4]: Muhajjah al-Baydha’, vol. 1, p. 309.

[^5]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1, p. 66.


