Sense of Humor
==============

That which can be derived from the etiquette and teachings of Islamic
society and the way (*sunnah*) of the Noble Prophet of Islam (peace and
blessings be upon him and his family) is that joking is desirable when
it does not lead to sinful acts such as disparaging, ridiculing or
slander and only has the intention of making a brother in faith happy.
The Most Noble Messenger (peace and blessings be upon him and his
family), in addition to encouraging his companions to make jokes, would
himself joke with them.

The Commander of the Faithful (peace be upon him) has said, *"The
Messenger of God (peace and blessings be upon him and his family), in
order to make one of his companions happy who had been upset, would joke
with him and he would say, 'Verily, God hates one who snarls in his
brother's (in faith) face."*[^1]

There are numerous instances of the Prophet's tendency to joke recorded
in books of his traditions and lifestyle. Reference will be made to some
of these:

1. A servant of the Messenger of God named Anjashah would say "*huda*"
(something they say to make a camel go faster) to the camel of the
Prophet's wife. The Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and his
family) said, "O Anjashah, be careful (when dealing) with glass"[^2] (an
allusion to the fact that women are fragile and it is possible that at a
high speed they may get scared, fall and hurt themselves).

2. A women came to the Most Noble Messenger (peace and blessings be upon
him and his family) and mentioned her husband's name. He asked, "Is your
husband the one who has white in his eyes? She replied, "No, he doesn't
have white in his eyes." When that woman went home and told her husband
what had happened, he said, "Don't you see that the white part of my
eyes is more than the black part?"[^3]

3. The Prophet's lifestyle was such that he permitted his supporters to
say humorous things in his blessed presence. Following the example of
the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him and his family), they would
stay away from inappropriate jokes. But they did not hold back when it
came to acceptable forms of jesting.

"Nu'ayman was the type of person who liked to joke. One day he saw a
Bedouin with a sack of honey. He bought it and took it to the Prophet's
house. The Messenger of God (peace and blessings be upon him and his
family) thought he had brought this as a gift. Nu'ayman left and the
Bedouin came standing in front of the Prophet's house. After waiting for
a long time, he yelled, 'Whoever lives here, if you don't have money,
give the honey back.' The Messenger of God (peace and blessings be upon
him and his family) discovered what had happened and paid that man for
the honey.

When the Prophet met Nu'ayman, he asked, 'Why did you do that?'

Nu'ayman said, 'I figured, the Messenger of God likes honey and that
Bedouin man had a lot of honey.' The Messenger of God laughed at what
Nu'ayman had done and did not show any signs of being upset. "[^4]

[^1]: Sunan an-Nabi, p. 60.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 16, p. 294.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 16, p. 294.

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 16, p. 296.


