Preface
=======

What is offered here is a fairly comprehensive selection of the
narrations pertaining to Jesus (‘a) said to have been reported by the
Shi‘i Imams, peace be with them. It is generally admitted that not
everything reported in this literature is correct, and the science of
hadith has been developed by Muslim scholars precisely for the purpose
of sorting through the narrations and evaluating their strength. No
attempt has been made in what follows to select only ahadith considered
reliable.

The narrations selected provide an overview of what various reporters of
ahadith have claimed that the Imams have said about Jesus (‘a). At the
same time, we cannot claim that our selection exhausts all such
narrations. Sometimes we have found several reports that differ only in
some insignificant details, in which case we have generally selected the
most complete form of the report.

Also omitted are reports in which Jesus is mentioned only incidentally,
although where such incidental mention seemed interesting to us, we have
provided the excerpt from the hadith. The *isnad*, or chains of
transmission that accompany the reports, have been omitted from the
English translations since they would only be of use to those who have
fluency in Arabic.

It is rather disheartening to find that so much misunderstanding remains
between Christians and Muslims in the world today. Hopefully the
collection presented here will be seen by Christians as a gift from the
Shi‘ah to show the reverence they have for Jesus (‘a). The vision of
Jesus (‘a) to be found here is different from that of Christianity, and
the difference is bound to lead some to respond negatively, “No. The
Christ we know is not like that.”

We are not concerned to argue here for the veracity of the vision of
Christ presented. Of course Christians will deny what conflicts with
their beliefs. However, it is hoped that the reader will be able to
bracket the question of what reports about Jesus (‘a) are best
considered factual, because this question depends on the standards used
for such evaluations, whether doctrinal, historical or otherwise.

According to our faith, as Shi‘ah, the overall picture of Christ
presented below is true, although questions may be raised about
particular narrations or details thereof. This is how we think of
Christ. It is a different way of thinking about him from what is
familiar to Christians. However, it is by no means disrespectful, and it
offers a way to understand the more general religious vision of Islam,
particularly Shi‘ia Islam.

It is up to our readers to choose to respond by focusing on differences
and rejecting what is contrary to their beliefs, or to find how much we
have in common and on this basis to search for what is of value in the
Muslim’s view, even where it differs from what one is prepared to
accept.

We expect that our readers will include English speaking Muslims, both
Sunni and Shi’ia, as well as Christians. To them we offer this
collection as an opportunity to reacquaint themselves with Islamic
teachings about Jesus, and hope that it will inspire better relations
between Muslims and Christians. Even as we stand fast in our own faith,
we should be prepared to deepen our appreciation of the commitment of
Christians to follow the teachings of one held in such high esteem in
the Qur’an and ahadith.

In the glorious Qur’an, in a passage describing the annunciation to the
Blessed Virgin Mary, Jesus (‘a) is described as a Word from God:

***O Mary! Verily Allah gives you the glad tidings of a Word from Him;
his name is the Messiah, Jesus son of Mary, prominent in this world and
in the Hereafter of those near [to God]. (3:44)***

The context in which this *ayah* was revealed was one of interreligious
encounter. It is said that the Christians of Najran sent a delegation to
the Prophet of Islam (S) at Mecca to question him about the teachings of
Islam concerning Jesus (‘a)*,* and that God revealed the above and other
*ayat* of *Surah Al-i ‘Imran* in response. The response is not merely a
denial of Christian teachings, although the divinity of Christ is
clearly rejected, but an affirmation of much believed by Christians, as
well, even the designation of Christ as *logos:*

***O People of the Book! Do not transgress in your religion, and do not
say of Allah but the Truth. Verily, the Messiah, Jesus the son of Mary,
is only an apostle of Allah and His Word which He conveyed unto Mary,
and a Spirit from Him. (4:171)***

So, in addition to being called the Word of God, Jesus (‘a) is also
called the Spirit of God, and in some of the narrations reported in the
Shi‘i tradition, this title is used.

Of course, the interpretation of the *logos* in Christian theology
differs markedly from the interpretation of the *kalimah* by Muslim
scholars. For the Christian, according to the Gospel of John, the Word
was God and the Word became flesh. For the Muslim, on the other hand,
the Word is creature, even while it is the creative principle, for it is
in God’s utterance of the word “Be!” that creation takes place.

To call Christ the Word of Allah is not to deify him, but to verify his
status as prophet. Because of his high status as prophet, Jesus (‘a)
becomes a complete manifestation of God, one who conveys the message of
God, one who can speak on behalf of God, and thus, the Word of God.

Jesus (‘a) becomes the Word of God not because of an incarnation whereby
his flesh becomes divine, but because his spirit is refined to such an
extent that it becomes a mirror whereby divinity comes to be known. The
temple is holy not because of any inherent sanctity in the structure,
but because it is the place of the worship of God.

The differences between Islamic and Christian thinking about Jesus (‘a)
are as important as they are subtle. Both accept the virgin birth,
although it is ironic that a growing number of liberal Christians have
come to have doubts about this miracle while Muslims remain steadfast!
Among the other miracles attributed to Jesus (‘a) in the Glorious Qur’an
are the revival of the dead and the creation of a bird from clay, but
all of the miracles performed by Jesus (‘a) are expressly *by the
permission of Allah*.

Just as in the miracle of his birth, Jesus (‘a) came into the world by a
human mother and divine spirit, so too, his miracles are performed as
human actions with divine permission. In this regard the error of the
Christians is explained by the great Sufi theoretician, Ibn al-‘Arabi,
as follows:

This matter has led certain people to speak of incarnation and to say
that, in reviving the dead, he is God. Therefore, since they conceal
God, Who in reality revives the dead, in the human form of Jesus, He has
said,

***They are concealers [unbelievers] who say that God is the Messiah,
son of Mary.(5:72)***[^1]

The point is that Muslims can find God in Jesus (‘a) without deifying
him, and furthermore that deifying Jesus (‘a) is really an obstacle to
their finding God in Jesus (‘a), for deification is an obstacle to
searching in Jesus (‘a) for anything beyond him.

One of the central questions of Christian theology is: “Who was Jesus
Christ?” The formulation of answers to this question is called
*Christology*. In this area of theology, Christians have debated the
significance of the historical Jesus as opposed to the picture of Jesus
presented in the traditions of the Christian Churches and the Biblical
understanding of Jesus.

The time has come for Muslims to begin work in this area, as well.
Through the development of an Islamic Christology we can come to a
better understanding of Islam as contrasted with Christianity, and Islam
in consonance with Christianity, too. Indeed, the first steps in this
direction are laid out for us in the Qur’an itself, in the verses
mentioned above and others.

Contemporary work toward an Islamic Christology is scarce. Christian
authors have tended to stress the salvific function of Jesus (‘a) which
seems to have no place in Islam, which leads to questions of religious
pluralism when Christians ask one another whether Christ (‘a) can be the
savior of Muslims and others who are not Christians.

Christians should be reminded that Muslims accept Jesus (‘a) as savior,
along with all the other prophets, for the prophetic function is to save
humanity from the scourge of sin by conveying the message of guidance
revealed by God. The important difference between Islam and Christianity
here is not over the issue of whether Jesus (‘a) saves, but how he
saves. Islam denies that salvation is through redemption resulting from
the crucifixion, and instead turns its attention to the instruction
provided in the life of the prophets (‘a).

Christian scholarship on Jesus as presented in Islam tends to ignore
*hadith* and focus on the Qur’an. Often the research is polemical as
authors attempt to support an interpretation of the Qur’an that is more
in keeping with Christian than Islamic doctrine. A general review and
introduction to this work may be found in Neal Robinson’s *Christ in
Islam and Christianity*.[^2]2

Muslims, on the other hand, have tended to produce their own polemical
works showing how much of what is in the Bible is consistent with the
Islamic view of Christ (‘a) as prophet rather than as a person of the
Trinity.[^3] Ahmad Deedat’s work along these lines has attracted much
attention.

More profound insights into the differences between Islam and other
faiths, including Christianity, may be found in the writings of Frithjof
Schuon, Shaykh ‘Isa Nur al-Din Ahmad, who presents the beginnings of a
genuine Christology from a Sufi perspective in his *Islam and the
Perennial Philosophy*.[^4]

In his *The Muslim Jesus : Sayings and Stories in Islamic Literature*,
Tarif Khalidi has collected Islamic references to Jesus from the eighth
to the 18th centuries, including mystical works, historical texts about
prophets and saints and selections from the *hadith* and Qur’an.[^5] As
Khalidi notes, these writings, form the largest body of texts relating
to Jesus in any non-Christian literature.

These days there is much discussion of dialogue between different faith
communities. Conferences have been held for this purpose in the Islamic
Republic of Iran as well as in Africa, Europe and the United States.

Perhaps one of the best ways Christians can find common ground for
discussion with Muslims is to become familiar with the portrait of Jesus
(‘a) presented in Islamic sources, the most important of which are the
Qur’an and *ahadith*, and for the latter, no matter what one’s religious
orientation, it must be admitted that the narrations handed down through
the Household of the Prophet (S) deserve careful attention.

For those of us who have the honour of being counted among the Shi‘ah,
the importance of what has been related by the *Ahl al-Bayt* weighs
especially heavily, as it should, according to the famous *hadith
al-thaqalayn*, in which the Prophet (S),in the last year of his life, is
reported to have said:

Verily, I am leaving with you two weighty things (thaqalayn): the Book
of Allah and my kindred, my household, for indeed, the two of them will
never separate until they return to me by the Pond [of Kauthar on the
Last Day].

Perhaps some Christians will be dismissive of what is said of Jesus (‘a)
in the Islamic narrations because the main debate about contemporary
Christology among Christians is whether research about the historical
Jesus (‘a)is relevant to religion, or whether knowledge of Jesus
(‘a)requires attention to the role he plays in the Church and in
theology.

The Islamic narrations, coming centuries after the life of Christ
(‘a)(and in some cases more than a century after the life of Muhammad
(S)) will likely be dismissed by liberal Christians in pursuit of a
portrait of Jesus (‘a) based on the standards of historical research
currently accepted in the West. The neo-orthodox Christian claims that
the Savoir is not to be found in history, but in the Church, so it will
not be surprising if he displays no interest in what Islam has to say
about Christ (‘a).

However, the Christian may find that the Islamic perspective illuminates
a middle ground between the historian’s emphasis on the natural and the
ecclesiastical emphasis on the supernatural. The humanity of Jesus (‘a)
is evident in the narrations of the Shi‘ah, but it is a humanity
transformed, a perfected humanity, and as such there is no denying its
supernatural dimension.

The Muslim always seems to appear as a stranger to the Christian, but
perhaps it is from the stranger that the Christian can best come to know
his savoir. The crucifix has hung in the Church for so long that it
becomes difficult for the Christian to find significance there.

The attraction of the quest for the historical Jesus is that it provides
a fresh look at the subject, even if that quest is marred by
naturalistic presumptions inimical to the religious outlook. By trying
to see Jesus (‘a)as the Muslim sees him, the Christian may find his
savoir come to life, lifted up to God in his own inner life rather than
crucified.[^6]

If we have given reason for Christians to study the narrations of the
Shi‘ah about Jesus (‘a)*,* the question of the value of such study for
Muslims remains. Some might wonder why, when we have the Qur’an and
*sunnah*, we should be especially interested in Jesus (‘a)*.*

To begin with, Jesus (‘a)*,* along with the prophets Noah, Abraham,
Moses, Peace be with them, and Muhammad (S) has a special status in
Islam as one of the greatest prophets, the *ulu’ al-‘azm,* the prophets
who brought the divine law.

What was revealed to the last of them is a confirmation of what was
revealed to the others. The truth of the revelation is not to be found
in its particularity but in its universality, and we come to understand
this best when we understand the teachings of all the prophets (‘a)*.*
Is this not why so much attention is given to the previous prophets in
the Qur’an?

All of the prophets (‘a) have brought a gospel of love, love of God and
love of neighbour and love even for the meanest of His creatures. So, in
the reports narrated below we find Jesus (‘a) giving some of his food to
the creatures of the sea.

At the same time, however, this love is not to be confused with a
sentimentalism which would prevent the execution of the divine law.
Jesus (‘a) found fault with the Pharisees not because of their regard
for the exterior forms of religion, but because of their disregard for
its interior forms, that is, because of their hypocrisy.[^7]

The Words of the Spirit of Allah reported in the selections that follow
are primarily concerned with morals. These are Christian morals and at
the same time Islamic morals. Today Christendom is in a state of moral
upheaval. Peculiarly modern ideas of what is right and wrong have found
their way into the theologians’ understandings of ethics.

Significant areas of agreement are difficult to find. The simple
morality taught by Jesus (‘a) and which continues to be emphasized in
Islam resonates in the narrations of the Shi‘ah. While excessive
asceticism is forbidden, we are to turn, like Jesus (‘a)*,* away from
the world to find refuge in God.

From the following narrations we not only become reacquainted with the
moral teachings of Jesus (‘a) and with his character, but we also
discover what the dear friends of Allah, the Household of the Prophet
(S) found it important to transmit about him, and thereby we get a
glimpse into their moral teachings and characters, too.

[^1]: Ibn al-‘Arabi, The Bezels of Wisdom (Fusus al-Hikam), tr. R. W. J.
Austin (Lahore: Suhail, 1988), p. 177.

[^2]: Neal Robinson, Christ in Islam and Christianity (Albany: SUNY,
1991), ch. 2. This work also contains an excellent survey of how Muslim
historians and apologists have approached issues pertaining to Christ
and Christianity, and an examination of various exegeses of the Qur’an
on the verses about Jesus.

[^3]: For example, see Ahmed Deedat, Was Jesus Crucified? (Chicago:
Kazi, 1992).

[^4]: Frithjof Schuon, Islam and the Perennial Philosophy (Lahore:
Suhail, 1985).

[^5]: Tarif Khalidi, the Muslim Jesus: Sayings and Stories in Islamic
Literature (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2003).

[^6]: We are reminded by the glorious Qur’an: “Recall when God said: ‘O
Jesus, I will take you away and lift you up to Me.’”. (3:54)

[^7]: Cf. Matt. 23:25.


