The Disciples of Jesus
======================

1. It is reported that al-Baqir (‘a) said, “Verily, Allah sent Jesus
only to the Children of Israel and his prophecy was at the Sacred House
[Jerusalem], and after him there were twelve apostles.”[^1]

2. It is reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “I said, ‘O Apostle of Allah!
How many imams will there be after you?’ He said, ‘The number of the
disciples of Jesus, the number of tribes of Moses, the number of the
chief tans of the children of Israel.’ I said, ‘O Apostle of Allah! How
many were they?’ He said, ‘They were twelve, and the imams after me will
be twelve....’”[^2]

3. It is reported that ‘Ali ibn al-Hasan ibn Fadal reported that his
father said, “I said to Al-Ridha’ (‘a), ‘Why were the disciples
(*hawariyin*) called *hawariyin?*’ He said, ‘According to the people,
they were called *hawariyin* because they were bleachers who used to
clean clothes from filth by washing, and this name is derived from
*hawari* (bleached) bread, but according to us they are called
*hawariyin* because they were pure in themselves and purified others
from the filth of sin by sermons and remembrance.’

Then it was asked, ‘Why the Christians (Nasara) were called *Nasara*?’
He said, ‘Because they were from a village named *Nasirah* among the
towns of Syria. Mary and Jesus settled in it after they returned from
Egypt.’”[^3]

4. Abu ‘Abd Allah (‘a) said, “Verily the disciples of Jesus (‘a) were
his followers, and our followers are our disciples. The disciples of
Jesus were not more obedient than our disciples are to us. Jesus (‘a)
said to the disciples, ‘Who are my helpers for Allah?’

The disciples said, ‘We will be the helpers of Allah.’[^4] By Allah,
they did not help him from the Jews and they did not fight with them for
him, but our followers, by Allah, always have helped us since Allah, may
His remembrance be magnified, took [the soul of] the Apostle of Allah,
and they have fought for us, have been burned and tormented and
frightened away in the cities. May Allah give them the best reward for
us.”[^5]

5. Anas ibn Malik said, “I asked the Apostle of Allah (S) about the
disciples of Jesus. He said, ‘They were those chosen by him as best, and
they were twelve who were unmarried and quick to help Allah and His
Apostle. There was neither pride in them nor weakness nor doubt.

They helped him with vision, influence, seriousness and suffering.’ I
said, ‘So, who are your disciples, O Apostle of Allah?’ He said, ‘The
leaders (*imams*) after me who are twelve from the loins of ‘Ali and
Fatimah. They are my disciples and the helpers of my religion, may peace
be granted to them from Allah.’”[^6]

6. Mufaddal reported in a lengthy narration that he said to Al-Sadiq
(‘a), “O my guardian and master! Why are the people of Moses called
*Yahud* (Jews)?” He said, “Because of the saying of Allah, the mighty
and magnificent,

***‘Verily, we turn (hudna) unto You’ (7:156),***

that is, ‘we seek Your guidance.’” He said, “What about the *Nasara*
(Christians)?” He said, “Because of the saying of Jesus (‘a),

***‘Who will be my helpers in the way of Allah?’ The disciples said, ‘We
are the helpers (ansar) of Allah. We believe in Allah and bear witness
that we are ones who submit.’ (3:52)***

So, they were called *Nasara* because of their help to the religion of
Allah.”[^7]

7. It was said to Abu ‘Abd Allah (‘a), “Why is it that the companions of
Jesus (‘a) walked on water, while it was not this way with the
companions of Muhammad (S)?” He said, “Verily, the companions of Jesus
were saved the trouble of livelihood, but the latter were tested by
livelihood.”[^8]

8. It is reported that Imam Al-Sadiq (‘a) said, “When Jesus (‘a) wanted
to wish farewell to his disciples, he called them together and order
them to be for weak creatures and he prohibited them from despots. Then
he sent two of them to Antioch. They arrived on the day of a festival.

They found the people there had uncovered idols and were worshipping
them. They hurried toward them violently. They were put in irons and
thrown into prison. When Simon found out about this, he went to Antioch
and visited them in the prison. He said, ‘Did I not prohibit you from
despots?’

Then he left them, and sat with the weak people. He began gradually to
discuss matters with them. Then the weak spoke of these things with
those who were stronger, while they kept it a most confidential secret.
Their words kept ascending until they finally reached the king. He
asked, ‘Since when has this man been in my kingdom?’ They said, ‘For two
months.’ He said, ‘Bring him to me.’ They brought him.

When the king saw Simon, he felt love for him. He said, ‘I will not sit,
unless he is beside me.’ Later after having had a frightening dream, he
asked Simon about it. Simon gave a good answer that gladdened the king.
Later he had another terrifying dream. Simon interpreted it in such
manner that the king’s happiness increased.

They conversed thus until Simon came to have influence over the king.
Then he said, ‘Verily, there are two men in your jail who insulted you.’
The king said, ‘Yes.’ Simon said, ‘Bring them to me.’ When they were
brought to Simon, he asked, ‘What is the god you worship?’ They said,
‘Allah.’ He said, ‘When you ask Him for something, does He hear you, and
does He answer you when you pray to Him?’ They said, ‘Yes.’ Simon said,
‘I want to ask you something to gain assurance from you about this.’

They said, ‘Ask.’ He said, ‘Does He cure the leper?’ They said, ‘Yes.’
He said, ‘Bring a leper.’ He said, ‘Ask Him to cure this leper.’ They
laid hands upon him and he was cured. Simon said, ‘I, also, can do the
like of what you have done.’ Then he said, ‘Bring another.’ Simon laid
hands on the leper and he was cured. Another mark remains; if you answer
this I will believe in your God.’ They said, ‘What is it?’

He said, ‘Can you revive the dead?’ They said, ‘Yes.’ Then Simon faced
the king and asked, ‘Do you have a dead person who’s passing has been
hard for you?’ He said, ‘Yes. My son.’Simon said, ‘Bring us to his
grave.’ Then he said, ‘They have put themselves at risk for you.’

Then they turned to the grave and raised their hands [in prayer], as did
Simon, then suddenly the grave cracked open and the youth stood up. He
faced his father who said to him, ‘How are you?’ He said, ‘I was dead,
and terrified, when I understood there to be three persons standing
before Allah with their hands raised in prayer to Him.

They prayed that He revive me. They were those two and he.’ Simon said,
‘I am a believer in your God.’ The king said, ‘O Simon, I believe in Him
in Whom you have come to believe.’ The viziers of the king said, ‘And we
believe in Him in Whom our master has come to believe.’ The weak always
followed the strong. In Antioch none remained who did not believe.”[^9]

9. Abu Hamzah al-Thumali said that he asked Imam Baqir (‘a) about the
exegesis of the *ayah*,

***And set out to them an example of the people of the town, when the
messengers came to it. When We sent to them two, the rejected both of
them, then We strengthened them with a third, so they said: Surely we
are messengers to you. (36:13-14).***

He said, “Allah commissioned two men to go to the people of Antioch.
They brought things that were unfamiliar to those people, so the people
were coarse with them, arrested them and imprisoned them in the house of
idols. So, Allah commissioned a third. He entered the town, and said,
‘Lead me to the gate of the king.’ When he stood before the gate of the
king, he said, ‘I am a man who has worshiped in the deserts of the
earth, and I would like to worship the God of the king.’

His speech reached the king, who said, ‘Bring him into the house of the
gods.’ They brought him in it, and he remained there a year, with his
two companions, to whom he said, ‘In this way we transfer a people from
one religion to another, not by bungling. Why were you not friendly?’
Then he said to them, ‘Do not admit to knowing me.’

Then he was brought before the king. The king said to him, ‘It has
reached me that you have been worshipping my god. You will always be my
brother, so ask me for what you need.’ He said, ‘I need nothing, O king!
But I saw two men there in the house of the gods, so, how is it with
them?’ The king said, ‘Those two are men who came here, misled people
from my religion, and invited them to a heavenly God.’

He said, ‘O king! What a beautiful debate! If they prove right, we will
follow them, and if we prove right, they will enter our religion with
us. So, whatever is for us is for them, and whatever is against us is
against them.’ The king sent for those two.

When they came before him, their companion said to them, ‘What do you
have for us?’ They said, ‘We came to invite to the worship of Allah, Who
created the heavens and earth, Who creates what He wills in the wombs,
Who forms as He wills, Who grows the trees and fruits and Who sends rain
from the sky.’

He said to them, ‘This God of yours, to Whom and to Whose worship you
invite, if we bring to you a blind person, can He restore him to
health?’ They said, ‘If we ask Him to do it, He will do it, if He
wants.’ He said, ‘O king! Bring a blind person who has never seen.’ One
such person was brought. He said to them, ‘Supplicate your God to
restore his sight.’

They stood up and prayed two prostrations (*raq‘atayn*). All at once,
the eyes of the blind man opened, and he looked to the sky. Simon said,
‘O king! Bring another blind person to me.’ One was brought. Simon
prayed one prostration (*sajdah*), then he lifted his head and all at
once the blind person was seeing. He said, ‘O king! A proof for a proof!
Bring a cripple.’

One was brought. He said the same [sort of thing as was previously
mentioned to them about the blind person]. They prayed and supplicated
Allah. All at once the cripple straightened his legs, stood and walked.
He said, ‘O king! Bring another cripple to me.’ One was brought. He did
the same [thing that he did in the case of the blind person]. The
cripple got up. He said, ‘O king! They brought two proofs, and we have
brought the like of both of them. One thing remains. If they do this, I
will enter their religion with them.’

Then he said, ‘O king! Word has reached me that the king had an only
son, and that he died. If their God revives him, I will enter their
religion with them.’ The king said to him, ‘And I with you, too.’ Then
Simon said to them, ‘One thing remains. The son of the king has died,
so, supplicate your God to revive him.’ They fell to prostrate
themselves to Allah.

They lengthened their prostration (*sajdah*). Then they raised their
heads and said to the kind, ‘Send someone to the grave of your son, and
you will find that he has been raised from his grave, God willing.’

The people went out to look. They found him to have come out of his
grave, wiping the dust from his head. They brought him to the king. He
recognized his son and said to him, ‘How are you, my son?’ He said, ‘I
was dead. Then I saw two men before my Lord, in prostration,
supplicating Him that I be revived. Then He revived me.’ He said, ‘O my
son! Would you recognize them if you saw them?’ He said, ‘Yes.’

He brought the people out to a field. One by one they passed him, and
the father told his son, ‘Look.’ The son said, ‘No. No.’ Then, after
many had passed, the king had one of them pass, and the son said, ‘This
is one of them,’ and he pointed to him. Then many passed by, until he
saw the companion of the other. The son said, ‘This is the other one.’

The prophet who was the companion of those two men said, ‘As for me, I
believe in your God. I know that what you have brought is the truth.’
The king said, ‘I, also, believe in your God.’ Then all the people of
his kingdom believed.[^10]

10. It is reported that Abu ‘Abd Allah (‘a) said, “Between David and
Jesus (‘a) there were four hundred eighty years. There descended to
Jesus admonitions, parables and sanctions in the Gospel. There was no
retaliation nor commands for punishments, nor obligatory inheritance.

There descended upon him a lightening of what was descended upon Moses
(‘a) in the Torah, and this is what He said, reporting the words of
Jesus to the Children of Israel,

***Likewise confirming the truth of the Torah that is before me, and to
make lawful to you certain things that were forbidden unto you.
(3:50).***

And Jesus ordered those who were with him, who followed him and who were
believers to believe in the law of the Torah and the laws of all the
prophets and the Gospel.” And he [Abu ‘Abd Allah (‘a)] said, “Jesus (‘a)
waited for seven or eight years, then he informed them [the people] of
what they ate and what they stored in their houses.

And he stood up among them, and made the dead to live, and cured the
born blind and the leper, and he taught them the Torah. Then Allah
descended the Gospel upon him when He wanted to bring an authority for
them.

And he [Jesus (‘a)] sent a man to Rome. All he treated were cured of
their illnesses, and he cured the born blind and the leper, until it was
mentioned to the king there. So, he was brought to him. He [the king]
said, ‘Do you make well the born blind and the leper?’ He said,‘Yes.’

He said, ‘Bring a youth who has no eyes and has never seen anything.’ He
took two hazelnuts and looked at them sharply, then he put them in his
eye sockets, and prayed. At once he became seeing. The king sat him next
to himself, and said, ‘Be with me, and do not leave my city.’ He
conferred upon him the best positions.

Then the Messiah sent another, and taught him something for reviving the
dead. He entered Rome, and said, ‘I am more knowledgeable than the
physician of the king.’ This was mentioned to the king. He said, ‘Kill
him.’ The [first] physician said, ‘Do not do it. Bring him. If you find
him to be in error, you will kill him. In that case, you would have
authority to do so.’

He was brought to him. He said, ‘I revive the dead.’ The king mounted
and so did the people and they went to the grave of the son of the king
who had recently died. The apostle of the Messiah prayed, and the first
apostle who was the physician of the king said, ‘Amen.’ The grave split
open and the son of the king emerged. Then he came walking until he sat
in the lap of his father.

Then he said, ‘O my son! Who revived you?’ Then he looked and said,
‘This one and that one.’ Then they stood and said, ‘We are messengers to
you from the Messiah. You had not listened to his messengers. You even
ordered them to be killed when they came to you.’ Then he obeyed and
glorified the affair of the Messiah until the enemies of Allah said what
they said about him and the Jews belied him and wanted to kill him.[^11]

11. It is reported that Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) raised John the son
of Zachariah among twelve apostles to teach the people and to prohibit
them from marrying their sisters’ daughters. The king of those people
was attracted to the daughter of his sister and he wanted to marry her.

When her mother was informed that John had prohibited this kind of
marriage, she brought her daughter adorned to the king. When the king
saw her, he asked her what she desired. She said, “I want you to
slaughter John the son of Zachariah.” He said, “Ask me for something
else.” She said, “I will not ask you for anything but this.”

When she refused him, he sent for a basin and sent for John. Then he
slaughtered him. A drop of his blood fell at once to the earth and the
stain of it remained until Bukht Nassar reigned over them. Then an old
man of the children of Israel came to him and guided him to that blood.
Bukht Nassar decided to kill the children of Israel because of that
blood until the stain would be obliterated. So he killed seventy
thousand for this in one year until it was obliterated.[^12]

12. Abu Ja‘far (‘a) said, “The foremost[^13] are four: the murdered son
of Adam, the foremost of the community of Moses, who was a believer
among the Pharaoh’s people, the foremost of the community of Jesus, who
was Habib the carpenter, and the foremost of the community of Muhammad,
who was ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (‘a).”[^14]

[^1]: Bihar, 14, 250, 40

[^2]: Bihar, 36, 285, 107

[^3]: Bihar, 14, 273, 2

[^4]: See (61:14)

[^5]: Kafi, 8, 268, 396

[^6]: Bihar, 36, 310, 149

[^7]: Bihar, 53, 5

[^8]: Kafi, 5, 71, 3

[^9]: Bihar, 14, 252

[^10]: Bihar 14, 240-242, 20

[^11]: Bihar, 14, 251, 43

[^12]: Bihar, 14, 182, 24

[^13]: See (56:10)

[^14]: Bihar, 66, 156


