The Episode of the Bell
=======================

1. It is reported that al-Harith al-A‘war said, “I was travelling with
the Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib (‘a) in Hirah when we
came upon a monk who was ringing a church bell.

‘Ali ibn Abu Talib (‘a) said, ‘O Harith! Do you know what this church
bell is saying?’ I said, ‘Allah, His Apostle and the son of the uncle of
His Apostle know better.’ He said, ‘It strikes the metaphor of this
world and its destruction and it says, “There is no god but Allah,
really, really, truly, truly. Surly this world has beguiled us, has
occupied us, has made itself alluring to us.

O son of this world! Take your time! Take your time! Ring, ring. O son
of this world! Gather, gather. The world is annihilated moment by
moment. No day passes us without a pillar falling. We have ruined the
everlasting house and we made our homes in a transitory realm. We do not
know how much we have fallen short in it until we die.’[^1]

Harith said, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! Do the Christians know this?’
He said, ‘If they knew it, they would not have taken Christ as a god
other than Allah, the Mighty and Magnificent.’

Harith said, ‘Then I went to the monk and said to him, “By the right of
Christ over you! Ring the church bell in the way that you do.”

Then he started ringing it, and I said word for word [what Imam ‘Ali had
told him] to ‘until we die.’ Then the monk said, ‘By the right of your
Prophet over you! Who informed you of this?’ I said, ‘That man who was
with me yesterday.’

He said, ‘Is that man kin to the Prophet?’ I said, ‘He is the son of his
uncle.’ He said, ‘By the right of your Prophet! Did he hear this from
your prophet?’ I said, ‘Yes.’ Then he became a Muslim. Then he said to
me, ‘By Allah! I found in the Torah that at the end of the prophets
there is a prophet who interprets what the church bell says.’”[^2]

[^1]: This interpretation of the sound of the church bell is in a rhymed
sing-song rhythm.

[^2]: Bihar, 14, 334, 1


