The Children of Israel
======================

1. Their Food
-------------

The Prophet (S) said, “Verily, Allah sent down a spread to Jesus (‘a)
and blessed him with a flat loaf of bread and fishes, so four thousand
seven hundred people ate of it and were sated.”[^1]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said, “O servants of Allah! Verily, when the
people of Jesus asked him to have Allah bring down a spread from heaven,
Allah said,

***I will send it down to you, then whoever of you disbelieves after
that, I will punish as I will not punish any other being.(5:115)***

Then He sent it down to them, and all of them who disbelieved after
that, Allah transformed into a pig, monkey, bear, cat, or in the form of
some birds, animals of the land or sea. So, they were transformed into
four hundred forms.”[^2]

It is reported that Abu al-Hasan said, “Verily, the swine among the
people of Jesus (‘a) asked for a table spread to come down. Then they
did not believe. So, Allah transformed them into swine.”[^3]

2. Their Denial
---------------

1. ’Anas ibn Malik said, “The Apostle of Allah (S) said, ‘Verily the
children of Israel split into seventy-one sects after Jesus. Seventy
sects perished and one sect was saved. My community will split into
seventy-two sects. Seventy-one sects will perish and one of them will be
saved.’ They said, ‘O Apostle of Allah! What is that sect?’ He said,
‘The community, the community, the community.’”[^4]

2 Muhammad ibn Ja‘far said, “Abu ‘Abd Allah (‘a) narrated to us from his
fathers, peace be with them, ‘I heard from ‘Ali that he said to the
chief of the Jews, ‘How many sects did you split into?’ He said, ‘So and
so many sects.’ ‘Ali (‘a) said, ‘You lie.’

Then he faced the people and said, ‘By Allah! If the seat [of
government] is returned to me, I will judge among the people of the
Torah by their Torah, among the people of the Gospel by their Gospel and
between the people of the Qur’an by their Qur’an.

The Jews split into seventy-one sects, seventy of them will be in the
Fire. One of them will be saved and will be in heaven and it is the sect
that followed Yusha‘ ibn Nun, the executor of Moses. The Christians
split into seventy-two sects. Seventy-one of them will be in the Fire
and one of them will be in heaven, and it is the sect that followed
Simon, the executor of Jesus.

And this community will split into seventy-three sects. Seventy-two of
them will be in the Fire. One of them will be in heaven, and it is the
sect that follows the executor of Muhammad.’

Then he beat his breast with his hand and said, ‘Thirteen sects, among
the seventy-three sects, will accept my kindness and love, but one of
them will be in heaven. It is the middle rite, and the twelve sects will
be in the Fire.’”[^5]

3. Imam ‘Ali (‘a) said, “O Kumayl! Neither the Christians denied Allah,
the Exalted, nor the Jews, and they did not refuse Moses or Jesus, but
they increased, decreased, perverted and misled. So they were cursed and
hated, and did not repent or accept.

O Kumayl! Our father Adam (‘a) was born neither as a Jew nor a
Christian, and he was not His son, but he was *hanif* (upright) and
Muslim. He did not do something that was obligatory, so what happened,
until Allah accepted a sacrifice for him.”[^6]

4. Mughayrah narrated from Abu ‘Abd Allah, and he from his father, and
he from his grandfather, peace be with them, that he said, “The
transformed among the children of Adam are thirteen kinds: monkey, swine
and… As for the monkeys, they were a group that came down to a town near
the beach of the sea, acted unlawfully on Saturday and fished. So Allah,
the Exalted, transformed them into monkeys.

As for the swine, they were a group among the children of Israel that
Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) cursed. So Allah, the Exalted, transformed
them into swine.”[^7]

5. It is reported that Abu ‘Abd Allah (‘a) said, “Moses told his people
something that they could not bear, so they exiled him to Egypt. They
fought with Moses, and he with them, and he killed them. Jesus told his
people something that they could not bear, so they exiled him to Takrit.
They fought with Jesus, and he with them, and he killed them. This is
the saying of Allah, the mighty and magnificent,

***So a party of the children of Israel believed and another party
disbelieved; then We aided those who believed against their enemy, and
they triumphed over them. (61:14).***[^8]

6 It is reported that when this verse descended,

***And there is not one of the followers of the Book but most certainly
believes in this before his death, and on the day of resurrection he
(Jesus) shall be a witness against them.(4:159),***

Abu ‘Abd Allah Al-Sadiq (‘a) said, “There are none who remain in
rejection of what has descended about Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) but
disbelievers.”[^9]

7. Ja‘far ibn Muhammad reported from his father (‘a) that the Apostle of
Allah (S) said, “O ‘Ali! There is a likeness between Jesus the son of
Mary and you. Allah [the Exalted] said,

***And there is not one of the followers of the Book but most certainly
believes in this before his death, and on the day of resurrection he
(Jesus) shall be a witness against them.(4:159).***

O, ‘Ali! Nobody who slanders Jesus dies unless he believes in him before
his death and tells the truth about him, when it is no use for him at
all. And you are like him. Your enemy does not die until he sees you
near his death. When he sees you, you will be angry and sad for him.
Then he will confess the truth about you, will say the truth about you
and will confess your *walayah*,[^10] while it is no use for him at
all.”[^11]

8. Al-Imam al-’Askari (‘a) said, “Allah, the Exalted, blamed the Jews
and faulted their disbelieving in Muhammad… He said,

***Evil is that for which they have sold their souls—that they should
deny what Allah has revealed, and there is a disgraceful punishment for
the unbelievers, so they have made themselves deserving of wrath upon
wrath. (2:90)***

That is, they came back while the wrath of Allah was upon them after
another wrath. The first wrath, when they falsified Jesus the son of
Mary and the second, when they falsified Muhammad...”[^12]

3. Their Extremism
------------------

1. ‘Ali (‘a) said, “Verily Jesus the son of Mary is a servant and a
creature. They took him as a Lord,

***but they forgot a portion of what they were reminded of”
(5:14).***[^13]

2. Some of our companions have reported that Ja‘far ibn Waqid and some
of the companions of Abu al-Khattab were mentioned, and someone that he
had often seen ibn Waqid, who said,

***“He it is who is God in the heavens and the earth” (43:84),***

He is the Imam.” Abu ‘Abd Allah (‘a) said, “No, by Allah! May I never be
under one roof with him. They are worse than the Jews, the Christians,
the Magians, and the pagans! By Allah! Their belittling Allah never
belittles His greatness a bit. What the Jews said about him was on
Ezra’s mind, and for this his name was erased from prophethood.

By Allah! If Jesus had confessed to what the Christians said about him,
Allah would have left deafness to him until the Resurrection Day. By
Allah! If I were to confess to what the people of Kufa say about me, the
earth would swallow me. I am nothing but a servant, a slave, who has no
power to harm or benefit.”[^14]

3. It is reported that ‘Ali (‘a) said, “The Apostle of Allah said, ‘The
example of you in my community is as the example of Christ Jesus the son
of Mary. His people split into three sects: a sect of believers, and
they were the disciples, a sect of his enemies, and they were the Jews,
and a sect that exaggerated about him, and they left the faith.

And verily, my community will split into three sects on account of you.
One sect is your Shi‘ah, and they are the believers; one sect is your
enemy, they are the doubters; and one sect are those who exaggerate
about you, and they are the deniers. O ‘Ali! You are in heaven, and your
Shi‘ah, and the lovers of your Shi‘ah. And your enemy and the
exaggerator are in the fire.’”[^15]

4. It is reported that Hasan ibn al-Juhm said, “One day, I was present
at a session with Ma’mun, and ‘Ali ibn Musa Al-Ridha’ (‘a) was beside
him. Jurists and theologians of various sects were gathered, and some of
them questioned him (‘a)...

Ma’mun said to him, ‘O Abu al-Hasan! I have heard that there is a group
that exaggerates and goes beyond the bounds about you.’ Al-Ridha’ (‘a)
said to him, ‘My father, Musa ibn Ja‘far reported from his father Ja‘far
ibn Muhammad, from his father Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, from his father, ‘Ali
ibn al-Husayn, from his father, al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali, from his father,
‘Ali ibn Abu Talib, that the Apostle of Allah said, “Do not exalt me
above what is my right, Allah, the blessed and exalted, took me as a
servant before He took me as a prophet. Allah, the blessed and exalted,
says,

***It is not for a man that Allah should give him the Book and Judgment
and apostleship and yet he should say to people, “Be worshippers of me
besides God;” but rather, “Be lordly that you teach the Book and what
you read” And nor would he enjoin you that your should take the Angels
and the Apostles for lords. What! Would he enjoin you with disbelief
after you submitted?. (3:79-80)”***

And ‘Ali (‘a) said, “Two will be destroyed because of me, although it is
not my fault: The exorbitant lovers and the extreme haters.” We absolve
ourselves from those who exaggerate about us, so that they exalt us
above what is our position, just as Jesus the son of Mary absolved
himself from the Christians. Allah, the mighty and magnificent, said,

***And when Allah will say, ‘O Jesus son of Mary! Did you say to men,
“Take me and my mother for two gods besides Allah?” He will say, “Glory
be to You! It did not befit me that I should say what I had no right to
say; if I had said it, You would indeed have known it; You know what is
in my soul, and I do not know what is in your soul. Surely, You are the
great Knower of the occult./ I did not say to them aught save what You
did enjoin me with: to serve Allah, my Lord and your Lord, and I was a
witness of them so long as I was among them, but when You caused me to
die, You were the watcher over them, and You are the witness of all
things. (5:116-117).***

And He, the mighty and magnificent, said,

***The Messiah does by no means disdain that he should be a servant of
Allah, nor do the angels who are near to Him, and whoever disdains His
service and is proud, He will gather them all together to Himself.
(4:172).***

And He, the mighty and magnificent, said,

***The Messiah, son of Mary, is only an apostle; apostles before him
have indeed passed away; and his mother was a truthful woman. They both
used to eat food. See how We make the communications clear to them, then
behold, how they are turned away. (5:75).***

The meaning of this is that these two persons defecated, so whoever
claims that the prophets were Lords, or who claims that the Imams are
Lords or prophets, or who claims that those who are not Imams are Imams,
we absolve ourselves from them in this world and in the other
world....’”[^16]

5. The Commander of the Faithful (‘a) said, “O Allah! I absolve myself
of the exaggerators, just as Jesus the son of Mary absolved himself from
the Christians. O Allah! Abandon them forever and do not help any of
them.”[^17]

6. It is reported that [Imam] ‘Ali (‘a) said, “The Messenger of Allah
called me and said, ‘O ‘Ali! Verily, there is a similarity between you
and Jesus the son of Mary. The Christians love him so much that they put
him in a position that was not for him; and the Jews hate him so much
that they even slandered his mother.’

And [Imam] ‘Ali (‘a) said, ‘Two [groups of] men will be ruined because
of me, he who goes to extremes in love of me for what I do not have and
he who hates me with a hatred that makes him slander me.’”[^18]

7. It is reported that Abu Basir said, “One day the Apostle of Allah (S)
was sitting among us when the Commander of the Faithful came. The
Apostle of Allah (S) said to him, ‘Indeed, you are similar to Jesus the
son of Mary.

If it were not the case that some groups from my community would say
about you what the Christians have said about Jesus the son of Mary, I
would speak about you in a way that you would not pass by any group
without them taking the dust from your footprints in hopes of a
blessing.’

Two Arabs, al-Mughirah ibn Shu‘bah and a group from the Quraysh that was
with them became angry. They said, ‘He was not satisfied to make a
comparison for his cousin with anyone but Jesus the son of Mary.’ Then
Allah sent down to His prophet,

***And when a comparison is made with the son of Mary, your people raise
a clamor at it/ And they say, ‘Are our gods better or is he? They do not
set it forth to you save by way of disputations; nay, they are a
contentious people./ He was naught but a servant on whom We bestowed
favor, and We made him an example for the children of Israel./ And if We
please, We could make among you angels to be successors in the land.
(43:57-60)***

Then Harith ibn ‘Amr al-Fahri became angry and said, ‘O Allah! If this
is the truth from You, that the Bani Hashim will be successors like one
Caesar after another, then rain stones down upon us or chastise us with
a painful torment. Then Allah sent down to the Prophet what they had
said (8:32), and this verse was sent down,

***But Allah was not going to chastise them while you were among them,
nor is Allah going to chastise them while yet they ask for forgiveness.
(8:33).***

Then the Prophet said to him, ‘O son of ‘Amr! Either repent or get out
of here!’ He said, ‘O Muhammad! Give something from what you have for
those who are not of the Quraysh. The Banu Hashim have taken the
nobility of the Arabs and non-Arabs.’ The Prophet said to him, ‘It is
not up to me. It is up to Allah, the blessed and exalted.’...”[^19]

4. Their Monasticism
--------------------

1. It is reported that the Apostle of Allah (S) said, “…O Abu Dharr!
Allah sent Jesus with monasticism but I was sent with simple
uprightness, and women and perfume are beloved by me, and prayer was
made the delight of my eyes....”[^20]

2. Ibn Mas‘ud said, “I was behind the Apostle of Allah on a donkey when
he said, ‘O son of Umm ‘Abd! Do you know how the Children of Israel
established monasticism?’ I said, ‘Allah and His Apostle know better.’
He said, ‘Tyrants dominated them after Jesus (‘a) who rebelled against
Allah. Then they became enraged at the people of faith and fought with
them. They defeated the people of faith three times. Only a few of them
remained.

They said, “If we appear, they will annihilate us, and no one will
remain for the religion to invite people to it. So, come. Let us scatter
over the earth until Allah commissions the prophet promised by Jesus
(‘a) (that is, Muhammad (S)).”

So they scattered into the mountains and initiated monasticism. Some of
them clung to their religion and some disbelieved.’ Then he recited this
verse,

***As for monasticism, they invented it themselves; We did not prescribe
for them anything but seeking the pleasure of Allah, and this they
observed not as they ought to have observed it. And we gave to those of
them who believed their due recompense; but many of them are
transgressors. (57:27).***

Then he said, ‘O son of Umm ‘Abd! Do you know what the monasticism of my
community is?’ I said, ‘Allah and His Apostle know better.’ He said,
‘Hijrah (migration), jihad, prayer, fasting, hajj and ‘umrah (the major
and minor pilgrimages).’”[^21]

[^1]: Bihar, 14, 249, 37

[^2]: Bihar, 14, 235, 8

[^3]: Bihar, 14, 236, 10

[^4]: Al-Khisal, 2, 584

[^5]: Bihar, 28, 4, 5

[^6]: Bisharah al-Mustafa li Shi‘ah al-Murtada, 29

[^7]: ‘Ilal al-Shara’i‘, 2, 487

[^8]: Bihar 14, 279, 11

[^9]: Tafsir Furat al-Kufi, 115

[^10]: The term wilayah means “authority” or “guardianship”; and walayah
is used for love of the Ahl al-Bayt, devotion to them, obedience to
their commands and holding them as models in morals and practice. See
the explanation of Asaf A. A. Fyzee in his A Shi‘ite Creed (Tehran:
WOFIS, 1982), 149.

[^11]: Tafsir Furat al-Kufi, 116

[^12]: Tafsir al-Imam al-‘Askari, 402

[^13]: Tafsir Al-Qummi, 1 164

[^14]: Bihar, 25, 295, 53

[^15]: Bihar, 25, 264, 4

[^16]: Bihar, 25, 134, 6

[^17]: Bihar, 25, 266, 7

[^18]: Bihar, 35, 319, 13

[^19]: Kafi 8, 57, 18

[^20]: Bihar, 79, 233, 58

[^21]: Bihar, 65, 320


