His Ascension
=============

1. Jabir al-Ansari reported that the Prophet (S) taught ‘Ali and Fatimah
this prayer, and said to them, “When a misfortune descends upon you or
you are afraid of a king’s injustice or something is lost, you should
perform a good ablution, say a prayer with two *rak‘at*, raise your
hands to heaven and say,

‘O Knower of the hidden and the secrets! O Obeyed One! O Most Knowing! O
Allah! O Allah! O Allah! O Vanquisher of the parties against Muhammad
(S)! O Outwitter of Pharaoh for Moses! O Savior of Jesus from the hands
of the unjust! O, Deliverer of the people of Noah from drowning! O,
Compassionate for the tears of Ya‘qub! O Remover of the Difficulties of
Job! O Savior of Jonah from the darkness! O Doer of every good! O Guider
to every good! O Shower of every good! O Commander to every good! O
Creator of the good! O Good-doer! You are Allah. I want from You what
you know I want, and You are Omniscient of all that is hidden. I ask you
to bless Muhammad and his descendants.’

Then ask your need, both of you. It will be answered, God willing.”[^1]

2. (A part of the psalm “*Mashlul*” is:) “O He who returned Joseph to
Ya‘qub! O He who removed the harm from Job! O He who forgave the sin of
David! O He who raised Jesus the son of Mary and saved him from the
hands of the Jews! O He who answered the calling of Yunus in the
darkness! O He who chose Moses by the Words! …”[^2]

3. It is reported that Abu ‘Abd Allah (‘a) said, “… as for the
occultation of Jesus, the Jews and the Christians are agreed that he was
killed, so Allah, the Mighty and Magnificent, belied them by His saying,

***They did not kill nor crucify him, but it appeared to them so
(4:157).***

Likewise, the occultation of al-Qa’im (‘a), then the community will deny
it.”[^3]

4. I asked him [Imam] about the nights of the month of Ramadan in which
*ghusl* [major ritual ablution] is recommended. Then he said, “The
nineteenth, the twenty-first and the twenty-third.” And he continued,
“On the night of the nineteenth, it is written who will go on the hajj,
and every wise affair will be distributed in it.

On the night of the twenty-first, Jesus (‘a) was raised and the executor
of Moses was taken in it, and the Commander of the Faithful was taken in
it….”[^4]

5. It is reported that Habib ibn ‘Amr said, “When the Commander of the
Faithful passed away, Hasan (‘a) stood and spoke. He said, ‘O you
people! On this night Jesus the son of Mary was raised.’”[^5]

6. It is reported that Abu Ja‘far (‘a) said, “On the night when ‘Ali
(‘a) was murdered no stone was lifted from the face of the earth unless
beneath it was found pure fresh blood, until the first break of dawn. It
was the same on the night Yusha‘ ibn Nunu, and it was the same on the
night when Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) was raised, and it was the same on
the night when Husayn (‘a) was murdered.”[^6]

7. ‘Amr ibn Sa‘id said, “A man who was from al-Madinah came on the night
of ‘al-Furqan’, [the night in which right and wrong were distinguished]
when Muslims and polytheists were ready to fight each [at Badr] and
said, ‘This night is the night of the seventeenth of Ramadan.’

Then I came to Abu ‘Abd Allah (‘a) and said to him what he had said. He
said, ‘He who was from al-Madinah denied it. You want the night that the
Commander of the Faithful received a blow. He received a blow on the
night of the nineteenth of Ramadan nineteen, and it is the night in
which Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) was raised.’”[^7]

8. It is reported that in response to questions put to him by his son,
Zayd, Imam Sajjad (‘a) said, “O my boy! Certainly the Ka‘abah is the
house of Allah, and whoever makes the pilgrimage to the house of Allah,
intends to come before Allah, and the mosques are the houses of Allah,
and whoever tries to get to them, tries to get to and intends to come
before Allah, and one who prays, as long as he is praying, stands before
Allah, the mighty and magnificent.

Verily, Allah, the blessed and exalted, has spots in the heavens, so
whoever is elevated to one of these spots is elevated to Him. Have you
not heard that Allah, the mighty and magnificent, says that the angels
and the spirit are elevated to Him. And Allah, the mighty and
magnificent, says, in the story of Jesus the son of Mary (‘a),

***Nay, Allah took him up to Himself. (4:158),***

and Allah, the mighty and magnificent, says,

***To Him the good words ascend, and He elevates the good deeds to
Himself. (35:10).***[^8]

9. Abu Basir said, “I heard from Abu Ja‘far al-Baqir (‘a), ‘The Sahib
hadha al-’amr [the twelfth Imam] is similar to four prophets. He is
similar to Moses, Jesus, Joseph and Muhammad (S).’ I said, ‘What is his
similarity to Moses?’ He said, ‘Fearing and waiting.’[^9] I said, ‘What
is his similarity to Jesus?’ He said, ‘It was said of him what was said
of Jesus.’[^10] I said, ‘What is his similarity to Joseph?’

He said, ‘Prison and absence.’[^11] I said, ‘What is his similarity to
Muhammad?’ He said, ‘When he takes his stand, he will follow the way of
the Apostle of Allah, except that he will explain the legacy of
Muhammad, and for eight months his sword will flash while there is
disorder until he satisfies Allah.’ I said, ‘How will he know when Allah
is satisfied?’ He said, ‘Allah will cast mercy into his heart.’”[^12]

10. It is reported that Abu ‘Abdullah (‘a) said, “Nine thousand three
hundred thirteen angels will descend to the Qa’im, and they are the ones
who were with Jesus when Allah raised him to Himself.”[^13]

11. It is reported that Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, “When the Jews wanted to
kill Jesus, he called upon Allah by our truth,[^14] then He saved him
from being murdered and raised him.”[^15]

12. It is related in the *tafsir* attributed to Imam Hasan ‘Askari that
regarding the verse,

***and We strengthened him with the holy spirit (2:87)***

he said, “He is Gabriel, and this was when Allah raised him through a
hole in his house to heaven, and He cast his likeness on the one who had
desired to kill him, so he was killed instead of him.”[^16]

13. Abu ‘Abdullah (‘a) said, “It is as if I were looking at al-Qa’im
(‘a) outside of Najaf mounted on a horse… When he raises the flag of the
Apostle of Allah (S) thirteen thousand and thirteen angels come down to
him each of whom looks to him, and they are those who were with Noah on
the ark, and they were with Abraham when he was cast into the fire, and
they were with Jesus at his ascension....[^17]

14. It is reported that Abu ‘Abdullah (‘a) said, “It is as though I were
looking at the Qa’im outside Najaf. He is mounted on a black and white
horse with a white forehead. Then he hastens his horse, so there will be
no one in any city who will not think that he is with them in their
city.

When he unfurls the standard of the Apostle of Allah (S) thirteen
thousand thirteen angels will descend, all waiting for the Qa’im (‘a),
and they are the angels who were with Noah (‘a) in the ark, and they
were with Abraham (‘a), the friend of God, when he was cast into the
fire, and they were with Jesus (‘a) when he was raised, and four
thousand three hundred thirteen distinguished of these angels in ranks
were present on the day of the battle of Badr, and four thousand came
down wanting to fight with Husayn ibn ‘Ali (‘a), but he did not allow
them, so they ascended to ask permission, after receiving which they
came back down, but Husayn had been killed.

So they remain separated, dust covered and weeping by the grave of
Husayn (‘a) until the Resurrection Day. Between the grave of Husayn and
heaven is a passage of angels.”[^18]

15. It is reported that Abu al-Hasan Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said: “…And all of
the [eleven] Imams after the prophet were killed, some by the sword, the
Commander of the Faithful and Husayn, peace be with them, and the rest
by poison. The tyrants of their times killed every one of them, and
indeed this was done to them, truly, not like anything the extremists
(*ghulah*) or the delegators (*mufawidah*), may Allah curse them. They
say, ‘They (the Imams) were not really killed, and it was only a
likeness of their affair that appeared to them.’

So, they lied, may the wrath of Allah be upon them. Indeed, the affair
of none of the prophets of Allah and His authorities, peace be with
them, appeared doubtful to the people, except the affair of Jesus the
son of Mary (‘a) alone, for he was raised from the earth alive and his
soul was taken between heaven and earth, then he was raised to heaven
and his soul was returned to him, and that is what the saying of Allah,
the Mighty and Magnificent, is about:

***When Allah said: “O Jesus! I will take you to Me, and I will raise
you to Me (3:55),***

and Allah, the Mighty and Magnificent, said, narrating the speech of
Jesus on the Resurrection Day,

***And I was a witness over them, so long as I was among them, but when
You took me to Yourself, You were Yourself the watcher over them. You
Yourself are witness over everything. (5:117)***

… And since it is permitted that all of the prophets and His messengers
and authorities after Adam (‘a) were born of fathers and mothers, but
among them Jesus was born without any father, it will be permitted that
his affair appeared doubtful to the people, but not the affairs of the
other prophets and authorities, peace be with them.

Likewise, it was permitted for him to be born without a father, but not
the others. Allah, the mighty and magnificent, only wanted to make his
affair as a sign and mark for it to be known by this that He has power
over all things.’”[^19]

16. It is reported that during his final pilgrimage, the Apostle of
Allah said, “…And Jesus the son of Mary remained among his people for
forty years.”[^20]

17. It is reported, “Hujjat ibn al-Hasan (‘a) in his *qunut*[^21]
prayed, ‘…And I supplicate You with the supplication of Jesus Your
spirit when he supplicated You and You saved him from his enemies and
You raised him to Yourself....’”[^22]

18. Abu Ja‘far (‘a) said, “Verily, Jesus (‘a) invited his companions [to
come] the night when Allah would raise him to Himself. So, they were
gathered before him at evening, and they were twelve men.

He brought them into a house, then he came out to them from a fountain
in a corner of the house while the water was flowing from his head, and
he said, ‘Verily, Allah revealed to me that He will raise me to Him now,
and He will free me from the Jews. Which of you will bear my semblance,
then be killed and crucified and be with me at my level?’

A youth among them said, ‘I, O Spirit of Allah!’ He said, ‘So, you are
he.’ Then Jesus said to them, ‘Beware! Among you there is one who will
disbelieve in me before twelve men become disbelievers.’ A man among
them said, ‘I am he. O prophet of Allah!’ Jesus said to him, ‘If you
feel it in yourself, you are he.’ Then Jesus (‘a) said to them, ‘Beware!
After me you will divide into three sects.

Two sects will blaspheme Allah and they will be in the Fire, and one
sect will follow Sham‘un, be true to Allah, and they will be in the
Garden. Then Allah raised Jesus from the corner of the house, while they
were looking at him.”

Then Abu Ja‘far (‘a) continued, “Verily, the Jews came seeking Jesus
that night, and took the man about whom Jesus (‘a) had said that he
would disbelieve in him before twelve men became disbelievers. And they
took the youth upon whom the semblance of Jesus had been cast. Then he
was killed and crucified. And the one about whom Jesus (‘a) had said
that he would disbelieve in him before twelve men became disbelievers
disbelieved.”[^23]

19. Abu Ja‘far al-Baqir (‘a) said, “When the Apostle of Allah (S)
ascended to heaven, he ascended on a ruby red couch crowned by green
emeralds borne by angels... When he ascended to the seventh heaven Jesus
(‘a) met him, offered him greetings of peace, and asked him about ‘Ali
(‘a).

He said to him, I appointed him as a successor in my community
(*ummah*). He said, “You appointed a good successor. Know that verily
Allah made the angels obey him.” Then Moses (‘a) and the prophets, one
by one, met him and he spoke with them. They told him the same thing
that Jesus (‘a) said....”[^24]

20. Hisham ibn Salim reported that Abu ‘Abd Allah (‘a) said, “Gabriel,
Mika’il and Israfil brought al-Buraq to the Apostle of Allah. The
Apostle of Allah [about his ascension to the Heaven] said, ‘… Gabriel
brought me down [from al-Buraq] and said, ‘Recite the prayer.’ I prayed.
He said, ‘Do you know where you prayed?’ I said, ‘No.’ He said, ‘You
prayed at a pure [town] and your pilgrimage will be to it.’

Then I rode [on al-Buraq] and we went [to] where Allah willed. Then he
said to me, ‘Come down and recite the prayer.’ I came down and prayed.
He said, ‘Do you know where you prayed?’ I said, ‘No.’ He said, ‘You
prayed at Tur Sayna, where Moses spoke with Allah.’ Then I rode and we
went where Allah willed. Then he said to me, ‘Come down and recite the
prayer.’ I came down and prayed. He said, ‘Do you know where you
prayed?’

I said, ‘No.’ He said, ‘You prayed at Bethlehem, in the district of
Jerusalem (Bayt al-Muqaddas), where Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) was
born.’ Then I rode and we went until we arrived at Jerusalem (Bayt
al-Muqaddas.) Then I tied al-Buraq by the link by which the prophets
tied it, and entered the Mosque while Gabriel was with me.

We found Abraham, Moses and Jesus, among the prophets gathered by the
permission of Allah… Then I was raised to the second heaven. There were
two men, like each other in it. I said, ‘O Gabriel! Who are these?’ He
said to me, ‘The cousins John and Jesus the son of Mary.’

Then I greeted them and they greeted me. I asked God’s forgiveness for
them. They asked God’s forgiveness for me too, and said, ‘Welcome
righteous brother and righteous prophet!’ The angels in that heaven were
similar to the angels in the first heaven and they were humble. Allah
created their faces as He wanted. All of them glorified and praised Him
with different voices.”[^25]

[^1]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, 8, 214, 9286

[^2]: Al-Misbah, 262

[^3]: Bihar, 51, 220, 9

[^4]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam, 4, 196

[^5]: Bihar, 14, 335, 1

[^6]: Bihar, 14, 336, 4

[^7]: Tafsir al-‘Ayyashi, 2, 64, 68

[^8]: Faqih, 1, 198, 603

[^9]: See (28:21).

[^10]: That is, that he had been killed.

[^11]: There is in another narration: “As for Jesus, it that is said
that he died, but he did not die. As for Joseph, it is absence from his
people so that he does not know them and they do not know him.” Taqrib
al-Ma‘arif, 190

[^12]: Bihar, 52, 347, 97

[^13]: Bihar, 14, 339, 15

[^14]: That is, Jesus swore by the truth of the Imams, seeking
intercession through them.

[^15]: Bihar, 14, 339, 14

[^16]: Bihar, 14, 338, 10

[^17]: Bihar, 19, 305, 47

[^18]: Bihar, 52, 325, 40

[^19]: Bihar, 25, 117

[^20]: Bihar, 37, 184, 69

[^21]: A part of the formal prayer of Islam in which personal
supplications are made.

[^22]: Bihar, 82, 233

[^23]: Bihar 14, 336, 6

[^24]: Bihar, 18, 303, 7

[^25]: Tafsir Al-Qummi, 2, 3-8


