On the Resurrection
===================

1. Regarding the Garden, the Prophet (S) said, “…then a man will come
out with a group and the angels will be around him with wings outspread
and the light will be in front of them. Then the people of the Garden
will crane their necks toward him and say, ‘Who is this who is thus
allowed by Allah?’ The angels will say, ‘This is the spirit of Allah and
His word! This is Jesus the son of Mary!’”[^1]

2. It is reported that Sama‘ah asked Abu ‘Abd Allah (‘a) about the
intercession of the Prophet (S) on the Resurrection Day. He answered,
“The people will be [as it were] bridled by perspiration on the
Resurrection Day and say, ‘Bring us to Adam, he will intercede for us
before our Lord.’

Then they will come to Adam and say, ‘O Adam! Intercede for us before
your Lord.’ He will say, ‘I have done a sin and a mistake. So Noah is
the one you must have.’ They will come to Noah, but he will send them to
the next prophet, and every prophet will send them to the next until
they will terminate at Jesus. He will say, ‘Muhammad the Apostle of
Allah is the one you must have.’ They will present themselves to him and
will ask him.’ He will say, ‘Be free.’

Then he will bring them to the door of heaven and will go to meet them
from the Door of Mercy and he will fall to the ground in prostration and
remain as long as Allah wills. Then Allah will say, ‘Raise your head and
intercede, you will be answered and ask, you will be given.’ It is His
saying,

***‘Maybe your Lord will raise you to a position of glory.’
(17:79)***[^2]

3. It is reported that Abu al-Hasan Musa (‘a) said, “…On the
Resurrection Day there will be four of the first and four of the last on
the throne of the Merciful. As for the four of the first, they will be
Noah, Abraham, Moses and Jesus. As for the four of the last, they will
be Muhammad, ‘Ali, Hasan and Husayn, may Allah bless them.”[^3]

4. It is reported that Al-Sadiq (‘a) said, “Whoever reads Surah Maryam
frequently will receive something that helps him in his soul, property
and children before his death. He will be from the people of Jesus (‘a)
and will be given the kingdom of Solomon the son of David on the Last
Day.”[^4]

5. Abu Ja‘far (‘a) said, “Whoever reads *Surah Maryam*, he will receive
something that helps him in his soul, his property and children before
his death. He will be from the people of Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) and
will be given the like of the kingdom of Solomon the son of David in
this world on the Last Day.”[^5]

[^1]: Ikhtisas, 1, 355

[^2]: Tafsir Al-Qummi, 2, 25

[^3]: Kafi, 4, 585, 4

[^4]: Misbah, 1, 441

[^5]: A‘lam al-Din, 371


