The Supplications of Jesus
==========================

1. It is reported that one was imprisoned by the Banu ’Umayya. He saw
Jesus (‘a) in a dream. Jesus taught him some words. So Allah, the
Exalted, released him from it the rest of his day. Here are those words:
“There is no god but Allah, the King, the Plain Truth.”[^1]

2. ‘Abd Allah ibn al-Mughira said, “The righteous servant Ibrahim Musa
ibn Ja‘far al-Kadhim (‘a) passed by a crying woman at Mina and her
children were around her crying. A cow of theirs died before. Al-Kadhim
(‘a) came near to her and said, ‘O servant woman of Allah! What makes
you cry?’ She said, ‘O servant of Allah! I have a young girl, [and]
orphans.

We had a cow that was my livelihood and that of my household. It died
and I remained with my children and we have no remedy.’ He said, ‘O
servant woman of Allah! Do you want me to make it alive?’ She was
inspired, then she said, ‘Yes.’ Al-Kadhim (‘a) went aside and prayed two
*rak‘a*, then he raised his hands, turned his right hand and moved his
two lips.

Then he stood, passed by the cow and kicked the cow or hit it with his
foot. Then it stood up on the ground. When the woman looked at the cow
and saw that it stood, she shouted and said, ‘Jesus the son of Mary! By
the Lord of al-Ka‘ba! Then he (‘a) mixed with the people and left.”[^2]

3. It is reported that (for hardship with labor,) it should be written
for her what is reported from Jesus (‘a), “O Creator of the soul from
the soul, Director of the soul from the soul and Savior of the soul from
the soul! Save her.”[^3]

4. It is reported that the Prophet said, “Whoever reads *Sura Saff*,
Jesus (‘a) will pray for him and ask God’s forgiveness for him in the
world and he will be his companion on the Resurrection Day.”[^4]

5. It is reported that when Jesus (‘a) called Him by this psalm, Allah,
the Exalted, raised him to Him and saved him from the Jews. It is: “O
Allah! I call You by Your name, the Majestic (*al-‘Azim*), the One
(*al-Wahid*) and Most Mighty (*al-A‘azz*).

I call you by Your name, the Everlasting Refuge (*al-Samad*). I call
You, O Allah! By Your name, the Majestic (*al-‘Azim*) and single
(*al-Watr*). I call You, O Allah! By Your name, the Great (*al-Kabir*)
and Exalted (*al-Muta‘al*), by which all Your pillars were firmly set,
may peace be with Muhammad and his progeny and remove the troubles I
have morning and night.”[^5]

6. Among the supplications narrated from Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) is:
“O Allah! You are the deity of all who are in heaven and the deity of
all on the earth. There is no deity in them other than You, and You are
the All-wise for all in heaven and the All-wise for all on the earth.
There is no All-wise in them other than You.

And you are the King of all in heaven and all on the earth. There is no
King in them other than You. Your power in heaven is like Your power on
the earth. And Your sovereignty in heaven is like Your sovereignty on
the earth. I ask you by Your All-generous Name and Your radiant face and
Your eternal kingdom, do such and such for me.”[^6]

7. Imam Al-Sadiq (‘a) said, “In the Gospel Jesus (‘a) says, ‘O Allah!
Bestow upon me a flat loaf of barley bread in the morning and a flat
loaf of barley bread in the evening, and do not bestow more than this
upon me that I become rebellious.’”[^7]

8. Among the supplications mentioned are those of Jesus that we reported
with our chain of narrators to Sa‘id ibn Hibah Allah al-Rawandi, may
Allah have mercy on him, from the book, *Qisas al-Anbiya’* (Stories of
the Prophets), with a chain of narrators to Al-Sadiq (‘a) from his
fathers, peace be with them, that the Prophet (S) said, “When the Jews
gathered before Jesus (‘a) to kill him, as they imagined, Gabriel (‘a)
came to him and covered him with his wing. Then Jesus looked at him
carefully.

There was writing within Gabriel and it was: ‘O Allah! I call You by
Your most mighty name, *al-Wahid* (the One), and I call You, O Allah, by
Your name, *al-Samad* (the Everlasting Refuge), and I call You, O Allah,
by Your single name, *al-‘Azim* (the Majestic), and I call You, O Allah,
by Your exalted name, *al-Kabir* (the Great), by which all Your pillars
stand firm, remove the troubles I have morning and night.’

When Jesus (‘a) called him by this, Allah revealed to Gabriel, ‘Raise
him to me.’” Then the Messenger of Allah, may the blessing of Allah be
with him, said, “O Children of ‘Abd al-Muttalib! Beseech your Lord by
these words. By Allah, in Whose hand is my soul!

No servant has called upon Him by them without the throne being moved,
and without Allah saying to the angels, ‘Bear witness that I, verily,
answered him by these words and gave him what he asked in the transient
world and in the term of the hereafter.’” Then he said to his
companions, “Beseech by it and do not postpone the answering.”[^8]

9. This is the psalm of Jesus by another narration, “The prophet saw
this psalm within Gabriel, then he taught it to ‘Ali and al-‘Abbas and
said, ‘O ‘Ali! O the best one among Banu Hashim! O the children of ‘Abd
al-Muttalib! Ask your Lord by these words.

By One, that my soul is in His hand, every believer calls [Him] by these
words sincerely, the Throne, the seven heavens and the earths will
tremble for it and Allah, the Exalted, says to His angels, ‘Testify. I
answered the caller by these words and gave him his request in this
world and the other world.’” Some [of the narrators] thought that this
psalm is the psalm by which Jesus the son of Mary called Him.

It is this psalm: ‘O Allah! I take refuge in your name, the Unique
(*al-Wahid*), the One (*al-Ahad*) and Most Mighty (*al-A‘azz*). I take
refuge in your name, the One (*al-Ahad*), the Everlasting Refuge
(*al-Samad*).I take refuge in Your name, O Allah, the Majestic
(*al-‘Azim*) and Single (*al-Watr*). I take refuge, O Allah, in Your
name, the Great (*al-Kabir*) and Exalted (*al-Muta‘al*), by which all
Your pillars have been set firm, remove the troubles I have morning and
night.’”[^9]

10. This is one of the psalms of Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) by another
narration: “O Creator of the soul from the soul, Director of the soul
from the soul and Deliverer of the soul from the soul! Release us and
deliver us from our trouble.”[^10]

11. Among these supplications is the supplication of Asif, the minister
of Solomon son of Davidu, about which it is narrated that by it he
brought the throne of Bilqis,[^11] and that by it Jesus (‘a) revived the
dead. It is, “O Allah! I beseech You by this that You are Allah; there
is no god but You, the Alive, the Self-subsisting, the Pure, the
Purifying, the Light of the heavens and the earths (and according to
some narrations, this last phrase is ‘the Lord of the heavens and the
earths’), Knower of the invisible and visible, the Great and Exalted,
the Compassionate, the Beneficent, Lord of Majesty and Honor, I beseech
You [by these words] to do (this or that) for me.”[^12]

12. The Commander of the Faithful sought refuge in Allah every day
through this prayer, known as *khislah,* “I seek refuge in Allah, the
Hearing and Knowing from Satan the cursed… O Allah! Verily I beseech You
by the *ayah* by which You commanded your servant Jesus the son of Mary
to call You, then you answered him, and he revived the dead, cured the
blind and the leper with Your permission, and by Your revelation he told
of mysteries with Your grace, kindness and mercy.

Praise be to You, Lord of the heavens and the earth, Lord of the worlds.
His is the dominion in the heavens and the earth. He is the Magnificent,
the Wise. Come between us and our enemies and help us against them, O
our Master and Lord.”[^13]

13. It is reported that a man complained to Jesus (‘a) about his debts.
Jesus (‘a) said to him, “Say: ‘O God, Who takes away grief, removes
sadness, disposes of sorrow, answers the prayers of the needy! O
Merciful of this world and the other world and the Compassionate of
them! You are Merciful to me and Merciful to all things! So, be Merciful
to me, with a mercy that will make me needless of the mercy of others
than You, and by that mercy let my debts be paid.”[^14]

14. It is reported that Gabriel brought these five psalms to Jesus the
son of Mary (‘a) as a gift of Allah, the Exalted, to supplicate by them
during the first ten days of Dhu al-Hajja:

“(1) I witness that there is no god but Allah alone, there is no partner
for Him, the kingdom is for Him, praise be to Him, the good is in His
hand and He is Almighty over everything.

(2) I witness that there is no god but Allah Alone and Everlasting;
there is no partner for Him. He did not take any wife or child.

(3) I witness that there is no god but Allah Alone and Everlasting,
there is no partner for Him, who did not beget and was not begotten and
no one is equal to Him.

(4) I witness that there is no god but Allah alone, there is no partner
for Him, the kingdom is for Him, praise be to Him, He makes alive and
makes dead, He is alive and does not die, the good is in His hand and He
is Almighty over everything.

(5) Allah is sufficient and enough for me. Allah hears whoever calls
him. After Allah there is no end. I bear witness to Allah by what He
claimed for Himself. He is exempt from those who disassociate from Him.
The Last and the First is for Him.”[^15]

[^1]: Misbah, 179

[^2]: Da‘avat, 70

[^3]: Misbah, 159

[^4]: Misbah, 447

[^5]: Misbah, 299

[^6]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, 6, 187

[^7]: Bihar, 14, 326, 39

[^8]: Bihar 92, 175

[^9]: Bihar, 92, 176

[^10]: Bihar, 92, 176

[^11]: The Queen of Sheba

[^12]: Bihar, 92, 175

[^13]: Bihar, 84, 17

[^14]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, 13, 289, 15379

[^15]: Mafatih al-Jinan, 251


