The Conversations of Jesus
==========================

1. Jesus (‘a) said to the disciples, “Be satisfied with a little of the
world, while your religion is safe, likewise the people of this world
are satisfied with a little of the religion, while their world is safe;
love Allah by being far from them, and make Allah satisfied by being
angry with them.”

The disciples said, “O spirit of Allah, so with whom should we keep
company?” He said, “He the sight of whom reminds you of Allah, his
speech increases your knowledge and his action makes you desirous of the
other world.”[^1]

2. It is reported that Abu Abdullah [Imam Al-Sadiq (‘a)] said, “The
Apostle of Allah, may the Peace and Blessings of Allah be with him and
with his progeny, said, ‘The Apostles said to Jesus (‘a) ‘O Spirit of
Allah! With whom should we keep company?’ He said, ‘He the sight of whom
reminds you of Allah, the speech of whom increases your knowledge, and
the works of whom make you desirous of the other world.’”[^2]

3. The disciples complained to Jesus the son of Mary about the
disrespect of the people for them and their hating them. He said, “Be
patient. Likewise the believers are hated among the people. The example
of them is like the example of wheat. How sweet is its taste and how
numerous are its enemies.”[^3]

4. It is reported that the disciples were the followers of Jesus.
Whenever they were hungry they said, “O Spirit of Allah! We are hungry.”
Then Jesus would hit his hands on the ground, whether smooth or hilly,
and he would bring out two loaves of bread for each of them. Whenever
they were thirsty they said, “O Spirit of Allah! We are thirsty.”

Then Jesus would hit his hands on the ground, and brought out water and
they drank from it. They asked, “O Spirit of Allah! Who is better than
we? Whenever we want we are given food, and whenever we want water is
given to us. We have faith in you and follow you.” Jesus (‘a) said,
“Better than you are those who work with their hands and eat from what
they earn.” After that the disciples washed clothes by the stream and
ate from their wages for it.”[^4]

5. Jesus (‘a) was asked about the best of people. He said, “One whose
speech is the mention of Allah, whose silence is contemplation, and
whose vision is admonition[^5].” [^6]

6. A man asked Jesus the son of Mary (‘a), “Which people is the best?”
He took two handfuls of earth and said, “Which of these is the best? The
people are created from earth, so the most honorable of them is the most
God-wary.”[^7]

7. Al-Sadiq (‘a) said, “It was said to Jesus son of Mary (‘a), ‘What is
the matter with you that you do not get married?’ Then he said, ‘What
have I to do with getting married?’ They said, ‘[A child] will be born
for you.’ He said, ‘What have I to do with children? If they live, they
will be a trial for us, and if they die, they will grieve us.’”[^8]

8. It has been reported that Abu Abdullah [Imam Al-Sadiq] said, “Verily,
Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) said, ‘I treated the sick, then I healed them
by the permission of Allah, and I cured those born blind and the lepers
by the permission of Allah, and I treated the dead and revived them by
the permission of Allah, and I treated the fool, but I could not correct
him.’

Then it was said, ‘O Spirit of Allah! What is a fool?’ He said, ‘He is
one who is admirable in his own view to himself, he who considers all of
merit to be for him and not against him, and who finds all rights to be
for himself and does not find against himself any right. Such is the
fool for whom there is no trick to cure him.’”[^9]

9. Muhammad ibn Muslim narrated from either Imam Baqir (‘a) or Imam
Al-Sadiq (‘a) that when he was asked, “We see one with whom there is
worship, endeavor and humility, but he does not speak the truth. Does it
benefit him at all?” He said, “O Abu Muhammad! The example of the Ahl
al-Bayt is like that of a family that lived among the Children of
Israel. None of them ever prayed for forty nights without his prayer
being answered.

But a man of that family prayed for forty nights, then he supplicated
and his prayer was not answered. Then he came before Jesus (‘a) and
complained about what had happened, and he asked Jesus to pray for him.
Jesus made ablutions and prayed. Then he supplicated Allah, the Mighty
and Magnificent. Allah revealed to him, ‘O Jesus! Verily, My servant
came to Me from a door other than that by which he should approach Me.

Verily he supplicated Me and in his heart there was doubt about you. If
he supplicated Me until his neck broke and his fingers were bruised, I
would not answer him.’ Jesus turned to him and said, ‘When you
supplicate your Lord, do you have doubt about His prophet?’ He said, ‘O
Spirit of Allah and His Word! By Allah, it was as you say. Supplicate
Allah that He remove the doubt.’ So, Jesus supplicated for him, and
Allah turned to him and accepted it from him, and he became like one of
his family.”[^10]

10. Verily, Jesus (‘a) passed by three people. Their bodies had become
thin and their colors had changed. Then he said, “What has brought you
to what I see?” They said, “Fear of the Fire.” He said, “It is the duty
of Allah to give security to those who fear Him.” Then he passed from
them to three other men.

He was surprised to find them even thinner and more changed. Then he
said, “What has brought you to what I see?” They said, “Yearning for the
Garden.” He said, “It is the duty of Allah to give to him who has hope
in Him.” Then he passed to three others. He was surprised to find them
even thinner and their faces were shining like mirrors.

Then he said, “What has brought you to what I see?” They said, “Love of
Allah, the Mighty and Magnificent.” Three times, he said, “You are those
who are close to Allah.”[^11]

11. The disciples asked Jesus (‘a), “Indicate to us a work by which we
may enter the Garden.” He said, “Do not speak at all.” They said, “We
cannot do that.” He said, “So, do not speak except what is good.”[^12]

12. A man said to Jesus the son of Mary (‘a), “O good teacher, indicate
to me a work by which I may enter the Garden.” Then he said to him,
“Beware of Allah secretly and openly, and do good to your parents.”[^13]

13. Imam Al-Sadiq (‘a) said, “The disciples of Jesus complained to him
about what was met to them by the people. Then he said, verily, in the
world the believers are always disturbed.”[^14]

14. It is reported that Abu ‘Abdullah (‘a) said, “The disciples
complained to Jesus the son of Mary about what was thrown at them by the
people. He said, ‘Verily the believers always are hated among the
people, like the wheat, how sweet is its taste and how many its enemies
are!’”[^15]

15. It is said that Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) was sitting and an old
man was working with a small shovel tilling the earth. Jesus (‘a) said,
“O Allah! Extract his desire from him.” The old man put down the small
shovel and slept for an hour. Then Jesus (‘a) said, “O Allah! Return the
desire to him.”

Then he stood up and began to work. Jesus (‘a) asked him about it. He
said, “When I was working I said to myself, ‘How long will you work,
being that you are an old man?’ Then I put down the small shovel and
slept. Then I said to myself, ‘By Allah! You have no alternative but to
live as long as you remain.’ Then I stood up with my small shovel.”[^16]

16. It was said to Jesus (‘a), “[Would it not be better] if you got a
house?” He said: “The remains which are left from those before us are
enough for us.”[^17]

17. It is reported that Abu ‘Abdullah [Imam Al-Sadiq] said, “Jesus the
son of Mary (‘a) sent two of his companions on an errand. Then one of
them returned thin and afflicted and the other like iron and fat. He
said to the one who was thin, ‘What did this to you, that I see you this
way?’ He said, ‘The fear of Allah.’ And he said to the other who was
fat, ‘What did this to you, that I see you this way?’ He said, ‘A good
opinion of Allah.’”[^18]

18. Jesus (‘a) said to his companions, “Accord great regard for the
thing which is not eaten by the fire.” They said, “What is that?” He
said, “That which is good.”[^19]

19. It is reported that Jesus (‘a) found fault with property and said,
“It has three characteristics.” It was said, “And what are they, O
Spirit of Allah!” He said, “One acquires it illegitimately, and if it is
acquired legitimately, it keeps one from one’s duties, and if one
performs one’s duties, its improvement busies one rather than worship of
one’s Lord.”[^20]

20. It is reported that Abu ‘Abdullah [Imam Al-Sadiq] said, “Iblis[^21]
said to Jesus the son of Mary, ‘Does your Lord have the power to put the
earth into an egg without reducing the size of the earth or enlarging
the egg?’ Then Jesus (‘a) said, ‘Woe unto you, for weakness is not
attributed to Allah. Who is more powerful than He Who makes the earth
subtle and makes the egg great?’[^22]

21. It is reported that Imam Al-Sadiq (‘a) said, “Iblis came to Jesus
(‘a), then he said, ‘Do you not claim that you can revive the dead?’
Jesus said, ‘Yes.’ Iblis said, ‘Then throw yourself down from the top of
the wall.’

Then Jesus said, ‘Woe unto you! Verily the servant does not try his
Lord.’ And Iblis said, ‘O Jesus! Can your Lord put the earth in an egg
while the egg remains in its form?’ Then he said, ‘Verily Allah, the
Supreme, is not proscribed by impotence, but what you said cannot be.’”
(i.e., it is impossible in itself, like the gathering of two opposites.
[^23]) [^24]

22. It is reported that Abu ‘Abdullah [Imam Al-Sadiq] said, “The
disciples said to Jesus the son of Mary (‘a), ‘O teacher of the good!
Teach us what is the most severe of things.’ Then he said, ‘The most
severe of things is the wrath of Allah.’ They said, ‘Then what prevents
the wrath of Allah?’ He said, ‘That you not be wrathful.’ They said,
‘What is the source of wrath?’ He said, ‘Pride, haughtiness and contempt
for the people.’”[^25]

23. Jesus (‘a) met Iblis who was driving five donkeys. Loads were upon
them. Jesus (‘a) asked him about the loads. Iblis said, “They are for
trade, and I am looking for buyers.” Jesus (‘a) said, “What is the
trade?” Iblis said, “One of them is injustice?” He (‘a) asked, “Who buys
it?” He said, “Rulers. And the second is pride.”

He asked, “Who buys it?” He said, “Village chiefs. And the third is
envy.” He (‘a) asked, “Who buys it?” He said, “The scholars. And the
fourth is treason.” He (‘a) asked, “Who buys it?” He said, “Those who
work for merchants. And the fifth is trickery.” He (‘a) said, “Who buys
it?” He said, “Women.”[^26]

24. It is reported that Imam Al-Sadiq (‘a) said, “Jesus the son of Mary
(‘a) passed by a group of people who were crying. He asked why they were
crying. It was said to him that they were crying for their sins. He
said, ‘They should pray about them and they will be forgiven.’”[^27]

25. Jesus (‘a) passed by a group crying. He said, “What is the matter
with them crying?” To him it was said, “For their sins.” He said, “They
should abandon them, so their sins will be forgiven.”[^28]

26. The Messenger of Allah (‘a) said, “Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) said
to John the son of Zachariah, ‘If what is said of you that which is true
of you, then know that it was a sin which you committed, so ask the
forgiveness of Allah for it, and if what is said of you is not true of
you, then know that for this a good deed will be recorded for you, so do
not weary yourself over it.’”[^29]

27. Jesus (‘a) said to a worshipper, “What do you do?” He answered, “I
worship.” He (‘a) said, “Then who provides for you?” He said, “My
brother.” He (‘a) said, “Your brother is more of a worshipper than you
are!”[^30]

28. It was said to Jesus (‘a), “Who trained you?” He said, “No one
trained me. I saw the ugliness of ignorance and, so, I avoided it.”[^31]

29. It is reported that Jesus (‘a) passed by a carcass with his
disciples. Then the disciples said, “How putrid the smell of this dog
is!” Then Jesus (‘a) said, “How intense is the whiteness of his
teeth!”[^32]

30. Jesus (‘a) passed by a grave whose occupant was being chastised.
Then he passed it the following year when he was not being chastised. He
said, “O Lord! I passed through this town last year and he was being
chastised, and I passed through it this year while he is not being
chastised.”

Then Allah revealed to him, “O Spirit of Allah! Verily one of his
children matured and cleared some way and sheltered an orphan. Then I
forgave him for the deeds of his child.”[^33]

31. The Messenger of Allah said, “My brother Jesus (‘a) passed through a
city when the teeth of its inhabitants were falling out and their faces
were swollen. Then they complained to him. He said, ‘When you sleep, you
close your mouths; then the air that is in your chests boils up until it
reaches the mouth; then there is no place for it to exit and it comes
back to the roots of the teeth and contaminates the face. So when you
sleep, you should open your lips, and make this a habit for yourselves.
They did this and the (sickness) left them.’”[^34]

32. The Apostle of Allah (S) said, “My brother Jesus (‘a) passed through
a city [whose inhabitants] had yellow faces and blue eyes.[^35] They
cried out to him and complained of their illness. He said, ‘It's
treatment is with you. When you want to eat meat, you cook it without
washing it. Nothing leaves this world without having an impurity. Then
they washed their meat and their illness went away.’”[^36]

33. The Prophet (S) said, “Jesus, my brother, passed through a city when
[he suddenly realized that] worms were in its fruits. [The people of the
city] complained to him about this problem. He said, ‘You have the cure
for this [problem], but you do not know it.

You are a folk who when you plant trees you pour soil on them then you
pour the water, but this is not proper. It is proper that you pour the
water on the roots of the trees, then pour the soil so that the worm
does not infect it.’ Then they started doing as he described and [the
problem] went away.”[^37]

34. It is narrated that ‘Ali (‘a) said: “My brother Jesus passed through
a city in which a man and a woman were shouting at one another. He said,
‘What’s the matter with you?’ The man said, ‘O Prophet of Allah! This is
my wife, and she is not bad, she is good, but I would like to separate
from her. He said, ‘Inform me, anyway, what is the matter with her.’ He
said, ‘Her face is aged while she is not old.’

He said to her, ‘O woman! Would you like to regain the freshness of your
face?’ She said, ‘Yes.’ He said to her, ‘When you eat, take care not to
eat your fill, because when the food fills you to your chest and is
greater than the amount [proper], the freshness of the face is lost.’
Then she did it, and the freshness of her face came back.[^38]

35. It has been reported that Abu Abd Allah [Imam Al-Sadiq] said, “The
world took the form, for Jesus (‘a), of a woman whose eyes were blue.
Then he said to her, ‘How many have you married?’ She said, ‘Very many.’
He said, ‘Then did they all divorce you?’ She said, ‘No, but I killed
all of them.’ He said, ‘Then woe be to the rest of your husbands! How
they fail to learn from the example of the past ones!’”[^39]

36. It is reported that Abu Abdullah [Imam Al-Sadiq (‘a)] said, “The
Apostle of Allah, may the Peace and Blessings of Allah be with him and
with his progeny, said, ‘The Apostles said to Jesus (‘a), “O Spirit of
Allah! With whom should we keep company?” He said, “He the sight of whom
reminds you of Allah, the speech of whom increases your knowledge, and
the works of whom make you desirous of the other world.”’”[^40]

37. It has been reported by Mujahid from Ibn ‘Abbas from the Apostle of
Allah (S), “Verily, Jesus (‘a) passed a city which had come to ruin and
whose foundations had collapsed. He said to some of his disciples, ‘Do
you know what it is saying?’ One said, ‘No.’ Jesus (‘a) said, ‘It says,
“Verily, the true promise of my Lord has come.

My rivers have dried up, though once they were full; my trees have
withered, though once they were in bloom; my castles are in ruins and my
residents have died. Then, oh, these are their bones within me, and
their property that was gained lawfully along with their ill-gotten
gains are in my belly, and the inheritance of the heavens and the earth
is only for Allah.”’”[^41]

38. Imam Al-Sadiq (‘a) said, “The Apostles met with Jesus (‘a) and said
to him, ‘O teacher of the good! Guide us!’ He said to them, ‘Verily
Moses the interlocutor of Allah commanded you not to swear by Allah, the
Blessed and Exalted, falsely, and I command you not to swear by Allah
falsely or truly.’ They said, ‘O Spirit of Allah! Guide us more!’

Then he said, ‘Verily Moses the prophet of Allah commanded you not to
commit adultery, and I command you not to talk to yourselves about
adultery, let alone to commit adultery. Verily one who talks to himself
about adultery is like one who sets fire to a room that is decorated so
the smoke damages the decor, even though the room is not burnt.’”[^42]

39. It was said to Jesus (‘a), “Teach us a deed for which Allah will
love us.” He said, “Detest the world and Allah will love you.”[^43]

40. ‘Abdullah ibn Maghfal said, “The Apostle of Allah (S) said, ‘Verily,
Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) said, “O group of disciples! The
congregational prayer!” Then the disciples came out ready for worship,
and their stomachs were empty, their eyes sunken and their color yellow.
Jesus brought them to an open ground and he went on top of a hill and
praised Allah and lauded Him.

Then he started to recite signs of Allah and His wisdom for them. He
said, “O group of disciples! Listen to what I tell you! I find in the
book sent down of Allah evident things that have been sent down by Allah
in the Gospel, so act according to them!” They said, “O Spirit of Allah!
What are they?” He said, “He created the night for three qualities, and
He created the day for seven qualities.

Whoever passes the night and day without having these qualities, the
night and day will be against him on the day of resurrection. He created
the night for you to rest your tired tendons that have toiled during the
day, and for you to ask forgiveness for the sins you have committed
during the day, and not to return to them, and to stand obedient with
the obedience of the patient.

So, in one third you sleep, in one third you stand and in one third you
are humble before your Lord. It is for this that the night was created.

He created the day for the performance of the obligatory ritual prayer
about which you will be asked and for which you are answerable, and for
being nice to your parents, and for toiling to earn a living for the
day, and for visiting the friends of Allah so that Allah will spread His
mercy for you, and for participating in funeral processions so that you
will change and Allah will forgive you, and to command doing what is
good and to prohibit doing what is bad, which is the apex of faith and
the establishing of religion, and to struggle in the way of Allah so
that you may visit Abraham the friend of the Merciful in his own place,
and whoever passes the night and day without having these qualities, the
night and day will be against him on the day of resurrection before the
Almighty King.”’”[^44]

41. Fayd ibn al-Mukhtar said, “I heard Abu ‘Abdullah [Imam Al-Sadiq]
say, ‘When *al-ma’idah* [the table spread] was sent down to Jesus (‘a)
he said to the Apostles, “Do not eat from it until I give you
permission.” Then one of them ate from it.

Then some of the Apostles said, “O Spirit of Allah! So-and-so ate from
it!” Then Jesus (‘a) said to him, “Did you eat from it?” He said to him,
“No.” Then the Apostles said, “Yes! By Allah! O Spirit of Allah! He ate
from it!” Then Jesus said to him [who had thus spoken], “Affirm your
brother and deny your eye.”’[^45]

42. Abu ‘Ali Muhammad ibn Hammam said, “On the ring of Abu Ja‘far
al-Saman, may Allah be pleased with him, [were the words]: ‘There is no
god but Allah, the King, the Evident Truth.’ I asked him about it.

He said, ‘Abu Muhammad, I mean, Imam Hasan al-‘Askari?, reported to me
from his fathers that they said, “Fatimah, peace be with her, had a ring
of silver and agate. Before she died she gave it to al-Hasan (‘a), and
before he died he gave it to al-Husayn (‘a). Al-Husayn (‘a) said, ‘I
wanted to engrave something on it. Then I dreamed of the Messiah Jesus
the son of Mary, peace be with our Prophet and his descendents and him
[Jesus].’

I said to him, ‘O Spirit of Allah! What should I engrave on this my
ring?’ He said, ‘Engrave on it, “There is no god but Allah, the King,
the Evident Truth,” for this is at the beginning of the Torah and at the
end of the Gospel.’”’”[^46]

43. Ahmad ibn Sahl said, “I heard from Abu Farwah al-Ansari, who was a
traveler, ‘Jesus (‘a) said, “O company of disciples! In truth I say to
you, verily the people say that a building is based on its foundation,
and I do not say such things to you.” They said, “Then, what do you say,
O Spirit of Allah?” He said, “In truth I say to you, verily the final
stone the worker sets is the foundation.” Abu Farwah said, “Surely he
meant the end of a task.”’”[^47]

44. Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn Hatim al-Nufili reported, “…Abu al-Husayn
Muhammad ibn Bahr al-Shaybani reported that… [Malikah] said: ‘O you
incapable ignorant person with regard to the children of the prophets!
Listen to me, and empty your heart [to accept what I say]. I am Malikah,
the daughter of Yashu‘a the son of Ceasar, the king of Rum, and my
mother is of the descendants of the Apostles, reaching to the successor
of Christ, Sham‘un (Simon, Peter).

I will tell you something very strange. Verily, my grandfather, Ceasar
wanted to marry me to the son of his brother when I was a thirteen year
old girl… Then I dreamt, during that night, as if Christ and Sham‘un and
a few of the Apostles gathered in the castle of my grandfather, and they
erected a pulpit that was so tall as to reach into the sky, on which my
grandfather placed his throne. Muhammad (S) entered before them with a
youth and a few of his descendents. Christ rose and embraced him.

Then he [Muhammad (S)] said, “O Spirit of Allah! I have come to you to
ask your successor, Sham‘un, for the hand of his daughter, Malikah, for
my boy there.” He then indicated Abu Muhammad with his hand, who wrote
this letter [instructing the servant to purchase Malikah, who had been
taken captive]. Then Christ looked at Sham‘un and said to him, “It is a
blessing [literally, nobility has come to you]. Become family with the
family of the Apostle of Allah (S).” Sham‘un said, “It is done!”

Then Muhammad (S) ascended the pulpit, read a sermon and married me [to
the youth, Imam ‘Askari (‘a)], and Christ (‘a), the children of Muhammad
(S) and the Apostles were witnesses to it. When I woke up from my sleep,
I was afraid to tell this dream to my father and grandfather, for fear
they might kill me.

So, I kept it to myself, a secret, and did not reveal it to them. My
breast was struck with love for Abu Muhammad, until I could neither eat
nor drink. I became weak, thin, and very sick.…’ Then Abu al-Hasan (‘a)
said, ‘Then she became the wife of Abu Muhammad and the mother of the
Qa’im [the twelfth Imam].’”[^48]

[^1]: ‘Uddat ul-Da’i, 121

[^2]: Kafi, 1, 39, 3

[^3]: Majmu‘a Warram, 2, 114

[^4]: Bihar, 70, 11

[^5]: That is, he takes a lesson from what he sees.

[^6]: Majmu‘ah Warram, 1, 250

[^7]: Majmu‘ah al-Akhbar fi Nafa’is al-Athar, 106

[^8]: Faqih, 3, 558, 4916

[^9]: Bihar, 14, 323

[^10]: Kafi, 2, 400, 9

[^11]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, 10, 156

[^12]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, 10, 137

[^13]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, 15, 175, 17911

[^14]: Bihar, 78, 194

[^15]: Mishkat al-Anwar, 286

[^16]: Bihar, 14, 329, 57

[^17]: Bihar, 14, 327, 51

[^18]: Bihar, 67, 400

[^19]: Bihar, 14, 330, 65

[^20]: Bihar, 14, 329, 59

[^21]: The devil who tempted Adam and Eve. Cf. Qur'an 2:34; 7:11; 15:31;
38:74.

[^22]: Bihar, 4, 142, 9

[^23]: The parenthetical comment is Majlisi’s

[^24]: Bihar, 14, 271, 3

[^25]: Bihar, 14, 287, 9

[^26]: Bihar, 61, 196

[^27]: Bihar, 6, 20, 7

[^28]: Majmu‘a Warram, 2, 114

[^29]: Bihar, 14, 287

[^30]: Majmu‘a Warram, 1, 65

[^31]: Bihar, 14, 326, 44

[^32]: Bihar, 14, 327, 46

[^33]: Kafi, 6, 3, 12

[^34]: Bihar, 14, 321, 28

[^35]: A blue tinge to the eyes was a sign of blindness (cataracts?).
Cf. Qur’an 20:102.

[^36]: Bihar, 14, 321, 27

[^37]: Bihar, 14, 321, 26

[^38]: Bihar, 14, 320, 25

[^39]: Bihar, 14, 330, 66

[^40]: Kafi, 1, 39, 3

[^41]: Adab al-Nafs, 1, 122)

[^42]: Kafi, 5, 542, 7

[^43]: Majmu‘a Warram, 1, 134

[^44]: Bihar, 55, 207, 38

[^45]: Bihar, 14, 235, 7

[^46]: Ghayba, 297

[^47]: Bihar, 68, 364, 54

[^48]: Kamal al-Din, 2, 417-424.


