Sources
=======

*Bihar al-Anwar* is a collection of ahadith in Arabic written by Mawla
Muhammad Baqir ibn Muhammad Taqi, known as Majlisi the Second, or simply
‘Allamah Majlisi (A.H. 1037-1110). He is one of the most prolific Shi‘i
writers, and was Shaykh al-Islam during the Safavid period. He authored
thirteen books in Arabic and fifty-three in Farsi. His largest and most
important work is *Bihar al-Anwar al-Jami‘ah li-Durar Akhbar al-A’immah
al-Athar.*

This is the most comprehensive of all collections of Shi‘i ahadith, and
it includes almost all ahadith attributed to the Prophet (S) through
Shi‘i chains of transmission, almost all of the *ahadith qudsi*
(narrations of the words of God revealed to the Prophet (S) not included
in the Qur’an) and other narrations attributed to the Imams.

One of the features of this work is that ‘Allamah Majlisi went to great
pains to separate his own views from the transmission of the *ahadith.*
It took him thirty-six years to compile the work, from A.H. 1070 to A.H.
1106, with the cooperation of other scholars of the day and students.

In the first volume, he identifies his sources, and later in the same
volume he evaluates their reliability. His sources include close to four
hundred titles, among which are sixteen works of Shaykh Saduq, sixteen
works of Shaykh Tusi, eighteen works of Shaykh Mufid, twelve works of
Sayyid Murtada, twelve works of Shahid Awwal, twenty-one works of Sayyid
ibn Tawus, twenty-three works of ‘Allamah Hilli and twelve works of
Shahid Thani.

He also made use of ninety works by Sunni authors for correcting the
words of the narrations or determining their meanings, and he mentions
each of these sources by name in his introduction. There are three
extant editions that have been published of *Bihar*, one is a lithograph
print in twenty-five volumes, known as the old edition. The second is
that of *Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah,* Tehran, Bazar Sultani, in one
hundred ten volumes (no date), known as the new edition.

In the Terhan edition, volumes 54, 55 and 56 contain a table of
contents. The third edition is really just a reprint of the Tehran
edition published by Mu’assasah al-Wafa’ of Beirut. In the Beirut
edition, the contents have been moved to volumes 108, 109 and 110, and a
volume 0 was added in which there is an introduction to the author and
the authors of his sources.[^1] We have used the new edition published
in Tehran.

*Tuhaf al-‘Uqul fi Ma Ja’a min al-Hikam wa al-Mawa‘iz ‘an Al al-Rasul*
by Abu Muhammad Hasan ibn ‘Ali ibn Husayn ibn Shu‘bah Harrani Halabi is
one of the most well known collections of Shi‘i narrations. The author
was a contemporary of Shaykh Saduq and died in A.H. 381. Shaykh Mufid
reports narrations from him, and he, in turn, reports traditions from
Shaykh Abu ‘Ali Muhammad ibn Hammam, who died in A.H. 336.

The book contains narrations from the Prophet (S) followed by narrations
of the first eleven Imams in order. After this, there are four more
parts to the book: (1) the whispered counsel (*munajat*) of God to
Moses; (2) the whispered counsel of God to Jesus (‘a); (3) the advice of
the Messiah in the gospel and other places; and (4) advice of Mufaddal
ibn ‘Umar, one of the companions of Imam Al-Sadiq (‘a) to the Shi‘ah. In
the introduction to this work, Ibn Shu‘bah writes:

I did not mention the chains of transmission in order to reduce the
volume of the book and keep it short. Most of the narrations in this
book are ones I have heard. Most of them pertain to manners and wisdom
which testify to their own validity and the correctness of their
attribution.

Scholars in this field consider the work to be reliable and refer to it
in support of their opinions about ahadith and fiqh. The book was first
published in A.H. 1303 in Iran, and later in Iraq, Lebanon and Iran.[^2]
The edition we have used is that of Qom: Mu’assasah al-Nashr al-Islami,
A.H. 1416.

The narrations we have translated from *Tuhaf al-‘Uqul* are given
without mention of a chain of transmission, although there is an
indication in this work that they are reported by Imam Musa ibn Ja‘far
al-Kadhim (‘a).[^3] Part of the narration may also be found in
*al-Kafi*, Vol. 2, p. 319, attributed to Imam Al-Sadiq (‘a).

*Al-Kafi* is one of the four most authoritative sources of Shi‘i
narrations. It was written by Muhammad ibn Ya‘qub ibn Ishaq al-Kulayni
al-Razi (d. A.H. 328) and contains six thousand narrations divided into
thirty-four sections. It took twenty years to write during the minor
occultation of the twelfth Imam. It has been published in eight volumes
in Tehran by *Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah.*

We have used the 1362/1983 edition. The whispered counsel of God to
Jesus (‘a) translated below from *al-Kafi,* Vol. 8, 131-141, may also be
found in *Tuhaf al-‘Uqul,* p. 496, without mention of the name of the
Imam from whom it was narrated, and in *Al-Amali* of Shaykh Saduq it is
narrated from Imam Al-Sadiq (‘a).

Another of the “four books” of Shi‘i narrations containing reports about
Jesus (‘a) is *Tahdhib al-Ahkam* by Shaykh al-Ta’ifah Abu Ja‘far
Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-Tusi (b. A.H. 385, d. A.H. 460). There
are said to have been four hundred small books of Shi‘i narrations
extant during the author’s lifetime, known as *Usul al-Arba‘ah Mi’ah*,
and the author claims to have compiled this collection from these.

This book is a commentary on *Al-Muqni‘ah* of Shaykh Mufid, a work of
jurisprudence containing references to ahadith. The edition of the
*Tahdhib al-Ahkam* we have used is that of Tehran: *Dar al-Kutub
al-Islamiyyah*, no date.

*Mustadrak al-Wasa’il wa Mustanbat al-Masa’il* by Hajj Mirza Husayn Nuri
al-Tabarsi ibn Muhammad Taqi (A.H. 1254-1320) contains more than
twenty-three thousand narrations and has been published in Qom by
*Mu’assasah Al al-Baytu li Ihya’ al-Turath,*first edition published in
A.H. 1408.

This is considered one of the four most important collections of Shi‘i
ahadith of the modern period, that is, after the eleventh/seventeenth
century, the others being *Al-Wafi* by Fayd Kashani, *Bihar al-Anwar* by
‘Allamah Majlisi and*Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah* by Shaykh Hurr al-‘Amili. It was
written in order to complete the narrations not included in the *Wasa’il
al-Shi‘ah*.[^4]

Muhammad Legenhausen

The Imam Khomeini Education and Research Institute, Qom  
 Muharram 1425/March 2004

[^1]: This information is given in the article “Bihar al-Anwar” by Baha’
al-Din Khoramshahi in Dayirah al-Ma‘arif Tashshayyu‘, Vol. 3, (Tehran:
Mu’assasah Dayirah al-Ma‘arif Tashshayyu‘, 1371/1992), p. 91-98.

[^2]: See the article “Tuhaf al-‘Uqul” by Sayyid Mahdi Ha’iri in Dayirah
al-Ma‘arif Tashshayyu‘, Vol. 4, (Tehran: Mu’assasah Dayirah al-Ma‘arif
Tashshayyu‘, 1373/1994), p. 169.

[^3]: Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p. 392.

[^4]: I would like to express my gratitude to ‘Abbas Husayni for
assitance in the translation of some of the ahadithand to Muntazar Qaim
for his guidance in the translation of all of them. Thanks also are due
to Prof. Tofighi, Hadi Yusufi Gharavi for their Suggestions. We are also
grateful to the Imam Khoemini Education and Research Institute for
providing the opportunity for this work.


