God’s Words to Jesus
====================

1. Allah revealed to Jesus the son of Mary (‘a), “O Jesus! I do not
forget those who forget Me, so how could I forget those who remember Me!
I am not stingy with those who disobey Me, so how could I be stingy with
those who obey Me.”[^1]

2. Allah, the Exalted, revealed to Jesus (‘a), “O Jesus the son of the
virgin, al-Batul! Cry over yourselves, like one who says his last
good-bye to his family, loathes the world, abandons it to its people,
and who has come to desire what is near his God.”[^2]

3. It is reported that among what was revealed to Jesus (‘a) is: “Do not
be deceived by those who are disobedient to Me, who eat what I provide
for them, but worship other than Me, then they call Me when they are
worried, so I answer them, then they go back to what they did.

Do they disobey Me or want to anger Me? [I swear] by Myself! I will take
them in such a way that there is no deliverance from it and there is no
refuge but Me. Where can they flee from My sky and My earth?”[^3]

4. ‘Abdullah ibn al-Walid said, “Abu ‘Abdullah (‘a) said to me, ‘What do
the followers say about Jesus, Moses and the Commander of the Faithful,
peace be with them?’ I said, ‘They say, “Verily Jesus and Moses are
better than the Commander of the Faithful.”’ He said, ‘Do they think
that he knew every thing that the Apostle of Allah knew?’

I said, ‘Yes, but they do not prefer anyone over the possessors of
determination (Ulu al-‘Azm) among the apostles.’ Abu ‘Abdullah (‘a)
said, ‘Argue with them by the Book of Allah.’ I said, ‘From which place
of it?’ He said, ‘Allah, the Exalted, said to Moses,

***We wrote in the tablets some knowledge of everything for him.
(7:145)***

He did not write everything for Moses. Allah, the Blessed and Exalted,
said to Jesus,

***I will explain for you something that you differ about. (43:63)***

And Allah, the Exalted, said to Muhammad,

***We brought you as a witness over them and revealed the Book to you
explaining clearly everything.(16:89)***[^4]

5. It is reported that Sayyid said that among the ahadith from the Imams
he saw, “Allah, the Exalted, ordered Adam to pray toward the West, and
Noah to pray toward the East, and Abraham to gather them, and this is
the Ka‘abah.

When Moses was commissioned, He ordered him to revive the religion of
Adam. When Jesus was commissioned, He ordered him to revive the religion
of Noah. When Muhammad was commissioned, He ordered him to revive the
religion of Abraham.”[^5]

6. It is reported that Allah, the mighty and magnificent, revealed to
Jesus the son of Mary, “Let him who considers Me slow in providence
beware of My wrath, so that I open a door to this world against
him.”[^6]

7. It is reported that one of the Imams, peace be with them, said, “The
Messiah said: ‘Allah, the blessed and exalted says, “My believing
servant is saddened if I turn the world away from him, and that is what
is most loved by Me, and that is what is most near to Me; and he is
gladdened if I am open handed with him in this world, and that is what
is most hated by Me, and that is what is furthest from Me.’”[^7]

8. The Apostle of Allah (S) said, “…O Abu Dharr! Verily, Allah revealed
to my brother Jesus, ‘O Jesus! Do not love the world! Verily I do not
love it. And love the otherworld, for it alone is the realm of the
Resurrection.’”[^8]

9. It is reported that Abu ‘Abdullah [Imam Al-Sadiq] said, “Jesus the
son of Mary (‘a) ascended clad in wool spun by Mary, woven by Mary and
sewn by Mary. When he was brought up to heaven it was called, ‘O Jesus!
Cast off from yourself the finery of the world.’”[^9]

10. I asked Abu ‘Abdullah [Imam Al-Sadiq] about the best thing by which
the servant may draw near to his Lord and what is most beloved by Allah,
the Almighty and Glorious. He said, “I know of nothing, after knowledge
(*ma‘rifah*), better than the ritual prayer (*Salah*). Do you not see
that the good servant Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) said:

***And He enjoined on me the ritual prayer (Salah) and the alms tax
(zakah) for as long as I live.” (19,31)***[^10]

11. Allah revealed to Jesus, “O Jesus! Humble your heart for me … let me
hear from you a sad sound.”[^11]

12. Allah revealed to Jesus (‘a), “Be to the people like the earth below
in meakness, like the flowing water in generosity, and like the sun and
the moon in mercy, which shine on the good and sinner alike.”[^12]

13. Allah revealed to Jesus (‘a), “O Jesus! Grant me the tears of your
eyes, and the humility of your heart, and stand beside the tombs of the
dead, and call to them aloud that you may be advised by them, and say,
‘I will join you with those who join you.’”[^13]

14. A Christian catholicos (*jathiliq*) met with Masab ibn Zubayr (an
amir) and spoke words that angered him. He [Masab] raised a cane against
him, then left him until his anger subsided. He [the catholicos] said,
“If the amir permits me, I would report to him something revealed by
Allah to Christ.”

He (Masab) turned his attention to him, and he (the catholicos) said,
“Verily, Allah revealed to Christ, ‘It is not fitting for a sultan to
become angry, for he commands and is obeyed, and it is not fitting for
him to be hasty, for nothing eludes him, and it is not fitting for him
to be unjust, for injustice is repulsed by him.’” Then Masab became
embarrassed and was pleased with him.[^14]

15. Allah said to Jesus, “O Jesus! Verily I have granted unto you the
poor and mercy upon them. You love them and they love you. They are
satisfied with you as a leader and guide and you are satisfied with them
as companions and followers. These are two of My characteristics.
Whoever meets Me with these [characteristics] meets Me with the most
pure of deeds which are most beloved by Me.”[^15]

16. Verily Allah revealed to Jesus, “Then indeed be warned! Otherwise
you should be ashamed before Me to warn [preach to] the people.”[^16]

17. It is reported that Nuf al-Bukali said, “I spent a night with the
Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib (‘a). I saw that he often
left his room to go outside and look at the sky. Once when he came back
in, as usual, he said to me, ‘Are you asleep or awake?’

I said, ‘I am indeed awake, O Commander of the Faithful! From the
beginning of the night I have been watching you to see what you are
doing.’ He said, ‘O Nuf! Blessed are the ascetics in this world, those
who yearn for the other world, the people who spread Allah’s earth
beneath them [to sleep on], who lean against its dust, whose motto is
His book, whose maxim is supplicating Him, whose perfume is water, and
who take the world on loan in the way of Christ.

Verily, Allah, the Exalted, revealed to Jesus, “O Jesus! Keep to the
first way, keep to the manner of the messengers, say to your people, O
brother of the warners, ‘Do not enter any of My houses except with pure
hearts, clean hands and lowered eyes. I will not hear the prayer of any
who supplicate Me if any of My servants is oppressed by him. And I will
not answer the prayer of any who has not fulfilled any of My rights over
him.’”’”[^17]

18. Allah revealed to Jesus, “Say to the Children of Israel, ‘Do not
enter any of my houses unless with lowered eyes and clean hands.’ And
inform them that verily, I will not answer the prayer of any of them
while any of my creation is oppressed by them...”[^18]

19. Allah said to Jesus (‘a), “O Jesus! Your tongue must be a single
tongue in secret and in public, and likewise your heart. Verily, I warn
you of your self, and I suffice as the All-aware.[^19] It is not proper
for there to be two tongues in a single mouth, nor two swords in a
single scabbard, nor two hearts in a single breast, and likewise two
minds.”[^20]

20. Allah, the Great and Almighty, said to Jesus (‘a), “O Jesus!
Remember me within yourself and I will remember you within myself, and
remember me publicly and I will remember you publicly in a public better
than that of the people. O Jesus! Soften your heart for me and remember
me much in solitude, and know that my pleasure is in your shuddering
[literally wagging the tail, taken as an indication of fear or being
driven in an animal] for me, and be alive in that and be not dead.”[^21]

21. Allah the Supreme revealed to Jesus, “When I give you a blessing,
receive it with humility, [and] I will complete it for you.”[^22]

22. Among the words revealed to Jesus is, “O Jesus! Humble yourself to
those who do good, participate with them in it, be witness over them and
say to the unjust of the children of Israel, ‘O companions of evil and
participants in it! If you do not accept the prohibition, I will
transform you into monkeys and swine.’”[^23]

23. It is reported in a long tradition that Muhammad al-Munkadir
narrated from his father that he said, “When al-Sayyid and al-‘Aqib, the
two bishops of Najran, with seventy persons arrived mounted [at Madina],
they came to the Prophet and I was with them… Al-‘Aqib said [to his
companion,] ‘Did you not read the fourth al-Misbah from which were
revealed to Christ, ‘Say to the children of Jerusalem, ‘How ignorant you
are! You perfume yourselves with perfume, to be perfumed with the people
of this world and with your people, but your interiors are dead corpses
to Me...’”[^24]

24. [Imam] Ja‘far reported that his father (‘a) said, “Najashi the king
of Habashah [Ethiopia] sent for Ja‘far the son of Abi Talib and his
companions. Then they arrived before him while he was sitting in the
dust in his house with worn garments.... Ja‘far ibn Abi Talib said to
him, “O pious king!

What is the matter with me, that I see you sitting in the dust in these
worn garments?” He said, “O Ja‘far! We find among that which has been
revealed by Allah, the Supreme, to Jesus (‘a) is, ‘Verily, among the
rights of Allah over His servants is that they should make themselves
humble before Allah when He makes them blessed.’[^25]

So, when Allah showed favor by His prophet Muhammad (S), I showed this
humility to Allah.” He [Imam Ja‘far] said, “When that news reached the
Prophet (S), he said to his companions, ‘Verily, giving alms increases
abundance, so give alms and Allah will have mercy on you, and humility
increases one’s elevation, so be humble and Allah will elevate, and
forgiveness increases glory, so forgive and Allah will grant you
glory.’”[^26]

25. Verily Jesus (‘a) passed by a grave, and he saw the angels of
punishment chastise a dead person. When Jesus (‘a) had finished his
business and passed by the grave [again], he saw the angels of mercy.
Levels of light were with them. He was surprised at that, and called
upon Allah about this.

Allah revealed to him, “O Jesus! This servant was a sinner, and left his
wife when she was pregnant. Then she bore and raised his child. When the
child got older, she gave him to the charge of the scribes. They
instructed him to say, ‘In the Name of Allah, the Merciful, the
Compassionate,’ so I was ashamed to chastise My servant with My fire in
the bowels of the earth while his child was remembering my name on the
surface of the earth.”[^27]

26. The Apostle of Allah (S)said, “Allah, the Exalted, may His greatness
be glorified, revealed to Jesus (‘a), ‘Make a serious effort regarding
My affairs, and do not give up. I made you without a male as a sign for
the worlds. Tell the people to believe in Me and in My Apostle, the
unlettered, whose ancestors are blessed, and she is with your mother in
heaven. Tuba[^28] is for he who hears his word is contemporary with
him.’ Jesus said, ‘O my Lord! What is Tuba?’

He said, ‘It is a tree in heaven under which is a fountain from which
those who drink will never again thirst.’ Jesus said, ‘Quench me with a
drink of it.’ He said, ‘No, Jesus. It is forbidden to the prophets until
that prophet drinks from it. And that heaven is forbidden to all
communities until the community of that prophet enters it.’”[^29]

27. Imam Ja‘far Al-Sadiq (‘a) said, “Among the things which Allah, the
Blessed and Supreme, exhorted Jesus (‘a) was, ‘O Jesus! I am your Lord,
and the Lord of your fathers. My Name is the One, and I am unique and
alone in the creation of all things. All things are my work, and all My
creations shall return to Me.’”[^30]

28. ‘Ali ibn Asbat has reported from the Household of the Prophet, peace
be with them, this from among the admonitions of Allah, the Exalted and
Sublime, given to Jesus (‘a):

“O Jesus! I am your Lord and the Lord of your father. My name is One and
I am the One, the Unique in having created everything. All things have
been made by Me and all return to Me.

O Jesus! You are the Messiah by My command, and you create from clay
what has a shape like a bird by My permission, and you revive the dead
by My word, so be one who beseeches Me and one who fears Me, and apart
from Me seek no sanctuary except toward Me.

O Jesus! I charged you in tenderness to you though mercy until you
became worthy of my friendship (wilayah) because you sought My pleasure
and so you were blessed when old and you were blessed when young
wherever you were.

I bear witness that you are My servant, son of my handmaid. Let Me into
your soul as your foremost regard, and make the remembrance of Me the
means to your return, and draw near to Me through the supererogatory
deeds. And trust in Me that I may suffice for you and do not trust in
any other than Me so that I abandon you.

O Jesus! Be patient with calamities and be content with the decree. Be
in such a way that I will be happy with you, because what pleases Me is
obedience without sin.

O Jesus! Enliven the remembrance of Me by your tongue, and let there be
love for Me in your heart.

O Jesus! Wake up at the hours of neglecting and give your decisions for
my sake with subtle wisdom.

O Jesus! Be one who beseeches and fears Me, and let your heart die of
awe of Me.

O Jesus! Be vigilant through the night seeking My pleasure, and thirst
through your day for the day when you are in need of Me.

O Jesus! Compete with others by doing good as hard as you can so that
you will be well known for good wherever you go.

O Jesus! Judge among my servants though My counsel and establish My
justice for I have brought down to you a cure for breasts against
satanic disease.

O Jesus! Do not associate with anyone infatuated [with the world].

O Jesus! Indeed I say, no creature believed in Me without becoming
humble to Me nor became humble to Me without seeking My requital; so
bear witness that such a one is secure from My punishment unless he
changes or alters my norm (sunnah).

O Jesus, son of the Virgin Lady! Weep for yourself with the weeping of
one who bade goodbye to his home, deserted this world and left it to the
worldly so that he became one beseeching what is with his God.

O Jesus! In addition to this, be someone who speaks mildly, who offers
salaams vigorously, and who keeps awake while the eyes of the pious
sleep in order to beware of the Day of the Return and severe earthquakes
and the terrors of the Resurrection Day when neither household nor
wealth nor offspring shall profit one.

O Jesus! Adorn your eyes with a touch of sadness when the vain (i.e.,
foolish) laugh.

O Jesus! Be one of those who humble themselves and are patient, for if
you attain that of which the patient have been promised, you are most
fortunate.

O Jesus! Day by day abandon this world and taste that which has lost its
taste, for truly I tell you; you live to an appointed hour and an
appointed day, so pass through this world by what is sufficient for your
survival and be content with coarse food and rough dress after you have
seen what your destiny is to be, and what you have spent and wasted is
recorded.

O Jesus! You are responsible, so be merciful toward the weak, just as I
am merciful toward you, and do not be cruel to the orphan.

O Jesus! Weep over yourself in seclusion; let your feet regularly make
for the places where prayers are performed, and let me hear the sweetest
melody of the words you say in remembrance of Me. Verily, what I have
done for you is good.

O Jesus! How many nations I have caused to perish for the sins they had
committed and from which I have preserved you.

“O Jesus! Minister to the weak and turn your weary eyes toward the sky
and ask your needs from Me, for I am near to you, and do not call upon
Me except as one who pleads with Me and whose concern is a single
concern. Then, when you call on Me in this way, I will answer you.

“O Jesus! I am not content that the world should be the reward of those
who were near you nor as a chastisement for those you would punish.

O Jesus! You perish and I remain, and your provision is from Me. The
term appointed for you is with Me, and to Me is your return and with Me
is your reckoning. So ask from me and do not ask from any other, so that
your supplication may be suitable and I will answer it.

O Jesus! How numerous are the people and how few is the number of the
patient. The trees are numerous, but those that are good among them are
few. Do not be deceived by the beauty of a tree until you taste its
fruit.

O Jesus! Do not be deceived by he who rebels against me by sin. He eats
what I have provided for him but he serves another. Then he calls on Me
in his sorrow, and I answer him.

Then he returns to what he had been doing. Does he rebel against Me or
does he seek My wrath? By Me, I have sworn I will take him with a taking
from which he cannot be delivered and other than Me he can find no
shelter. Where will he escape from My heaven and earth?

O Jesus! Say to the unjust from the children of Israel, do not call upon
Me while you are involved in unlawful dealings and there are idols in
your houses, for I have resolved that I will respond to them who call
upon Me, and my response to their calls will be curses upon them lasting
until they disperse.

O Jesus! How long must I wait and hope for good from people while they
are heedless and reluctant to return? The words which emitted from their
mouths do not do not correspond to what is in their hearts, they subject
themselves to my loathing, while seeking the love of the believers by
[feigning] drawing near to Me.

O Jesus! Let your tongue say the same in secret and in the open, and let
your heart and your vision be in accord with that. Turn your heart and
your tongue entirely away from the forbidden, and withhold your eyes
from anything in which there is no good. How many a beholder there has
been whose look planted in their hearts a lust and threw them into the
pit of destruction.

O Jesus! Be merciful with great mercy, and behave in such a way that you
wish others to treat you, and increase your remembrance of death, and
departing from your household, and avoid wasting your time, for wasting
time corrupts one, and do not be heedless, for he who is heedless of Me
is far away from Me. And remember Me by doing righteous acts so that I
will remember you.

O Jesus! Turn toward Me after sinning, and remind those who are penitent
of Me. Believe in Me and seek nearness to the believers by Me, and bid
them to call upon Me with you, and beware of the call of the wronged
one, for I have resolved to open a gate in the heavens to accept it and
to answer him, even if later.

O Jesus! Know that evil ones infect others and the companions of evil
cause others to perish, and know those to whom you are near, and choose
for yourselves brothers from the believers.

O Jesus! Turn toward Me, for no sin is too great for Me to forgive, and
I am the most Merciful of the Merciful.

Work for yourself in the period before your death before your heirs may
fail to do it for you, and worship Me for a day that is equal to a
thousand years of what you reckon in which I repay for the good many
times over, and evil deeds will corrupt one who performs them, so
prepare the way for yourself throughout the period appointed for you,
and compete with others to do whatever is righteous, for how many an
assembly there have been from which people rose and were then granted
sanctuary from the Fire.

O Jesus! Restrain yourself from being involved in this mortal life which
comes to an end, and follow in the footsteps of those who have lived
before you. Call them and speak to them in confidence. Do you feel their
presence? Take your advice from them, and know that soon you will join
them.

O Jesus! Tell him who rebels against Me by offense and who would
compromise [his religion], that he should await My punishment and expect
My destruction of him, soon he will be cut off with the destroyed ones.

O son of Mary! Blessed are you, that you take your manners from your
God, Who shows tenderness toward you mercifully, Who first bestowed
blessings from Him generously, and He aids you in difficulties. Do not
offend, O Jesus! For offenses are not lawful for you. I have made a
covenant with you as I made a covenant with those who were before you,
and I am a witness of that.

O Jesus! I have honored no creature as I have My religion, and I have
not blessed [any creature] with the like of My mercy [for My religion].

O Jesus! I have honored nothing in creation like My religion, and I have
bestowed nothing on it like My mercy.

O Jesus! Wash your exterior by water and your interior by good deeds,
for verily you are returning to Me. Get ready, for that which is coming
is near; and let me hear from you a sad sound.

O Jesus! That with which I have blessed you by grace without pollution,
and I sought from you a loan for your soul, then you were stingy, so you
will be of those who are destroyed.

O Jesus! Adorn yourself with religion and love of the needy, and walk
through the earth modestly. And perform the prayers at any place, for
all of them are [ritually] clean.

O Jesus! Be prepared, for whatever is coming is near, and recite My book
while you are [ritually] clean, and make Me hear from you a sad voice.

O Jesus! There is no good in pleasure that does not continue, and in a
life, for the one who lives it, that fades away.

O son of Mary! If only your eyes could see that which is furnished as a
reward for My righteous friends, your heart would melt and your soul
would depart longing for it, for there is no abode like that of the
other world, where the good live as neighbors, and the cherubim enter it
among them, and they are safe from the fear of the day of resurrection.
It is an abode in which blessings do not change and they are not lost.

O son of Mary! Vie with others for [that abode], for it is the hope of
the hopeful, being such a good sight. Blessed are you, O son of Mary, if
you work for it, and you are with your fathers, Adam and Ibrahim in the
Garden and bliss, you seek no alternative to it and no change in it. I
do this for the God-wary.

O Jesus! Flee toward Me with those who flee from a fire having a
dreadful blaze and a fire having chains and shackles into which no
gentle wind enters and from which no gloom ever goes, with sectors like
those of the dark night, and he who is delivered from it will have
attained a great achievement, and those who perish will never be
delivered from it. It is the abode of tyrants, the wrongdoing
oppressors, all who are rudely obstinate and all who are proud boasters.

O Jesus! It is an evil abode for those who rely on it, and evil place to
stay, the abode of the oppressors. I warn you of yourself. So, be aware
of Me.

O Jesus! Wherever you are, be observant of Me, and bear witness that it
is I who created you, that you are My servant and that I formed you and
conveyed you to the earth.

O Jesus! It is not proper for there to be two tongues in one mouth nor
two hearts in one breast, and likewise for minds.

O Jesus! Do not be awake while sinning, do not be aware while wasting
time. Wean yourself from destructive lusts and put away every lust that
puts you far from Me. Know that to Me you are a trusted apostle, so be
careful of Me. Know that your world will give you back to Me, and I will
take you knowledgably, so abase yourself when you remember Me. Humble
your heart when you remember Me. Be awake beside the sleep of the
negligent.

O Jesus! This is My advice to you and My admonition to you, so take it
from Me and I am the Lord of the worlds.

O Jesus! When My servant is patient for My sake, the reward for his work
is from Me, and I am beside him when he calls on Me, and I am sufficient
in avenging those who disobey Me. Where will the oppressors go to escape
from Me?

O Jesus! Make your speech wholesome, and wherever you are, be both
learned and a learner.

O Jesus! Send good deeds to Me, so that they will be remembered by Me
for you, and grasp My advice. Verily, in it there is a cure for hearts.

O Jesus! Do not feel safe when you devise your plans from My plans, and
do not forget, when alone in the world, the remembrance of Me.

O Jesus! By returning to Me, take account of yourself, so the reward may
be deserved of those who work. They are given their compensation and I
am the best of the givers.

O Jesus! You were created by My word, Mary gave birth to you at My
command that I sent to her by My spirit, the trusted Gabriel of My
angels, until you grew up as one alive and walking, and all of this was
in My foreknowledge.

O Jesus! Zacharias is in the position of a father to you and as a
guardian to your mother. When he went to her in the prayer niche then he
found with her provisions. John is like you among My creatures. I
granted him to his mother when she was old when she did not have the
strength for it. By this, I wanted My sovereignty to appear to her, and
My power to appear in you. The most beloved of you by Me is the most
obedient to me and the most intense of you in fear of Me.

O Jesus! Wake up and do not despair of My mercy and glorify Me with
those who glorify Me and with wholesome speech hallow Me.

O Jesus! How can the servants disbelieve in Me when their forelocks are
in My fist and their changes take place on My earth? They are ignorant
of My blessings and they are supporters of My enemy, and so the
disbelievers are perishing.

O Jesus! Indeed, this world is a foul prison, and the fair seeming in it
is, as you see, that over which the tyrants slaughter one another.
Beware, the world and all of its blessings will come to an end, and it
has but few blessings.

O Jesus! Seek Me when you go to bed, and you will find Me; and call upon
me while you love Me, and I am the most hearing of the hearers; I answer
the callers when they call upon Me.

O Jesus! Fear Me and make My servants fear Me. Happily the sinners may
abstain from what they do because of it, so they do not perish unless
they knowingly [do it].

O Jesus! Be afraid of Me as you fear predators and death you will meet.
I have created all of them, so of Me alone, be afraid.

O Jesus! Verily, Mine is the kingdom and it is in My hand, and I am the
King. If you obey Me, I will make you enter My Garden in the
neighborhood of the righteous.

O Jesus! If I am angry with you, the pleasure of those who are pleased
with you will not benefit you, and if I am pleased with you, the anger
of those who are angry with you will not harm you.

O Jesus! Remember Me to yourself, and I will remember you to Myself.
Remember Me among your people, and I will remember you among a people
better than the children of Adam.

O Jesus! Call upon Me with the call of one who is drowning, afflicted,
for whom there is none to aid.

O Jesus! Do not swear by Me falsely, so that My Throne shakes with
anger. The world is short lived, but is long on hope, and with Me is a
realm better than what you gather.

O Jesus! What will you do when I take out for you a book that speaks in
truth, while you witness it, of the secrets you have hidden, and the
deeds you have done.

O Jesus! Say to the unjust of the Children of Israel: You wash your
faces and soil your hearts. Are you deceived about me, or would you be
audacious toward me. For the worldly you use perfumes, but to me your
stomachs are like putrid corpse, as though you were a dead people.

O Jesus! Say to them, “Draw back your hands[^31] from illicit gain, and
stop your ears from listening to curses, and come near to me by your
hearts for your appearance does not appeal to me.

O Jesus! Rejoice in the good deed, for it pleases Me, and weep over the
evil deed, for it is a disgrace, and that which you do not like to be
done unto you, do not do unto others, and if one slaps your right cheek,
offer him the left one, and draw near to Me by your efforts through
love, and ignore the ignorant.

O Jesus! Be humble toward the doers of good deeds and take part with
them in such deeds, and be witnesses to them, and say to the unjust of
the Children of Israel, “O friends of evil, and those who keep company
with it! If you do not comply with the prohibitions, I will transform
you into apes and swine.

O Jesus! Say to the unjust of the Children of Israel that wisdom[^32]
weeps in fear of Me, while you [Children of Israel] leave laughing. Has
there come to you a reprieve, or is there with you a guarantee against
My chastisement, or that you will not be subject to My punishment? I
swear by Myself, that I will abandon you as an example for those who
remain.

Thus I charge you, O son of Mary, that you bring news to the Children of
Israel of the Master of the messengers and My beloved, who is Ahmad,
having a red camel and a face like the moon, who is a shining light, a
pure heart, courageous, venerably modest.

Verily, he is a mercy to the worlds, and master of the children of Adam
on the day of his meeting Me, the most honored of the foremost,[^33] and
the latest of the messengers from Me, an Arab, a trustworthy person, one
committed to My religion, one patient for My sake and one who struggles
by his hand against the idolaters for the defense of My religion.

Order them to affirm him, believe in him, follow him and help him. Jesus
(‘a) said, “Who is it that I should please? Then, pleasure is for You.
He said, “He is Muhammad the Messenger of Allah (S) to the people, all
of them.

In station, he is nearer to Me than they; in intercession, he is more
ready than they; blessed be he as prophet, and blessed be his community
(ummah) if they meet Me on his path. The inhabitants of the earth praise
him, and the inhabitants of the heavens ask for his forgiveness. He is
the trustworthy, the blessed, the wholesome and salutary, better than
others with Me. He will be at the end of time.

When he arrives, the spouts of the heavens are loosed, and the earth
puts forth its blossoms, so that they see the benediction. I will bless
them by that upon which he puts his hand. He has many wives and few
children. He is an inhabitant of Bakkah [Mecca] the place of the
foundations of Abraham.

O Jesus! His religion is upright (Hanifiyyah), and his qiblah is
Yemenite,[^34] and he is of My party, and I am with him, so blessed be
he, then blessed be him. The Kawthar[^35] is for him, and the greatest
position in the gardens of Eden.

He lives most honored of all who have ever lived, taken as a martyr, for
whom is a fountain greater than the distance from Bakkah to the place of
the rising of the sun, full of wine untouched, in which there are dishes
like the constellations of the sky, and stars like the clouds of the
earth, agreeable, in which is every sort of wine and the flavors of
every fruit in the Garden. Whoever drinks a drink from it will never
thirst.

It is apportioned for him, and I have preferred him by a period of time
between you and him. His secrets agree with what is apparent from him,
and his words with his actions. He does not command the people, unless
he first begins to practice it. His religion is a struggle in hardship
and in comfort. The cities will obey him, and the ruler of Rome will
humble himself before him following the religion of Abraham.

He will mention the Name of God at meals, and bid peace, and he will
pray while the people sleep. For him each day there will be five prayers
in succession. His call to prayer will be like the call to muster
troops. He will open his prayer with ‘Allahu akbar (God is the
greatest)’ and end it with salutations of peace. He will put his feet in
line in prayer as the angels place their feet in line, and his heart and
head will be humbled for Me.

Light is in his breast and truth is on his tongue. And he is in the
right, wherever he is. First an orphan, wandering for a time regarding
what He wills for him, his eyes sleep but his heart does not,
interceding is only for him, and his community will reach the [Final]
Hour,[^36] and My hand will be above their hands, whoever breaks [his
pledge with the Prophet (S)], breaks [it] against himself, and whoever
is loyal to his pledge, I will be loyal to him [awarding to him] the
Garden.

So command the oppressors of the Children of Israel not to obliterate
his books and not to distort his tradition and to offer peace to him.
Surely, there is a noble station for him.

O Jesus! Whatever brings you near to Me, I have guided you to it, and
all that takes you far from Me, I have prohibited it for you. So, seek
what is for your own sake.

O Jesus! Surely this world is sweet, and surely I have employed you in
it, so keep aside from you all from which I have warned you, and take
from it all that I have given to you in forgiveness.

O Jesus! Look into your deeds with the look of a mistaken sinful
servant, and do not look into the works of others from the position of
Lord. Be without attachment to [this world], and do not long for it so
that it causes you hardship.

O Jesus! Reason about and contemplate and look into the regions of the
earth as to what has been the outcome of the oppressors.

O Jesus! All of My attributes are counsel for you, and all of My speech
to you is the Truth, and I am the plain Truth. So, in truth I say, “If
you disobey me after I informed you, there is no protector nor helper
for you but Me.

O Jesus! Humble your heart in meekness and look at those who are lower
than you and do not look at those who are above you. And know that at
the head of every mistake and sin is the love of this world. So, do not
love it, for I do not love it either.

O Jesus! Make wholesome your heart for Me and remember Me much in
solitude, and know that My pleasure is in your fawning love Me, in an
animated and not in a lifeless manner.

O Jesus! Do not make anything My partner, and be wary on account of Me,
and do not be deceived by health, so delight in yourself. Surely, this
world is like a passing shadow, and what comes from it is like what goes
from it.

So compete in your struggle for righteousness, and be with truth
wherever it is, even if you will be cut or burned by fire. So, do not
deny me after knowledge. So, do not be of the ignorant. A thing is
surely with things [of its own sort].

O Jesus! Pour forth tears from your eyes for Me, and humble your heart
for Me.

O Jesus! Call on Me for help in hard conditions. I am He Who helps those
who are upset, and Who answers the destitute. And I am the most merciful
of the merciful.”[^37]

[^1]: Jami‘ al-Akhbar, 1, 180

[^2]: ‘Uddat ul-Da’i, 169

[^3]: 'Uddat ul-Da’i, 212

[^4]: Basa’ir al-Darajat, 227

[^5]: Bihar, 81, 57, 9

[^6]: Bihar, 100, 21, 16

[^7]: Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, 1, 513

[^8]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, 12, 39, 13456

[^9]: Bihar, 14, 338, 9

[^10]: Kafi, 3, 264, 1

[^11]: Bihar, 90, 341

[^12]: Bihar, 14, 3

[^13]: Bihar, 79, 178

[^14]: Adab al-Nafs, 2, 69

[^15]: Bihar, 69, 55

[^16]: Irshad al-Qulub, 1, 112

[^17]: Bihar, 67, 316

[^18]: Bihar, 90, 373

[^19]: Cf. Qur’an 17:17; 25:58.

[^20]: Kafi, 2, 343, 3

[^21]: Kafi, 2, 502, 3

[^22]: Bihar, 14, 328, 56

[^23]: Kafi, 8, 138, 103

[^24]: Bihar, 21, 350, 20

[^25]: According to another report by the same narrator: “Verily Jesus
the son of Mary became more humble whenever God’s blessings were granted
him.”

[^26]: Bihar, 18, 418

[^27]: Majmu‘ah al-Akhbar fi Nafa’is al-Athar ,146

[^28]: The phrase Tuba ‘alay is translated as “Blessed are those,” or
“Happy are those,” in the Arabic version of the beatitudes.

[^29]: Bihar, 14, 323, 33

[^30]: Bihar, 14, 289, 13

[^31]: Literally, “Clip your fingernails from illicit gain.”

[^32]: Those who are wise.

[^33]: The foremost are the first to have believed in God.

[^34]: The portion of the Arabian peninsula including Mecca and Yemen
was referred to as Yemenite.

[^35]: The term kawthar has several meanings. Literally it means
‘abundant [good]’, and in many ahadith it is used in reference to Hadrah
Fatimah, peace be with her. It is also considered the name of a fountain
in heaven.

[^36]: This indicates that he will be the final prophet.

[^37]: Kafi, 8, 131-141, 103


