The Preaching of Jesus
======================

1. Jesus (‘a) said, “Whoever is content with the destiny of Allah, it is
as if his works are in accord with the gospel.”[^1]

2. Jesus (‘a) said, “Sleeping on a mat and eating barely bread for
seeking paradise is expeditious.”[^2]

3. The Prophet said, “Jesus (‘a) said, ‘We bring what is revealed for
you, but as for the interpretation, it will be brought by the Paraclete
(*farqiliT*) at the end of time.’”[^3]

4. Ja‘far ibn Muhammad narrated from his fathers, in order, that ‘Ali
the son of Abu Talib (‘a) said, “One day, the Apostle of Allah was among
us on the mountain of Tahama, and Muslims were around him. Then an old
man with a staff in his hand came.

The Apostle of Allah looked at him and said, ‘One with the walk, voice
and pride of a jinn has come.’ He greeted him and the Apostle of Allah
returned the greeting and said, ‘Who are you?’ He said, ‘I am Hama the
son of al-Him the son of Laqis the son of Iblis.’ The Apostle of Allah
said, ‘Glory be to Allah, glory be to Allah, there is no one between you
and Iblis unless two fathers!’ He said, ‘… And I met Moses the son of
‘Imran.

He said to me, ‘When you meet Jesus the son of Mary, greet him.’ I met
Jesus the son of Mary and greeted him. He said to me, ‘When you meet
Muhammad, greet him.’ So I greet you O the Apostle of Allah from Jesus
the son of Mary.’ The Apostle of Allah said, ‘Glory be to Allah. May
Allah bless Jesus as long as the world remains.’”[^4]

5. Imam ‘Ali (‘a) said, “Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) said, ‘Verily the
evil doer is infectious, and the associate of the wicked is brought
down. So beware of those with whom you associate.’”[^5]

6. I heard Imam Al-Ridha’ (‘a) say, “Jesus the son of Mary, may Allah
bless him, said to the apostles, ‘O Children of Israel! Do not grieve
over what you lose of this world, just as the people of this world do
not grieve over what they lose of their religion, when they gain this
world of theirs.’”[^6]

7. Imam Al-Sadiq (‘a) said, “Jesus the son of Mary, peace be with our
Prophet and his progeny and with him, said, ‘Woe unto the evil scholars!
How the fire inflames them!’”[^7]

8. And he (Jesus (‘a)) said, “How long will you be advised without
taking any advice? Certainly you have become a burden to the
advisors.”[^8]

9. It is reported from Imam Al-Sadiq (‘a) from his father that he said,
“Jesus (‘a) used to say, ‘Regarding the fright which you do not know
when you will encounter [i.e. death], what prevents you from preparing
for it before it comes upon you suddenly?’”[^9]

10. Imam Ja\`far (‘a) said, “Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) said, ‘He who
lies much looses his worth.’”[^10]

11. It is reported that Abu ‘Abdullah, [Imam Al-Sadiq (‘a)] said, “The
Messiah used to say: ‘He who often becomes upset, his body becomes sick;
he whose character is bad, his self becomes his torment; he who often
talks, often stumbles; he who often lies, he loses his worth; he who
quarrels with men, he loses his manliness.’”[^11]

12. It is reported that the Commander of the Faithful [Imam ‘Ali (‘a)]
said, “Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) said, ‘The dinar is the illness of
religion, and the scholar (*al-‘alim*) is the physician of religion. So
if you see that the physician brings illness upon himself, distrust him,
and know that he is not to advise others.’”[^12]

13. It is reported that Ali ibn al-Husayn [Imam Sajjad (‘a)] said, “The
Messiah said to his Apostles, ‘Verily, this world is merely a bridge, so
cross over it, and do not become preoccupied with it.’”[^13]

14. It is reported that Imam Al-Sadiq (‘a) said, “Jesus the son of Mary,
peace be with them, said to some of his companions, ‘That which is not
loved by you for someone to do to you, do not do that to others, and if
someone strikes you on the right cheek, turn to him your left cheek
also.’”[^14]

15. It is reported that Abu ‘Abdullah [Imam Al-Sadiq (‘a)] said that
Jesus (‘a) said, “The affairs of this world and those of the other world
have gotten hard. But the affairs of this world are hard because there
is nothing of this world at which you may grasp that some sinner has not
grabbed first, while the affairs of the other world are hard because you
do not find helpers to help you toward it.”[^15]

16. The Messiah said to the Apostles, “Verily, the eating of barley
bread and the drinking of plain water today in this world is for he who
would enter heaven tomorrow.”[^16]

17. Jesus (‘a) is reported to have said, “One of the evils of this world
is that Allah, the Supreme, is disobeyed in it, and the other world will
not be reached except by relinquishing this one.”[^17]

18. Jesus (‘a) is reported to have said, “How can one be of the people
of knowledge if the next world is shown to him while he remains involved
in this world, and what harms him is more desirable to him than what
benefits him?”[^18]

19. It is reported by Mufaddal, one of the companions of Imam Al-Sadiq
(‘a) from the Imam (‘a) in a long hadith, that he said, “Jesus the son
of Mary, Peace be with our Prophet and with him, used to spend some time
with the disciples and advise them, and he used to say, ‘He does not
know me, who knows not his soul, and he who does not know the soul
between his two sides, does not know the soul between my two sides.

And he who knows his soul which is between his sides, he knows me. And
he who knows me knows He Who sent me.’”[^19]

20. It is reported that Abu ‘Abdullah [Imam Al-Sadiq (‘a)] said, “Jesus
the son of Mary, may the blessings of Allah be with him, said, ‘You work
for the sake of this world while it is not by work that you are provided
for in it. And you do not work for the sake of the next world, while it
is only by work that you will be provided for in it.

Woe be unto you, evil scholars (*‘ulama*)! You take payments and waste
works. The backer[^20] comes close to accepting his work, and the people
come close to leaving the narrowness of this world for the darkness of
the grave. How can one be knowledgeable who is on the way to the next
world and nevertheless is going after this world, and he likes the
things that harm him more than the things that benefit him?’”[^21]

21. It is reported that Jesus (‘a) said, “Woe unto you, evil scholars
(*‘ulama*)! You take payments and waste works. The Master of the work
comes close to search for his work, and you come close to leaving this
wide world for the darkness of the grave and its narrowness.

He prohibited you from sins, likewise He ordered you to fast and say
prayers. How can one be a scholar who is angry with His livelihood and
debases His Dignity, while he knows that it is from the knowledge and
the power of Allah? How can one be a scholar, who accuses Allah
regarding what He has destined for him, so he is not satisfied with what
reaches him!?

How can one be a scholar, who prefers this world to the other world,
turns to this world and likes the things that harm him more than the
things that benefit him!? How can one be a scholar who seeks words
(*kalam*) in order to report them, but does not seek to put them into
practice?’”[^22]

22. Jesus (‘a) said, “How can some one benefit himself while he trades
himself for all that is in this world, then he abandons the inheritance
which he has traded to others and destroys himself? But blessed be the
man who purifies himself and prefers his soul to everything of this
world.”[^23]

23. Jesus (‘a) said, “Woe to the companion of the world! How he dies and
leaves it, and how he relies on it and it deceives him, and how he
trusts it and it forsakes him! Woe unto those who are deceived! How that
which is repugnant encompasses them and that which is beloved separates
from them! And that which is promised will come to them. And woe to
those whose endeavors are only for the world and error. How he will be
disgraced before Allah tomorrow!”[^24]

24. Verily, Jesus (‘a) said, “Why do you come to me clothed in the
clothing of monks while your hearts are those of ferocious wolves? You
should be clothed in the clothing of kings, and soften your hearts with
fear.”[^25]

25. Jesus (‘a) said, “Who would build a house on the waves of the sea?
This world is that house, so you should not take it as a dwelling.”[^26]

26. Jesus (‘a) said, “The love of this world and the next cannot be
aligned in the heart of a believer, like water and fire in a single
vessel.”[^27]

27. Jesus (‘a) said, “Blessed is he who abandons the present desire for
the absent promise.”[^28]

28. And Jesus (‘a) was saying, “O assembly of Apostles, love Allahby
hatred of the disobedient, and approach Allah by distancing [yourselves]
from them, and request His contentment by their discontentment.”[^29]

29. Jesus (‘a) said, “O group of Apostles! How many lamps the wind has
put out, and how many worshippers pride has corrupted!”[^30]

7.30. Jesus (‘a) said, “Never stare at that which is not for you. If you
restrain your eyes, you will never commit adultery; and if you are able
to avoid looking at the garments of women who are not permitted for you,
then do so.”[^31]

31. It is reported that Imam Al-Sadiq (‘a) said: “Jesus the son of Mary
(‘a)said, When one of you sits in his house, he should have clothes on.
Verily, Allah has allotted modesty for you, just as He has allotted your
sustenance.”[^32]

32. I heard Imam Al-Sadiq (‘a) say: “Christ (‘a) said to his disciples:
‘If you are my lovers and my brothers, you must accustom yourself to the
enmity and hatred of the people, otherwise you will not be my brothers.
I teach you this that you may learn it; I do not teach you so that you
may become proud.

Verily, you will not achieve that which you desire unless you give up
that which you desire, and by enduring patiently that which you detest,
and guard your gaze, for it plants lust in the heart, and it is
sufficient to tempt him. Happy are they who see that which they desire
with their eyes, but who commit no disobedience in their hearts. How far
is that which is in the past, and how near is that which is to come.

Woe to those who have been deluded when what they loathe approaches
them, and what they love abandons them, and there comes that which they
were promised. Woe to those whose efforts are for the sake of this
world, and whose works are mistaken. How he will be disgraced before his
Lord! And do not speak much for aught but the remembrance of Allah.

Those who speak much about aught but Allah harden their hearts, but they
do not know it. Do not look at the faults of others over much [the
phrase used here indicates spying], but look after the purity of your
own selves, for you are enslaved servants. How much water flows in a
mountain without its becoming soft.

And how much wisdom you are taught without your hearts becoming soft.
You are bad servants, and you are not pious servants. You are not nobly
free. Indeed you are like unto the oleander, all who see it wonder at
its flower, but when they eat from it they die. So, peace be unto
you.’”[^33]

33. Jesus (‘a) said, “O Children of Israel! Do not be excessive in
eating, for those who are excessive in eating are excessive in sleeping,
and those who are excessive in sleeping are deficient in praying, and of
those who are deficient in praying, it is written that they are
negligent.”[^34]

34. Jesus (‘a) said to his companions, “Verily, sleeping on a dunghill
and eating barley bread is a great good, with a sound religion.”[^35]

35. Jesus (‘a) said, “O assembly of disciples! I have thrown the world
prostrate before you, so do not lift it up after me, for one of the
evils of this world is that Allah was disobeyed in it and one of the
evils of this world is that the next world is not attained except by
leaving this one.

So pass through this world without making it livable, and know that the
root of all wrong is the love of this world. Many a vain desire leaves
an inheritance of lasting sorrow.”[^36]

36. Jesus (‘a) said, “This world and the next one are rivals. When you
satisfy one of them you irritate the other, and when you irritate one of
them you satisfy the other.”[^37]

37. When Jesus passed by a house the family of which had died and was
replaced by others, he said, “Woe to your owners who inherited you! How
they have learned no lesson from their late brothers.”[^38]

38. Jesus (‘a) said, “Do not take the world as a master, for it will
take you as its servants. Keep your treasure with one who will not
squander it. The owners of the treasures of this world fear for its
ruin, but he who owns the treasure of Allah does not fear for its
ruin.”[^39]

39. It is reported that [Imam] ‘Ali (‘a) said, “Jesus the son of Mary
(‘a) said, ‘Blessed is he whose silence is contemplation (*fikr*), whose
vision is an admonition, whose house suffices him and who cries over his
mistakes and from whose hand and tongue the people are safe.’”[^40]

40. And Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) said, “There is no sickness of the
heart more severe than callousness, and no soul is more severely
afflicted than by the deprivation of hunger, and these two are the lines
to exclusion and abandonment.”[^41]

41. Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) stood up among the Children of Israel to
preach. He said, “O Children of Israel! Do not eat before you become
hungry and when you become hungry eat but do not eat your fill, because
when you eat your fill your necks become thick and your sides grow fat
and you forget your Lord.”[^42]

42. The Apostle of Allah [Muhammad] said, “Jesus the son of Mary (‘a)
stood up among the Children of Israel and said, ‘O Children of Israel!
Do not speak with the ignorant of wisdom, for otherwise you do injustice
with it, and do not keep it from its folk, for otherwise you do
injustice to them, and do not help the unjust with his injustice, for
otherwise your virtue becomes void.

Affairs are three: the affair whose righteousness is clear to you, so
follow it; the affair whose error is clear to you, so avoid it; and the
affair about which there are differences, so return it to Allah, the
Almighty and Glorious.’”[^43]

43. Jesus (‘a) said, “In truth I say to you, just as one who is sick
looks at food and finds no pleasure in it due to the severity of the
pain, the masters of this world find no pleasure in worship and do not
find the sweetness of it, for what they find is the sweetness of this
world.

In truth I say to you, just as an animal which is not captured and tamed
becomes hardened and its character is changed, so too when hearts are
not softened by the remembrance of death and the effort of worship they
become hard and tough, and in truth I say to you, if a skin is not torn,
it may become a vessel for honey, just as hearts, if they are not torn
by desires, or fouled by greed, or hardened by blessings, may become
vessels for wisdom.”[^44]

44. Abu ‘\`Abdullah Al-Sadiq (‘a) said: “Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) said
to his companions, ‘O children of Adam! Free yourselves from this world,
escaping to Allah, and take your hearts out of it [this world].

Verily, you are not suitable for it [this world] and it is not suitable
for you, and you do not remain in it and it does not remain for you. It
is an insatiable deceiver. He who has emigrated to it is misled. He who
relies on it has been duped. He who loves it and desires it is
destroyed.

So repent to your Lord, and fear your Lord, and beware a day when no
father can compensate for his child and no child can be the compensation
for his father. Where are your fathers? Where are your mothers? Where
are your brothers? Where are your sisters? Where are your children? They
were called and they answered, said farewell to the earth, joined the
dead, and they came among the destroyed.

They exit the world and separate from their loved ones, and are in need
of what they sent ahead and needless of what they left behind. How much
you have been advised and how much you have been prohibited, but you are
frivolous and inattentive. Your likeness in this world is the like of
beasts. Your zeal is for the inside of your belly and for your private
parts.

Do you not answer Him Who created you, while He threatened the
disobedient with the Fire, and you are not able to cope with the Fire,
and He promised the obedient the Garden and being near to Him in the
high heaven? So compete for it and be deserving of it, and be fair to
yourselves, and be kind to the weak and needy among you.

And repent to Allah sincerely, and be righteous servants, and do not be
oppresive kings or inordinate Pharaohs who conquers those who rebel
against him by death. [And repent to] the Almighty of the mighty, Lord
of the heavens and the earth, of the first and the last, Possessor of
the Day of Judgment, the Severe in punishment, Whose chastisement is
painful. No oppressor is saved from Him, and nothing escapes Him.

Nothing slips past Him, and nothing disappears from His sight. His
knowledge encompasses all thing, and He sends down to each according to
his stations the Garden or the Fire. Oweak son of Adam! Where would you
run from Him Who seeks you in the dark of your night and the brightness
of your day, and in every state in which you may be. One who advised
delivered his advice; and one who has listened to the advice is
saved.’”[^45]

45. Imam Al-Sadiq (‘a) said: “Jesus the son of Mary said to the
Apostles, ‘Beware of looking at what is prohibited, for it is the seed
lust and plant of depravity.’”[^46]

46. Jesus son of Mary (‘a) said, “The most wretched of people is he who
is known by the people for his knowledge and is not known for his
works.”[^47]

47. Al-Sadiq (‘a) said, “Jesus (‘a)said, ‘Keep company with him the
vision and encounter—let alone speech—of whom reminds you of Allah. And
do not keep company with him who is agreeable to your exterior but to
whom your interior is opposed, for, verily, such a person makes a claim
for what is not due to him, if you are sincere about what is to your
benefit.

Make the most of the vision and encounter and company of one who has
three traits, even if but for an hour, for his blessings will be
effective in your religion and your heart and your worship: his speech
does not go beyond his action, his action does not go beyond his
truthfulness, and his truthfulness is not removed from his Lord.

So, keep company with him honorably, and await mercy and blessings and
beware the necessity of his proof against you and tend to his time that
he does not reproach you then you would incur loss, and look at him by
the eye of the grace and magnanimity granted especially to him by
Allah.’”[^48]

48. Jesus (‘a) said, “In truth I say to you, the folds of heaven are
empty of the rich, and the entering of a camel through the eye of a
needle is easier than the entering of a rich man into heaven.”[^49]

49. Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) said, “Take the truth from the folk of
falsehood, but do not take the false from the folk of truth. Be critics
of speech. How much aberration is adorned by a verse of the Book of
Allah, like the adornment of a copper dirham with silver plating.
Looking at it is the same, but those who have vision are aware.”[^50]

50. Imam Al-Sadiq (‘a) said: “… Jesus the son of Mary said, ‘Keep your
tongue to reform your heart, and be satisfied with your house, and
beware of pretentiousness and excess, and be ashamed before your Lord,
and cry over your mistakes, and escape from the people as you would run
from the lion or viper, [for] they were medicine but today, they have
become illness. Then encounter Allah when you will.’”[^51]

51. Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) said, “O seeker of this world for the
sake of doing good, abandoning the world is better.”[^52]

52. Jesus the son of Mary (‘a) said, “Beauty of dress is pride of
heart.”[^53]

53. Among the words of Jesus, “Consider your houses as way stations, and
the mosques as your residences, and eat the grains of the land and drink
of pure water, and go out of the world in health. Upon my life! You have
directed yourself to what is other than Allah. What has corrupted you?
Are you afraid of becoming lost if you direct yourself toward
Allah.”[^54]

54. Imam Baqir (‘a) said, “Christ said, ‘O group of disciples! The foul
odor of the oil will not harm you when the light of its lamp reaches
you. Take knowledge from he who has it, and do not look at his
works.’”[^55]

55. Jesus (‘a) said to say, “O weak son of Adam! Beware of your Lord,
and cast away your greed, and be weak in the world, and be modest in
your desires. Accustom your body to patience and your heart to
contemplation (*fikr*). And do not withhold sustenance for tomorrow,
because it is a mistake for you. And multiply praise to Allah for
poverty (*faqr*), for it is a sort of impeccability that you cannot do
what you want.”[^56]

56. Among the words attributed to Jesus (‘a) are, “On a day when one of
you fasts, he should oil his head and beard and should wipe his lips
[with oil] so that the people do not know that he is fasting. When he
gives [charity] by his right hand, he should hide it from his left hand.
And when he prays, he should let down the curtain over his door. Verily
Allah divides praise as He divides sustenance.”[^57]

57. It is reported that Abu ‘Abdullah (‘a) said, “Jesus the son of Mary
(‘a), passed by Safa’ih al-Rawha’ and he said, ‘Here I am, Your servant,
the son of your bondwoman, here I am.’”[^58]

58. Jesus (‘a) used to say, “O house! You will be destroyed, and your
inhabitants will die. And O soul! Work and have sustenance. And O body!
Toil, then rest.”[^59]

59. Jesus (‘a) said, “Worship has ten parts. Nine of them are in silence
and one is in withdrawing from the people.”[^60]

60. Jesus (‘a) said, “Among the greatest of sins is that when he does
not know something, a servant says, ‘Verily, Allah knows it,’ and even
when he lies about what he has dreamed, this is a great sin.”[^61]

61. When Allah raised Jesus as a prophet, Satan turned to him and
tempted him. Jesus said, “Glory be to Allah, with a plenum of His
heavens and earth and the ink of His words and the weight of His throne
and His own satisfaction.” [Imam] said, “When Satan heard this, he ran
away in the direction he faced, unable to control himself at all, until
he fell into the green waves [of the depths of the sea].”[^62]

62. It is reported that Abu ‘Abdullah (‘a) said, regarding the saying of
Allah, the Mighty and Magnificent,

***He has made me blessed wherever I may be (19:26),***

“Very beneficial.”[^63]

63. The Messenger of Allah (S) said, “Eat lentils, for they are blessed
and sacred. They soften the heart and increase tears. Seventy prophets
blessed them, the last of whom was Jesus the son of Mary (‘a).”[^64]

64. Jesus the son of Mary said, “Hardening of the heart is from drying
of the eyes, and drying of the eyes is from accumulating sins, and
accumulating sins is from loving the world, and loving the world is at
the head of all error.”[^65]

65. Abu Amama said, “I said, ‘O Apostle of Allah! When was the beginning
of your appearance?’ He said, ‘The calling of my father Abraham and good
news of Jesus the son of Mary and my mother saw that something went out
of her that castles of Syria were lightened by it.’”[^66]

66. Dahya al-Kalbi said, “The Apostle of Allah sent me with a letter to
the Caesar. Caesar sent [some one] to the bishop [to come]. I informed
him about Muhammad and his Book. The bishop said, ‘This is the prophet
whom we expected, Jesus the son of Mary announced him to us. As for me,
I confirm him and follow him.’ Caesar said, ‘As for me, if I do this my
kingdom will be lost…’”[^67]

67. Jesus (‘a) said, “Do not worry about your livelihood for tomorrow.
If tomorrow is a part of your life, your livelihood will come along with
your life, and if it is not a part of your life, then do not worry about
the livelihood of others.”[^68]

68. Jesus (‘a) said, “Blessed is he to whom Allah has taught His book,
and then he does not die as a tyrant.”[^69]

69. Jesus (‘a) said to some of the apostles, “Your distance from the
wrath of Allah is in your not being wrathful.”[^70]

70. Al-Sayyid ibn Tawus, may Allah have mercy on him, said, “I read in
the Gospel that Jesus (‘a) said, “Who among you gives his son a stone
when he asks for bread? Or who gives a snake when asked for a cloak? If
despite the fact that your evil is well known you give good gifts to
your sons, then it is more fitting that your Lord gives good things to
one who asks.”[^71]

71. It is reported that Abu ‘Abdullah (‘a) said, “Christ used to say,
‘If someone abandons giving aid to one who has been injured, he is
certainly a partner to the party who injured him…. Likewise, do not
narrate wisdom to those who are not fit for it, for they are ignorant.

And to not prevent those who are fit for it, for that would be a sin.
Each of you must be like a prescribing physician if he sees that the
condition is appropriate to a certain medicine, otherwise, he withholds
it.’”[^72]

72. Musa ibn Ja‘far (‘a) said, “…O Hisham! Verily, the Messiah said to
the apostles, ‘O evil servants! The height of the date palm frightens
you, and you remember its spikes and the difficulty of climbing it, but
you forget the wholesomeness and benefit of its fruit; likewise you
remember the difficulty of deeds for the other world, and it seems to
you to take a long time, but you forget the obtaining of the blessings,
light and fruit of those deeds…

In truth, I say to you, one who has no debt to the people is happier and
less sad than one who has debts, even if his paying it is excellent.
Likewise, one who does not make a mistake is happier and less sad than
one who makes mistakes, even if his repentance is pure and he returns
[to goodness.] Small sins and those considered paltry are among the
deceptions of Satan.

He makes them seem paltry to you and makes them small in your eyes, so
they will be gathered and increased and will surround you… O evil
servants! Do not be like stealing kites, deceptive foxes, misleading
wolves or vicious lions. You treat the people as you do your horses,
from some you steal, some you deceive and some you mislead.

In truth I say to you, it is not sufficient for a body that its exterior
is sound but its interior is corrupt. Likewise it is not sufficient for
you that your bodies be pleasing to you while your hearts are corrupted.
It is not sufficient for you that you cleanse your skins, while your
hearts are unclean.

Do not be like the sieve that the pure flour goes down from it and keeps
the siftings. Likewise you send out wisdom from your mouths, and hatred
remains in your chests…”[^73]

73. Al-Sayyid ibn Tawus, may Allah have mercy on him, said, “I read in
the Gospel[^74] that Jesus (‘a) said, ‘I tell you, do not worry about
what you will eat or what you will drink or with what you will clothe
your bodies. Is not the soul more excellent than food, and the body more
excellent than clothes?

Look at the birds of the air, they neither sow nor reap nor store away,
yet your heavenly Lord provides for them. Are you not more excellent
than they? Who among you by worrying can add a single measure to his
stature? Then why do you worry about your clothes?’”[^75]

[^1]: Jami‘ al-Akhbar, 180

[^2]: Majmu‘a Warram, 2, 230

[^3]: ‘Awali al-La’ali, 4, 124

[^4]: Ja‘faryyat, 176

[^5]: Kafi, 2, 640, 4

[^6]: Kafi, 2, 137, 25

[^7]: Kafi, 1, 47, 2

[^8]: Adab al-Nafs, 1, 175

[^9]: Bihar, 14, 336, 67

[^10]: Kafi, 2, 341, 13

[^11]: Bihar, 14, 318, 17

[^12]: Bihar, 14, 319, 21

[^13]: Bihar, 14, 319, 20

[^14]: Bihar, 14, 287

[^15]: Kafi, 8, 144, 112

[^16]: Adab al-Nafs, 2, 225

[^17]: Majmu‘a Warram, 1, 78

[^18]: Majmu‘a Warram, 1, 83

[^19]: Adab al-Nafs, 2, 213

[^20]: Rabb al-’amal has been translated as ‘backer’. It refers to those
who support the evil ‘ulama, following them and giving them financial
backing.

[^21]: Kafi, 2, 319, 13

[^22]: Bihar, 2, 39

[^23]: Bihar, 14, 329, 58

[^24]: Bihar, 14, 328, 53

[^25]: Bihar, 70, 208

[^26]: Bihar, 14, 326, 41

[^27]: Bihar, 14, 327, 50

[^28]: Bihar, 14, 327, 45

[^29]: Bihar, 14, 330, 64

[^30]: Bihar, 69, 322, 37

[^31]: Majmu‘ Warram, 1, 62

[^32]: Bihar, 68, 334, 11

[^33]: Bihar, 14, 325, 37 7.33.

[^34]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, 19, 188

[^35]: Adab al-Nafs, 1, 223

[^36]: Bihar, 14, 327, 48

[^37]: Bihar, 70, 122

[^38]: Bihar, 14, 329, 60

[^39]: Bihar, 14, 327

[^40]: Bihar, 14, 319, 22

[^41]: Bihar, 63, 337

[^42]: Bihar, 63, 337, 30

[^43]: Faqih 4, 400, 5858

[^44]: Bihar, 14, 325, 38

[^45]: Bihar, 14, 288, 12

[^46]: Bihar, 101, 41

[^47]: Bihar, 2, 52, 19

[^48]: Bihar, 97, 84

[^49]: Bihar, 69, 55

[^50]: Bihar, 2, 96, 39

[^51]: Bihar, 67, 110

[^52]: Majmu‘a Warram, 1, 134

[^53]: Bihar, 70, 207

[^54]: Sharh Najh al-Balaghah, 3, 155

[^55]: Bihar, 2, 97, 42

[^56]: Bihar, 14, 329, 62

[^57]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, 2, 181

[^58]: Faqih, 2, 234, 2284

[^59]: Bihar 14, 329, 61

[^60]: Majmu‘a Warram, 1, 106

[^61]: Bihar, 69, 258

[^62]: Bihar, 90, 181, 14

[^63]: Bihar, 14, 247

[^64]: Bihar, 14, 254, 48

[^65]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, 12, 39, 13458

[^66]: Bihar, 16, 321, 9

[^67]: Bihar, 20, 378

[^68]: Majmu‘ah Warram, 1, 278

[^69]: Majmu‘ah Warram, 1, 198

[^70]: Majmu‘ah Warram, 2, 27

[^71]: Bihar, 14, 317

[^72]: Kafi, 8, 345, 545

[^73]: Bihar, 1, 145, 146

[^74]: Cf. Matt 6:25-34: 25 "Therefore I tell you, do not worry about
your life, what you will eat or drink; or about your body, what you will
wear. Is not life more important than food, and the body more important
than clothes? 26 Look at the birds of the air; they do not sow or reap
or store away in barns, and yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you
not much more valuable than they? 27 Who of you by worrying can add a
single hour to his life? 28 "And why do you worry about clothes? See how
the lilies of the field grow. They do not labor or spin. 29 Yet I tell
you that not even Solomon in all his splendor was dressed like one of
these. 30 If that is how God clothes the grass of the field, which is
here today and tomorrow is thrown into the fire, will he not much more
clothe you, O you of little faith? 31 So do not worry, saying, 'What
shall we eat?' or 'What shall we drink?' or 'What shall we wear?' 32 For
the pagans run after all these things, and your heavenly Father knows
that you need them. 33 But seek first his kingdom and his righteousness,
and all these things will be given to you as well. 34 Therefore do not
worry about tomorrow, for tomorrow will worry about itself. Each day has
enough trouble of its own. (NIV)

[^75]: Bihar, 14, 317, 17


