Respect Shown By Christians to Jesus
====================================

1. It is reported that Zayn al-‘Abidin (‘a) said, “When the head of
al-Husayn was brought to Yazid, he convened sessions for wine drinking
and had the head of al-Husayn brought, placed before him and he would
drink wine in front of it.

One day, a messenger from the king of Rum was present at one such
session of Yazid, and he was one of the nobles and greats of Rum. He
said, “O King of the Arabs! Whose head is this?” Yazid said to him,
“What is this head to you?”

He said, “When I return to our king, he will ask me about everything I
saw. So, I would like to report to him about the story of this head and
its owner so that our king may share in your joy and happiness.” Yazid
said, “This is the head of al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib.” The man
from Rum said, “Who is his mother?” He said, “Fatimah the daughter of
the Messenger of Allah.”

The Christian said, “Fie on you and on your religion! I have a religion
better than yours. Verily, my father is one of the descendents of David,
and there are many generations between David and my father. But the
Christians honor me and take some of the earth from beneath my feet as a
blessing because of my father, as one of the descendents of David.

But you kill the son of the daughter of the Messenger of Allah, while
between them there is only one mother! What sort of religion do you
have?” Then he said to Yazid, “Have you heard the story of the Church of
the Hoof?” He said to him, “Tell it to me so I can hear it.” He said,
“There is a sea between Oman and China that it takes a year to cross.
Along the way there is no inhabited place except one city in the middle
of the water. It is eighty by eighty farsangs.

There is no city on the earth bigger than it, and camphor and emeralds
are brought from it. Its trees are aloes wood and ambergris. It is in
the hands of the Christians. No king has sovereignty over it except
them. There are many churches in that city. The biggest of them is the
Church of the Hoof. There is a small golden box in its sanctuary in
which is hung a hoof.

They think this is the hoof of a donkey that Jesus used to ride. They
decorated the area around the box with gold and silk brocade. Every year
many Christians make a pilgrimage to it and walk around it, kiss it, and
offer their supplications to Allah, the Exalted.

This is their manner and habit regarding the hoof of the donkey they
think Jesus, their prophet, used to ride. And you kill the son of your
prophet’s daughter!? Then Allah does not bless you and your religion.”
Yazid said, “Kill this Christian so that he cannot expose me in his
cities.”

When the Christian realized this, he said to him, “Do you want to kill
me?” He said, “Yes.” He said, “Know that I saw your prophet last night
in my dreams. He said to me, ‘O Christian! You are of the people of
heaven!’ I was surprised by what he said to me. Now I bear witness that
there is no god but Allah and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah (S).”
Then he jumped to the head of al-Husayn, embraced it, began to kiss it
and cried until he was killed.”

(*Bihar*, 45, 144)


