The Childhood of Jesus
======================

1. It is reported that Abu Ja‘far [Imam Baqir (‘a)] said: “When Jesus
the son of Mary was born, when he was one day old he was like a two
month old boy. When he was seven months old, his mother took his hand
and brought him to a school and sat him before a teacher. The teacher
said to him, “Say: ‘In the Name of Allah, the Merciful, the
Compassionate.’” Jesus said, “In the Name of Allah, the Merciful, the
Compassionate.”

The teacher said to him, “Say *abjad*.”[^1] Jesus raised his head and
said, “Do you know what is *abjad*?” The teacher raised the lash to hit
him. Jesus said, “O my teacher! Do not hit me if you know it, and if
not, ask me so that I may explain it.” He said, “Explain it to me.”
Jesus said, “As for the *alif*, it is a blessing (*ala’*) of Allah, and
the *ba* is the bliss (*bahjah*) of Allah, and the *jim* is the beauty
(*jamal*) of Allah, and the *dal* is the religion (*din*) of Allah.

*Hawwaz:* the *ha* is the terror (*hawl*) of hell, and the *waw* is ‘Woe
(*wayl*) to the people of the fire,’ and the *za* is the moaning
(*zafir*) of hell. *Hutti:* The sins are forgiven (*huttat*) of those
who ask the forgiveness of Allah. *Kaliman*: The speech (*kalam*) of
Allah, there is no one who can change His words.*Sa‘afis*: Measure for
measure (s*a‘*) and wages for wages. *Qarashat*: He will gather them
(*qarashahum*) and resurrect them.” Then the teacher said, “O woman!
Take your son’s hand, indeed he already knows, and he has no need of a
teacher.”[^2]

2. Abu ‘Abd Allah (‘a) said, “Verily, Jesus the son of Mary, used to cry
intensely, so that Mary was at wits end regarding his profuse crying. He
said to her, ‘Get some of the bark of that tree, make a tonic from it
and feed me with it.’ When he drank it, he cried intensely. Mary said,
‘What sort of prescription did you give me?’ He said, ‘O my mother!
Knowledge of prophethood and weakness of childhood.’”[^3]

[^1]: An old Semitic sequence of letters, called abjad, is used in
Hebrew and Arabic in which each letter is used to represent a number in
addition to its vocal value

[^2]: Bihar, 14, 286, 8

[^3]: Bihar 14, 254, 47


