The Characteristics of Jesus
============================

1. The Apostle of Allah (S) said, “I saw Abraham, Moses and Jesus. Moses
was a tall man, and his hair was hanging down, like the men of the Zut,
and like the men of the Shanu’ah.[^1] Jesus was a ruddy faced man with
curly hair and medium height.” Then he was silent. They said to him, “O
Apostle of Allah! What about Abraham?” He said, “Look at your companion
[me].”[^2]

2. Aminah [the mother of the Prophet] said, “When the birth of the
Apostle of Allah became near I would hear a sound, ‘Bring Muhammad (S)
around the East and West and show him to the *jinn*, people, birds and
wild animals and give him the clarity of Adam, the tenderness of Noah,
the loveliness of Abraham, the tongue of Isma‘il, the perfection of
Joseph, the good news of Ya‘qub, the voice of David, the asceticism of
John and the nobility of Jesus.’ Then he appeared [i.e., the Prophet (S)
was born]. So, I faced him....”[^3]

3. The Apostle of Allah (S) said, “Everyone who wants to look at Adam in
his knowledge, Noah in his piety, Abraham in his perseverance (*hilm*),
Moses in his awe and Jesus in his worship should look at ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib.”[^4]

4. It is reported from Abu al-Hamra’ that the Prophet (S) said,
“Everyone who wants to look at Adam in his dignity, Moses in the
intensity of his grip,[^5] and Jesus in his asceticism, should look at
the one coming.” Then ‘Ali (‘a) came.[^6]

5. It is reported that Abu Dharrr al-Ghifari said, “One day we were
before the Apostle of Allah (S) when he stood, bowed, and prostrated in
thanks to Allah, the Exalted.

Then he said, ‘O Jundab! Whoever wants to look at Adam in his knowledge,
Noah in his understanding, Abraham in his friendship, Moses in his
intimate prayers, and Jesus in his journeying, Job in his patience and
calamity, look at the man coming who is like the sun and the moon in
radiance, and stars shining bright, whose heart is bravest of all
people, and whose hand is more generous, so that may the curse of Allah,
the angels and the people be upon those who hate him.’ He said, ‘The
people turned to see who was coming when ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (‘a)
came.”[^7]

6. Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Gabriel was near the Prophet at the right side of
him, then the Commander of the Faithful came. Gabriel laughed and said,
‘… O Muhammad! If you yearn for the face of Jesus and his worship, the
asceticism of John and his obedience, the inheritnce of Solomon and his
generosity, look at the face of ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib.’ Then Allah the
Exalted sent:

***And when the example of the son of Mary is given, they laughed and
exclaimed their surprise) (43:57),***

that is, the son of Mary is like ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib and ‘Ali is like
Jesus.[^8]

7. When a comparison was made before the Apostle of Allah, in his
loudest voice he said, “O servants of Allah! Whoever wants to look at
Adam in his majesty, to look at Seth in his wisdom, to look at Idris in
his nobility and dignity, to look at Noah in his thanks to his Lord and
his worship, to look at Abraham in his friendship and loyalty, to look
at Moses in his hatred to every enemy of Allah and his opposing them,
and to look at Jesus in his love of every believer and his good
relations, look at ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib, here.”[^9]

8. The Apostle of Allah (S) said, “He who wants to look at the
asceticism of Jesus the son of Mary, look at Abu Dharr.”[^10]

9. It is reported that the Apostle of Allah said, “The imams after me
are twelve, the number of the months of the year, and from us is the
Mahdi of this community who will have the awesomeness of Moses, the
magnificence of Jesus, the judgment of David and the patience of
Job.”[^11]

10. Zayd al-Kunasi said, “I heard that Abu Ja‘far would say, ‘In the
Sahib hadha al-’amr [the twelfth Imam] there is an attribute (*sunnah*)
of Joseph, an attribute of Moses, an attribute of Jesus and an attribute
of Muhammad. As though his likeness to Joseph is that his brothers
acknowledge him as a leader and address him while they do not know him.
His likeness to Moses is that he is fearful. His likeness to Jesus is
journeying and his likeness to Muhammad is the sword[^12].’”[^13]

11. Sa‘id ibn Jubayr reported, “I heard the saying of ‘Ali ibn
al-Husayn, ‘There are many attributes (*sunnah*) of six prophets in our
al-Qaim: Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, Job and Muhammad. As for the
attribute from Noah, it is long life, from Abraham, it is having a
hidden birth and being separated from the people, from Moses, it is fear
and absence, from Jesus, it is the disagreement of people about him,
from Job, it is release after suffering and from Muhammad (S), it is
going out with the sword. [^14]

12. Jabir reported that Abu Ja‘far (‘a) said, “Verily the Lord, the
blessed and almighty, says, ‘Enter into heaven by my mercy, save
yourselves from the Fire by my pardon and divide the heaven according to
your deeds. By My glory! I will send you down in the everlasting and
noble dwelling.’

When they enter it they will become like Adam with his height…, like
Jesus, with the youth of thirty- three years, like Muhammad with the
Arabic language, like Joseph, with a beautiful figure shining with
light, and like Job, with a heart of purity from hatred.”[^15]

13. Abu ‘Abdullah (‘a) said, “…Then Noah took the Ark (of the covenant)
and buried it in al-Ghari, the part of the mountain on which Allah
talked with Moses, on which He sanctified Jesus, on which He took
Abraham as a friend, took Muhammad as a beloved, and made it a dwelling
for the prophets….”[^16]

14. Among the intimate conversations between Allah and Moses ibn Imran
is, “O Moses! I recommend to you as One Who is kind and compassionate to
you Ibn Batul, Jesus the son of Mary, who has a donkey and a burnoose,
olive oil and olives and a prayer niche.”[^17]

15. The Prophet (S) said, “Whoever says the prayer of Tuesday night with
thirty rak‘a and in each rak‘a he reads Sura Hamd and the verse al-Kursi
one time and Sura Tawhid seven times, Allah will give him the reward of
Job, the patient, John the son of Zachariah and Jesus the son of
Mary….”[^18]

[^1]: The Zut are a tribe from India, with wide faces with little facial
hair, and the Shanwah are like the Qahtaniyah of the Arabs. -Majlisi

[^2]: Bihar 12, 10, 24

[^3]: Bihar, 15, 272, 17

[^4]: Bihar, 39, 39

[^5]: Compare the language in (85:12).

[^6]: Bihar, 40, 78

[^7]: Bihar, 39, 38, 9

[^8]: Bihar, 35, 47

[^9]: Tafsir al-Imam al-‘Askari, 498

[^10]: Bihar, 22, 343

[^11]: Bihar, 36, 303, 141

[^12]: The sword is used as a symbol of authority, not as a symbol of
war or violence

[^13]: Dala’il al-Imamah, 291

[^14]: Al-Sirat al-Mustaqim, 2, 238

[^15]: Bihar, 8, 218, 207

[^16]: Jami‘ al-Akhbar, 21

[^17]: Bihar 13, 332, 13

[^18]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, 6, 370, 7014


