The Religion of Jesus
=====================

1. Al-Sadiq (‘a) said about

***…He has enjoined on me prayer and the poor-rate so long as I live
(19:31)***

that by the “poor-rate” what is meant is *zakah al-ru’us*,[^1] because
not all people have wealth, but the *fitrah* is [to be paid] by the poor
and the rich, the little and the big.[^2]

2. It is reported that there was retaliation in the revealed law of
Moses and blood money was necessary in the revealed law of Jesus. So the
true and tolerant religion [Islam] came down permitting both of
them.[^3]

3. It is reported in true narrations that getting married without limit
[to the number of wives] was permitted in the revealed law of Moses for
the sake of men’s affairs; and in the revealed law of Jesus only one was
permitted for the sake of women’s affairs. So this revealed law [of
Islam] came for the sake of both.[^4]

4. It is reported that Abu al-Hasan Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, “Every prophet
who was in the time of Moses (‘a) and after him had the revealed law of
Moses and his rites and followed his Book until the time of Jesus (‘a).
And every prophet who was in the time of Jesus and after him had the
rites of Jesus and his revealed law and followed his Book until the time
of our Prophet Muhammad (S).

Then these five prophets who possessed resolution (*ulu al-‘azm*) are
the most noble prophets and apostles, peace be upon them. And the
revealed law of Muhammad will not be abrogated until the Resurrection
Day and there will be no prophet after him until the Resurrection
Day.[^5]

5. It is reported that Abu ‘Abd-Allah narrated from his fathers, in
order, until the Commander of the Faithful peace be upon all of them,
that one day the people of five religions, the Jews, the Christians, the
Naturalists (*dahriyah*), the Dualists and the ‘Arab Idolaters gathered
before the Apostle of Allah.

The Jews said, “We say, ‘Ezra is the son of Allah.’ O Muhammad! We came
to you to see what you say. If you follow us, we were right prior to you
and better than you, and if you oppose us, we will argue with you.”

The Christians said, “We say, ‘Verily Jesus is the son of Allah who
united with Him.’ We came to you to see what you say. If you follow us,
we were right prior to you and better than you, and if you oppose us we
will argue with you.” The Naturalists said, “We say, ‘There is no
begining of things and they are everlasting.’ We came to you to see what
you say.

If you follow us, we were right prior to you and better than you, and if
you oppose us we will argue with you.” The Dualists said, “We say,
‘Verily the light and the darkness are the administrators.’ We came to
you to see what you say. If you follow us, we were right prior to you
and better than you, and if you oppose us we will argue with you.”

The ‘Arab Idolaters said, “We say, ‘Verily our idols are gods.’ We came
to you to see what you say. If you follow us, we were right prior to you
and better than you, and if you oppose us we will argue with you.”

The Apostle of Allah (S) said, “I believe in God alone. There is no
partner for Him, and I deny every god but Him.” Then he said to them,
“Verily Allah the Exalted raised me for all of the people as a bearer of
good news, a warner and as an authority for the inhabitants of the
world, and Allah will turn the deceptions of those who deceive in His
religion back on them.”…

Then he faced the Christians and said to them, “You said that the
Eternal is united with Christ, His son. What do you mean by this saying?
Do you want to say that the Eternal became non-eternal by this creature
who is Jesus, or that the non-eternal, who is Jesus, became eternal by
the Eternal who is Allah, or your saying, ‘He united with him’ means
that ‘He distinguished him by nobility while He did not ennoble anyone
but him.’

If you mean that the Eternal, the Exalted, became non-eternal, you are
wrong. For it is impossible for the eternal to change and become
non-eternal, and if you mean that the non-eternal became eternal you are
wrong for it is impossible too for the non-eternal to change to the
eternal, and if you mean that He united with him whereby He
distinguished him and chose him among His other servants, you confess to
the originality of Jesus and everything that is united with him for his
own sake.

Because if Jesus is non-created and Allah is united with him and changed
him to the best creature before Him, Jesus and Him would have been
non-eternal, and this is opposite to what you said in the beginning.”

The Christians said, “O Muhammad! Allah the Exalted manifested some
strange things by the hand of Jesus, so He took him as His son for the
sake of nobility.” The Apostle of Allah said, “You heard what I said to
the Jews about what you said.” Then he repeated all of that. They said
nothing except one of them who said, “O Muhammad! Do not you say,
‘Abraham is *khalil Allah* (the friend of Allah)?’ So when you say this
why do you reject our saying, ‘Jesus is the son of Allah.’”

The Apostle of Allah said, “These are not alike for *khalil Allah* is
taken from *khallah* or *khullah* and the meaning of *khallah* is
poverty and neediness. He was a friend of his Lord and needy of Him,
chastely, abstemiously and independently separated from all but Him.

Because when they wanted to throw him into the fire and to cast him with
a catapult, Allah, the Exalted, raised Gabriel and said to him, ‘Catch
My servant!’ Gabriel came to him, met him in the air, and said,
‘Commission me for what happened to you, for Allah the Exalted raised me
to help you.’ He said, ‘But Allah is sufficient for me and He is the
best Trustee (*wakil*). I ask no one but Him and there is no need for me
unless of Him.’

Then He named him His friend (*khalil*), that means His poor and needy,
and who is separated from all but Him. When the meaning of *khalil* is
taken from need (*khullah*) and he is needy (*takhalal*) of Him and
knows His secrets that no one else knows, it means that he knows Him and
His affairs. And it does not cause the likeness of Allah to him.

Do not you see that if he did not separate from all but Him, he would
not have been His friend, and if he did not know His secrets he would
not have been His friend. One’s father is he of whom one is born, even
if his father slanders him and sends him far away, for the meaning of
being born of him remains. Then if it is necessary for you to compare
Jesus with Abraham and say Jesus is His son for He said, ‘Abraham is My
friend,’ it is necessary for you to say, ‘Moses is His son,’ For his
miracles were no less than the miracles of Jesus. So you should say
‘Moses is His son too.’

And it is permitted for you to say, ‘He is his shaykh, master, uncle,
chief and commander,’ in the meaning that I said it to the Jews.” Then
some of the Christians said, “According to the revealed books Jesus
said, ‘I go to my father.’” The Apostle of Allah said, “If you do
according to that book, you should say, ‘All of the people that He
addressed were His sons as Jesus was his son.’ For according to that
book, Jesus said, ‘I go to Him who is my father and yours.’

Then something that is in that book makes invalid what you think, that
only Jesus is His son because he was so distinguished. For you said,
‘Jesus is His son because He, the Exalted, distinguished him by that
which He did not distinguish the others.’ But you know that Jesus was
chosen for something that this group was not chosen for, and Jesus said
to this group, ‘I go to Him who is my father and yours.’

So it is wrong that only Jesus is chosen. For this is proven for you
[that Jesus is not distinguished as His son] by the saying of Jesus to
those who were not so distinguished. You narrated the words of Jesus but
you interpreted it wrongly. For when he said, ‘my father and yours’ he
wanted to say something you do not say and impute. What do you know?

Perhaps it was in his mind, ‘I go to Adam and Noah. Allah raises me to
them and gathers me with them. Adam is my father and your father, and
Noah is likewise.’ But he did not mean anything but this meaning.” The
Christians became silent; then they said, “We did not see a disputant or
an opponent like what we saw today, and we will think about our
affairs….”[^6]

6. Imam al-‘Askari reported that about the verse,

***“It is not righteousness that you turn your faces toward the East and
the West, but righteousness is this, that one should believe in Allah,
the Last Day, the angels, the Book and the prophets, give away wealth
out of love for him to the near of kin, the orphans, the needy, the
wayfarer, beggars and for the emancipation of captives, keep up the
prayers and pay the poor-rate…” (2:177)***

‘Ali Ibn al-Husayn (‘a) said, “The Apostle of Allah favored ‘Ali (‘a)
and informed [his people] about his majesty before his Lord, the Mighty
and Magnificent, and revealed the favor for his followers and the
helpers of his calling and rebuked the Jews and Christians for their
disbelief and their concealing the mention of Muhammad, ‘Ali and their
descendents, peace be with them, about their being favored and good
deeds.

Then the Jews and Christians became proud [thinking themselves better].
The Jews said, “We prayed to this our *qiblah* many prayers. There are
some people among us who stay awake nights with praying to this *qiblah*
which is the *qiblah* of Moses; and Allah commanded us about it.”

The Christians said, “We prayed to this our *qiblah* many prayers. There
are some people among us who stay awake nights with praying to this
*qiblah* which is the *qiblah* of Jesus; and Allah commanded us about
it.” Each of these two sects said, “Do you think that our Lord makes
invalid our numerous works and our prayers to our *qiblah*, because we
do not follow the desire of Muhammad for himself and his brother?”

Then Allah the Exalted, sent, “O Muhammad! Say, ‘Righteousness is not
the obedience by which you reach heaven and merit forgiveness and
sanctity. In your prayers you turn your faces to the East, O Christians!
And to the West, O Jews! But you oppose the command of Allah and you are
angry with the friend (*wali*) of Allah.

But righteous is he who believes in Allah, in His being one, alone and
unique, impermeable (*Samad*); Who makes whom He wants great, makes
honor for whom He wants, makes despicable and humble whom He wants—no
one can refute His order and none can reprove His judgement. Also
righteous is he who believes in the Last Day, the Resurrection Day.”[^7]

7. It is reported that Abu ‘Abd Allah (‘a) said, “Verily, Allah, the
blessed and exalted, gave to Muhammad the laws of Noah, Abraham, Moses
and Jesus: *tawhid* (divine unity), *ikhlas* (purity), the dismissal of
peers [for Allah], the liberal uprightness of human nature, there is no
monasticism and no mendicancy, what is pure is made lawful and what is
filthy is prohibited, and He removes from them their burdens and the
shackles that were upon them.[^8]

So, He made known his excellence with this. Then He made obligatory for
him the prayer, alms, fasting, the pilgrimage, enjoining the good,
prohibiting evil, the allowable (*halal*) and the forbidden (*haram*),
the laws of inheritance, the penal laws, the obligations, jihad in the
way of Allah, and He added the minor ablution, He made him excellent by
the opening of the Book,[^9] the closing part of *surah Baqarah*, and
the detailed *suwar*,[^10].

He made lawful for him the spoils of war and booty, He aided him with
fear [in the hearts of his enemies], He made the earth for prostration
and made it purifying, He sent him universally, to the white and the
black, the jinn and the humans, and He gave him the *jizyah* (poll tax
for non-Muslims), and taking the pagans as captives and releasing them.
Then He made it his duty what was not the duty of any of the other
prophets, He sent him a sword from heaven without a scabbard, and it was
said to him,

***Fight in the way of Allah, and you are not obliged for anyone but
yourself.” (4:84)***[^11]

8. It is reported that Sama‘ah ibn Mahran said that he asked Abu ‘Abd
Allah (‘a) about the saying of Allah, the mighty and magnificent,

***‘So, bear with patience as did those who had resolution (Ulu
al-‘azm)’ (46:35).***

He said, “Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus and Muhammad (S).” I said, “How
did they become those who had resolution?”

He said, “Because Noah was raised as a prophet with a book and a divine
law, and all who came after Noah held to his book, law and his way until
Abraham (‘a) came with a scripture and resolution, and he was obliged to
leave the book of Noah without disbelieving in it.

Then each of the prophets who came after Abraham held to the law of
Abraham and his way and his scripture, until Moses came with the Torah
and his law and way and resolution and he was obliged to leave the
[previous] scripture. Then each of the prophets who came after Moses
(‘a) held to the Torah and his law and way, until the Messiah came with
the Gospel and resolution, and he had to leave the law of Moses and his
way.

Then each of the prophets who came after the Messiah held to his law and
way, until Muhammad (S) came and brought the Qur’an and his law and way,
and his permissions (*halal*) are permitted until the Resurrection Day
and his prohibitions (*haram*) are prohibited until the Resurrection
Day. So, it is they who are those who had resolution.”[^12]

9. It is reported that Abu ‘Abd Allah said that when Christians of
Najran came to the Apostle of Allah, they arrived at the time of their
prayer, so they started to sing with a bell and prayed. Their chiefs
were al-Ahtam, al-‘Aqib and al-Sayyid. The companions of the Apostle of
Allah said, “O Apostle of Allah! This? In your mosque!?”

He said, “Leave them alone.” When they finished they approached the
Apostle of Allah and said, “To what do you invite us?” He said, “To bear
witness that there is no god except Allah and that I am the Apostle of
Allah and that Jesus is a created servant. He eats drinks and
defecates.” They said, “So who is his father?”

Then a revelation descended to the Apostle of Allah, and it said, “Ask
them what they say about Adam. Was he a created servant who ate, drank,
spoke and married.” Then the Prophet asked them this. They answered,
“Yes.” He asked, “Then who is his father?” They were silent. Then Allah
sent down,

***Truly the likeness of Jesus in the sight of Allah is as Adam’s
likeness; He created him of dust, then He said to him, ‘Be,’ and he was.
The Truth is from Your Lord, so do not be of the doubters. And whoever
disputes with you after the knowledge that has come to you, say: ‘Come
now. Let us call our sons and your sons, our wives and your wives, our
selves and your selves; then let us humbly pray and place the curse of
Allah upon the liars. (3:59-61)***

Then the Prophet said, “So let us curse one another. If I am truthful
the curse will be sent down upon you and if I am lying the curse will be
sent down upon me.” They said, “You are fair.”

Then they agreed upon the mutual cursing. When they returned to their
homes, their chiefs, al-Sayyid, al-‘Aqib and al-Ahtam, said, “If he
would curse us with his people, then we will curse him, for he is not a
prophet; but if he would curse us specifically with his household, then
we will not curse him, for surely he would not stand up against his
household unless he were sincere.”

When morning came, they came to the Apostle of Allah, and with him was
the Commander of the Faithful, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn, peace be with
them. The Christians said, “Who are they?” It was said to them, “That is
his uncle’s son, and his trustee, his son-in-law, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib,
and that is his daughter, Fatimah, and those are his grandsons, Hasan
and Husayn.” Then they parted, and they said to the Apostle of Allah (S)
“We are satisfied with you, so pardon us from the mutual cursing.” Then
the Apostle of Allah compromised with them for the *jizyah* and they
left.[^13]

10. It is reported that when a delegation from Najran came, the Prophet
(S) invited their chiefs, al-‘Aqib and al-Tayyib, to Islam. They said,
“We became Muslims before you.” He said, “You lie. Love of the cross and
drinking wine prevent you from it.” Then he called them to curse one
another. They promised him that they would come tomorrow morning.

The Prophet (S) came the next morning while he took the hand of ‘Ali,
al-Hasan, al-Husayn and Fatima. They said, “He came with his immediate
family. They trust in their religion.” So they refrained from cursing
each other. The Prophet (S) said, “If they had done it, fire would have
been showered on them in the desert.”[^14]

11. It is reported that Abu ‘Abd Allah (‘a) said, “Between David and
Jesus the son of Mary there were four hundred years. The religion of
Jesus was *tawhid* (divine unity), *ikhlas* (purity) and what Noah,
Abraham and Moses, peace be with them, had bidden. The *Injil* (gospel)
was sent down to him.

The pledge that was taken from the other prophets was also taken from
Jesus, and it was made law for him in the book to establish prayer with
religion, enjoining the good and prohibiting evil, forbidding what was
forbidden, and allowing what was allowed. Admonitions and parables were
sent down to him in the *Injil,* but there was no law of retribution in
it nor precepts of retribution (*ahkam al-hudud*), and no obligations
for inheritance.

What was sent down to him was an alleviation of what was sent down to
Moses in the Torah. This is in the saying of Allah in which Jesus the
son of Mary said to the Children of Israel,

***[and to make lawful to you certain things that before were forbidden
to you] (3:50).***

Jesus commanded those with him who were believers and followed him that
they believe in the law of the Torah and *Injil*.”[^15]

12. It is reported that Abu Ja‘far (‘a) said, “…then Allah commissioned
Jesus to witness that there is no god but Allah and to recite what was
brought to him from Allah, and He made for him a law and a method.

Then the Saturday, which they previously had been commanded to strictly
observe, was abrogated, and generally the path and customs that had been
practiced that were brought by Moses. Then, one who does not follow the
path of Jesus, Allah will cast him into the fire, although what all the
prophets brought is not to associate anything with Allah.”[^16]

13. Ibn ‘Abbas said, “A group of the scholars of Jews came to ‘Umar when
he was Caliph of the Muslims… Then ‘Ali said to [the chief of them],
‘Ask.’ He said, ‘Inform me about a group from early times who died and
after three hundred-nine years Allah revived them.

What was their story?’ ‘Ali (‘a) started and wanted to read *Sura
al-Kahf*. The scholar said, ‘How much we have heard of your Qur’an! If
you know them, inform us about their story, names, number, the name of
their dog, cave, king and the name of their city.’

‘Ali (‘a) said, ‘There is no power and no strength save in Allah, the
High, the Great. O Jewish brother! Muhammad reported to me that there
was a city, named Aqsus, on the territory of Rum and it had a pure king.
Their king died. So they differed in their words [among each other].

A king, from the kings of Persia, named Daqyanus, heard of their
differences and turned with one hundred thousand persons and entered the
city of Aqsus. Then he took it as a part of the realm of his country and
made a palace in it, one parasang by one parasang. In the palace there
was a hall that was a thousand cubits in length by a thousand in width
in polished marble.

In that hall there were four thousand golden columns, one thousand
golden chandeliers, for each of which was a chain of silver, and lit
with scented oil. There were eighty windows in the Eastern wall, and in
the Western wall it was the same. When the sun rose, in lit the hall,
and there was sunlight in the hall wherever the sun went. In the hall
was a golden throne that was forty by eighty cubits whose legs were
silver studded with jewels, and on it were small cushions.

On the right of the throne there were eighty chairs of gold decorated
with green chrysolite. There the Batariqah sat. At the left there were
eighty silver chairs decorated with red rubies, on which sat the
Haraqilah. Then the king ascended the throne and placed the throne on
his head.’

The Jew started and said, ‘What was his crown made of?’ Imam ‘Ali (‘a)
said, ‘Golden mesh with seven pillars on each of which was a white pearl
that shone like a light shining in a dark night. There were fifty youths
of the Haraqilah with shirts of red brocade and skirts of green brocade.
They wore crowns, bangles and anklets.

They had golden scepters and stood at the head of the king. He took six
young man as ministers and stood three of them at his right and three of
them at his left.’ The Jew said, ‘What were their names?’

‘Ali (‘a) said, ‘The names of those who were at his right were Tamlikha,
Maksalmina and Mishilina, and the names of those who were at his left
were Mirnus, Dirnus and Shadharrius. He consulted them about all his
affairs. Every day he held court in the yard of his house with the
Batariqah at his right and the Haraqilah at his left. Three boys were at
the hand of one of them serving a golden goblet with powdered musk, and
at the hand of another was a silver goblet full of rose water.

On the hand of another was a white bird with a red beak. Whenever the
king looked at the bird, he would call it, and it would fly until it
fell into the goblet of rose water, in which it drenched itself. Then it
would fall into the goblet of musk, which would stick to its feathers
and wings. Then the king would call it again, and it would fly onto the
crown of the king, and what was on its feathers and wings would fall
onto the head of the king.

When the king saw this, he would exult and pride himself. Then he would
claim Lordship for himself to the exclusion of Allah and call his people
to it. So he gave, granted and clothed everyone who obeyed him in this.
He killed everyone who did not swear allegiance to him.

So all of them answered him. He held a celebration for them every year.
One day, at a feast, the people of Batariqah were at his right and the
people of Haraqilah were at his left. Suddenly, a Bitriq came to him and
informed him that an army from Persia had overcome him. So he became sad
for it as his crown fell from his head.

One of those three who were at his right was called Tamlikha and was a
young man. He said to himself, ‘If Daqyanus is God, as he thinks, he
should not become sad, should not fear, urinate, deficate or sleep.

These deeds are not the deeds of God. Those six young people were in the
house of one of them every day and that day were in the house of
Tamlikha. He prepared pure food for them. Then he said to them, ‘O
brothers! There is something in my heart that has kept me from eating,
drinking and sleeping.’

They said, ‘What is that? O Tamlikha!’ He said, ‘I thought about this
sky for a long time and said to myself, “Who raised its ceiling without
any support and without any bond above it? Who placed the sun and the
moon in it as two luminous signs? Who adorned it with stars?” Then I
thought about the earth for a long time and I said, “Who spread it over
the back of the brimming sea? Who has kept down the earth with mountains
so that it does not move all over?”

Then I thought about myself for a long time: “Who brought me out as a
foetus from the belly of my mother? Who fed me and who raised me?
Verily, there is a creator and a director other than the king Daqyus. He
is not anyone but the King of kings and the Almighty of the heavens.”’

Then that group fell at his feet, kissed them and said, ‘Allah guided us
from going astray by your guidance, so show us the way.’ Tamlikha
jumped, sold some dates from his garden for three thousand dirhams and
put them in his bag. They rode their horses and went out of the city.
When they went three miles, Tamlikha said to them, ‘O brothers! The
dwelling of the other world came and the kingdom of this world went. Go
down from your horses and walk by foot. Allah may put relief and escape
for you.’

They went down from their horses and walked for seven farsangs that day,
until their feet bled. A shepherd met them. They said, “O shepherd! Do
you have any milk or water?” The shepherd said, “I have whatever you
want, but I see that your faces are those of princes. I suspect that you
have fled from King Daqyus.” They said, “O shepherd! It is not permitted
for us to lie. If we tell you the truth, will we be safe from you?”

Then they told him their story. The shepherd fell at their feet and
kissed them, and he said, “O people! In my heart I realized what you
realized in your hearts. Give me time to return these beasts to their
owners and join you. They waited for him. He returned the beasts and
hurried back. The dog followed.’ The Jew stood and said, ‘O ‘Ali! What
was the name of the dog, and what was its color?’

‘Ali (‘a) said, ‘There is no power and no strength save in Allah, the
High, the Great. The color of the dog was between white and black, more
toward black. The name of the dog was Qitmir. When the youths looked at
the dog, some of them said, “We are afraid that the barking will reveal
us.” So they threw stones at it. Allah, the Exalted, magnificent is His
remembrance, made the dog speak: ‘Let me be, so I can protect you from
your enemies.’

The shepherd constantly guided them until he brought them up a mountain.
Then he brought them down to a cave called al-Wasid. At the entrance to
the cave there were springs and fruit trees. They ate the fruit and
drank the water, and the night covered them. They took refuge in the
cave, and the dog lied down to sleep at the entrance of the cave, and
stretched out its paws.

Then Allah, the Exalted, revealed to the angel of death to take their
spirits, and for each of the men Allah appointed two angels to turn them
from right to left and from left to right. The Allah, the Mighty and
Exalted, revealed to the keepers of the sun so it inclined from their
cave toward the right and passed them by on the left.[^17]

When Daqyus, the king, came back from his celebration, he asked about
them. He was informed that they had left the city out of fear. He
mounted a horse with eighty thousand others, and they constantly
searched for any trace of them, until they ascended and arrived at their
cave. When they looked at them, they saw that they were asleep.

The king said, ‘If I had wanted to chastise them, I would not have
chastised them more than they have chastised themselves. Bring the
builders.’ They dammed the entrance of the cave with lime and stone. The
king said to his companions, ‘Tell them to ask their God Who is in
heaven to save them and to get them out of here.’

‘Ali (‘a) continued, “O Jewish brothers! They stayed there for three
hundred nine years. When Allah wanted to revive them, he commanded the
angel Israfil to breathe the spirit into them. He breathed. Then they
stood up from their sleep.

When the sun rose, some of them said, we neglected our worship the God
of heaven during the night. They stood and the water of the spring had
sunken, and the trees had withered. Some of them said, ‘How strange is
our affair! Like this sunken spring that had been full, and these trees
that have withered in a single night.’ They were hungry. They said,

***Now send one of you with this coin of yours to the city. Then let him
see which of them has purest food; so let him bring you provision from
it, and let him behave with gentleness, and by no means make your case
known to anyone. (18:19)***

Tamlikha said, ‘No one but I will go for your needs. O shepherd! Give me
your clothes.’ So the shepherd gave his clothes to him and he set out
for the city. He saw places that he did not know and roads with which he
was unfamiliar, until he reached the gate of the city, where there was a
green flag on which was written, “There is no god but Allah, and Jesus
is the Apostle of Allah.”

He looked at the flag and rubbed his eyes and said, “Am I dreaming?”
Then he entered the city until he came to the market. He came to a baker
and said, “O baker! What is the name of this city of yours?” He said,
“Aqsus.” He said, “And what is the name of your king?” He said, “‘Abd
al-Rahman.”

He said, “Give me food for this money.” The baker started in surprise at
the weight and size of the dirham.’ The Jew stood up and said, ‘O ‘Ali
(‘a)! What was the weight of a dirham.’ He (‘a) said, ‘The weight of
every dirham was that of ten and two thirds dirhams.’ ‘Ali (‘a)
continued, “Then the baker said, ‘O you! Have you found a treasure?’
Tamlikha said, ‘This is the money I made selling dates three days ago,
and then I left this city to escape worshipping King Daqyus.’

The baker took his hand and brought him to the king. The king said,
‘What is the story of this youth?’ The baker said, ‘He is a man who
found a treasure.’ The king said, ‘O youth! Do not be afraid, for our
prophet, Jesus (‘a), commanded us only to take a fifth of what is found
of treasure. So, give us a fifth of it and go in peace.’ Tamlikha said,
‘O king! Look at my affair. I did not find a treasure. I am a man of
this city.’ The king said, ‘You are of its people?’

He said, ‘Yes.’ He said, ‘Does anyone here know you?’ He said, ‘Yes.’ He
said, ‘What is your name?’ He said, ‘My name is Tamlikha.’ He said,
‘There is no such name among the names of our times.’ The king said, ‘Do
you have a house in this city?’ He said, ‘Yes. O king! Mount and come
with me.’ The king mounted and so did his people with him. Tamlikha
brought them to the highest building in the city. He said, ‘This is my
house.’

He knocked on the door. An elderly man came out, whose eyebrows covered
his eyes because of his age, and said, ‘What do you want?’ The king
said, “This young man brought us something strange. He thinks that this
is his house.” The old man said to him, “Who are you?” He said, “I am
Tamlikha son of Qustikin.” The old man fell at his feet and kissed them,
and said, “He is my grandfather, by the Lord of the Ka‘bah. O king!
These six are those who escaped out of fear of King Daqyus.”

The king came down from his horse and carried Tamlikha on his shoulders,
and the people started kissing his hands and feet. He said, “O Tamlikha!
What have your companions done?” He informed him of the cave. In those
days there was in the city a *muslim* king and a Jewish king. Both
mounted with their companions.

When they got close to the cave, Tamlikha said, “I am afraid that my
companions will hear the sound of the hooves of the horses and suspect
that King Daqyus is coming after them. Give me time to go ahead and
inform them.” The people waited and Tamlikha went ahead until he entered
the cave. When they looked at him and gathered around him and said,
“Praise Allah Who delivered you from Daqyus.” Tamlikha said, “Leave off
this talk of Daqyus.”

He said,

***How long have you tarried? They said, We have tarried for a day or a
part of a day. (18:19)***

Tamlikha said, “You have tarried three hundred nine years, and Daqyus
has died, and centuries have passed. Allah raised a prophet called the
Messiah, Jesus the son of Mary (‘a). Allah made him ascend. The king
came to our side and the people with him.” They said, “O Tamlikha! Do
you want to make a trial by us for the people?” Tamlikha said, “So, what
do you want?” They said, “Pray to Allah, Whose remembrance is glorious,
and we will pray with you that our souls will be taken.”

They raised their hands. Then Allah commanded that their souls be taken.
Then Allah covered the door of the cave from the people. The two kings
came and circled about the door of the cave for seven days without
finding it. The *muslim* King said, “They died with our religion. I will
build a mosque over the door of the cave.”

The Jew said, “No! Rather they died with my religion. I will build a
synagogue over the door of the cave.” Then they fought. The *muslim*
won, and built a mosque over it.’ O Jew! Does this agree with what is in
your Torah?” The Jew said, “You have not added or subtracted a letter,
and I bear witness that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is
His servant and His apostle.”[^18]

14. It is reported that Safwan the son of Yahya, the companion of
al-Sabiri said: “Abu Qurrah, the companion of al-Jathiliq, asked me to
bring him to Al-Ridha’ (‘a). Then I asked him for permission. He said,
‘Bring him to me.’ Then, when he came to him, Abu Qarah kissed the
carpet and said, ‘This is our duty, according to our religion, that we
must do for the nobles of our time.’

Then Abu Qarah said to him, ‘May Allah help you. What would you say
about a sect that claimed something, and another sect bore witness that
it was right?’ He answered, ‘The claim is in their favor.’ He said, ‘
[What about] another sect that claims something but finds no witnesses
for it but themselves?’ He answered, ‘There is nothing in their favor.’
He said, ‘So we, ourselves, claim that Jesus is the spirit of Allah and
His word, and the Muslims agree with us about this.

But the Muslims claim that Muhammad is the prophet, while we do not
follow them in this. That on which we agree is better than that about
which we differ.’ Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said to him, ‘What is your name?’ He
answered, ‘Yuhanna.’ He said, ‘O Yuhanna! We believe in Jesus, the
spirit of Allah and His word, who believed in Muhammad and gave tidings
of him and acknowledged that he was His servant and subject.

So, if Jesus, the spirit of Allah and His word, as you hold, is not one
who believed in Muhammad, and gave tiding of him, and who acknowledged
that he is the servant of Allah and that He is the Lord, then we are
acquitted of him. So, on what do we agree?’ Then he stood up and said to
Safwan the son of Yahya, ‘Stand up! We did not get anything out of this
meeting.’”[^19]

15. Ishaq ibn ‘Ammar said: “I asked Abu ‘Abd Allah (‘a) about what
Allah, the blessed and exalted, said,

***and aforetime they used to pray for victory against those who
disbelieved, but when there came to them (the Prophet) that which they
did not recognize, they disbelieved in him, (2:89)***

He answered, ‘There was a group between Muhammad (S) and Jesus (‘a) that
used to threaten disbelievers with a prophet and they used to say,
“Verily a prophet will appear and will break your idols and will do with
you this and that,” but when the Prophet of Allah appeared, they
disbelieved him.’”[^20]

16. Hasan ibn Muhammad al-Nufali said, “When ‘Ali ibn Musa Al-Ridha’
(‘a) came before Ma’mun the later commanded Fadl ibn Sahl to gather the
scholars (*ashab al-maqalat*) such as the Catholicos (*Jathaliq*), the
Exilarch (*Ra’s al-Jalut*), the chiefs of the Sabeans, Hirbidh al-Akbar,
the Zoroastrians, Nastas al-Rumi and the theologians so as to hear his
words and their words. Fadl ibn Sahl gathered them and informed Ma‘mun
of their gathering.

Ma‘mun said, ‘Bring them before me.’ He did it. Ma‘mun welcomed them;
then he said to them, ‘I gathered you here for the good, and I would
like you to debate with my cousin from Madinah who has come before me.
Come here early tomorrow morning, and let not one of you be remiss.’
They said, ‘We hear and we obey, O Commander of the Faithful! We will be
here early tomorrow morning, God willing.’…

The next morning, Fadl ibn Sahl came and said to Al-Ridha’ (‘a), ‘May I
be your sacrifice. Your cousin is waiting for you. The people have
gathered. What is your view about coming before him?’ Al-Ridha’ (‘a)
said to him, ‘You precede me, and I will come to you, God willing.’ Then
he made ablutions (*wudu’*) as though for prayer, and he drank some
barley water (*sharbah sawiq*) and we also drank some.

Then he left, and we left with him, until we entered before Ma‘mun. All
at once it was crowded, and Muhammad ibn Ja‘far was among the
Talibiyyin, the Hashimiyyin and the Quwwad. When Al-Ridha’ (‘a) entered,
Ma‘mun stood up, and Muhammad ibn Ja‘far and all the Hashimiyyin. They
waited until Al-Ridha’ (‘a) sat with Ma‘mun and ordered them to sit.
Then they sat, and Ma‘mun faced him and spoke with him for an hour.

Then Ma‘mun turned toward the Catholicos and said, ‘O Catholicos! This
is my cousin, ‘Ali ibn Musa ibn Ja‘far, who is a descendent of Fatimah
the daughter of our Prophet and ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, may they both be
blessed. So, I would like you to speak with him and debate fairly.’

The Catholicos said, ‘O Commander of the Faithful! How can I debate with
someone who relies upon a book that I deny and a prophet in whom I have
no faith?’ Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said to him, ‘O Christian! If I debate against
you by your Gospel, will you concede?’

The Catholicos said, ‘Can I reject what is spoken in the Gospel? Yes, by
God, I will concede even if I do not like it.’Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said to
him, ‘Ask whatever comes to your mind, and understand the answer.’ The
Catholicos said, ‘What do you say about the prophethood of Jesus and his
book? Do you deny them?’

Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, ‘I confess the prophethood of Jesus and his book,
and the glad tidings to his community to which the Apostles also
confessed. And I disbelieve in the prophethood of any Jesus who did not
confess the prophethood of Muhammad (S) and in his book and who did not
give glad tidings of him to his community.’

The Catholicos said, ‘Is it not the case that you consider the judgment
of*two* just witnesses decisive?’ He said, ‘Yes.’ The Catholicos said,
‘Then bring two witnesses for the prophethood of Muhammad from a nation
other than yours who are not denied by the Christians, and ask us for
the like from other than our nation.’ Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, ‘Now you are
being fair, O Christian! Do you not accept from me the earlier just ones
who were with the Messiah, Jesus the son of Mary?’

The Catholicos said, ‘Who is that just one? Tell me his name?’ He said,
‘What do you say about John Daylami?’ He said, ‘Very well! You have
mentioned the most beloved person to the Messiah.’ He (‘a) said, ‘I
swear to you, does the Gospel not say that John said, “The Messiah
informed me of the religion of Muhammad the Arab, and he gave me glad
tidings of him, that he would come after him; then I gave glad tidings
of him to the Apostles, so believe in him.”?’

The Catholicos said, ‘John mentioned this from the Messiah and he gave
glad tidings about the prophethood of a man and about his folk and his
trustee. But he did not specify when this would be, and he did not name
these people for us so that we could recognize them.’

Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, ‘If we bring someone who reads the Gospel and he
recites for you the mention of Muhammad and his folk and his community,
will you believe in him?’ He said, ‘Surely.’ Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said to
Nastas al-Rumi, ‘How is your memory of the third scripture of the
Gospel?’ He said, ‘I do not remember it.’

Then he turned to the chief of al-Jalut and said, ‘Do you not read the
Gospel?’ He said, ‘Yes, by my soul.’ He said, ‘Start the third scripture
for me. If the mention of Muhammad and his folk and his community is in
it, bear witness to it for me, and if it is not there, then do not bear
witness for me.’ Then he recited the scripture until when he arrived at
the mention of the Prophet (S) he stopped.

Then he said, ‘O Christian! I ask you by the right of the Messiah and
his mother, did you know that I know the Gospel?’ He said, ‘Yes.’ Then
he recited for us the mention of Muhammad, his folk and his community.

Then he said, ‘What do you say, O Christian? This is the speech of Jesus
the son of Mary. If you belie what is said in the Gospel then you belie
Moses and Jesus, peace be with them, and when you deny this mention, it
is obligatory for you to be killed, because you would be a disbeliever
in your Lord, your prophet and your book.’

The Catholicos said, ‘I will not deny what is clear for me in the
Gospel. I will confess to it.’ Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, ‘Bear witness to
what he has confessed.’ Then he said, ‘O Catholicos! Ask whatever comes
to your mind.’

The Catholicos said, ‘Inform me about the Apostles of Jesus the son of
Mary. How many were they? And how many were the scholars of the Gospel?’
Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, ‘You have come to one who is well informed. As for
the Apostles, they were twelve men, and the most noble and knowledgeable
of them was Luke.

As for the Christian scholars, they were three men: John the Great of
Ajj,[^21] John of Qirqisa and John Daylami of Zijar, and it is he who
mentions the Prophet (S), and mentions his folk and his community, and
it is he who brought the glad tidings of him to the community of Jesus
and to the Children of Israel.’

Then he said to him, ‘O Christian! Verily, we do indeed, by Allah,
believe in Jesus who believed in Muhammad (S) and we do not resent
anything about your Jesus except his weakness and the small amount that
he fasted and prayed.’ The Catholicos said, ‘By Allah! You spoiled your
knowledge and weakened your affair.

I imagined nothing less than that you were the most knowledgeable of the
folk of Islam.’ Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, ‘How is that?’ The Catholicos said,
‘Because of what you said about Jesus being weak and having little
fasting and prayer, while Jesus never broke his fast and slept through
not a single night; he was constantly fasting and holding vigils.’
Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, ‘So, for whom did he fast and pray?’

Then the Catholicos was dumbfounded and stopped speaking. Al-Ridha’ (‘a)
said, ‘O Christian! I want to ask you about a problem.’ He said, ‘Ask.
If I know anything about it, I will answer you.’ Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said,
‘Why did you deny that Jesus raised the dead by the permission of Allah,
the Mighty and Magnificent?’ The Catholicos said, ‘I denied it because
whoever raises the dead and cures the blind and the leper is the lord
deserving to be worshipped.’

Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, ‘Elisha also did things like Jesus did: walked on
the water, raised the dead and cured the blind and the leper, but his
community did not take him to be the Lord, and not one of them
worshipped him instead of Allah, the Mighty and Magnificent. And the
prophet Ezekiel also did things like what Jesus the son of Mary did, for
he raised thirty-five thousand men after they had been dead for sixty
years.’

Then he turned to the Exilarch and said to him, ‘O Exilarch! Do you find
in the Torah what there is about the youths of the Children of Israel
who were exiled by Nebuchadnezzar when they revolted in Jerusalem and
then he sent them to Babylon? Then Allah, the Exalted, sent one to them
and Allah revived them. This is in the Torah. None of you deny this
unless he is a disbeliever.’

The Exilarch said, ‘We heard this and know about it.’ He said, ‘You
spoke the truth.’ Then he said, ‘O Jew! Consider the scripture of the
Torah.’ Then he (‘a) recited some verses of the Torah. The Jew started
at his recitation and was surprised. Then he faced the Christian and
said, ‘O Christian! Did this take place before Jesus or was Jesus before
that?’ He said, ‘No. They were before him.’

Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, ‘Once the Quraysh gathered before the Apostle of
Allah (S) and asked him to raise their dead for them. He had ‘Ali ibn
Abi Talib (‘a) accompany them, then he said to him, ‘Go to al-Jubbanah
and call that clan by their names, those about whom they had asked, with
your loudest voice: O so-and-so! O so-and-so! And O so-and-so! Muhammad
the Apostle of Allah says to you, “Rise, by the permission of Allah, the
Mighty and Magnificent.”’ Then they rose and wiped the dust from their
heads.

The Quraysh received them and asked how they were. Then they told them
that Muhammad (S) had been raised as a prophet. They said, ‘We would
love to see him and to believe in him.’ He cured the blind, the leper
and the insane. The beasts, birds, genies and devils spoke to him, but
we did not take him as a Lord instead of Allah, the Mighty and
Magnificent. We do not deny the virtues of any of them.

So, when you take Jesus as Lord, it becomes allowable to take Elijah and
Ezekiel as Lords, because both of them did things like what Jesus did,
such as raising the dead, etc... Verily, there was a tribe of the
Children of Israel who fled their town because of plague and fear of
death, and they were thousands, but in a single hour Allah made them
die.[^22]

The people from that town set up an enclosure for them, and they [the
dead] were always in it, until their bones rotted and decayed. Then one
of the prophets of the Children of Israel passed them, and wondered
about them and the great quantity of their rotted bones.

So, Allah, the Mighty and Magnificent, revealed to him, ‘Would you like
Me to revive them for you and warn them?’ He said, ‘Yes, O my Lord!’
Allah, the Mighty and Magnificent, revealed to him that he should call
them. He said, ‘O you rotted bones! Rise, by the permission of Allah,
the Mighty and Magnificent!’ Then they rose living, all of them. They
wiped the dust from their heads.

Then, Abraham, the friend of the Merciful, when he took the birds and
cut them up, then put a portion of them on each mountain, then called
them and they went toward him with effort.[^23] Then there was Moses of
‘Imran and seventy of his chosen companions who went with him toward a
mountain, and said to him, ‘You have seen Allah, glory be to Him, so
show Him to us as you saw Him.’[^24]

He said to them, ‘Verily, I did not see Him.’ They said, ‘We will not
believe in you until we see Allah openly. Then they were struck by
lightning. They burned, to the last of them, and Moses remained alone.
He said, ‘O my Lord! Verily, I chose seventy men of the Children of
Israel. I brought them here, but return alone.

So, how is my people to affirm what I report to them? If you wanted, you
could have destroyed them before and me. Would You destroy us because of
what the fools among us did?’ Then Allah revived them after their death.
Everything I have mentioned to you, you cannot deny, for the Torah, the
Gospel, the Psalms, the Qur’an have spoken of it.

If everyone who raises the dead, cures the blind, the leper and the
insane is to be taken as a Lord, instead of Allah, then take all of
these as Lords. What do say, O Christian?’ The Catholicos said, ‘It is
as you say, and there is no god but Allah.’

Then he (‘a) turned to the Exilarch and said, “O Jew! Listen to me, for
I want to ask you about ten verses which descended to Moses ibn ‘Imran.
Do you find this written in the Torah about Muhammad and his community:
‘When the last community comes following the rider of the camel, and
they glorify the Lord very earnestly with a new glorification in new
synagogues.

Then let the Children of Israel seek refuge with them and their king so
that their hearts may be assured. Verily, there are swords in their
hands by which they obtain revenge against the disbelieving communities
in the regions of the earth.’?” Do you find anything like this written
in the Torah?”

The Exilarch said, “Yes. We find the like of this.” Then he said to the
Catholicos, “O Christian! How is your knowledge of the book Sha‘ya?” He
said, “I know it word for word.” Then he said to him, “Are you familiar
with these words from it: ‘O people! Verily I saw a figure riding a
donkey clothed in a garb of light, and I saw the rider of a camel whose
radiance is like the radiance of the moon.’?” They both said, “Certainly
Sha‘ya said this.”

Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, “O Christian! Do you know the saying of Jesus in
the Gospel: ‘Verily, I am going to your Lord and my Lord, and the
paraclete (*barqalita*) is coming, he who will testify for me truly,
even as I testify for him. And he will interpret all things for you, and
he is the one who will reveal the sins of the nations, and he will break
the pillar of disbelief.’?” The Catholicos said, “You have not mentioned
anything from the Gospel that we do not confess.”

He said, “Do you find this set in the Gospel, O Catholicos?” He said,
“Yes.” Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, “O Catholicos! Will you not inform me about
the first Gospel, when it was lost, with whom was it found? And who
compiled this Gospel for you?” He said, “We did not lose it, except for
one day, and when we found it, it was like new, and it was brought out
by John and Matthew.”

Then Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said to him, “How little is your knowledge of the
mystery[^25] of the Gospel and its scholars! If it is as you imagine,
then why are there differences about the Gospel? And verily, there are
differences about the Gospel that is in your hands today. If it were the
original testament, you would not differ about it. But I will offer you
knowledge about it.

Know that when the original Gospel was lost, the Christians gathered
around their scholars and said to them, ‘Jesus the son of Mary was
killed, the Gospel has been lost, and you are scholars, so what is in
your possession?’ Luke and Mark said to them, ‘Verily, the Gospel is
within our breasts, and we will bring it out scripture by scripture for
everyone, so do not worry about it. Do not empty the synagogues.

So, we will soon recite for every one of you scripture by scripture
until it is all collected.’ Luke, Mark, John and Matthew sat down and
compiled this Gospel for you after you had lost the original Gospel.
These four persons were students of the first students. Did you know
this?”

The Catholicos said, “I did not know this, but now I know it. The extent
of your knowledge of the Gospel has become clear to me. I heard
something to the truth of which my heart testifies, so I want to
increase my understanding.”

Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said to him, “What do you think about that to which they
all testify?” He said, “It is allowed; they are the scholars of the
Gospel. Everything to which they testify is true.” Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said
to Ma‘mun and to his folk and others with him present, “Bear witness to
this.” They said, “We bear witness.”

Then he said to the Catholicos, “By the truth of the son and his mother,
do you know that Matthew says, ‘Verily the Messiah is the son of David
son of Abraham son of Isaac son of Jacob son of Yahuda son of Hadrun,’
and that Mark, regarding the lineage of Jesus the son of Mary says,
‘Verily, he is the word of Allah, He made it incarnate in the body of a
man; so it became man,’ and that Luke says, ‘Verily, Jesus the son of
Mary and his mother were two persons of flesh and blood, and the holy
spirit entered into them,’ and then you say that Jesus testifies about
himself, ‘In truth I say to you, O company of disciples, verily, no one
ascends to heaven unless he descends from it, except the rider of the
camel, the seal of the prophets. Verily, he ascends to heaven and then
descends from it.’? What do you say about this saying?”

The Catholicos said, “That is the saying of Jesus; we do not deny it.”
Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, “So, what do you say about the testimony of Luke,
Mark and Matthew about Jesus and what they have attributed to him?” The
Catholicos said, “They lied about Jesus.” Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, “O
people! Did he not just say that they were pure and testify that they
were scholars of the Gospel, and that their word is the truth?”

The Catholicos said, “O scholar of the Muslims! I would like you to
pardon me for this about them.” Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, “We have done it.
Ask, O Christian, whatever comes to your mind!”

The Catholicos said, “Let someone other than me ask you. Nay! By the
truth of the Messiah! I never imagined that a scholar like you was among
the Muslims.” Then Al-Ridha’ (‘a) turned to the Exilarch and said to
him, “Will you question me or shall I question you?”

He said, “I would question you, and I will not accept any argument from
you unless it is from the Torah, the Gospel, the Psalms of David or from
what is in the scriptures of Abraham and Moses.”

Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, “Do not accept any argument from me unless it is
spoken of in the Torah by the tongue of Moses ibn ‘Imran, the Gospel by
the tongue of Jesus the son of Mary or the Psalms by the tongue of
David.”

The Exilarch said, “How do you prove that Muhammad was a prophet?”
Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, “Moses ibn ‘Imran, Jesus the son of Mary and David
the Steward of Allah, the mighty and magnificent, on earth bore witness
to it.” So he said to him, “Prove the saying of Moses ibn ‘Imran.”

Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, “Do you know, O Jew, that Moses ibn ‘Imran left a
will for the Children of Israel in which he said to them, ‘Verily, there
will soon come to you a prophet from among your brethren, so affirm him
and listen to him.’ Do you know any brethren of the Children of Israel
other than the offspring of Isma‘il, if you know of the kinship of
Israel and Isma‘il, and the relation between them from Abraham?”

The Exilarch said, “That is the saying of Moses; we do not deny it.”
Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said to him, “Has there come to you from the brethren of
the Children of Israel any prophet other than Muhammad?” He said, “No.”
Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, “Is this not correct according to you?”

He said, “Yes, but I would like you to show the correctness of this
matter from the Torah.” Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said to him, “Do you deny that
the Torah says to you, ‘Light came from Mount Sinai, and that it
radiates to us from Mount Sa‘ir, and it has appeared to us from Mount
Faran.’?” The Exilarch said, “I know these words, but I do not know the
interpretation of them.”

Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, “I will inform you of it. As for its saying, ‘Light
came from Mount Sinai,’ that is the revelation of Allah, the blessed and
exalted, which He sent down to Moses at Mount Sinai; as for His saying,
‘and that it radiates to us from Mount Sa‘ir,’ it is the mountain at
which Allah, the mighty and magnificent, sent revelation to Jesus the
son of Mary when he was on it; and as for His saying, ‘and it has
appeared to us from Mount Faran,’ this is one of the mountains of Mecca
which is one day’s journey from Mecca.

The prophet Sha‘ya says in the Torah, what you and your companions also
say, ‘I saw two riders for whom the earth became illuminated, one of
them on a donkey and the other on a camel.’ Who is the rider on the
donkey and who is the rider of the camel?” The Exilarch said, “I do not
know those two, so inform me of them.” He (‘a) said, “The rider of the
donkey is Jesus, and the rider of the camel is Muhammad. Do you deny
that this is from the Torah?” He said, “No, I do not deny it.”

Then Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, “Do you know the prophet Habakkuk?” He said,
“Yes. I know of him.” He (‘a) said, “He said, and this is narrated in
your book, ‘Allah brought down speech on Mount Faran, and the heavens
were filled with the glorification of Muhammad and his community. His
horse carries him over water as it carries him over land.

He will bring a new book to us after the ruin of the holy house [the
temple in Jerusalem].’ What is meant by this book is the Qur’an. Do you
know this and believe in it?” The Exilarch said, “Habakkuk the prophet
has said this and we do not deny what he said.” Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, “In
his Psalms, David said, and you recite it, “O God! Send one to revive
the tradition after it has languished.’ Do you know a prophet other than
Muhammad who has revived the tradition after it languished?”

The Exilarch said, “This is the saying of David. We know it and do not
deny it, however, what is meant by this is Jesus, and his day was the
period of languishing.” Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said to him, “You are ignorant.
Verily, Jesus did not oppose the tradition, but he was in agreement with
the tradition of the Torah, until Allah raised him to Himself.

It is written in the Gospel, ‘Verily, the son of the good woman will
leave, and the paraclete will come after him, and he will lighten the
burden, and he will interpret everything for you, and he will bear
witness for me as I bear witness for him. I have brought parables for
you, and he will bring for you exegesis.’ Do you believe in this from
the Gospel?” He said, “Yes. I do not deny it.”

Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said to him, “O Exilarch (*Ra’s al-Jalut*)! I ask you
about your prophet Moses ibn ‘Imran.” He said, “Ask!” He (‘a) said,
“What proof do you have that Moses was a prophet?” The Jew said,
“Verily, he brought that which had not been brought by any prophet
before him.”

He said to him, “Like what?” He said, “Like the splitting of the sea,
changing his staff into [a serpent] running, hitting the rock so that
fountains sprung from the cleft, bringing out his hand white for the
observers, and signs for the like of which people have no power.”

Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said to him, “You spoke truly that the proof of his being
a prophet was that he brought that for the like of which people have no
power. Is it not the case that it becomes obligatory for you to affirm
whoever claims to be a prophet then brings the like of that for which
people have no power?” He said, “No. Because there was no one like Moses
in station before his Lord, and nearness to Him; and it is not
obligatory for us to admit the prophethood of one who claims it unless
he bring signs like what he brought.”

Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, “So, how do you admit that there were prophets
prior to Moses, while they did not split the sea, and did not cleft the
rock so that twelve fountains sprung from it, and they did not bring out
their hands as Moses brought his hand out white, and they did not change
staves into running serpents.” The Jew said to him, “I will indeed
inform you that when one brings a sign the like of which people have no
power to bring, even if they are not what Moses brought or are other
than what he brought, it becomes obligatory to affirm him.”

Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, “O Exilarch (*Ra’s al-Jalut*)! So, what prevents
you from admitting [to the prophethood of] Jesus the son of Mary, while
he revived the dead, cured the blind and the leper, and created of clay
what had the form of birds, then blew into them and they became birds by
the permission of Allah?” The Exilarch said, “It is said that he did
this, but we did not witness it.”

Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, “Tell me, did you witness the signs that Moses
brought? Is it not the case that narrations from the trusted companions
of Moses conveyed that he did these things?” He said, “Yes.” He said,
“Then likewise, successively confirmed reports (*akhbar mutawattir*)
have come to you about what Jesus the son of Mary did. So how is it that
you affirm Moses but you do not affirm Jesus?” He gave no answer.

Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, “And likewise the affair of Muhammad (S) and what
he brought, and the affair of every prophet commissioned by Allah. Among
the signs Muhammad (S) had was that he was an orphan, poor, a shepherd
and a wage laborer who did not study any book and who was not taught by
any teacher, yet brought the Qur’an in which there are the stories of
the prophets and reports of them letter by letter, and reports of those
who have gone before, and the peoples who will remain until the day of
resurrection.

He reported about their secrets and what they had done in their houses,
and he brought unaccountably many signs.” The Exilarch said, “According
to us, neither the reports about Jesus nor the reports about Muhammad
are correct, and it is not permitted for us to affirm these two by what
is incorrect.”

Al-Ridha’ (‘a) said, “So, the witnesses who testified for Jesus and
Muhammad, may the peace and blessings of Allah be with them both, are
not valid?” He gave no answer.[^26]

[^1]: There are two kinds of zakah or poor-rate. One is based upon a
person’s wealth, and is not imposed upon the poor. The other is given at
the end of Ramadan by believers who are not so poor that they are
eligible to receive alms, regardless of wealth.

[^2]: Tafsir Al-Qummi, 2, 50

[^3]: ‘Awali al-La’ali, 1, 387

[^4]: ‘Awali al-La’ali, 1, 446

[^5]: ‘Ilal al-Shara’i, 1, 122

[^6]: Tafsir al-Imam al-‘Askari, 530-535, 323

[^7]: Tafsir al-Imam al- ‘Askari, 589

[^8]: See (7:157).

[^9]: That is, the opening surah of the Qur’an.

[^10]: The detailed suras, mufadhdhal, are considered by some to be
those from surah Muhammad to the end, but there are other opinions among
scholars as to which suras are to be included under this heading.

[^11]: Bihar, 16, 330, 26

[^12]: Kafi, 2, 17, 2

[^13]: Bihar, 21, 340, 5

[^14]: Bihar, 21, 341, 6

[^15]: Bihar, 14, 234, 4

[^16]: Kafi, 2, 29

[^17]: See Qur’an 18:17

[^18]: Bihar, 14, 411- 419, 1

[^19]: Bihar, 10, 30,341

[^20]: Kafi, 8, 310, 482

[^21]: Some say that what is meant here is Akh in Basra.

[^22]: See Qur’an, (2:243).

[^23]: See Qur’an (2:260).

[^24]: See Qur’an, (7:155).

[^25]: In another text, instead of mystery (sirr) there is traditions
(sunan).

[^26]: Bihar, 10, 299-310, 1


