The Successor of Jesus
======================

1. One of the companions of the Commander of the Faithful said that some
of his companions said, “O Commander of the Faithful! The executor of
Moses showed the signs to his companions after Moses and the executor of
Jesus showed the signs to his companions after Jesus. So, will you not
show us?”

He said, ‘You do not remain [in your belief.]’ They insisted on it and
said, ‘O Commander of the Faithful!’ Then he took the hands of nine
persons among them and took them out toward the houses of *Hajars* until
he overlooked a salt marsh. Then he spoke slowly and said to his hand,
‘Disclose what you have covered.’

Then every thing in the Heaven that has been described by Allah, was
before their eyes with its gladness and beauty. Then four of them came
back and said, ‘Magic! Magic!’ One of them remained [in his belief], as
Allah wills, and sat somewhere (in an assembly) and reported some of it.
So the people gathered around him and brought him to the Commander of
the Faithful.”[^1]

2. Al-Mufaddal ibn ‘Umar said, “Abu ‘Abd Allah (‘a) said to me, ‘On the
Resurrection Day four days hurry to Allah, the Mighty and Magnificent,
like the bride who hurries to her quarters of the tent, *al-Fitr,
al-’Adha, al-Jum‘ah* (Friday) *and Ghadir Khum. Ghadir Khum* is between
*al-Fitr* and *al-’Adha*. Friday is like the moon among the stars.

Allah puts the cherubim, the prophets of Allah who are apostles, the
chosen executors and the friends of Allah on *Ghadir Khum*. On that day,
the master of the angels is Gabriel (‘a), the master of the prophets is
Muhammad, the master of the executors is the Commander of the Faithful
and the masters of the friends of Allah are Salman, Abu Dharr, al-Miqdad
and ‘Ammar. These days bring them into heaven just as the shepherd
brings his sheep to the water and grassland.’ I said to him, ‘O my
master! Do you order me to fast on it?’

He answered, ‘Yes, By Allah. Yes, By Allah. Yes, By Allah. Verily it is
the day on which Allah accepted the repentance of Adam (‘a) and he
abstained on it to thank Allah. It is the day on which Allah, the
Exalted, saved Abraham (‘a) from the fire and he abstained on it to
thank Allah, the Exalted. It is the day on which Moses established Harun
(‘a) like a flag, and he abstained on it to thank Allah, the Exalted. It
is the day on which Jesus (‘a) revealed his executor Simon al-Safa and
he abstained on it to thank Allah, the Mighty and Magnificent.

It is the day on which the Apostle of Allah established ‘Ali like a flag
for the people and revealed his favor and his being the executor, and he
abstained on it to thank Allah, the Blessed and Exalted. It is the day
of fasting, vigil, feeding [the poor], and visiting with the brothers,
and in it there are the satisfaction of al-Rahman and the dislike of
Satan.’”[^2]

3. Ibn ‘Abbassaid, “When Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, sent the verse,

***‘…And fullfill My covenant, so I will fullfill your covenant.’ (2,
40)***

the Apostle of Allah said, ‘By Allah, Adam made a covenant with his
people concerning his son, Seth and went out from this world, but his
people did not fulfill it. Noah made a covenant with his people
concerning his executor, Sam and went out from this world, but his
people did not fulfill it. Abraham made a covenant with his people
concerning his executor, Isma‘il and went out from this world, but his
people did not fulfill it.

Moses made a covenant with his people concerning his executor, Yusha‘
ibn Nun and went out from this world, but his people did not fulfill it.
Jesus the son of Mary made a covenant with his people concerning his
executor Simon ibn Hamun al-Safa and was raised to heaven, but his
people did not fulfill it.

Also I will separate from you soon and will leave you. I have made a
covenant with my community concerning ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib, but they will
continue with the rites of the previous communities in opposing my
executor and disobeying him….’”[^3]

4. It is reported that Qays, the servant of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (‘a)
said, “Once when ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, was near the
mountain at Siffin, the time for the evening prayers came. So, he went
farther away and called for the prayers. When he finished the call to
prayer, a man appeared from near the mountain with grey hair and beard,
and a bright white face.

He said, ‘Peace be with you, O Commander of the Faithful, and mercy and
blessings from Allah! Welcome to the successor of the last of the
prophets, leader of the ones with bright, brilliant faces, magnanimous
and protected, excellent and one who has the reward of the truthful,
master of all the successors!’

So, the Commander of the Faithful said, ‘And peace be with you. How are
you?’

He replied, ‘I am well, waiting for the holy spirit. I do not know of
any name that is greater in the estimation of Allah, His Name is Mighty
and Magnificent, at the time of an ordeal than yours, nor of any who has
earned more rewards than you, nor of anyone who has an elevated place
higher than yours. Put up with all that your face, O my brother, until
you meet the beloved.

Verily, I have witnessed whatever happened to our companions in the past
at the hands of the children of Israel. They cut them apart with the saw
and carried them over the bier.’ And then pointing towards the people of
Syria, he said, ‘And if these poor, ugly faces knew what chastisement
and exemplary punishment awaited them for fighting against you, they
would withdraw.; And then pointing to the people of Iraq, he said, ‘And
if these bright faces knew that award awaited them for having obeyed
you, they would love to be cut by scissors. And peace and His mercy and
blessings be with you.’

Then he disappeared. At that time, Ammar ibn Yasir, ‘Abdul Haytham ibn
al-Tihan, Abu Ayyub al-Ansari, ‘Ubaydah ibn al-Samit, Khuzayma ibn
Thabit and Hashim al-Marqal, among a group of his followers, having
heard what the man had said, stood up and said, ‘O Commander of the
Faithful! Who was that man?’ The Commander of the Faithful said, ‘He is
Simon, the successor of Jesus (‘a). Allah sent him to me to give me
solace for this confrontation with His enemies.’ They said, ‘May our
parents be your ransom! By Allah! We will help you the way we helped the
Apostle of Allah (S), and none from the *Muhajirin* nor *Ansar* shall
desert you, except the unfortunate one.’ Then the Commander of the
Faithful said some kind words to them.”[^4]

5. Imam Baqir (‘a) said, “Verily, Allah sent Muhammad (S) to the genies
and the people, and after him He put twelve exectutors (*wasiy*). Some
of them have gone and some remain. Each executor put a way (*sunnah*)
into practice, and the executors after Muhammad (S) followed the way of
the executors of Jesus, who were also twelve, and the Commander of the
Faithful followed the way of the Messiah.”[^5]

6. Musa ibn Ja‘far narrated from his fathers, peace be with them, that
‘Ali (‘a) said to Salman, “Will you not inform us about the beginning of
your matter?” He said, “I am from Shiraz and I was a dear boy to my
father. I was with him in a cloister on one of their festival days. Then
one in it called, ‘I testify that there is no god but Allah, Jesus is
the Spirit of Allah and Muhammad is the beloved of Allah.’ Then the
loveliness of him entered into my flesh and blood.

My father said, ‘Why do you not prostrate for the rise of the sun?’ I
argued with him until he became silent. When I came back to my house I
saw a book hung below the ceiling. I said to my mother, ‘What is this
book?’ She said, ‘O Ruzbih! When we returned from our festival, we saw
this book that was hung. So do not approach that place. If not, your
father will kill you.’ I implored her until the darkness of night came
and my father and mother went to sleep.

Then I stood and took the book. Written in it was, ‘In the name of
Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful. This is a covenant from Allah to
Adam that He will create from his loins a prophet, who will be named
‘Muhammad.’ He will command noble virtue and prohibit the worship of
idols. O Ruzbih! Go to the executor of the executor of Jesus and be at
his service. He will guide you to your aim.’ Then I lost my
consciousness.

My parents understood and put me in a well and said, ‘Do not come back,
otherwise we will kill you.’ I said, ‘Do to me what you want. The love
of Muhammad will not go from my breast.’

I did not know Arabic, but Allah taught me on that day. They sent small
loaves of bread to me. I spent a long time in the well, and I raised my
hands to the sky and said, ‘O My Lord! You evoked the love of Muhammad
and his executor in me. By the right of his means, may You hasten my
emergence.’

Then one who wore white clothes came to me and said, ‘O Ruzbih! Stand
up.’ Then he took my hand and brought me to the cloister. I went up to
it. The monk said, ‘Are you Ruzbih?’ I answered, ‘Yes.’ I stayed near
him two years and served him. When he was in the throes of death, he
directed me to a monk in Antioch and gave me a tablet on which the
attributes of Muhammad were written.

When I came to the monk of Antioch and went up to his cloister, he said,
‘Are you Ruzbih?’ I answered, ‘Yes.’ He welcomed me and I served him for
two years, too. He informed me of the attributes of Muhammad and his
executor.

When he was in the throes of death, he said to me, ‘O Ruzbih! The
raising of Muhammad is near.’ After his death, I went out with a group
to Hijaz and served them. Once they killed a sheep with a blow, roasted
it, prepared wine and said to me, ‘Eat and drink.’ I refused. They
wanted to kill me. I said, ‘Do not kill me. I confess that I will be a
servant to you.’

Then they bought me to a Jew. He asked me about my story. I told him the
matter from the beginning to the end. He said, ‘I hate you and
Muhammad.’ and brought me out of his house. There was much sand near the
door of his house. He said, ‘If you do not transfer all of this sand
from here to there, I will kill you.’ I began to carry it during the
night.

When I became tired, although I had moved but a little of it, I would
say, ‘O My Lord! You evoked the love of Muhammad and his executor in me.
By the right of his means, give me rest from this.’ So Allah raised a
wind by which the sand moved from its place to the place that the Jew
had said. In the morning the Jew said to me, ‘You are a witch. I will
bring you out of this village for you cannot destroy us.’

He brought me out and sold me to a good woman. She loved me. She put me
in a garden for her and said, ‘Eat, grant and give alms from it.’ One
day when I was in the garden, I saw that seven groups were coming and a
cloud was shading them and went with them. I said, ‘Verily there is a
prophet among them.’”[^6]

[^1]: Al-Ikhtisas, 326

[^2]: Al-’Iqbal, 466

[^3]: Ma‘ani al-Akhbar, 373

[^4]: Amali, 1, 104-106, 5

[^5]: Kafi, 1, 532, 10

[^6]: Al-Khara’ij wa al-Jara’ih, 3, 1078, 1081


