Chapter 10 - the Birth
======================

At dawn, on the 15th Sha'ban 255 A.H., the rays of the illuminating
world shone with a powerful shaft of light into a human form which
became the source of existence for the universe.

Yes, finally, the Divine Promise was fulfilled and Imam al-Mehdi (a.s.)
was born in spite of the efforts of those who denied him. It is one of
history’s miracles that the Umayyids, ‘Abbisides and other opponents of
this Holy Imam attempted to extinguish this divine light but met with
complete failure.

The cruel and tyrannical caliphs of the Bard ‘Abbas had heard that the
Twelfth Imam of the Shi’ites would establish a just Government and would
rule over the east and west of the world, and would destroy the
foundations of injustice.

Therefore, to counter this event, they tortured and shed the blood of
the Shi’ites as much as they could. The conditions of the martyred
Shi’ites can be referred in the books on this subject

In the year 235 A. H., Mutawakkil the 'Abbasid caliph, ordered the
Tenth Imam Muhammad al-Hadi (a.s.) and his family to be shifted from
Medina to Samarra his seat of government so that he could keep a close
watch on the Imam of the Shi’ites.

Similarly, Mu’tamid, the ‘Abbasid caliph, the Pharaoh of the time, was
afraid of the son of Imam Hasan al-’Askari (a.s). He formed a group of
detectives and midwives who had the mission of frequently searching
through the houses of the ‘Alawiyyin and especially the house of Imam
Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), so that if a newly-born child were found, he
could be killed immediately. 18

The search to find and kill Imam al-Mehdi (as.) was intensified when
Imam Hasan al-‘Askari (a.s.) left this world for the eternal one. This
is because everyone knew that on that day the command of Divine
Leadership Imamate was to be entrusted to the Twelfth Imam, and the
universe would come under his authority.

Shaykh Sadiq, the eminent scholar of the Shi’ite world, writes in
Kamalud-din:

"When the holy body of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) was buried and the
people went away, the caliph and his comrades started their efforts to
search for his growing son and inspected the houses carefully."

Shaykh Mufid, a distinguished Shi’ite scholar, also wrote in Irshad:

"When Imam Hasan al-’Askari (as.) passed away, the caliph of that time,
pursued his son because the Shi’ite Imamiyyah’s belief was famous and
was spread about that the Shi’ites were awaiting His Eminence. "

Mu’ta’id, one of the tyrant Abassid caliphs who ruled from 279 to 289
A. H., decided all at once to destroy the entire family of al-‘Askari
when he heard that more than twenty years had passed since the birth of
the son of Imam Hasan al-’Askari (a.s.) and that he was still living in
spite of the attempts of the pre-ceding caliph to kill him.

One of Mu’tadid’s officers said: Mu'tadid has ordered me and two other
persons, each of us to mount a horse and to proceed to Samarra’ in full
speed without even stopping for prayer. He gave us the address of (Imam)
al-’Askari and instructed us to enter his house without his permission
and to bring him the head of whoever we find there."

As a matter of fact, they were unaware that the same power which had
protected the Imam from the former caliphs would give him protection
from his evil, because:

Allah disdains (nothing) save that He shall perfect His light, however
much the disbeliveers are averse. (Qur'an) (9:32)

Indeed what an immature thought and foolish act it was! If the Divine
Will bears on some matter, can a person revolt against it and combat it?
Is it possible that definite Divine Promises may not be compiled with?
Or is it possible that the reins of oppressive impostors who fight
against the Divine decree will not cut?

Is it not more amazing that Peerless, Al-mighty Allah has shown His
power many times before, so that after that all men should know that if’
He wishes to give His chosen servant government and sovereignty and to
destroy in-fidelity and irreligiousness through him, then there is no
one who can disrupt His rule?

Fortunately, this sensational story is mentioned in the Holy Qur’an.
Pharaoh, the great emperor of Egypt, who had great power and pride,
claimed the divinity for himself. He determined to kill all the youths
and boy children of Bani Isra’il as a result of what he had heard about
a son being born who would destroy his empire and divinity.

He shed the blood of innocents, and banished many persons to unknown
regions; but see how Almighty Allah restored His Prophet and how the
Divine Will worked to protect the life of Musa (Moses - a.s.) and
destroy Pharaoh:

And We revealed to the mother of Musa saying, "Give him suck; and if
you fear for him, launch him on the river; and fear not, nor grieve; for
We will return him to you and make him one of the Messengers." And took
him up Pharaoh’s people, that he might be to them an enemy and a (cause
of their) grief, (for) verily Pharaoh and Haman and their hosts were
sinners. - So We did restore him to his mother that her age might be
refreshed and that she might not grieve, and that she might know that
the promise of Allah is (always) true, but most of them know not
(28:7-13)

Yes, Allah will protect His Proof (Hujjah) and will fulfil His promises
and glad tidings be-cause His decision is based on its execution,
al-though most people do not know it.

Would Allah wish to save the life of Prophet Musa (as.), who was only a
messenger to a certain nation and tribe, and yield the Imam of the Age
Imam-e-Zaman) into the hands of Mu’tamid and Mu’tadid?

Would Allah protect the life of Musa (a.s.) while he was in the middle
of the roaring waves of a river, and give no security to the Imam of the
Age who was in the house of his father, Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.)?

Would the Sustaining Allah of the Prophet Ibrahim (Abraham - a.s.)
(Whose story is mentioned in the Qur’an)23 protect Ibrahim (a.s.) in the
middle of the flaming fire, but allow the Last Pearl of the Prophet’s
progeny to be a victim of the lust and anger of the Abassid caliphs?
Really, how do false thinkers and feeble-minded people judge?

At dawn, on the middle day of Sha'ban in the year 255 A.H. Imam Hasan
al-’Askari (a.s) beheld the heavenly, shinning face of his son who was
to fulfil all Divine promises and glad tidings. Not more than three days
had passed after his birth when the Eleventh Imam took the holy child to
his companions and told them:
"After me this will be your master of authority and my successor, and
he is the "Support’ (al-Qa’im) for whose appearance all people will
wait; when the earth is full of injustice and tyranny, he will fill it
with peace and justice."

At the time of his son’s birth, the Eleventh Imam told some of his
companion:

"Oppressors were plotting to kill me so that my son would not be born,
but now see how great is the power of the All-powerful."

Imam Hasan al-’Askari (a.s.), ordered ten thousand pounds (10,000 lbs.)
of bread and meat to be distributed among the Bani Hashim to mark the
happy and auspicious birthday. ‘Uthmin ibn Sa'id was charged with this
important work which he undertook in the best way.26

From the very beginning, Imam Hasan al-’Askari (as.) hide his son from
stangers.

Read carefully these words of Shaykh Mufid, part of which was quoted
above.

"Imam Hasan al-’Askari (a.s.) Prepared a true Government for his
fruitful son. He kept secret the birth of his son and other related
matters, because His Eminence was living in a difficult time when the
caliphs were intensively searching for his son and were keeping a close
eye on the affairs of Imam al-’Askari. This is because the Shi’ite
Imamiyyah belief about the Imam al-Mehdi (a.s.) had become so current
that they were waiting for His Eminence. Hence, Imam Hasan al-’Askari
(a.s) did not show his son, and, therefore, the enemies could not
recognise Imam al-Mehdi (a.s.) after the demise of His Eminence (father)
"

Although the affairs of Imam al-Mehdi (a.s.) were unknown to his
enemies and opponents, the sincere Shi’ites gathered the news of this
important event.

Some of them were informed by Imam al-’Askari (a.s.) through a letter.
One of the sincere Shi’ites, Ahmad ibn Ishaq, received a letter from the
Imam written in his own hand-writing, saying:

"A son is born to me. Therefore, keep secret the news of it from people
and inform only his near relatives and particular friends."
Some of the Shi’ites used to pay private visits to Imam al-’Askari
(a.s.) who would take them into the presence of the Twelfth Imam
al-Mehdi (a.s.) who would guide them. Abu ‘Umari and Ahwazi reported:

"Abu Muhammad Imam Hasan al-’Askari (a.s.) showed me his son (the
Twelfth Imam) and told me, ‘This is your Master.’ "

Some other Shi’ites used to visit Imam al-’Askari (a.s.) in a group,
and if the Imam trusted in them that they would faithfully keep their
visit secret, he would show them his beloved son.

Mu’awiyah ibn Hakim, Muhammad ibn Ayyun and Muhammad ibn ‘Uthman 'Umari
have narrated that:

"We were forty persons who gathered at the house of Imam Hasan, then
His Eminence showed us his son and said to us, ‘This is your Imam and my
successor. You should obey him after me and should not oppose him lest
you perish.’ "

Anyhow, from the time of the birth of the Twelfth "moon" till his
Imamate, the Shi’ites used to go to the Eleventh Imam and congratulate
him.

Hasan ibn Hasan al-Alawi said:

"I went to see Imam Hasan (al-’Askari) in Samarra, and congratulated
him on the birth of his son."

And ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas al-’Alawi also said:

"I visited Imam al-’Askari (a.s.) in Sama-rra and congratulate him on
the birth of his son. "

Yes, in this manner was the Imam of the Age (Imam-e-Zaman) born and
kept hidden from the reach of strangers. On some occasions only were
virtuous Shi’ites allowed to see him, until the year 260 A.H., when the
Eleventh Imam expired, and by Divine decree the office of Divine
Leadership (Imamate) was vested in the Master of the Authority (Sihibu
'l-Amr).


