Chapter 11 - the Minor Occultation
==================================

When Imam Hasan al-’Askari (a.s) died, the office of Divine Leadership
(Imamate) was transferred to the Last Luminous Pearl of the Household of
the Holy Prophet, Imam al-Mehdi (a.s). Although His Eminence did not
appear amongst the people, some persons in whom he had trust and
confidence were allowed to visit him and present him the problems and
questions of the Shi’ites. And they communicated to the people the
guidance and commands of the Divine Luminous Light.

From the point of view faith, confidence and virtue, these were
distinguished persons among the Muslims who were mediators between the
Imam and the people. And in due time they conveyed the guidance of His
Eminence to the people.

By studying the degree of the character and perception of the belief
and piety of these individuals, not only does the greatness of their
personalities become clear to us, but we become more familiar with the
Imam of the Age, be-cause, among the sayings of these distinguished,
trustworthy and reliable companions of the Holy Imams, one finds the
signs of the greatness of His Eminence (Imam al-Mehdi - a.s.).

Among the companions of Imam-e Zaman, four became his most famous and
confidential deputies who acted as mediators between the Imam and the
people, and they are known as the Nawwib al-arbi‘ah (the four
deputies).

In order to know more about the dignity and greatness of their
positions, we give below a brief description of each one of them:

1) ‘Uthman ibn Sa’id ‘Umari: This honourable figure was not only a
deputy (nasib) of Imam-e Zaman but he was also a representative (wakil)
of Imam Hasan al-’Askari (a.s.) and Imam ‘All an-Naqi (a.s.) - He
settled and organised many affairs of the Shi’ites. The Tenth Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) said to his followers regarding him:

"This Abu Umari is a reliable and trust-worthy person. Whatever he says
to you he says so on my behalf, and whatever he does he does on my
behalf."

This representation continued till 254 A.H. when Imam al-Hadi (a.s.)
died. Then, the Eleventh Imam is reported to have praised the character
of Abu ‘Umari as having his high esteem in his address to his Shi’ites,
saying:

"This Abu ‘Umari is a reliable and trust-worthy person. He had the
confidence of the preceding Imam, and has also my confidence in my
lifetime and after my death. Whatever he says to you he says so on my
behalf, and what ever he does he does on my behalf."

Likewise, with this certificate of admiration, he became the deputy
(Ni’ibu ‘l-Imam) of the Twelfth Imam after the demise of Imam Hasan
al-’Askari (a.s.).

On the death of Abu ‘Umari, the Lord of the Age (Sahibu-z-Zaman)
himself sent condolences to his son, Muhammad ibn ‘Uthman saying:

"Verily, we'd belong to Allah and verily to Him shall we return. We
submit to His command and are pleased with His decree. Your father has
lived in good fortune and has died with dignity. May Allah’s mercy be
upon him, he has joined his friends and masters. He was always
endeavouring to search for whatever would bring him near to Allah and
His friends. May Allah make strengthen his countenance."

2) Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn ‘Uthman:

This man was the second special deputy of Imam-e Zaman. He was also a
deputy of the Eleventh Imam about whom the latter said:

"The greatness of his dignity and the exaltation of his status among
the Shi’ites is so famous that these is no need to explain or dispute
it."

Regarding him and his father, ‘Uthman ibn Sa’id, Imam Hasan al-’Askari
(a-s.) said to one of his companions:

"Umar and his son are both trustworthy. Whatever they do they do on my
behalf, and whatever they say to you, they say so on my behalf.
Therefore, listen to their words and obey them, because both of them are
reliable and trustworthy to us."

And Imam-e- Zaman himself said about him:

"He is my confident, and his letter is of the same status as mine."

3) Abul-Qasim Husayn ibn Ruh Nawbakhti: Abi Ja’far Muhammad ibn
‘Uthman, the third deputy of Imam-e -Zaman, said about him:

This Husayn ibn Ruh ibn Abu Bakr Nawbakhti is my successor. He is a
reliable and trust-worthy envoy and deputy between you and the
Sahibul-Amr (the Master of the Authority) Therefore, in your affairs and
important tasks refer to him and trust him. I was given this task; and I
have announced it." Shaykh Tuisi (may Allah's mercy be upon him) said
about him:

"Abu-l-Qasim Husayn ibn Rim was regarded by his friends and opponents
as the most learned man among the people. "

The integrity of Husayn ibn Ruhs deputy-ship was acknowledged by his
opponents too. Shalmaghani who was one of the pseudo claimants to the
deputyship, had to confess his falsity when Imam-e Zaman ordered Husayn
ibn Ruh to expose him. He (Shalmaghani) said:

"It is not right between me and Allah to say anything in the affair of
Husayn ibn Ruh other than the truth. Although his crime towards me is a
big one, yet this man was appointed by Imam-e Zaman for the task. The
Shi’ites should not turn away from him."

4) Abu‘l-Hasan Ali ibn Muhammad: This honourable figure was the last
special deputy. His death coincided with the 15th of Sha’ban 329 A.H.
Husayn ibn Ruh introduced him as the deputy of the Imam. The last letter
of Imam-e Zaman (the Lord of the Age) to the four special deputies was
addressed to this honourable man. In this order the Imam announced the
death of ‘All ibn Muhammad and the end of the deputation:

"In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. You are going to
die in six days, may Allah grant patience to your brothers in faith on
your departure. So, be prepared, but appoint no one in your place,
because from the day of your death the period of my major occultation
(ghaybatu‘l-kubra) will begin. Henceforth-, no one will see me, unless
and until Allah makes me appear. My reappearance will take place after a
very long time when people will have grown tired of waiting and those
who are weak in their faith will say: ‘What! Is he still alive?’ When
men will become cruel and inconsiderate, and the world will be full of
injustice and violence. Very soon some men will claim to have seen me.
Beware! Anyone who makes such a claim before the coming out of Sufyani
and the sound from heaven announcing my reappearance, is a liar and an
impostor. There is no might nor strength except in Allah, the
Magnificent. "

As can be seen from this, it is the last order, in which the door of
special deputation is closed by the death of ‘All ibn Muhammad; hence,
any-one who claims to be a mediator, or claims that the Imam can be
seen, is a liar. In the period of the major occultation no-one has made
the claim that he has been in the presence of the Holy Imam-e-Zaman.

The. people would not accept the deputation of the four special
deputies unless they had been shown the miracles of the Sahibu 'l Amr to
verify their truthfulness and accuracy, although they acknowledged them
as reliable and trustworthy and had not the smallest doubt in their
piety, faith and knowledge.

The special deputies presented to Imam-e-Zaman the problems and
questions of the Shi’ite scholars, and he answered the ones that were
necessary in letter form and delivered them through the same deputies.

In these letters, the most important and difficult problems on
different subjects of Shi’ite beliefs were cleared up.

One of these problems was a question as to what would be the
responsibility of the Shi’ites who would be faced with new events during
the period of occultation, and what should they do to face them?

In the letter issued by Imam-e-Zaman to the celebrated and
distinguished Shi’ite Is'haq ibn Ya'qub he recounted duties, methods and
guidance for the Shi’ites in the period of occultation. This direction
was carried out for many centuries, and it is one of the proofs of the
comprehensiveness and eternity of Islamic rule.

In one of the letters to Imam-e-Zaman which he sent through the second
special deputy of the Imam, Is’haq ibn Ya’qub asked him some different
questions, among which was a question which is the subject of our
discussion.

The Imam said that in those affairs one must refer to those who really
understands their (Imams’) sayings and have truly related them:

"But as for the problems which will occur in the future, you should
refer to the narrators of our traditions for their verdicts as they are
my proofs to you, and I am Allah’s Proof (Hujjatullah) to them."

Other letters of His Eminence (Imam al -Mehdi [a.s.]) were issued
during the minor occultation ghabatu'‘s-sughra) each one of them solved
difficulties and gave instruction in the boundless sea of wisdom. All
these letters were conveyed through the Holy Imam ‘s special deputy to
the desirous seekers.

Yes, the four deputies, who were at the highest level of faith and
confidence for many years, were the blessed mediators between the Imam
and the people till in the year 329 A. H. when this deputation was
closed, and on the basis of the Divine Will the major occultation of
Imam-e Zaman commenced This was the very occultation which was
prophesied a long time previously by the Holy Prophet and the Shi’ites
Imam; and Muslims keep patient in this period of test, till by the order
of Almighty Allah, the Awaited Imam will appear and the Divine Aim will
reach its fulfilment.


