Chapter 1 - Introduction
========================

Not only is al-Mehdi (the Guided One) a materialisation of an Islamic
belief of a spiritual nature, but a model to a particular goal which
humanity has been striving to achieve, as well as a form to a natural
inspiration, through which people came to realise in spite of their
different faith and means of access to the unseen that there is an
appointed day on earth, when the Divine mess-ages will be fulfilled in
all their great significance and final aim, when the exhausting march
which humanity took in the course of history will lead to stability and
security, after a long struggle. Ultimate defeat of oppression while on
the summit of its glory brings great hope before every persecuted
individual and every oppressed nation, in tipping the balance and
rebuilding the world.

If the idea of al-Mehdi is older and wider than Islam, the detailed
outlines, which the latter has fixed for it, have proved more
satisfactory to all those ambitions that have been seeking its
realisation since the dawn of history as well as a more generous gift
and a stronger prediction for the feel-ings of those who have been
persecuted and op-pressed in the course of history. This is because
Islam has turned the idea from the unseen into reality, and from an
aspiration for a saviour the world would produce in the distant and
unknown future into the conviction that he actually exists looking
forward with other people to that day and the right circumstances that
would make it possible for him to assume his great role.

Thus, al-Mehdi (peace be upon him) is no longer an idea waiting to be
materialised nor a prophecy that needs to be substantiated, but a living
reality and a particular person, living among us in flesh and blood, who
is sharing our hopes, suffering, sorrows and joys, actually witnessing
all the sufferings, sadness and transgression that exist on the surface
of the earth, who is affected with all this from near or far, who is
waiting for the appropriate moment when he can stretch his hands to
every oppressed and needy person and eradicate the tyrants.

However, it has been decreed that this expected leader is not to reveal
anything concerning his life or person to other people, although he is
living amongst them, waiting for the appointed moment.

It is obvious that thinking in terms of these Islamic indications
narrows the gap of the unseen between the oppressed people and the
expected saviour and reduces the psychological distance between him and
them, no matter how long the expectation may last.

So, when we are supposed, as far as we are concerned, to consider the
idea of al-Mehdi as actually designating a particular living person who
is observing events like we are, it is to inspire us with the fact that
the idea of the unconditional protest against all sorts of transgression
and tyranny, which al-Mehdi stands for, has already materialised in the
expected dissident leader who will emerge, paying no homage to the
transgressors, as it has been mentioned in the hadith (tradition), and
that by believing in him we are in reality believing in this unyielding
and living protest and participating in it.

Indeed lots of hadith (traditions) are constantly urging those who
believe in al-Mehdi to expect release from suffering and be prepared for
his coming, which is a consolidation of that spiritual bond and
emotional tie between them and the dissident leader and every value he
stands for both of which could not have existed had he not actually
materialised as a contemporary living person.

Thus we come to realise that this materialisation has given a new
impetus to the idea and made it a source of strength and generosity of a
higher degree in terms of what any dissident individual finds of comfort
consolation and relief from the pains that he has to suffer under
tyranny and deprivation, when he comes to feel that his Imam and leader
shares them with him, since the latter is a contemporary person and not
an idea to be realised in the future.

However, the above mentioned materialisation has led many people, who
found it hard to believe or assume, to take negative attitudes even
regarding the idea of al-Mehdi.

Since they all wonder if the idea of al-Mehdi actually designates a
living person who has co-existed with all these consecutive generations
for expectation may last.

So, when we are supposed, as far as we are concerned, to consider the
idea of al-Mehdi as actually designating a particular living person who
is observing events like we are, it is to inspire us with the fact that
the idea of the unconditional protest against all sorts of transgression
and tyranny, which al-Mehdi stands for, has already materialised in the
expected dissident leader who will emerge, paying no homage to the
transgressors, as it has been mentioned in the hadith (tradition), and
that by believing in him we are in reality believing in this unyielding
and living protest and participating in it -

Indeed lots of ahadith (traditions) are constantly urging those who
believe in al-Mehdi to expect release from suffering and be prepared for
his coming, which is a consolidation of that spiritual bond and
emotional tie between them and the dissident leader and every value he
stands for both of which could not have existed had he not actually
materialised as a contemporary living person.

Thus we come to realise that this materialisation has given a new
impetus to the idea and made it a source of strength and generosity of a
higher degree in terms of what any dissident individual finds of comfort
consolation and relief from the pains that he has to suffer under
tyranny and deprivation, when he comes to feel that his Imam and leader
shares them with him, since the latter is a contemporary person and not
an idea to be realised in the future.

However, the above mentioned materialisation has led many people, who
found it hard to believe or assume, to take negative attitudes even
regarding the idea of al-Mehdi.

Since they all wonder if the idea of al-Mehdi actually designates a
living person who has co-existed with all these consecutive generations
for more than ten centuries, who will continue to do so until the time
comes for him to emerge on the surface, how can such a human being live
all this long and yet be immune from the laws of nature which compel any
person to pass by the phase of old age and decrepitude and from there to
his death - Is not such a matter impossible from an existential point of
view?

Also, why should Allah show all this desire for this particular
person - for whom the laws of nature would be obstructed - and
endeavours to prolong his life and preserve him for the appointed day;
has humanity become barren from yielding capable leaders? Why should not
that day come when a leader will be born at its dawn and grow up like
anyone else and gradually assume his role until the earth be filled with
justice after having been filled with injustice and transgression?

They also wonder if al-Mehdi is the name of a particular person, who is
the son of the eleventh Imam of the family of the Prophet (Ahlul-Bayt -
peace and blessing of Allah be upon them), born in the year 256 A.H.
whose father died in the year 260 A.H. - This means that he was very
young when his father died, not exceeding the age of five, which is too
early for him to have completed his religious and intellectual education
at the hands of his father. Therefore how and by what means could he
personally be prepared to assume that great role from religious,
intellectual and scientific angles.

Moreover, if the leader is ready why should he wait all these hundreds
of years? Is not what the world has witnessed of afflictions and social
disasters enough to justify his appearance on its surface for the
establishing of justice on earth?

They also wonder how can we believe in his existence even if we were to
assume that this could be possible? Can anybody admit the validity of a
hypothesis of this kind when it is not actually imported by any
conclusive legal or scientific evidence? Should some narratives
(ahadith) related the Prophet (blessing and peace of Allah be upon him
and his progeny), of which we doubt the authenticity be enough for us to
approve such a hypothesis?

As far as the role that this individual is going o play on the
appointed day is concerned they wonder how a single person can assume
this great Decisive role in the world, while we know that However great
an individual is, he cannot create destroy nor lead it into a new phase;
whereas the deeds of any historical movement ripen under certain
objective circumstances and their coming together; and the sublimity of
the individual is the actor which selects him to shape these objective
circumstances and provide the required solutions?

They also wonder how we can imagine what his individual would achieve
of enormous change and decisive victory for justice and its message
against the realities of injustice, oppression and tyranny m spite of
what they have of power and influence and what they possess of means of
destruction as well as what they have achieved of high standards in
scientific, political, social and military capabilities.

Questions in this connection recur often in one form or another,
however the true motives behind them are not only intellectual, since
they have also a psychological source expressed in terms of the fear
that dominates the world and the meagreness of all opportunity of change
from the roots. Therefore, doubts deepen and questions increase, the
more one becomes aware of the harsh reality that has prevailed in the
world in the course of time - Thus failure, meagreness and the weakness
that the human being is subject to lead him to feel under a
psychological pressure whenever he attempts to imagine the tremendous
change of the world which would relieve it of its contradictions and
historical oppression and would provide it with a new structure based on
justice and truth. This pressure makes the individual doubt the whole
concept of change and leads him to refuse it for one reason or
another.

As far as we are concerned, we are going to deal with all these
questions in sequence answering each one briefly due to the limits
provided by these pages.


