Chapter 2 - How Was This Long Life Granted To Al-mehdi?
=======================================================

In other words, is it possible for a man to live for many centuries, as
is the case with the Expected Leader, for the change of the world, whose
age must be actually one thousand one hundred and forty years, or
fourteen times the average age of an ordinary person who would pass
through the phases of life from childhood to old age normally.

The word possibility here has one of the three following meanings,
namely: Practical possibility, scientific possibility and philosophical
or logical possibility.

I mean by practical possibility that a task is feasible in a manner
that enables me, you or a third person to perform it, such as a journey
across the ocean, reaching the depth of the sea or going to the moon,
all of which are practically possible since they have actually been
performed by people in one way or another.

By scientific possibility I mean that there are some tasks that neither
I nor you nor a third per-son can practically perform with the means
that are accessible to present civilisation. However there is nothing in
the alterable trends of science which can indicate a justification for
the rejection of the possibility of these tasks and their occurrence
conforming to certain special circumstances and means. For example,
there is nothing in science that could deny the possibility of
travelling to Venus, because all its existing trends indicate the
possibility of such a task, although that is still not possible for me
or you since the difference between going to the moon and travelling to
Venus is only one of degree. The latter representing a stage of
overcoming some relative difficulties stemming from the fact that the
distance is longer. From this we deduce that it is scientifically
possible to travel to Venus even if it is still not feasible from a
practical angle.

Contrary to that is the idea of travelling to the sun in distant space
since it is scientifically impossible, meaning that science would never
entertain the possibility of this task, for one can-not assume
scientifically or empirically the possibility of inventing that
preventive armour that could protect the body against the heat of the
sun which is like an enormous kiln constantly burning with a degree
impossible to imagine.

By logical or philosophical possibility I mean that there is nothing in
the intellect, conforming to what it knows of previous laws - (preceding
the experiment) that could justify the rejection of a task nor decide
that it could not occur.

Say, for example, the grouping of three oranges into two equal parts,
this is logically impossible, since the intellect knows - before
carrying out such an experiment - that three is an odd number, thus it
is impossible to divide it into two equal parts, first it would turn
into an even number, which would be a contradiction, which is impossible
in logic.

But if a man were to be exposed to fire, or if he were to go to the sun
without burning, that would not be impossible from a logical point of
view, since there is no contradiction in the assumption that heat does
not penetrate into a body of Lower temperature from one of higher
temperature. That would only run contrary to the experiment which proved
that heat actually penetrates into a body of lower temperature from one
of higher temperature until both bodies get an equal temperature.

Therefore, we come to realise that logical possibility has a wider
scope than scientific possibility and that the latter is wider than
practical possibility.

There is no doubt about the logical possibility of the prolongation of
human life for some thousands of years, because that is not impossible
from an abstract intellectual point of view, also there is no
contradiction in an assumption of this sort, since life as it is
understood does not fathom sudden death and no one can dispute this
fact.

Also, there is no doubt or controversy that this prolonged life is not
possible from the practical aspect, as is the case in going down to the
depths of the ocean or ascending to the moon. That is because science
with what it owns of mod-em means and instruments, that were made
avail-able by concomitant human experiments, cannot prolong human life
for hundreds of years, this is why we find that even those among people
who are more eager about life and more able to utilise scientific
possibilities can only live to the extent of what is usual.

As far as scientific possibility is concerned, there is nothing in
science, nowadays which could justify the denial of that fact from a
theoretical point of view. This inquiry is in reality related to the
nature of the physiological interpretation of the phenomenon of old-age
and decrepitude among people. Does this phenomenon indicate a natural
law that compels the tissues of the human body and its cells to harden
gradually and become less efficient in the performance of their task
once they have reached the summit of theft growth, until they die at a
particular moment, even if we were to isolate them from the influence of
some external failure? Or is this hardening of the bodily tissues and
cells and the lack of efficiency in the performance of their
physiological tasks a result of their struggle against certain external
factors, such as microbes or poison that penetrate the body from an
excess in food or from the heavy work that the person might perform or
any other factor.

Now this is the question that science has to find an answer to, yet
many answers present them-selves on a scientific level in this
respect.

If we are to consider the scientific point of view that tends to
interpret old-age and the weakness that goes with it, as a result of
reactions against some external factors, it means that it is
theoretically possible, once we have isolated the tissues that compose
the body from these influences, to prolong life to the extent of
surpassing the phenomenon of old-age and even overcoming it.

On the other hand, if we consider the other point of view which sees
old-age as a natural process with regards to the living tissues and
cells, it will mean that they hear within themselves the seed of their
own ultimate death, once the phase of old-age has been completed.

I say: If we take this point of view into consideration it should not
mean that there is no flexibility in this natural law, rather the
assumption of its existence shows that it is in fact flexible, since we
find in our everyday life, in addition to what has been found by
scientists through the experiments that they carry out in their
laboratories, that old-age as a physiological phenomenon has no fixed
time, since a man can be very old and yet possess tender limbs, with no
trace of old-age appearing on him as has been mentioned by some doctors.
Moreover some scientists take advantage of this flexibility and prolong
the life of some animals by a hundred times their natural age, by
creating certain circumstances and factors that delay the process of
old-age.

Thus it has been proved scientifically that this process can be
postponed, by creating specific circumstances and factors, even if this
experiment has not been carried out by science on a particular
complicated creature such as the human being, owing to the difference in
the difficulty of carrying it out on the human being and other
organisms.

This means that, from a theoretical point of view, science, with all
its alterable orientations, has never had any objection to the
prolongation of human life, whether old-age has been interpreted as the
product of a struggle and close con-tact with some external influences,
or as a result of a natural process of the cells and tissues that leads
them towards their death.

Thus we deduce that the prolongation of human life and its survival
over many centuries is possible logically as well as scientifically but
it is still impossible from a practical angle, and that nevertheless
scientific progress has a long way to go before realising this
possibility.

In light of what has been discussed we shall deal with the age of
al-Mehdi (peace be upon him) and what has been surrounding it of wonder
and surprise.

Thus we notice that since the possibility of this prolonged life has
been confirmed both logically and scientifically, science is in the
process of gradually transforming the theoretical possibility into a
practical one. There is no room left for wonder except the remoteness of
the probability that al-Mehdi might have preceded science in this
transformation, before that the latter could have, in its evolutionary
course, reached the standard of actual capacity for such a
transformation, which would make him equal to that person who had
pre-ceded science in discovering the cure for cancer.

The question now is How could Islam - which determined the age of the
Expected Leader - have preceded science in the field of this
transformation?

The answer is that this is not the only field in which Islam preceded
science. Has the Islamic shari‘ah (revealed law) as a whole not come
before science and the evolution of human thought by many centuries? Did
it not promulgate certain symbols that submitted plans to be put into
practice, which man could achieve only after hundreds of years of his
independent activity? Did it not formulate certain regulations perfect
in wisdom, the secrets of which were realised by man only after a
certain length of time? Did the Divine message not reveal mysteries
about the universe, that could never have occurred to people’s minds,
which science came later to confirm and support?

So, if we are convinced by these facts why then should we regard as too
much that the sender of this message - the Exalted - anticipates science
in determining the age of al-Mehdi?

Here I mentioned only those aspects of precedence that we can notice in
a direct manner, we can also include the aspects of precedence mentioned
in the Divine message, for example, when it informs us about the night
journey which the Prophet undertook from al-Haram Mosque to al-Aqsa
Mosque. If we are to understand this journey within the frame of natural
laws, we will find that it shows that these laws were utilised in a way
that science could achieve only after hundreds of years.

Therefore, the same Divine knowledge which enabled the Messenger (peace
and blessing of Allah be upon him and his progeny) to undertake this
fast motion before science could achieve it, has also enabled his
designated successors to have a prolonged life before science could
realise such a project.

Certainly, this prolonged age that Allah, the Exalted, has bestowed on
the Expected Saviour may seem rather strange, if it is considered within
the limits of the everyday in people’s lives and what has been achieved
by the experiments of scientists. But is the decisive and transformative
role which has been prepared for this Saviour not strange within the
limits of the ordinary in people’s lives and what they have experienced
of historical evolution? Has he not been entrusted with the task of
changing the world and rebuilding its civilisation on the basis of
justice and truth? Why should we disapprove if the preparation of this
great role is characterised by strange and unusual aspects, such as the
prolongation of the Expected Leader’s age?

For this remoteness of those aspects and their unusual aspects, however
great they are, cannot surpass the remoteness of the great role that has
to be achieved on the appointed day? Therefore, if we approve the
validity of that unique role from a historical angle in spite of the
fact that there has never been in the history of humanity a role similar
to it, why should not we also approve that pro-longed age which is still
unique in our ordinary life?

I wonder if it is a coincidence that only two individuals should carry
out the task of emptying human civilisation of its corrupt elements and
re-building it, which means that they must have been of an excessive age
many times superior to our the applicability of a natural law under a
certain circumstances, in order to preserve the life of a particular
individual whose role is to cherish Divine message.

Yet this is not the only miracle of its kind, nor is it remote from a
Muslim’s faith, which derives from the Qur’an and the Sunnah. More over
the process of old-age is no more rigid than is the process of the
passage of heat from a body of’ higher temperature to another of lower
temperature until both of them become equal. This had occurred in the
case of Ibrahim (peace be upon him) when the only way to preserve his
life was by hindering that process, when it was said to the fire in
which he was thrown:

We said, "O fire be cool on Ibrahim and keep him safe." (Qur'an,
21:69)

So, he emerged from it safe and unharmed. There are also other cases
where natural laws were hindered to protect some of the prophets or
Proofs of Allah on earth. When the sea was split for Musa (Moses), when
the Romans were misled in thinking they had caught ‘Isa (Jesus) or when
Muhammad (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him and his progeny) left
his house while it was surrounded by the troops of Quraysh who were
waiting for hours to attack him but Allah, the Exalted, hid him from
their eyes while he was walking in their midst. All of these cases show
a hindrance of the laws of nature to protect an individual, whom the
Divine wisdom wished to preserve. Therefore, why not include here the
process of old age and decrepitude?

From this we can deduce a general notion, which is that whenever the
preservation of the Prophet’s life (the Proof of Allah on earth) depends
on the hindrance of a natural law, and the prolongation of his life
comes to be necessary for the performance of his task, Divine care then
intervenes by delaying the process so that the task of that individual
can be accomplished., On the other hand, once the Divine mission of that
individual has been fulfilled he either dies naturally or as a martyr
depending on what is determined by natural laws.

Thus we find ourselves confronted with the present question in
connection with this general notion: How can the process be obstructed?
How can the necessary correlation that exists between natural phenomena,
be sundered? Does it not contradict science, which discovered the
existence of that natural law or process and defined that necessary
correlation on experimental and deductive bases?

The answer is that science has already solved the problem by giving up
the idea of necessity as far as natural laws are concerned. To clarify
this we can say that science discovers natural laws through systematic
observations and experiments. For example, when the occurrence of a
natural phenomenon is followed another one, we deduce from this a
natural law which is: that whenever the first phenomenon comes into
existence it is automatically followed by another phenomenon.

However, science does not propose a necessary correlation between the
two phenomena stemming from their nature, since necessity is an
invisible condition that experimentation and the instruments of
scientific and inductive inquiry cannot demonstrate. Therefore, the
logic of mod-em science emphasises that natural law as it is defined by
science does not indicate a necessary correlation, but an uninterrupted
connection, between two phenomena. But when the miracle occurs and
separates one from the other, it does not mean that their correlation
was sundered.

The truth of the matter is that the miracle, in its religious sense,
has become, in the light of modern scientific logic, more understandable
than before, under the classical view of causal correlation. This old
view assumed that every two phenomena, in which one is followed
automatically by the other, must have a necessary correlation, which
means that it is impossible to separate one from the other. However,
this correlation has been transformed thanks to modern scientific logic
into a law of correlation or of consecutive succession between two
phenomena without the hypothesis of invisible necessity.

Thereby the miracle becomes an exceptional condition with regard to
this connective succession without running against a necessity or
leading to impossibility.

So, in the light of the logical foundation of induction we agree with
the modern point of view which says that induction does not demonstrate
the existence of a necessary correlation between two phenomena. We find
that it shows that there is a common interpretation for the consecutive
connection between the two - Since this common interpretation can be
formed on the basis of the assumption of subjective necessity, it can
also be formed on the assumption of a wisdom that made the Creator of
the universe to continuously combine some particular phenomena with
others. The same wisdom sometimes calls for exception; thus a miracle
occurs.


