Chapter 4 - How Was the Preparation of the Expected Leader Achieved?
====================================================================

Now we have reached the third question which is: How could the
preparation of the expected Leader be achieved, while we know that he
only remained five years with his father, al- Imam al-’Askari - which is
a period of childhood not sufficient for the maturity of his
personality. Therefore, under what circumstances has this achievement
taken place?

The answer is: That al-Mahdi (peace be upon him) was appointed as a
successor to his father, for the leadership of the Muslims, which means
that he was an Imam in the fullest intellectual and spiritual sense of
the word in a very early age of his noble life.

Moreover, the early Imamate (leadership) is a previous phenomenon in
the case of his fore-fathers (peace be upon them all), for example,
al-Imam Muhammad son of ‘Ali al-Jawad (peace be upon him). We call it a
phenomenon because it has given in the case of al-Mahdi ‘s forefathers
(peace be upon them), a perceptible and a practical meaning, which the
Muslims have lived and been aware of, in all their experiences with the
Imams, in one way or another. Therefore, we cannot claim the proof of a
clearer and wider phenomenon than the experience of a whole community.
So, we can clarify the issue in the following points:

1) The leadership of the Imams of Ahlul- bait (descendants of the
Prophet) has never been one of the centres of influence and power that
are transmitted through inheritance, from father to son, with the full
support of the ruling regime, as was the case, in the leadership of
Fatimid caliphs and the 'Abassids, but it has always won the good will
of its wider popular bases, on the grounds of their intellectual and
spiritual conviction about the worth of the Imamate for the leadership
of Islam.

2) These popular bases have existed since the dawn of Islam and became
wider during the times of the two Imams, al-Baqir and as-Sadiq (peace be
upon them). The school that these two Imams led within the boundaries of
these bases formed a very wide trend that stretched all over the world
of Islam, bringing together hundreds of jurists (fuqaha’) theologians
(mutakallimin and commentators (mu fassirun on the Qur‘an and the
learned in the different branches of Islamic and human sciences that
were predominant in those times, to the extent that al-Hasan son of ‘Ali
al-Washsha said, "I went into al-Kufah Mosque and found nine hundred
sheikhs all of them were saying, ‘Ja’far son of Muhammad related to
us.

3) This school and what it represented of popular bases from Islamic
society, had certain conditions which it believed in and abode by, in
the appointment of the Imam and his suitability for the role because it
believed that an individual cannot be appointed as Imam unless he is the
most learned among the agnostic of his time.

4) That both this school and its popular bases were ready to give
sacrifices, for the sake of their belief in the Imamate, since the
latter was considered, in the opinion of the concomitant leadership, as
a hostile line, even from an intellectual point of view. This was the
reason that led the authorities to carry out several campaigns of
purging and torture to the extent that many people were either killed or
were put into prisons, while hundreds of them died in the darkness of
the cells. This meant that those who believed in the Imamate were ready
to pay a lot, and the only instigation they had was their nearness to
Allah.

5) The Imams these bases yielded to were not isolated from them, only
when the authorities prosecuted them or sent them into exile. This is
what we come to know through the narrators who related to us the events
of each one among the twelve Imams, and on the one hand from what has
been copied from the letters that they sent to their contemporaries and
the trips that they took, and on the other hand from representatives
that they dispatched to the different corners of the Islamic world, as
well as the frequent visits that the Shi’ahs used to pay to their Imams
in the holy city of Medina, when they went to the sacred lands for the
performance of the holy rites of hajjl. All of these factors show an
uninterrupted inter-action between the Imam and his popular bases, that
stretched over the different parts of the world of Islam, with all their
different classes including the learned as well as the others.

6) That the caliphate which was contemporary with the Imams (peace be
upon them) used to consider their spiritual leadership as a great threat
against its existence and its destiny. Because of that it deployed all
of its efforts for the sake of disintegrating that leadership and bore a
lot of negativism in that respect, sometimes appearing under the guise
of cruelty and transgression when its security was at stake. The
campaigns of persecution and victimisation were a permanent event with
respect to the Imam in spite of what that left behind of sadness and
disgust among the Muslims and theft supporters from the different
classes of society.

If we take these six points into consideration knowing that they are
all historical facts, it leaves no room for doubt, and we come out with
the following result: That the phenomenon of the early Imamate was a
fact and not an illusion. Because the Imam who emerges while still young
and declares openly that he is the spiritual and the intellectual leader
of the Muslim community as a whole, and whom that wide trend pledges its
loyalty, must surely be in possession of a remark-able, let alone a very
wide knowledge and agonises and a very wide horizon as well as a
proficiency in jurisdiction, exegesis and the articles of faith,
otherwise the popular bases would not be convinced of his spiritual
leadership. We should also bear in mind the fact that the Imams took
certain positions that made the interaction with their bases possible
and threw different lights on their way of life and personality.

Do you think then that a young child who declares his Imamate
(spiritual leadership) and hoists out of it a flag for Islam, with the
full know-ledge of the masses among his popular bases who believe in him
and are prepared to sacrifice their lives and security without taking
the trouble to discover his condition, or without being incited by the
phenomenon of the early Imamamte to in-quire about the validity of the
situation and the establishment of the worth of this young Imam?

Now supposing that people did not attempt to assess the situation,
would it then be possible that after days, months or even years, the
whole affair would go unnoticed without its truth coming to the surface,
although there has been a natural and constant interaction between the
young Imam and the rest of the people? Is it rational that the worth of
a young child’s way of thinking and knowledge would not be obvious after
this long interaction?

Therefore, if we assume that the popular bases of the Imams of Ahlul
bayt (descendants of the Prophet) were not able to discover the truth of
the matter, why did the existing caliphate keep silent and did not
attempt to find out, if it were for its benefit?

Nothing could have been easier for the authorities then if the Imam had
been a child, quite immature in his education and way of thinking, the
normal case in all children.

No plan would have been more successful than to present this child to
his supporters (the Shi’ah) and others and prove to them that he was not
fit for the Imamate and the intellectual and spiritual leadership.

If it is indeed difficult to convince people of a man in his forties or
fifties, already in possession of a great deal of education for the role
of the Imamate, there can be no difficulty in convincing them of the
incapacity of an ordinary child for the same role, in the sense that the
Shi’ah know, regardless of his intelligence and awareness.

All this would have been possible and easier than the complicated means
of suppression and recklessness which the authorities resorted to in
these times.

The only explanation for the caliphate’s hesitation in playing this
card, is that it realised that the early Imamate was a real phenomenon
and not an invented idea. The truth is that it had realised the fact
after it had attempted to play that card but failed. History relates to
us many of these attempts and their failure, while it does not mention
at all the occurrence of a situation in which the phenomenon of early
Imamate was put into question, where the Imam was confronted with
difficulties or complications which surpassed his ability or shook
people’s trust in him.

This is what we mean when we said earlier that the early Imamate is a
real phenomenon in the life of Ahul-Bait (descendants of the Prophet),
moreover this phenomenon has similar roots and situations in the Divine
heritage that stretched over all the messages and the Divine leadership.
It is enough to cite one example of an early leadership of Ahlul-Bayt
(peace be upon them) in the case of Yahya (peace be upon him) when Allah
said:

"O Yahya take the Book with strength, and We have given him wisdom when
he was young". (Qur’an, 19:12)

Now that the early leadership has been proved as an existing and real
phenomenon in Ahlul Bayt life there is no more objection to the
leader-ship of al-Imam al-Mahdi (peace be upon him) nor to his
succession to his father while very young.


