Surah al-Fath, Chapter 48, Verses 1 - 16
========================================

**(The Victory)**

**Section (juz’): 26**

**Number of Verses: 29**

General Overview of the Chapter
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.***

The Chapter in question has twenty nine Verses and it was revealed in
the sixth year following the Treaty of Hudaybiyya in Medina.

The Chapter in question mainly treats of the glad tidings as to the
conquest of Mecca and the issues pertained to the Treaty of Hudaybiyya,
pledge of pleasure (bay’at al-ridhwan), hypocrites’ sabotage, turning
one’s back to jihad, and finally mention is made of the Noble Prophet’s
(S) Companions.

As the title of the Chapter designates, it beacons triumph and victory
over the enemies of Islam, a remarkable a decisive triumph, be it the
conquest of Mecca or Khaybar or the Treaty of Hudaybiyya or triumph in
the broad sense of the word. To appreciate the contents of the Chapter,
it is required, above all, to know that the Chapter was revealed in the
sixth year following the Treaty of Hudaybiyya.

The Merits of the Recitation of the Chapter
-------------------------------------------

According to a Prophetic tradition:

*“One who recites the Chapter is on a par with one who served in the
Noble Prophet’s (S) army upon the conquest of Mecca.”*

It is narrated in another tradition that such person

*“is like one who was beneath the tree in Hudaybiyya and gave him his
pledge.”*[^1]

It is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as):

*“Preserve your wives and possessions from perdition through the
recitation of*

***‘Indeed, We have granted you a triumph.’***

*One who recites it at all times a caller shall call on the Day of
Resurrection such that he will be heard by everyone saying:*

*‘You are one of My sincere servants; take him to My righteous servants
and admit him in bountiful gardens of Paradise and offer him the drink
particular to the people of Paradise.’”*[^2]

It goes without saying that such excellence and honor may not be accrued
with mere recitation devoid of thought and deeds, but the main goal of
the recitation of the Chapter lies in establishing one’s deeds and
disposition upon the contents of the Verses.

Wondrous traditions are attested in Islamic sources concerning the
blessed Chapter in question. According to a tradition narrated on the
authority of Anas,

*“Upon our return from Hudaybiyya, polytheists impeded us from entering
Mecca and performing voluntary (‘umra) pilgrimage.*

*We were deeply sad when God Almighty of a sudden revealed the Verse:*

***‘Indeed, We have granted you a manifest triumph.’”***

The Noble Prophet (S) is reported as saying:

*“A Verse has been revealed to me which I love more than the
world.”*[^3]

Surah al-Fath - Verses 1-3
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا فَتَحْنَا لَكَ فَتْحاً مُبِيناً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيَغْفِرَ لَكَ اللَّهُ مَا تَقَدَّمَ مِنْ ذَنْبِكَ وَمَا تَأخَّرَ
وَيُتِمَّ نِعْمَتَهُ عَلَيْكَ وَيَهْدِيَكَ صِرَاطاً مُسْتَقِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَنْصُرَكَ اللَّهُ نَصْراً عَزِيزاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. Indeed, We have granted you a manifest triumph.***  
***2. That Allah may forgive you your sins of the past and the future
[attributed to you by Meccan polytheists] and complete His Favor on you
and guide you on the Straight Path,***  
***3. And that Allah may help you with invincible succor.***

Qur’anic exegets disagree on the interpretation of

***“a manifest triumph.”***

Some of them, e.g. Alusi, Abu al-Futuh, ‘Allama Tabataba’i, and Faydh
Kashani attribute it to the Treaty of Hudaybiyya and some others, e.g.
Shaykh Tusi, Zamakhshari, and Fakhr Razi regard it as related to the
conquest of Mecca and all of them have substantiated their views with
certain traditions. The significance of the Treaty of Hudaybiyya lies in
the fact that it served as a prelude to the conquest of Mecca and its
ensuing remarkable triumphs.

Furthermore, to that time, polytheists solely entertained thoughts
regarding Muslims’ perdition and did not recognize their position.
Nonetheless, following the Treaty of Hudaybiyya, they recognized Muslims
and such recognition served as a great triumph in the socio-political
scene.

The

***“manifest triumph”***

makes a reference to the fact that approximately one thousand and forty
hundred people were with the Noble Prophet (S) in the sixth year, but
following two years, ten thousand people accompanied the Noble Prophet
(S) in the conquest of Mecca.

There is not obscurity in Divine Guidance, rather all things are evident
and illuminating including His Messenger;

***(“a Messenger explaining things clearly,”)***[^4]***.***

His Qur’an is clear and illuminating;

***(“a plain Qur’an,”)***[^5]***.***

It is expressed clearly and eloquently;

***(“This [the Qur’an] is a clear Arabic tongue,”)***[^6]***.***

Its warnings are also unequivocal;

***(“He [Prophet Muhammad] is but a plain warner,”***[^7]***.***

Even its war and peace is unambiguous;

***(“manifest triumph,”)***[^8]***.***

Thus, those standing against such transparency are in manifest error

***(“And whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger, he has indeed strayed
into a plain error,”)***[^9]***.***

The noble Prophet of Islam (S) is addressed six times:

***“We have granted you triumph … for your forgiving, your sin, upon
you, guides you, grants you succor.”***

The word dhanb used in the second Verse signifies the consequence of
anything and it is often employed in the sense of the consequence of
sins and their evil consequences. Any truth seeking move is indubitably
undesirable to those in error considering the call as sin and bring
about diverse problems, concerns, persecutions, false accusations,
conspiracies, and rumors against the callers.

Imam Ridha says:

*“To polytheists, nobody was on a par with the Noble Prophet (S) in
terms of the burden of sins, since he struggled against idolatry but
polytheists worshipped three hundred and sixty idols prior to the
conquest of Mecca. However, upon the conquest of Mecca and the decisive
triumph of the Noble Prophet (S) and Muslims, all the faults remained
concealed.”*[^10]

As a consequence, such sins were imaginative rather than actual thus
regarded by polytheists and idolaters. It is worthy of note that the
direction of prayers changed to that of Ka’ba in the second year
following Hijra, i.e. the Noble Prophet’s migration from Mecca to
Medina.

Furthermore, the Treaty of Hudaybiyya was concluded in the sixth year
and the conquest of Mecca occurred in the eighth year when the Promise
to the completion of the most exalted Divine Favors in future was
proclaimed.

However, it was on the Noble Prophet’s (S) farewell pilgrimage (hajjat
al-wida’) that the Promise was actualized through his announcement of
‘Ali (as) as the Imam, saying:

***“This day, I have perfected your religion for you, completed My Favor
upon you, and have chosen for you Islam as your religion”***[^11]***.***

Account of the Treaty of Hudaybiyya. It was in the month of Dhu al-Qa’da
of 6 AH / March 628 that the Noble Prophet of Islam (S) departed for
Mecca intending to go on pilgrimage. Having encouraged Muslims to
accompany him on the pilgrimage, one thousand and forty Muslims wearing
pilgrims’ garment accompanied him.

Apprised of the intelligence, Meccan polytheists stopped them in the
vicinity of Mecca at the Village of Hudaybiyya and impeded them from
reaching Mecca. Delegates from both parties entered into negotiations
and the polytheists’ representative noticed that Muslims feel such love
for the Noble Prophet (S) that they take the drops of water used by him
when performing ablution before daily prayers.

The representative informed polytheists of the same saying that they
might not sever the bond between the Noble Prophet (S) and Muslims.

Representing Muslims, ‘Uthman went to Mecca to negotiate with Meccan
polytheists, but rumors became widespread that he had been murdered in
Mecca. To keep Muslims alert, the Noble Prophet (S) had Muslims gather
beneath a tree to renew his allegiance with them. The allegiance was
termed Bay’at al-Ridhwan.

‘Uthman returned safe after a few days. Participated by representatives
from both parties, a session was held in which a treaty was drafted with
a number of articles and ‘Ali (as) wrote down the text of the treaty
which was signed by representatives.

According to the treaty, both parties assumed obligations including:
keeping away from engaging in war for a period of ten years; Muslims had
to return from Hudaybiyya to return the next year for a three day
pilgrimage to Mecca; the Noble Prophet of Islam (S) ordered that the
camels brought for pilgrimage be sacrificed there; Muslims shave their
heads and took off their pilgrimage garments to return to Mecca.

Although Muslims did not perform their pilgrimage rituals in Mecca, but
the Treaty ensured that that there would be no war for ten years and
performing the pilgrimage rituals would be unimpeded, hence the manifest
triumph for Muslims. The Treaty put an end to polytheists’ manifest
enmity against Muslims, opened the path of propagation of the Islamic
faith, and paved the way for consolidation of their might and the
prospective conquest of Mecca.

It is worthy of note that we need to know that success and triumph
springs from Divine Support rather than our thought, schemes, prudence,
and might:

***(“Indeed, We have granted you a manifest triumph”).***

The other point is that the Noble Prophet (S) enjoys Divine Support as
he is addressed in:

***“We have granted you triumph, to forgive your sins, to guide you, to
render you triumphant.”***

Thus, what God Almighty bestows upon man is the most exalted, the most
manifest, and the best. He grants manifest victory, perfect bounties,
guidance to the Straight Path, and invincible succor.

Surah al-Fath - Verse 4
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي أنْزَلَ السَّكِينَةَ فِي قُلُوبِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
لِيَزْدَادُوا إِيمَاناً مَعَ إِيمَانِهِمْ وَلِلَّهِ جُنُودُ
السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأرْضِ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ عَلِيماً حَكِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***4. He it is the One Who sent down serenity into the hearts of
believers so that they may grow more in faith along with their faith.
And to Allah belong the hosts of the heavens and the earth and Allah is
Ever Omniscient, All-Wise.***

The Arabic word sakina designates serenity and calm. Whoever is granted
such Divine Favor shall enjoy many a consequence. He is not afraid of
being blamed. He puts his trust in God. If he loses something, he shall
not be saddened by the loss. If he gains something, he shall not rebel
nor shall he disobey Divine Commands. He shall not be affected by
people’s respect or indifference, fame, obscurity, poverty, or
affluence.

In the same manner that frightening disbelievers is Divine Succor;

***(“We shall cast terror into the hearts of those who
disbelieve,”)***[^12]***,***

serenity is also a Divine Favor granted to believers’ hearts:

***(“is the One Who sent down serenity into the hearts of
believers”).***

Therefore, peace of mind is solely possible through Divine Favor and it
may not be accrued from any other source.

The aforementioned Verses reflect the Great Favors bestowed by God
Almighty upon the Noble Prophet (S) as consequences of the manifest
triumph, namely the Treaty of Hudaybiyya.

However, the blessed Verse in question treats of a Great Favor bestowed
upon all believers:

***“He it is the One Who sent down serenity into the hearts of believers
so that they may grow more in faith along with their faith.”***

Believers shall definitely be rewarded by serenity and peace of mind,
since;

***“To Allah belong the hosts of the heavens and the earth and Allah is
Ever Omniscient, All-Wise.”***

The Arabic word sakina is cognate with sukun which designates such
serenity and peace of mind that removes any doubt and fear from man’s
heart and makes him persevere in the face of the tempest of
vicissitudes.

Such serenity may be ideological and remove ideological debilitation or
it may be practical such that it may provide man with perseverance and
patience. It is worthy of note that taking into account the foregoing
discussions and the contextual meaning of the blessed Verse in question,
it mainly alludes the former sense. Even if faith had not other fruits
but such serenity and peace of mind, they would have sufficed to make
man welcome it from the bottom of his heart.

However, the fact is that faith engenders many other bounties and
favors.

Taking a glance at the states of believers and disbelievers reflects
that the latter suffer from permanent anxiety and concern, whereas the
latter enjoy unequalled peace of mind as a consequence of which they
fear no one but Allah:

***(“And fear none but Allah,”)***[^13]***.***

Whether faith be taken in the sense of knowledge and awareness or the
spirit of submission to God Almighty, it consists of different degrees
and even love and passion together with faith are different.

The clause:

***“so that they may grow more in faith along with their faith”***

lays emphasis on the same truth.

Consequently, believers are not supposed to stay at one stage of faith,
but they need to ascend to more elevated stages through
self-purification through knowledge and practice.

It is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) that:

*“There are ten degrees to faith in the same manner that one ascends the
steps of a ladder.”*[^14]

Each of the two clauses closing the blessed Verse in question,

***“to Allah belong the hosts of the heavens and the earth and Allah is
Ever Omniscient, All-Wise,”***

reflects one of the reasons lying behind believers’ serenity.

The former ensures man that if he believes in God Almighty; He shall
support you with all the forces of the heavens and the earth. The latter
says unto him that God Almighty is All-Aware of his needs, problems,
struggles, and obedience. Having faith in these two principles will lead
to his serenity and peace of mind.

Surah al-Fath - Verse 5
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيُدْخِلَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ
تَحْتِهَا الْأنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا وَيُكَفِّرَ عَنْهُمْ
سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ وَكَانَ ذَلِكَ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ فَوْزاً عَظِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***5. That He may admit the believing men and the believing women to
Gardens [in Paradise] under which rivers flow [beneath trees] to abide
therein forever and He may expiate from them their sins and that is with
Allah a supreme salvation and success.***

Descent of Divine serenity increases faith and prepares the path for
being admitted to Paradise. Believers’ great and real happiness and
salvation lie in serenity in this world and abode in Paradise in the
Hereafter.

A number of Shi’i and Sunni Qur’anic exegets narrate that upon the
revelation of the opening Verses of the Chapter regarding the glad
tidings to the Noble Prophet (S) as to manifest triumph, completion of
Favors, Guidance, and Succor, concerned and saddened by the incident of
Hudaybiyya, some Muslims said unto the Noble Prophet (S):

*“Good for you since you have been promised so many Divine Bounties.
What will be granted to us?”*

Thus the first Verse was revealed bearing glad tidings to believers that
they would be granted great rewards.[^15] These Verses also treat of the
Treaty of Hudaybiyya and its diverse reflections in people’s thought and
its fruitful consequences, specifying the fate of each group in the
crucible of such ordeals.

The Verse opens by saying that another goal behind such great triumph
was that believing men and women would be admitted the gardens of
Paradise beneath whose trees rivers flow.

They shall abide in it for good and they shall never lose such great
Favor;

***(“to abide therein forever”).***

Furthermore,

***“He may expiate from them their sins and that is with Allah a supreme
salvation and success.”***

Thus, against the four Favors bestowed upon the Messenger of God (S) in
the manifest triumph, two great Favors were also granted to believers:
everlasting Paradise with all its Bounties and forgiving of their faults
besides serenity and peace of mind in this world. These three Favors
constitute a great triumph and a grand salvation for those who pass the
ordeals with flying flags.

In the Holy Qur’an, the word fawz is often collocated with ‘adim and at
times with mubin and kabir. In his Mufradat, Raghib says that fawz
designates victory and attainment of good things together with health
when it entails salvation in the Hereafter despite losing worldly
bounties.

According to a well-known narration, upon receiving the blow on his head
inflicted by ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Muljam, the criminal of the time, Imam
‘Ali’s (as) shouted:

*“By the God of Ka’ba I attained to triumph”*

(and the letter of my happiness was signed with blood of my head).

Divine Ordeals are at times so difficult and unbearable that they uproot
shallow faiths and turns hearts upside down; true believers enjoying the
bounty of serenity may solely persevere and reap the consequences of
their perseverance in the Hereafter and it is actually the great
triumph.

Surah al-Fath - Verse 6
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيُعَذِّبَ الْمُنَافِقِينَ وَالْمُنَافِقَاتِ وَالْمُشْرِكِينَ
وَالْمُشْرِكَاتِ الظَّانِّينَ بِاللَّهِ ظَنَّ السَّوْءِ عَلَيْهِمْ
دَائِرَةُ السَّوْءِ وَغَضِبَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلَعَنَهُمْ وَأعَدَّ
لَهُمْ جَهَنَّمَ وَسَاءَتْ مَصِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***6. And that He may chastise the hypocrites, men and women, and also
the polytheist men and women who entertain evil thoughts about Allah
[say that God will not support His Messenger (S)]. For them is a
disgraceful torment, and the Wrath of Allah is upon them and He has
cursed them and prepared Hell for them and worst indeed is that
destination.***

The Arabic phrase da’irat al-su’ connotes unfavorable and far-reaching
incident.[^16] Following the treatment of the four Divine Favors
bestowed upon the Noble Prophet (S) and believers in the preceding
Verses, the blessed Verse in question includes threats against
hypocrites and polytheists.

The torment of hypocrites and polytheists may not connote the torment in
the Hereafter but it may refer to the torments and afflictions bred by
hypocrisy and polytheism with which they were entangled following the
Treaty of Hudaybiyya and the conquest of Mecca.

It is narrated that God Almighty shall never afflict any servant with
torment following his repentance and asking God for forgiving his sins
unless he entertains suspicion against Him and loses his hope of His
Favor. Then the noble Imam recited the Verse in question.[^17]

***“He may chastise the hypocrites, men and women, and also the
polytheist men and women who entertain evil thoughts about Allah.”***

Upon the departure of the Noble Prophet (S) and believers from Medina,
hypocrites thought that they would never return safe and sound, as it is
reflected in Verse 12 of the Chapter in question:

***“Nay, but you thought that the Messenger (S) and the believers would
never return to their families.”***

The word da’ira literally designates occurrences and incidents, good and
evil, happening to man, but it ad hoc is accompanied with the word su’
(“bad, evil”) and connotes unfavorable incidents.

The other point is that:

***“the Wrath of Allah is upon them and He has cursed them.”***

The blessed Verse finally adds that God Almighty:

***“prepared Hell for them and worst indeed is that destination.”***

It is worthy of note that the majority of men were Muslim at Hudaybiyya
and they were opposed by hypocrite and polytheist men, but the preceding
Qur’anic Verses make mention of men and women in attainment to the great
triumph and being afflicted with the excruciating torment.

reason is that the believing men appearing on the battleground may never
succeed without being supported by believing women and likewise,
hypocrite men may never attain to their goals without the support of
hypocrite women.

Basically, the Islamic faith does not solely belong to men nor does it
ignore women’s characters and contributions; as a consequence of which
whenever failing to mention women leads to exclusion of women, they are
explicitly mentioned such that it becomes evident that the Islam faith
belongs to humanity.

Surah al-Fath - Verse 7
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِلَّهِ جُنُودُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأرْضِ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ عَزِيزاً
حَكِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***7. And to Allah belong the hosts of the heavens and the earth. And
Allah is Ever Omnipotent, All-Wise.***

God Almighty works through causes and ways.

The blessed Verse in question reiterates Divine Omnipotence and
Greatness, saying:

***“To Allah belong the hosts of the heavens and the earth. And Allah is
Ever Omnipotent, All-Wise.”***

Reference to Divine Omnipotence was already mentioned when the preceding
Verses treated of the exalted states and Favors bestowed upon believers.
It is reiterated herein in treating of chastising hypocrites and
polytheists in order to indicate that God Almighty whose Commands are
followed by all the hosts of the heavens and the earth is Omnipotent
everywhere.

Those worthy of enjoying His Mercy are at all times provided with the
same and whenever He is Wrathful against any wrong doer, he may not flee
the same. It is worthy of note that when mention is made of believers,
Divine Attributes of Omniscience and Wisdom, consistent with His Mercy
are mentioned, but treating of hypocrites and polytheists, His
Attributes of Omnipotence and Wisdom, consistent with torment, are
mentioned.

***“The hosts of the heavens and the earth”***

include hosts of angels and also those of lightning, earthquakes,
tempests, torrents, sea waves, and also invisible forces lying beyond
our knowledge since they all constitute Divine hosts and follow His
Commands.

Surah al-Fath - Verses 8-9
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أرْسَلْنَاكَ شَاهِداً وَمُبَشِّراً وَنَذِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِتُؤْمِنُوا بِاللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ وَتُعَزِّرُوهُ وَتُوَقِّرُوهُ
وَتُسَبِّحُوهُ بُكْرَةً وَأصِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***8. Indeed, We have sent you as a witness [over deeds], as a bearer of
glad tidings, and as a warner,***  
***9. In order that you may believe in Allah and His Messenger and that
you assist and honor him and that you glorify [His] praises morning and
evening.***

The Arabic verbal form tu’azziruhu derives from ‘azara (“keep from”)
connoting that the Noble Prophet (S) should be preserved from any harm
or harassment. The word shahid (“witness”) may refer to a perfect model.
Applied to the Noble Prophet (S), the word indicates that he is the
perfect model for humanity.

The verbal forms tu’azziruhu and tuwaqqiruhu (“honor him”) may refer to
God Almighty, i.e. assist and honor Him. It may also refer to the Noble
Prophet (S) and it is to be noted that honoring him is honoring God
Almighty.

Verse 8 is addressed to the Noble Prophet (S) saying unto him that God
Almighty sent him on the Prophetic mission such that he serves as a
witness for people confirming the words of true believers and reject
those uttered by hypocrites.

It is mentioned elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an that:

***“The Messenger is a witness over them.”***

It may also refer to the Noble Prophet’s (S) spiritual state implying
that he attained to such intuitive knowledge that he may perceive
through the eyes of his head and heart that he may bear glad tidings to
believers that they shall enjoy Divine Mercy and elevated states in
Paradise and he may warn disbelievers and polytheists against torments
in Hell as the consequences of their polytheism and disbelieve such that
he may impart the final argument to people and help them purify their
souls.

Verse 9 is saying that thus he may show unto people the Path of Guidance
so that through their intellect, they may believe in God Almighty and
His Messenger (S), assist the True Religion, defeat disbelievers, and
glorify God Almighty as a token of obedience to Him in the morning and
in the evening. The Arabic words bukra and asil designate morning and
evening and may also refer to the prayers established at these times.

It is worthy of note that five significant injunctions are being
mentioned as the causes and goals of the preceding attributes of the
Noble Prophet (S).

Two injunctions concern obedience to God Almighty and glorifying Him and
three Injunctions are related to obeying, defending, and honoring the
elevated state of the Noble Prophet (S), saying that the goal of the
Prophetic Call is that people believe in God Almighty and His Messenger
(S), defend him against enemies, honor him, and glorify God Almighty in
the morning and in the evening.

Surah al-Fath - Verse 10
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُبَايِعُونَكَ إِنَّمَا يُبَايِعُونَ اللَّهَ يَدُ
اللَّهِ فَوْقَ أيْدِيهِمْ فَمَن نَّكَثَ فَإِنَّمَا يَنكُثُ عَلَی
نَفْسِهِ وَمَنْ أوْفَی بِمَا عَاهَدَ عَلَيْهُ اللَّهَ فَسَيُؤْتِيهِ
أجْرًا عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***10. Indeed, those who give pledge to you, they are giving pledge to
Allah. The Hand of Allah is over their hands. Then whosoever breaks his
pledge breaks it only to his own harm and whosoever fulfils what he has
covenanted with Allah, He will bestow on him a great reward.***

Muslim leaders are supposed to lay emphasis in critical circumstances
and require their adherents to pledge allegiance once again.

God Almighty is in need of no one, thus man should abstain from
unfaithfulness since Divine Might is superior to everyone else. In this
blessed Verse, God Almighty addresses His friend, the Noble Prophet (S),
saying unto him that those who pledge their allegiance with you have in
fact sworn allegiance with Him, since Divine Omnipotence far exceeds
people’s might and those who have broken their allegiance have in fact
broken their own character and have denigrated himself.

Au contraire, those who stand loyal to the pledge sworn with God
Almighty through the Noble Prophet (S) and act upon their duties shall
soon receive great Divine Rewards.

The Arabic word bay’a derives from b-y-’ designating purchase and
exchange.

The Verse is saying that one who swears a pledge with the Noble Prophet
(S), it is as if he has entered into some transaction with God Almighty;

***(“Indeed, Allah has purchased of the believers their lives and their
property for that theirs shall be the Paradise,”***[^18]***).***

God Almighty has purchased believers’ lives and possessions at the price
of Paradise, since swearing allegiance with the Messenger of God (S) is
on a par with pledging allegiance with God Almighty.

***“The Hand of Allah is over their hands”***

refers to the fact that God Almighty regards the His Messenger’s (S)
hand like that of His own. In other words, the Noble Prophet’s (S)’s
hand at the time of pledging allegiance with him is actually His Hand,
since His Messenger’s (S) hand symbolizes that of God Almighty.

The blessed Verse reveals that swearing allegiance with the Noble
Prophet (S) is in fact giving pledge to God Almighty, i.e. if God
Almighty had Hands, He would regard the Noble Prophet’s (S) hands like
His own and giving pledge to him is in fact giving pledge to God
Almighty.

The blessed Verse reflects the Noble Prophet’s (S) closeness to God
Almighty so that believers know that their allegiance with the Noble
Prophet (S) stands precisely on a par with their allegiance with God
Almighty, since the Noble Prophet (S) has attained to such elevated
state of nearness to Him that he annihilated his self and has found
everlastingness in Truth. Thus, his word and act stand on a par with
those of God Almighty.

Surah al-Fath - Verse 11
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَيَقُولُ لَكَ الْمُخَلَّفُونَ مِنَ الْأعْرَابِ شَغَلَتْنَا
أمْوَالُنَا وَأهْلُونَا فَاسْتَغْفِرْ لَنَا يَقُولُونَ بِألْسِنَتِهِم
مَّا لَيْسَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ قُلْ فَمَن يَمْلِكُ لَكُم مِّنَ اللَّهِ
شَيْئًا إِنْ أرَادَ بِكُمْ ضَرًّا أوْ أرَادَ بِكُمْ نَفْعًا بَلْ كَانَ
اللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ خَبِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***11. Those of the Bedouin who lagged behind [in jihad] will say unto
you [in order to justify their transgressions]: “Our possessions and our
families preoccupied us, so ask forgiveness for us.” They say with their
tongues what is not in their hearts. Say: “Who then has any power at all
[to intervene] on your behalf with Allah, if He intends you harm or
intends you benefit? Nay, but Allah is Ever All-Aware of what you do.***

The Arabic word ‘arab is ad hoc applied to anti-social and uncultured
Bedouin. Unrefined people tend to show weakness in participating in
jihad. Leaders are supposed to be forward-looking, predict the words and
intrigues of opponents and hypocrites and think of appropriate
reactions.

The blessed Verse in question is informing the Noble Prophet (S) that
the Arabs who disobeyed his orders would apologize to him. ‘Abd Allah
ibn ‘Abbas and Mujahid narrate that when the Noble Prophet (S) intended
to depart for Mecca for performing ‘umra pilgrimage together with a
number of his companions.

Thus he summoned the Arabs living in the vicinity of Mecca bidding them
to accompany him so that if the Quraysh engaged in fight with Muslims,
they could render them aid. They thought that the Quraysh could defeat
Muhammad (S) and his followers and they could lose their lives so they
declined the Noble Prophet’s (S) request.

It was for this occasion that the blessed Verse in question was revealed
informing the Noble Prophet (S) that the Arabs who failed to keep their
loyalty to him following the Treaty of Hudaybiyya and pledging
allegiance with him would come to him to express their apologies saying
that their possessions and families preoccupied them and kept them from
accompanying him.

Then they implored the Noble Prophet (S) to ask God Almighty for their
forgiveness. They were hypocrites and what they uttered was not from
their hearts. The blessed Verse in saying unto the Noble Prophet (S)
that he needs to ask them if God Almighty intends to make them accrue
benefits or harms who possesses the might to intervene on your behalf.
God is All-Aware of what they do, their hypocrisy and lies. He is
Omniscient of all outward and concealed affairs.

Surah al-Fath - Verses 12-13
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ ظَنَنتُمْ أن لَّن يَنقَلِبَ الرَّسُولُ وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ إِلَی
أهْلِيهِمْ أبَدًا وَزُيِّنَ ذَلِكَ فِي قُلُوبِكُمْ وَظَنَنتُمْ ظَنَّ
السَّوْءِ وَكُنتُمْ قَوْمًا بُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن لَّمْ يُؤْمِن بِاللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ فَإِنَّا أعْتَدْنَا
لِلْكَافِرِينَ سَعِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***12. “Nay, but [your disobedience and flight was because] you thought
that the Messenger and the believers would never return [safe and sound]
to their families and that was made fair-seeming in your hearts and you
did entertain an evil thought and you became a vain people going for
perdition.”***  
***13. And whosoever does not believe in Allah and His Messenger, then
truly, We have prepared for disbelievers a blazing Fire.***

The Arabic word bur designates bankruptcy, disgrace, and perdition. Some
deeds are evil by human natural disposition, but Satan and Concupiscence
make them seem fair to man so that he may commit them. Those Arabs who
had turned away from jihad thought that Muslims would all be defeated
and killed; consequently, fear, meanness, deprivation, and disgrace fell
into their share.

The blessed Verses in question address those Arabs saying unto them that
they entertained suspicion and doubt imagining that the Messenger of
Allah (S) and believers who accompanied him at Hudaybiyya would never
return to Medina as they would be destroyed by the Quraysh. Satan made
such evil thought seem fair to them.

***“They entertained an evil thought and became a vain people going for
perdition.”***

Consequently, they were deprived of embarking upon that historic
journey, the pledge of the tree, and other honors. It entailed such
disgrace, perdition, and excruciating torment in the Hereafter.

Their hearts were dead as a consequence of which such dire fate was in
store for them. Since such wrong acts sprang at times from
faithlessness, Verse 13 is saying that:

***“Whosoever does not believe in Allah and His Messenger (S), then
truly, We have prepared for disbelievers a blazing Fire.”***

Surah al-Fath - Verse 14
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِلَّهِ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأرْضِ يَغْفِرُ لِمَن يَشَاء
وَيُعَذِّبُ مَن يَشَاء وَكَانَ اللَّهُ غَفُورًا رَّحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***14. And to Allah belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the
earth. He forgives whom He wills [and deems it appropriate] and punishes
whom He wills [and deems it befitting]. And Allah is Ever Oft-Forgiving,
Most Merciful.***

There are some instances when God Almighty says:

***“Allah forgives whom He wills and chastises whom He wills.”***

Taking into account Divine Justice and Wisdom, it may be said that man
makes himself worthy of receiving

Divine Forgiving and Mercy and at times he makes himself unworthy of
such Divine Forgiving and Mercy and accrues Divine Wrath and torment.
Divine Forgiving precedes His Chastisement which indicates that the
former precedes the latter.

The Arabic word sa’ir (“blazing fire”) indicates that for those who fail
to believe in God Almighty and His Messenger (S) is prepared a blazing
fire, namely Hell.

The verbal form a’tadna (“we have prepared”) and the contextual meaning
of other related Verses demonstrate that Hell and Paradise exist in
their places and whose gates are closed to us so long as we live but
they shall be opened upon our death rather than as some have imagined
will be created in the Hereafter.

It is worthy of note that Forgiving precedes torment. The close of the
blessed Verse lays further emphasis on Divine Forgiving and Mercy, since
these threats and warnings aim at educating people which necessitates
that the path of return be open to sinners and even disbelievers;
particularly owing to the point that most of such wrong deeds spring
from ignorance.

Such ignorant people are supposed to be encouraged to ask for Divine
Forgiving so that they may turn to the Straight Path and proceed toward
belief in God Almighty and His Messenger (S).

Surah al-Fath - Verse 15
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَيَقُولُ الْمُخَلَّفُونَ إِذَا انطَلَقْتُمْ إِلَی مَغَانِمَ
لِتَأخُذُوهَا ذَرُونَا نَتَّبِعْكُمْ يُرِيدُونَ أن يُبَدِّلُوا كَلَآمَ
اللَّهِ قُل لَّن تَتَّبِعُونَا كَذَلِكُمْ قَالَ اللَّهُ مِن قَبْلُ
فَسَيَقُولُونَ بَلْ تَحْسُدُونَنَا بَلْ كَانُوا لَآ يَفْقَهُونَ إِلاّ
قَلِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***15. Those who lagged behind [at Hudaybiyya] will say, when you set
forth to take the spoils [of Khaybar], “Allow us to follow you.” They
want to change Allah’s Words [to the effect that those other than the
companions of Hudaybiyya were not supposed to participate at Khaybar].
Say [unto them]: “You shall not follow us. Thus Allah has said [about
you] in advance.” Then they will say: “Nay, you envy us [and do not want
us to benefit from the spoils which is not true].” Nay, but they
understand not except a little.***

The majority of Qur’anic exegets maintain that these blessed Verses
treat of the conquest of Khaybar occurring in 7 AH/627, one year
following the Treaty of Hudaybiyya.

It is worthy of note that according to traditions, it was upon the Noble
Prophet’s (S) return from Hudaybiyya that by Divine Command he bore glad
tidings to those participating at Hudaybiyya that Muslims would conquer
Khaybar and specified that they were solely supposed to participate at
the battle of Khaybar; as a consequence of which they rather than those
lagging behind, could have war spoils.

However, when these timid mammonists noticed that the Noble Prophet (S)
shall definitely be triumphant at the prospective war and many spoils
shall fall into the share of the army of Muslims took the opportunity to
come to him asking for permission to take part in the battle of Khaybar.

They resorted to the apology that they intended to compensate for their
past faults, repent of their sins, and serve the cause of the Islamic
faith and the Holy Qur’an with sincerity! They were ignorant of the
revelation of the Qur’anic Verses that disclosed their secret
intentions:

***“Those who lagged behind [at Hudaybiyya] will say, when you set forth
to take the spoils [of Khaybar], ‘Allow us to follow you.’ They want to
change Allah’s Words [to the effect that those other than the companions
of Hudaybiyya were not supposed to participate at Khaybar].”***

It may be noted that in other instances such avaricious, indolent, and
self-indulgent people fled hardships and perils and aimed at accruing
mammons which entailed less hardships.

At any rate, the blessed Qur’anic Verses in question provides an answer
to these opportunists:

***“They want to change Allah’s Words.”***

Then, it is further added:

***“You shall not follow us.”***

It is not what the Noble Prophet (S) says of his own, but

***“Thus Allah has said [about you] in advance”***

informing Muslims of your future deeds. It is Divine Command that the
spoils of Khaybar shall fall into the share of the companions of
Hudaybiyya and others are not supposed to accompany them in this
respect.

It is worthy of note that such shameless defectors persist in their
false claims and accuse Muslims of entertaining envy;

***“Then they will say: “Nay, you envy us.”***

Thus, they even impliedly refute the Noble Prophet’s (S) words, claiming
that they enviously impede them from taking part in the battle of
Khaybar!

The blessed Verse closes thus:

***“Nay, but they understand not except a little.”***

Their misfortunes spring from their ignorance regarding God Almighty,
the elevated state of His Messenger (S), man’s fate, and transience of
worldly possessions. It is true that they were clever and precise in
financial matters and personal gains, but they were too ignorant to
exchange whatever they had with transient mammons.

Finally, the Noble Prophet (S), as per historical accounts, distributed
the spoils of the battle of Khaybar amongst the companions of
Hudaybiyya, even the person present at Khaybar who failed to participate
in the battle of Khaybar, received a share. He is no one but Jabir ibn
‘Abd Allah Ansari.[^19]

Surah al-Fath - Verse 16
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لِّلْمُخَلَّفِينَ مِنَ الْأعْرَابِ سَتُدْعَوْنَ إِلَی قَوْمٍ
اُوْلِي بَأسٍ شَدِيدٍ تُقَاتِلُونَهُمْ أوْ يُسْلِمُونَ فَإِن تُطِيعُوا
يُؤْتِكُمُ اللَّهُ أجْرًا حَسَنًا وَإِن تَتَوَلَّوْا كَمَا
تَوَلَّيْتُم مِّن قَبْلُ يُعَذِّبْكُمْ عَذَابًا ألِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***16. Say unto the Bedouin who lagged behind: “You shall be called
[soon] to fight against a people given to great warfare, then you shall
fight them, or they shall convert to Islam. Then if you obey [and
embrace the Prophetic Call], Allah will give you a fair reward; but if
you turn away as you did turn away before, He will chastise you with a
painful torment.”***

We are supposed to leave the path of return open to defectors without
depriving them of the same for good. Muslims are supposed to possess
such military means and might that they be able to defeat their mighty
enemies and make them surrender;

***“You shall be called [soon] to fight against a people given to great
warfare, then you shall fight them, or they shall convert to Islam.”***

People reveal their inward secrets, sincerity, and hypocrisy in
battleground.

In this blessed Verse, God Almighty says unto His Messenger (S):

“O Muhammad (S)! Say unto those Arabs who disobeyed the Messenger’s (S)
command and failed to accompany believers at Hudaybiyya and then offered
their apologies and intended to participate at the battle of Khaybar
with believers in order to have a share of spoils.

“You shall be called [soon] to fight against a mighty and bold. You need
to confront them in battle so that they convert to the Islamic faith or
surrender. If you Arabs obey Divine Commands and fight for Allah’s
cause, He will grant you fair reward, but if you turn away from
departing for Mecca, as you did earlier, you will be chastised by God
Almighty with excruciating torment. Now, who were these mighty warriors
referred to in the blessed Verse in question?”

The sentence:

***“You shall fight them or they shall convert to Islam”***

demonstrates that they were not people of the Book, since they could not
be required to embrace the Islamic faith as they are free to choose
between conversion to the Islamic faith or recognition of the conditions
of paying tribute to the Islamic state and living under the protection
of Islamic rule through peaceful coexistence with Muslims.

Only polytheists and idolaters have to convert to the Islamic faith,
since Islam does not recognize idolatry as a religion and it is
permitted to force idolaters to forgo idolatry.

[^1]: Majma’ al-Bayan, vol. 9, p. 108.

[^2]: Thawab al-A’mal, apud Nur al-Thiqalayn, vol. 5, p. 46.

[^3]: Majma’ al-Bayan, loc. cit.

[^4]: 44:13

[^5]: 15:1

[^6]: 16:103

[^7]: 7:184

[^8]: 48:1

[^9]: 33:36

[^10]: Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn.

[^11]: 5:3

[^12]: 3:151

[^13]: 33:39

[^14]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 69, p. 165.

[^15]: Tafsir Maraghi, vol. 26, p. 85; Tafsir Abu al-Futuh Razi, vol.
10, p. 26; Tafsir Ruh al-Ma’ani, vol. 26, p. 86.

[^16]: Raghib’s Mufradat.

[^17]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 77, p. 399.

[^18]: 9:112

[^19]: Ibn Hisham's Sira, vol. 3, p. 364.


