Surah al-Dhariyat, Chapter 51, Verses 1 - 23
============================================

**(The Scattering Winds)**

**Section (juz’ 26-27)**

**Number of Verses: 60**

General Overview of the Chapter
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.***

The Chapter has sixty Verses and it was revealed in Mecca.

The title of the Chapter derives from its opening Verse:

***“By the scattering winds”***

connoting harsh winds that scatter everything. The Chapter opening and
closing with a treatment of Resurrection deals mainly with Divine Unity,
Divine Manifestations in the world of existence, the story of angels
receiving Abraham’s (as) hospitality and bearing to him the glad tidings
of a child to be born to him, warning against destruction of the people
of Lot (as), and a reference to a number of Prophets (as) like Moses and
Noah (as) and the peoples of ‘Ad and Thamud.

Making mention of the history of former Prophets (as) and the hardships
they experienced for guiding their peoples, the Chapter in question
calls the Noble Prophet of Islam (S) to persevere and be patient in
proclaiming his Call.

Merits of Recitation of the Chapter
-----------------------------------

It is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as):

*“One who recites Surah al-Dhariyat in the day or at night, God Almighty
will improve his* *life and sustenance, providing him with abundant*
*provision, and illuminating his grave with a light shining to the Day
of Resurrection [provided that he acts upon Qur’anic Injunctions].”*[^1]

Surah al-Dhariyat - Verses 1-4
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالذَّارِيَاتِ ذَرْوًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَالْحَامِلَآتِ وِقْرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَالْجَارِيَاتِ يُسْرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَالْمُقَسِّمَاتِ أمْرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. By the winds that scatter everything forcefully.***  
***2. Then by the clouds bearing heavy weight [of water].***  
***3. Then by the ships that float with ease.***  
***4. Then by angels distributing the affairs by [Allah’s] Command.***

In the opening four blessed Verses of the Chapter in question God
Almighty swears by four great things in the world of creation, saying
that what the Prophets promised you concerning the exalted states and
Bounties in store for good-doers in the Hereafter are certain and true
and the Recompense of deeds shall be given at Divine Tribunal in the
Hereafter such that each and every person shall certainly be recompensed
for his deeds.

Qur’anic exegets’ views concerning the opening four blessed Verses of
the Chapter in question:

1. By the winds dispersing the clouds or dust. By the angels who
disperse the clouds. By the women who disseminate generations of mankind
through conception and pregnancy.

2. By the clouds bearing the heavy weight of rain by the angels
responsible for making the clouds heavy with the weight of rain to flow.
By the women carrying the burden of pregnancy.

3. By the ships floating in the sea with ease. By the planets, the sun,
and the moon circling in their orbits. By the winds that move around.

4. Then these are the distributors of affairs or the angels serving as
agents of the affairs of creation, responsible for sending down rain and
distributors of the provisions of creatures, since each kind of angels
are responsible for fulfilling certain duties so that the world of
creation be preserved through order.

Ibn al-Kawwa’ asked the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (as)
regarding the opening four blessed Verses and narrated from Mujahid that
‘distributors’ refers to the four archangels responsible for the affairs
of mankind: Gabriel for severity, Michael for Mercy, ‘Izra’il for taking
life, and Israfil for blowing the Trumpet or distributing the winds that
distribute the clouds throughout the world.

The author of [the exegetic work titled] Kashshaf and Tabarsi narrate
from Ibn ‘Abbas and Mujahid who in turn narrate from Ibn al-Kawwa’ that
the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (as) was asked while preaching
on the pulpit:

*“O Commander of the Faithful (as)! I ask you a few questions. Tell me
what is meant by:*

***‘al-Dhariyat Dharwa?’”***

He replied:

*“The wind is being intended.”*

I inquired:

*‘What about*

***fa-al-hamilat waqra?’***

He replied:

*‘The clouds are being meant.’*

I further asked:

*‘What is intended by*

***fa-al-muqassimat amra?’***

He answered:

*‘Angels are being meant.’”*

The tradition is attested in many a tradition source. The tradition in
question bears testimony to the aforesaid view as per which dhariyat,
hamilat, jariyat, and muqassimat designate the wind, the clouds, the
ships, and the distributing angels respectively.

Certain Qur’anic exegets have been quoted as saying that in all
instances, the word

***‘Lord’***

is the object of oaths, since it is solely befitting to swear by God
Almighty.

In this vein, a tradition is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) as per which
he said:

*“No one is allowed to take an oath unless he swears by God Almighty,
but He may swear by any of His creatures. God Almighty swears by these
creatures since they are of great benefits. Divine Unity is also further
substantiated through such oaths. The fundamentals of the physical world
include these four things; even if one of the four fails to function or
transgress its bounds, the affairs of all mankind and also all creatures
shall be ruined.”*

Surah al-Dhariyat - Verses 5-6
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا تُوعَدُونَ لَصَادِقٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ الدِّينَ لَوَاقِعٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***5. Indeed, that which you are promised is certainly true.***  
***6. And indeed, the [Day of] Recompense is certain to occur.***

God Almighty fulfills the Promises given to His servants in this world
and the Hereafter. God Almighty whose Manifestations of Omnipotence are
visible in the world of creation is Able to fulfill His Promises.

The twain blessed Verses in question serve as the apodoses of the oaths
to such multiplicities in the natural phenomena and their distribution
as promised by the Prophets including the Rewards, Chastisements,
Paradise, and Hell which are all true. Since the oath taken is supposed
to be consistent with what is mentioned as the substantiation thereof,
making mention of the multiplicities of the natural phenomena, e.g.
wind, rain, and cloud, may make a reference to the point that despite
the contradiction and dispersion of natural phenomena, God Almighty has
removed such contradiction and dispersion though His Omniscience and
Omnipotence and they all constitute an orderly world.

Likewise, it was promised by the Prophets as to getting together of all
mankind and jinn living in dispersion and different spatial and temporal
spheres that on the Promised Day they shall get together in one single
line. These temporally disintegrated creatures shall unite on the Day of
Resurrection. Thus, all different and dispersed deeds committed in this
world shall be presented to them in the Books of Deeds and those
committing them shall be recompensed.

Surah al-Dhariyat - Verses 7-9
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسَّمَاء ذَاتِ الْحُبُكِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّكُمْ لَفِي قَوْلٍ مُّخْتَلِفٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُؤْفَكُ عَنْهُ مَنْ اُفِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***7. By the heaven abounding in beauteous paths and beauties,***  
***8. Surely, you are [perplexed] in having different words.***  
***9. Turned aside from Truth is he who will be led astray [in
future].***

The insensible may utter different words at different times. Thus, there
is one Straight Path, but ways leading people astray are large in
number. There is one true belief, but untrue ones are many. The blessed
Verses in question like the preceding ones open with an oath and treat
of disbelievers’ differences regarding Resurrection and different
questions including the Noble Prophet of Islam (S) and Divine Unity.

The blessed Verse 7 reads:

***“By the heaven abounding in beauteous paths and beauties.”***

Different senses have been presented by lexicographers for the Arabic
plural noun hubuk (singular form: hibak) including: paths and meanders
as traces of wind blowing onto desert sand, water surface, or clouds. It
is also applied to ‘curly hair’ and at times to ‘beauty, adornment,
orderly shape.’

The word derives from the root h-b-k denoting ‘bind, tighten.’[^2] All
the different senses traces back to one single sense: the beauteous
folds and meanders visible in waves, clouds, desert sand hills, and
hair.

Application of the original sense of the word to the heaven is owing to
either the different forms of the masses of planets and constellations
or the fascinating meanders visible in clouds which are at times so
appealing that one may be mesmerized by them for a while. It may also
reflect the immense masses of galaxies appearing in spheres like curls
of hair.

The fascinating pictures taken by scientists by means of telescopes
remind one of curly hair. Thus, the Holy Qur’an swears by the heaven and
immense galaxies still unperceived by the sharp vision of science.

Taking into account the fact that these senses are by no means
inconsistent may reflect that they are all intended in the oath, as it
is attested elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^3]:

***“And indeed We have created above you seven heavens [one above the
other]”***

which makes a reference to the multiplicity and variety of the heavens,
planets, galaxies, and different worlds. It is also worthy of note that
the root of the word may reflect the consolidation of the heavens and
the solid nexus existing amongst planets, like that between the planets
of the solar system with the sun.

The apodosis of the oath, namely the object of it, is to be found in the
blessed Verse 8:

***“Surely, you are [perplexed] in having different words.”***

It is saying that your words are contradictions in terms demonstrating
the unfoundedness of your words. Regarding Resurrection you say at
times:

*“We never believe that decayed bones may ever be rejuvenated.”*

At times you say:

*“We are in doubt concerning Resurrection.”*

You sometimes say:

*“Bring our ancestors to bear witness that Resurrection will follow
death so that we may acknowledge your claims.”*

Regarding the Noble Prophet of Islam (S) you sometimes say that he is a
lunatic, a poet, a sorcerer. At times you say that a teacher teaches him
these words. At times, you call the Holy Qur’an ‘ancient legends’
(asatir al-awwalin), poetry, magic, and lie.

By the meanders of the heavens! Your words abound in contradictions in
terms. Had you had any reasonable argument to produce, you would have
presented the same argument instead of searching different unfounded
arguments each and every day. Such expression is actually an argument
negating disbelievers’ unfounded claims regarding Divine Unity,
Resurrection, the Noble Prophet of Islam (S), and the Holy Qur’an.

It is worthy of note that based on the contextual meaning of the
following blessed Verses, the focal point of these blessed Verses is the
question of Resurrection.

The blessed Verse 9 treats of the reasons behind deviation from the true
path, saying:

*“Those who refuse to acknowledge sound arguments and submit to reason
deviate from belief in Resurrection; though the arguments substantiating
life after death are evident.”*

***(“Turned aside from Truth is he who will be led astray [in
future]”).***

It is worthy of note that the Verse in expressed in brief as the literal
translation of the same is:

***“Turned aside from Truth is he who will be led astray [in
future].”***

The Arabic word ufik originally designates ‘turn away from’;
consequently, it is applied to ‘lie’ which entails deviation from the
Straight Path. Likewise the Arabic plural noun mu’tafikat is applied to
different winds. Taking into account the point that the preceding Verses
treated of Resurrection, it may be said that the contextual meaning of
the blessed Verse makes a reference to deviation from such belief.

Since the preceding blessed Verses dealt with disbelievers’
contradictory statements, it is evident that those deviating from reason
and clear arguments are being meant herein. Thus, the contextual meaning
of the blessed Verse refers to those who deviate from belief in
Resurrection owing to turning away from logical arguments and the logic
aiming at seeking truth.

However, deviation may reflect refusing to acknowledge the Truth
including the Holy Qur’an, Divine Unity, the Noble Prophet’s (S)
Prophethood, Resurrection, and Divine Guardianship of the Infallible
Imams (as) reflected in a number of traditions. The Question of
Resurrection is indisputably involved herein.

Surah al-Dhariyat - Verses 10-11
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُتِلَ الْخَرَّاصُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ هُمْ فِي غَمْرَةٍ سَاهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***10. Down with the liars [talking of the Holy Qur’an and Resurrection
without relying on sound arguments]***  
***11. Who are immersed in heedlessness and neglect.***

The Arabic word kharras

***(“liar”)***

derives from kh-r-s denoting ‘form a conjecture, tell untruth.’ The
Arabic word ghamra designates ‘abundant bottomless water,’ but it ad hoc
connotes profound ignorance encompassing man. Some people are in the
habit of gossiping based on their surmises and conjectures aiming to
create doubts in others.

Gossips are usually commissioned by the enemy, created by hypocrites,
and acknowledged by simpletons. At any rate, the blessing Verse in
question is saying: “May the liars die.” The sentence is a curse to
those liars who deserve to die since their non-existence is better than
their existence.

The blessed Verse 11 is a depiction of such liars, saying that they are
immersed in neglect and heedlessness. The Arabic word sahun derives from
s-h-w denoting ‘to be inattentive, to neglect; though it ad hoc connotes
those who are immersed in ignorance and produce unfounded words and
excuses each and every day in order to evade the Path of Truth.

Surah al-Dhariyat - Verses 12-14
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَسْألُونَ أيَّانَ يَوْمُ الدِّينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ هُمْ عَلَی النَّارِ يُفْتَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذُوقُوا فِتْنَتَكُمْ هَذَا الَّذِي كُنتُم بِهِ تَسْتَعْجِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***12. They inquire: “When will be the Day of Recompense?”***  
***13. [It shall be] a Day when they will be burned over the Fire!***  
***14. [It is said unto them:] “Taste you your trial! This is what you
used to demand to be hastened!”***

Inquiry aiming at understanding entails no problem, but it is
blameworthy if the same aims at finding faults and denial of truth;

***(“They inquire: “When will be the Day of Recompense?”).***

The antecedent of

***‘they’***

in

***“They inquire”***

are those immersed in ignorance as mentioned in the preceding blessed
Verses; those who have turned away from the Path of Truth and inquire
from believers regarding the Day of Recompense sworn by in the Holy
Qur’an as well as the Noble Prophet of Islam (S) in order to deride
them.

***“A Day when they will be burned over the Fire”***

is the reply to their question whose predicate is omitted, namely the
Day of Recompense is the Day on which you shall be burned and chastised
and the angel responsible for inflicting chastisement upon disbelievers
in Hell says unto them: “Taste your trial!”

This is same Day promised by the Prophets warning disbelievers against
the pain and torment in the Hereafter; but disbelievers refused to
believe them; instead they hastened out of denial asking about the time
of Recompense.

Now, they may taste their trial and acknowledge the truth thereof. It is
also worthy of note that the Arabic word fitna is used originally in the
sense of melting gold and silver in the crucible to separate pure gold
or silver from impurities, though the world ad hoc signifies the
severity of disbelievers’ torment.

Surah al-Dhariyat - Verses 15-16
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْمُتَّقِينَ فِي جَنَّاتٍ وَعُيُونٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آخِذِينَ مَا آتَاهُمْ رَبُّهُمْ إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا قَبْلَ ذَلِكَ
مُحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***15. Indeed, the God fearing shall be in the midst of Gardens and
[beside] Springs,***  
***16. Receiving what their Lord has granted them. Indeed, they were
formerly the good-doers [in this world].***

Turning away from transient pleasures entails permanent ones. Besides
gardens and springs, the people of Paradise receive new Bounties at any
moment. It is worthy of note that what they receive befits Divine
Lordship and all Bounties in Paradise will be granted to the God fearing
by the Sacred Essence of God Almighty.

Following a depiction of those who have immersed in the mire of
ignorance and the manner of their dire fate, God Almighty depicts the
state of the good-doers and the Bounties and Blessings granted to them.
The Qur’anic depiction of the state of disbelievers and evil doers and
their dire fate follows precedes or follows the state of believers and
the God fearing.

We expect the same since God Almighty has glorified His Messenger (S)
and called him ‘bearer of glad tidings and a warner.’ Furthermore, the
perfect man is supposed to know God Almighty by all Divine Beauteous
Names and be aware that He bestows many Blessings at the time of Mercy
and is severely Revengeful at the time of Wrath.

Thus, the God fearing are supposed to be in a state between fear and
hope at all times, rather than be proud of their piety, worship, and
fearing God Almighty or lose their hope of Divine Mercy. As a
consequence, the Qur’anic Verses treat of the state of disbelievers and
their torments inflicted upon them in Hellfire preceding or following a
treatment of the state of the God fearing and those obedient to Divine
Commands deriving pleasure in Gardens and beside Springs in Paradise.

The Arabic word jannat the plural form of jannat which may not only
allude to the point that they will enjoy different kinds of Paradise but
it may also make a reference to the point that they will enjoy physical
and spiritual Paradises and Springs without bounds. The Arabic word
‘uyun is the plural form of ‘ayn which may refer to different kinds of
Springs to be enjoyed by the God fearing.

The blessed Verse proceeds with some of the attributes of the God
fearing including the receipt of what their Lord bestows upon them out
of Mercy and Graciousness;

***(“Receiving what their Lord has granted them”).***

The relative ma (“that, what”) in

***“what their Lord has granted them” (ma ata-hum rabbu-hum)***

designates generality connoting innumerable Bounties. It may also allude
to their exalted state, namely they are so close to God Almighty that
they immediately receive Bounties from Him.

A similar motif is attested elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^4] that it
seems as if the hand of the poor is likened to His:

***“Know they not that Allah Accepts repentance from His servants and
takes the alms and that Allah Alone is the One Who forgives and accepts
repentance, the Most Gracious?”***

The blessed Verse makes a reference to the exalted state of the God
fearing by which they receive Divine Bounties from His Hand; in other
words, they heavenly soul shall receive many a Bounty from its Origin.

The clause

***“Indeed, they were formerly the good-doers [in this world]”***

refers to the point that the God fearing believers attained to such
exalted state of receiving Divine Bounties immediately from the Origin
of Such Bounties owing to their piety and fearing God in their mundane
life.

Qur’anic exegets maintain that:

***“formerly” (qabla dhalik)***

may refer to mundane life and reflect that the Reward of their doing
righteous good deeds is that their pure souls receive Bounties from the
Lord and they also receive Divine Blessings in their worldly life.

Surah al-Dhariyat - Verses 17-19
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَانُوا قَلِيلاً مِّنَ اللَّيْلِ مَا يَهْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِالْأسْحَارِ هُمْ يَسْتَغْفِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفِي أمْوَالِهِمْ حَقٌّ لِّلسَّائِلِ وَالْمَحْرُومِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***17. They used to sleep but little by night.***  
***18. And at dawn, they were invoking [Allah] for forgiveness.***  
***19. And in their property there was the right of mendicants and the
deprived.***

The second attribute of the God fearing is made mention of in the
blessed Verse 17, saying:

***“They used to sleep but little by night.”***

The verbal form yahja‘un is cognate with huju‘ (“night’s sleep”)
deriving from the root h-j-‘. The blessed Verse may be interpreted in
two ways: firstly, the God fearing are awake most of the night and sleep
a short time at night; secondly, most of the nights they are awake
worshipping God Almighty and few are the nights in which they sleep
failing to be awake for the sake of worship.

In this vein, there is a tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq (as)
concerning the blessed Verse in question according to which he said:

*Few are the night in which they sleep without rising [to worship God
Almighty].”*[^5]

The blessed Verse 18 enumerates another attribute of the God fearing
saying that they invoke God Almighty for forgiveness.

The blessed Verse reflects that istighfar designates asking God Almighty
for forgiveness at night has a further merit: despite spending most of
the night in worshipping God Almighty and what is desirable to the
Divine Legislator (shari‘), the God fearing believer whose hear is
purified devotes the dawn time to invoking God Almighty, the
Oft-Forgiving, for forgiveness.

As some Qur’anic exegets maintain, the blessed Verse refers to the point
that the God fearing are supposed to repeatedly invoke God Almighty for
forgiveness following their nightly prayers unless they be deceived by
formal worship imagining that they have attained to the exalted state of
being close to God Almighty consigning to oblivion the Qur’anic Verse:

***“Indeed Allah accepts [prayers] from the God fearing.”***

Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“The best time for invocation to God Almighty is dawn, since Allah
says:*

***‘And at dawn, they were invoking [Allah] for forgiveness.’”***[^6]

Regarding the blessed Verse in question, he said:

*“It refers to invoking God Almighty seventy times for forgiveness in
odd (witr) and night prayers.”*[^7]

According to a Prophetic tradition quoted in Durr al-Manthur:

*“Late night is more desirable to me than early night for night prayers,
since God Almighty says:*

***‘The God fearing invoke God Almighty for forgiveness at
dawn.’”***[^8]

It is also narrated from Imam Sadiq (as):

*“The good-doers who are the people of Paradise invoke God Almighty
seventy times for forgiveness in their odd prayers at dawn.”*[^9]

The blessed Verse 19 enumerates another attribute of the God fearing
saying that they determine certain portions for the poor in their
property thereby they take the poor as their partners in their property.
The Arabic word sa’il is applied to a poor man who expresses his poverty
asking the rich to provide him with what is due to him. The word mahrum
is applied to a gentleman whose continence impedes him from expressing
his poverty and dire state.

Surah al-Dhariyat - Verses 20-23
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفِي الْأرْضِ آيَاتٌ لِّلْمُوقِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفِي أنفُسِكُمْ أفَلَآ تُبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفِي السَّمَاء رِزْقُكُمْ وَمَا تُوعَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَوَرَبِّ السَّمَاء وَالْأرْضِ إِنَّهُ لَحَقٌّ مِّثْلَ مَا أنَّكُمْ
تَنطِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***20. And on the earth are signs for those who have faith with
certitude.***  
***21. And also in [the creation of] your ownselves [are Signs of Divine
Omnipotence, Grandeur, and Wisdom]. Will you not then see [with your
inward sight]?***  
***22. And in the heaven is [the preordainment of] your provision, and
that which you are promised.***  
***23. Then by the Lord of the heaven and the earth, it [Word of Ours]
is the Truth, just as it is the truth that you can speak [in which you
entertain no doubt, likewise entertain no doubt concerning Our
Words].***

According to the Holy Qur’an preparedness of heart is the prerequisite
for finding Guidance and attaining to certitude through Signs of nature,
the Book, and the Islamic faith;

***(“And on the earth are signs for those who have faith with
certitude”).***

Many a secret lie behind the creation of the earth and that of mankind,
including the mass, area, and depth of the earth, mountains and valleys,
its distance from the sun and other planets, different motions of the
earth, visible and invisible mines, vegetation, water reservoirs,
colors, stones, soils, fruits, plants, refinement of the earth and its
providing food and other provisions for its inhabitants all of which
reflect the Signs of Divine Omnipotence and Wisdom to those seeking
certitude.

Different states of the body, from conception onward serve as
manifestations of Divine Omnipotence and man’s different instincts
reflect the signs of His Omniscience and Wisdom as to man’s needs. The
harmony between physical senses and their lack of consistency with each
other, skeleton, nervous, respiratory, and digestion system well as
sight, hearing, and defense mechanism are all signs of Divine
Omnipotence.

Imam ‘Ali (as) says:

*“God Almighty created you with hearing and sight; you become happy,
angry, hungry, and thirsty.”*[^10]

The certain (mawqinin) are those who have attained the knowledge of
certitude (‘ilm al-yaqin) through intellectual and narrational arguments
and look at the earth in order to increase their certitude and knowledge
so that they may perceive the Signs of Divine Attributes of Glory and
Beauty.

They are attentive at all times to find Signs of Divine Mercy in all
things so that through attentiveness and reflection they may attain to
such state thereby they may perceive things as representatives of Divine
Attributes and reach from knowledge of certitude to certitude by sight
(‘ayn al-yaqin).

It is then that they see with their inward eye what is attributed to the
Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (as) as saying:

*“His Signs are to be seen in all things, reflecting that He is One”;*

Thus, they may perceive Divine Infinite Mercy in all creatures.

The blessed Verse 21 is addressed to all mankind.

The hamza (the glottal stop) in a-fa-la (“why not”) is an interrogative
particle connoting censure for those who fail to perceive the Signs of
Divine Omnipotence in themselves, nor do they see that whatever exists
in macrocosm is an instance existing in human existence, since man is
the only creature in him exist all the world of existence and the
treasure of Divine Secrets; he is the only representative of Divine
Attributes who at times soars in the infinite realm of the world of
contingent being through the faculty of his spiritual soul and he is at
times attracted by nature and plunges into the depth of the mire of
materiality.

Despite his Divine vicegerency, he has blinded his inward eye and fails
to perceive the Signs of the Divine in order to know Him.

Acquisition of the knowledge of the origin and Resurrection is dependent
upon knowing one’s self. First of all, one is supposed to know one’s
self in one’s own being as one is the Sign of the Existence of God
Almighty so that one may acquire knowledge of the origin and
Resurrection of one’s self as it is reflected in a generally transmitted
and accepted (mashhur) tradition narrated from the Noble Prophet of
Islam (S):

*“One who knows his own self and truth, he has known his Lord.”*

It is worthy of note that knowing one’s self is not solely dependent
upon acquisition of knowledge concerning one’s body, natural faculties,
and genealogy, but one who knows his own self through acquiring
knowledge as to his createdness and knowing that he is the manifestation
of Divine Existence and Attributes, he may know God Almighty within the
limited capacity of his knowledge and existence.

It is narrated from the master of mystics, Imam ‘Ali (as), saying:

*“Do you imagine that you are but a minute mass? But, macrocosm is
encompassed in you.”*

The blessed Verse 22 is saying that your provision and what is promised
to you are in the heaven descending upon the earth through rain, snow,
and sunlight thereby vegetation grows on which you feed. What is
promised to you has been sent down as Divine Signs.

The word:

***‘heaven’ (sama’)***

may refer to the celestial realm, namely the world of preordainment and
the Preserved Tablet (lawh mahfud) including provision (rizq)
preordained for man from the beginning of creation embracing physical
and spiritual Bounties and also what is promised to the God fearing from
Bounties in Paradise to the exalted states in the Hereafter through
Divinely appointed Messengers.

Although the former meaning of provision, namely what constitutes man’s
sustenance and/or natural requirements, occurs to mind at the first
glance, but taking into account the clause

***“and what is promised”***

with the conjunct ‘and’ and the following blessed Verse:

***“Then by the Lord of the heaven and the earth, it [Word of Ours] is
the Truth, just as it is the truth that you can speak,”***

it becomes evident that the general meaning is intended, since the
antecedent of ‘it’ are seemingly the preceding blessed Verses in which
oaths were taken as to the Lord, Distributor, and Organizer of the
heaven and the earth. Such attributes were enumerated as belonging to
the God fearing for whom states were specified.

It was also mentioned that man’s preordained provision and what is
promised to them from worldly to otherworldly Bounties are certainly
true, like your words of which you are certain. It is worthy of note
that it would be unbefitting to swear by the provision prepared for man
through rain, snow, and sunlight and thereby attempt to substantiate
what is evident by such emphatic oaths.

[^1]: Majma‘ al-Bayan, the opening of Chapter 51; Thawab al-A‘mal apud
Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn, vol. 5, p. 120.

[^2]: Lisan al-‘Arab; Raghib’s Mufradat, under h-b-k.

[^3]: 23:17

[^4]: 9:104

[^5]: Usul Kafi, vol. 3, p. 446.

[^6]: Mustadrak, vol. 5, p. 200.

[^7]: Tahdhib, vol. 2, p. 130.

[^8]: Durr al-Manthur, vol. 6, p. 113.

[^9]: Majma‘ al-Bayan, under the blessed Verses in question.

[^10]: Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn.


