Surah al-Qamar, Chapter 54, Verses 1 - 32
=========================================

**(The Moon)**

**Section (juz’): 27**

**Number of Verses: 55**

General Overview of the Chapter
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.***

The blessed Chapter has 55 Verses and was revealed in Mecca. The
designation of the Chapter derives from the raising the question of
Cleaving of the Moon (shaqq al-qamar). All the blessed Verses of the
Chapter in question end in the letter r.

The preceding Chapter ended with the question of Resurrection and the
blessed Chapter 55 opens with the same. The Chapter mainly treats of
Resurrection, Prophethood, and an account of Prophets' opponents. The
accounts of five peoples, namely those of Noah (as), ‘Ad, Thamud, Lot
(as), and Pharoah are being referred to in this Chapter.

Merits of the Recitation of the Chapter
---------------------------------------

According to a tradition narrated from the Noble Prophet (S)

*"One who recites Surah al-Qamar and perseveres will enter the Plain of
Judgment in splendor on the Day of Resurrection on the condition that he
acts upon Qur’anic Injunctions."*

Surah al-Qamar - Verses 1-3
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اقْتَرَبَتِ السَّاعَةُ وَانشَقَّ الْقَمَرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن يَرَوْا آيَةً يُعْرِضُوا وَيَقُولُوا سِحْرٌ مُّسْتَمِرٌّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَّبُوا وَاتَّبَعُوا أهْوَاءهُمْ وَكُلُّ أمْرٍ مُّسْتَقِرٌّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. The Hour has drawn near and the moon has been cleft asunder.***  
***2. And if they see a miracle, they turn away, saying: "This is
continuous magic."***  
***3. They belied [Divine Verses] and followed their own desires. And
every matter will have a place [for its own].***

The first blessed Verse treats of two significant happenings. Firstly,
mention is made of Resurrection drawing near entailing the most
significant alteration in the world of creation serving as an opening to
a new life in the other world, a world whose greatness and extent are
indescribable and unintelligible to us, the captives of the mundane
world.

Resurrection is inevitable and close to us. The life of this world is so
transient and man is supposed to be attentive and prepare the provision
for the Hereafter. Secondly, the blessed Verse deals with the great
miracle of Cleaving of the Moon bearing witness to Divine Omnipotence
over all things serving as a token of the veracity of the Prophetic
Call. God Almighty says that Resurrection draws near and the moon cleft
asunder.

The question of the Cleaving of the Moon is recurrently mentioned in
Shi‘i and Sunni tradition sources, according to which, disbelievers
asked the Noble Prophet of Islam (S) to cleave the moon asunder because
they imagined that magic and sorcery could not affect the heaven and if
the moon happened to cleave asunder, Prophet Muhammad's (S) task could
definitely be regarded as a miracle.

It is worthy of note that separation of the planets of the solar system
off the sun and/or meteors reflect the possibility of the moon cleaving
asunder. It is interesting to note that Cleaving of the Moon occurred at
night without prior proclamation as to the same while people were
asleep.

The travelers proceeding toward Mecca and Syria and even Indians could
witness Cleaving of the Moon.[^1] It is inscribed on some monuments in
India that the completion date of those monuments was the time when the
moon cleft asunder.

According to Muslim consensus, consecutively transmitted traditions, and
the testimonies of many a Prophetic Companion, people witnessed Cleaving
of the Moon. According to Tabarsi, ‘Abd Allah ibn Mas‘ud, Anas ibn
Malik, Hudhayfa, Ibn ‘Abbas, Jubayr ibn Mat‘am, and ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Umar
witnessed Cleaving of the Moon and bore witness to the same.

According to Tabarsi, it is also narrated from Ibn ‘Abbas that
disbelievers got together one night in full moon and asked the Noble
Prophet (S):

*"If your claim to Prophethood is true, command the moon to cleave
asunder into two halves."*

The Noble Prophet (S) inquired:

*"If I do so, would you believe?"*

They replied:

*"Yes."*

Then the Noble Prophet (S) invoked God Almighty to command the moon to
cleave asunder into two halves. The Noble Prophet (S) summoned
disbelievers and asked them to observe Cleaving of the Moon.

It is narrated from the Noble Prophet (S) on the authority of Ibn Mas‘ud
that he said:

*"By Allah in Whose Hand of Might rests my soul, I witnessed the Mount
of Hira through the two halves of the moon when it was cleft asunder."*

According to Qur’an exegetes, transmitted traditions, and historical
sources, there is no doubt as to Cleaving of the Moon which happened by
Divine Will and the Noble Prophet's (S) miracle.[^2] Sunni exegetes and
traditionists maintain that Cleaving of the Moon is consecutively
transmitted[^3] among whom mention may be made of Suyuti quoting the
same on the authority of ‘Abd al-Razzaq, Ahmad, ‘Abd ibn Humayd, Muslim,
Ibn Jurayr, Ibn al-Mundhar, Tirmidhi, Ibn Murdiwayh, Bayhaqi[^4], and
Qurtubi[^5].

Other sources have transmitted the same on their authorities. It is a
matter of consensus and is free from doubt. The sources are not
mentioned herein for the sake of brevity.

The second blessed Verse is saying that when obdurate disbelievers
witness the miracle proving the veracity of your Prophetic Call turn
away saying that it is a magic repeated. The Arabic word mustamirr
(continuous, repeated) reflects that they had repeatedly seen miracles
worked by the Noble Prophet of Islam (S) such that Cleaving of the Moon
was another. Although such false ascription was a pretext for their
disobedience to Truth.

Alluding to their opposition and its inauspicious consequences, the
blessed Verse 3 is saying that they belied and followed their
concupiscent desires and

***"every matter will have a place [for its own]."***

The point is that their denial of the Prophetic Call, the Noble
Prophet's (S) miracles, and their denial of Resurrection sprang from
their following concupiscent desires, since their prejudice, obduracy,
and arrogance impeded their submission to Truth.

On the other hand, their lust for unconditional deriving pleasures of
the flesh and their impurities stemming from committing sins and doing
wrong served as obstacles in acknowledging the Call to Truth, since such
acknowledgement entailed obligations. It has been always likewise and it
will remain the same. The worst obstacle on the path toward Truth is
following concupiscent desires.

***"Every matter will have a place [for its own]"***

designates that everyone will receive the Reward and Recompense of his
own deeds. The good shall reap Rewards and the evil shall suffer the
evil consequences of their vile deeds.

The expression seemingly makes a reference to the truth that nothing
shall be effaced in this world, but any good or evil act shall stay the
same until man receives his Reward or Recompense of the same. It is
worthy of note that the shadows of night will end in the bright of the
day and Truth shall be established on its stable place.

The Holy Qur’an says elsewhere[^6]:

***"Therefore, one who does righteous good deeds equal to the weight of
an atom shall see it. And one who does evil equal to the weight of an
atom shall see it."***

It is narrated from Imam Baqir (as):

*"No servant shall be afflicted by any affliction unless he has
committed sins."*[^7]

Surah al-Qamar - Verses 4-6
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ جَاءهُم مِّنَ الْأنبَاء مَا فِيهِ مُزْدَجَرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حِكْمَةٌ بَالِغَةٌ فَمَا تُغْنِ النُّذُرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَوَلَّ عَنْهُمْ يَوْمَ يَدْعُ الدَّاعِ إِلَی شَيْءٍ نُّكُرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***4. And indeed there has come unto them news wherein there is to cease
disbelief,***  
***5. Perfect wisdom, but the words of the warners benefit the obdurate
not.***  
***6. Therefore, turn away from them. The Day that the Caller shall call
[them] to a terrible thing and torment of Hell.***

The Arabic word naba’ is applied a piece of news which has three
characteristics. Firstly, the subject matter happens to be of
significant occurrence, as any piece of news is not termed naba’.
Secondly, knowledge and/or certitude is accrued of the same. Thirdly,
the issue is true devoid of untruth.[^8]

The Arabic word muzdajar derives from z-j-r ("drive back, hold back")
which connotes the news that may impede man from committing sins. In
other words, accounts of the ancients and their desperation and torments
contain significant news embodying warning and disgust for believers.

The blessed Verse 5 is saying that the Holy Qur’an is wisdom par
excellence in terms of eloquence, which resumes the points discussed in
the preceding Verses.

As it was mentioned above, it may make a reference to the point that
Cleaving asunder of the Moon at a certain time, all the miracles of the
Prophets and the torment of the damned unfortunate (ashqiya’) as the
Recompense of their deeds, and all other happenings that occurred at
other times owing to the Preordination of the Most Exalted Lord
constitute Wisdom par excellence.

***"But the words of the warners benefit them not"***

may allude to the fact that such obdurate, arrogant, and ignorant people
were not convinced to believe by such significant miracle but they
regarded it as magic and remained in their disbelief and animosity.

In short, all these blessed Verses indicate that Cleaving of the Moon at
the command of the Seal of the Prophets (S) was done to bear witness to
the veracity of his Prophetic Call and the same was worked according to
the order of the world of creation.

Addressed to the Noble Prophet (S), the blessed Verse 6 is saying that
when disbelievers witnessed such great miracle but failed to believe,
you are supposed to withdraw from them without taking troubles for their
ignorance but remember the Day when the Divine Caller calls people unto
a horrible thing – the Call to Record of deeds. It is worthy of note
that the Arabic word nukur designates something horrible and
unbeknownst.

Surah al-Qamar - Verses 7-8
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُشَّعًا أبْصَارُهُمْ يَخْرُجُونَ مِنَ الْأجْدَاثِ كَأنَّهُمْ جَرَادٌ
مُّنتَشِرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُّهْطِعِينَ إِلَی الدَّاعِ يَقُولُ الْكَافِرُونَ هَذَا يَوْمٌ عَسِرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***7. They will come forth with humbled eyes from graves as if they were
locusts scattered,***  
***8. Hastening with erect necks towards the Caller. The disbelievers
will say: "This is a hard Day."***

The Arabic word ajdath is the plural form of jadath ("grave, tomb").
Humbling of eyes is a token of intensity of fear or shamefulness leading
to humbleness. The similitude of sinners on the Day of Resurrection to
scattered locusts reflects their perplexity and astonishment upon coming
out of graves hastening hither and thither out of witnessing the torment
on that Day.

The blessed Verse 8 is saying that when they leave their graves upon the
Call, they protrude their necks toward Calling angels out of the
intensity of fear. The Arabic word muhti‘in derives from h-t-‘
("protrude one's neck").

Some exegetes interpret the word in the sense of gazing or hastening.
Both senses are possible in the interpretation of the blessed Verse,
though the former sense is seemingly more appropriate herein, since when
a horrible sound is heard, man immediately protrudes his neck and then
turns toward the source of the sound.

It is worthy of note that the contextual meaning of the blessed Verse in
question may refer to all these senses. Thus, upon hearing the Divine
Caller, they protrude their necks toward the source of the sound, then
gaze at it, and later on hasten toward it and make their presence at
Divine Tribunal. Then, the horror of the hard incidents of that Day
encompasses them all.

Thus, the blessed Verse proceeds to add that disbelievers say that that
today is a hard and excruciating. It is a hard day since all the things
cause fear in sinners. May God Almighty bestow His Mercy upon His
servants. On that Day, there shall be neither fear nor grief for
believers.

Surah al-Qamar - Verses 9-10
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَذَّبَتْ قَبْلَهُمْ قَوْمُ نُوحٍ فَكَذَّبُوا عَبْدَنَا وَقَالُوا
مَجْنُونٌ وَازْدُجِرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَدَعَا رَبَّهُ أنِّي مَغْلُوبٌ فَانتَصِرْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***9. The people of Noah (as) denied [him] before the disbelievers
denying the Noble Prophet (S). They denied Our servant and besides
denial of his Prophethood said: "A madman!" and that he was far from the
true path.***  
***10. Then Noah (as) invoked his Lord [saying]: "I have been overcome,
so render [me] assistance!"***

God Almighty consoles the Noble Prophet (S) saying that if disbelievers
denied your Prophetic Call and miracles, do not entertain sorrow since
people in aforetime were the same. The people of Prophet Noah (as) did
so many wrongs to the Archprophet (as) and transgressed the bounds to
such an extent that they attributed madness and ignorance to him.

They even threatened that they would kill him as it is reflected
elsewhere in the Holy Qur'an[^9]:

***"They said: 'If you cease not, O Noah (as), you will surely be among
those stoned to death.'"***

Finally, he was desperate of guiding them and said unto God Almighty
that neither such people nor their offspring may be guided.

Thus, according to the blessed Verse 10, Noah (as) said:

***"I am overcome, render me assistance."***

Following nine hundred and fifty years of imparting Divine Guidance, his
people, except for a small number, denied his Prophetic Call. Further,
they transgressed the bounds to such extent that he was desperate and
called his Lord saying that he could not guide them to the Straight Path
and invoked him to take his vengeance upon them. Then, God Almighty
answered his prayer as a consequence of which the torment of tempest
encompassed them.

Surah al-Qamar - Verses 11-12
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَفَتَحْنَا أبْوَابَ السَّمَاء بِمَاء مُّنْهَمِرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفَجَّرْنَا الْأرْضَ عُيُونًا فَالْتَقَی الْمَاء عَلَی أمْرٍ قَدْ
قُدِرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***11. Therefore, We opened the gates of the heavens with water pouring
forth.***  
***12. And We caused springs to gush forth from the earth. Therefore,
the waters from the earth and the heaven joined for a matter
preordained.***

The blessed Verses make a telling and awe-inspiring reference to the
manner of their torment saying that following Noah's (as) invocation, We
opened the gates of the heaven and an incessant and heavy rain poured
down.

The metaphor of opening the gates of the heaven is a beautiful one which
is employed at the time of pouring down heavy rain. The metaphor is also
used in the Persian tongue when it is said that it is as if the gates of
heaven have opened and all the rain is pouring down.

The Arabic word munhamir ("pouring down, flowing down") derives from
h-m-r ("pour down, flow") connoting heavy pouring down of rain or
flowing of tears. The word is also figuratively employed to connote
milking animals to the last drop. It would be of interest to know that
according to some exegetes, they had been afflicted with famine for
years and expected rain until a fatal rain, rather than a rejuvenating
one, poured down.

The blessed Verse 12 is saying that such heavy rain poured down that
water gushed forth from the earth, as reflected in the blessed Verse in
question. God Almighty cleft the earth asunder and made many a spring
gush forth from the same. The two waters intermingled as it was
preordained and encompassed all over the earth.

In short, water gushed forth from all over the earth and springs flowed
and a heavy rain poured forth and the waters met and formed an immense
and agitating ocean.

Surah al-Qamar - Verses 13-14
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَحَمَلْنَاهُ عَلَی ذَاتِ ألْوَاحٍ وَدُسُرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَجْرِي بِأعْيُنِنَا جَزَاء لِّمَن كَانَ كُفِرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***13. And We carried him on a [vessel] made of planks and nails,***  
***14. The vessel upon which Noah (as) and his followers embarked
Floated under Our Eyes. It was a Reward for him who had been denied.***

The blessed twain Verses in question let go of the account of the
tempest, since what had to be said is contained in the preceding blessed
Verses.

Proceeding with the account of Noah's Ark, the blessed Verse 13 reads:

***"We carried him on a [vessel] made of planks and nails."***

According to Raghib's Mufradat, the Arabic word dasur, the plural form
of disar, originally denotes "shove, push off severely." Since nails are
hammered with heavy strikes into the wood and the like, it is called
disar. However, some exegetes maintain that the word designates rope,
applied to the ropes of the sail and the like.

It is worthy of note that the Qur’anic expression employed herein is
meaningful and significant, since it reflects that in such harsh tempest
encompassing everything, We commanded some pieces of wood and some nails
to rescue Noah (as) and his followers and these inanimate objects
fulfilled their obligation in the best manner and the same reflects
Divine Omnipotence.

The expression may also allude to the simplicity of the vessels of that
time in comparison with modern sophisticated vessels. Nonetheless,
according to historical sources, Noah's (as) Ark was sufficiently large
for whose building he spent years and it could accommodate one pair of
different animals.

The blessed Verse 14 is a reference to the special Favor bestowed upon
Noah (as) by God Almighty saying that the Ark cleaves waves asunder
before Our Eyes and under Our Supervision.

***"Before Our Eyes"***

is a delicate metaphorical expression alluding to special attention to
and perfect preservation of something, as it is elsewhere[^10] attested
in the Holy Qur’an:

***"And build the vessel under Our Eyes and with Our Revelation and call
not upon Me on behalf of those who did wrong; they shall certainly be
drowned."***

The blessed Verse 14 further adds:

***"It was a Reward for him who had been denied."***

Prophet Noah (as) like all other Prophets enjoyed the Great Favors and
Bounties of the Lord, but ignorant disbelievers denied his Prophetic
Call.

Surah al-Qamar - Verses 15-16
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَد تَّرَكْنَاهَا آيَةً فَهَلْ مِن مُّدَّكِرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكَيْفَ كَانَ عَذَابِي وَنُذُرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***15. And Verily, We left the vessel as a Sign. Then is there any that
will receive admonition?***  
***16. Then how terrible is My Torment and My Warning?***

In these twain blessed Verses, God Almighty is saying that He made the
account of Noah's Tempest and Ark and the perdition of disbelievers at
the time remain until the Day of Resurrection such that it may serve as
warning and admonition for all peoples and they learn that denying
Messengers of Allah entails evil consequences.

The blessed Verse 15 is saying:

"Is there anyone who will receive admonition out of such
all-encompassing torment and learn the manner of My torment in store for
disbelievers and contenders?"

Surah al-Qamar - Verse 17
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ يَسَّرْنَا الْقُرْآنَ لِلذِّكْرِ فَهَلْ مِن مُّدَّكِرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***17. And We have verily made the Qur’an easy to understand and receive
admonition. Then, is there anyone who will receive admonition?***

The blessed Verse in question is saying that God Almighty truly made the
Holy Qur’an easy to understand, such that anyone may easily comprehend
the words and expressions therein and thereby find the path toward his
happiness.

Thus, people may learn the accounts of former peoples like Prophet
Noah's (as) tempest and Ark and the perdition of all peoples all over
the earth except for his followers. Thus, they may learn the Recompense
of their evil deeds and take a lesson.

Now, is there anyone who remembers God Almighty and receive admonition?
It is in this vein that people may reflect upon the horror of torment in
this world and attain to felicity. It is worthy of note that not
everybody deserves to benefit from Qur’anic Verses since it is solely
for those who remember God Almighty rather than those who are immersed
in neglect.

Surah al-Qamar - Verses 18-19
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَذَّبَتْ عَادٌ فَكَيْفَ كَانَ عَذَابِي وَنُذُرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أرْسَلْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ رِيحًا صَرْصَرًا فِي يَوْمِ نَحْسٍ
مُّسْتَمِرٍّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***18. The people of ‘Ad belied their Prophet. Then how were My Torment
and My Warnings?***  
***19. Indeed, We recurrently sent against them a furious and icy gale
on an inauspicious day.***

Following the account of Prophet Noah (as) and the tempest, the Holy
Qur’an proceeds with those of Prophet Hod (as) and the people of ‘Ad so
that it makes people aware of the manner of the torment of those who
disobeyed Divine Command.

Although the people of ‘Ad were strong, robust, and of high stature such
that they extracted rocks from mountains and built their houses, they
were afflicted with Divine torment in the form of an incessant icy gale
on an inauspicious day. The inauspicious day mentioned herein may
reflect Divine torment encompassing disbelievers on that day and led to
their perdition.

Surah al-Qamar - Verses 20-22
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَنزِعُ النَّاسَ كَأنَّهُمْ أعْجَازُ نَخْلٍ مُّنقَعِرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكَيْفَ كَانَ عَذَابِي وَنُذُرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ يَسَّرْنَا الْقُرْآنَ لِلذِّكْرِ فَهَلْ مِن مُّدَّكِرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***20. A harsh gale plucking out men as if they were eradicated stems of
date-palms.***  
***21. Then, how are My Torment and My Warning?***  
***22. And indeed We made the Holy Qur’an facile to comprehend and
remember. Then is there anyone who will receive admonition?***

Depicting the aforesaid gale, the Holy Qur’an is saying that it plucked
down people like the uprooted trunks of palm-trees and scatters them
hither and thither. The Arabic word munqa‘ir deriving from q-‘-r
designates the lowest point of anything though it is employed in the
sense of 'eradicate.'

The expression may allude that the people of ‘Ad were strong and robust
and as some exegetes say they had built underground shelters in order to
preserve themselves from gales, but the gale blew so harshly that day
that it eradicated them from their shelters and scattered them around.
It is also said that the gale struck them unto the earth head down that
their heads were severed.

The Arabic word a‘jaz is the plural form of ‘ijz denoting the lower or
rear part of something and their similitude to the lower parts of
palm-tree trunks is owing to the point that the gale was so harsh that
their limbs were severed and scattered into the air and then their
bodies were uprooted from the earth and were scattered hither and
thither. It may also connote that the harshly blowing gale pounded them
onto the earth head down and broke their necks and severed their heads.

The blessed Verse 21 is warning that people may see how Divine torment
and warnings were. God Almighty thus chastised other peoples who trod
the path of denial, arrogance, vanity, sinfulness, and rebellion. What
do you think that you proceed on their path?

The blessed Verse 22 is saying that God Almighty made the Holy Qur’an
facile to comprehend and derive admonitions thereof. Is there anyone who
remembers God Almighty and receives admonition? Is there anyone
listening to the Divine Call and Warnings?

It is worthy of note that the clause;

***"Then how was My Torment and Warnings?"***

is reiterated as to the people of ‘Ad – once in the beginning of the
account and once at the close of it. The difference might lie in the
fact that their torment was more severe and more horrible, though all
Divine torments are severe.

Surah al-Qamar - Verses 23-26
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَذَّبَتْ ثَمُودُ بِالنُّذُرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَالُوا أبَشَرًا مِّنَّا وَاحِدًا نَّتَّبِعُهُ إِنَّا إِذًا لَّفِي
ضَلَآلٍ وَسُعُرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أؤُلْقِيَ الذِّكْرُ عَلَيْهِ مِن بَيْنِنَا بَلْ هُوَ كَذَّابٌ أشِرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَيَعْلَمُونَ غَدًا مَّنِ الْكَذَّابُ الْأشِرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***23. Thamud belied the warners.***  
***24. And they inquired: "Should we obey one single man amongst us?
Truly then we should be deeply [entangled with] in error and
madness!"***  
***25. Is it that he is the only one from amongst us who receives
Revelation? Nay, he is an very arrogant and a liar!"***  
***26. Tomorrow they will come to know who is the liar, the arrogant
one!***

The people of Thamud are the third people whose account is precisely
mentioned as a lesson. They inhabited in the land of Hijr, in the
northern region of Hijaz. Their Prophet Salih (as) made his utmost
effort to guide them onto the Straight Path, but his efforts were of no
avail. They denied Divine Warnings.

The Arabic word nudhur herein connotes warning Prophets and the denial
of the Prophetic Call by the people of Thamud is regarded as that of all
the Prophets, since the Prophetic Calls of all Prophets were consistent.
Nonetheless, the Arabic word nudhur is herein the plural form of indhar
denoting statements made accompanied by warning which are naturally
included in the words of any Prophet.

The second Verse in question treats of their pretexts as to their denial
of the Prophetic Call saying:

"They said: 'Should we follow a man of our community? If we do so, we
will be in error and entangled with madness.'"

Arrogance and vanity served as veils between them and Prophetic Calls.
They said that Prophet Salih (as) was a man like them. Thus, it would be
in vain to follow him. What are his privileges over us so that we should
follow his commands? Astray peoples often found the same fault with
Prophets saying that they are people like us for which reason they may
not be Divinely appointed Prophets.

The Arabic word su‘ur is the plural for of sa‘ir originally denoting
blazing fire but it is employed at times in the sense of madness as
well, since madmen are imbued with special excitement. Thus, naqa
mas‘ura is applied to mad camel. It is worthy of note that the plural
form su‘ur connotes emphasis and permanence, be it in respect to madness
or as to setting fire ablaze.

In the third blessed Verse disbelievers are saying that taken for
granted that Divine Revelation be sent to a certain man, would he be the
only one receiving it where there are people enjoying more recognition,
fame, and possessions?

They also say that he is an arrogant liar desiring to rule over them.
The ignorant solely regard the form but are totally ignorant of
significance and truth. Narrow minded people have always regarded
Prophets human beings like them and have been ignorant of their
spiritual truth.

They have been unaware of the their inward precious jewels thereby they
are connected to the spiritual world and that of Divine Command and are
prepared to receive Divine Revelation. It is through the nexus that they
receive Divine Favors and impart the same unto their peoples. Therefore,
they regarded Prophets liars. It is worthy of note that the Arabic word
ashir connotes exuberance accompanied with lustfulness.

The fourth blessed Verse in question thus provides disbelievers with a
reply saying that it will be known tomorrow as to who the lustful liar
is. Divine torment will strike them into a handful of dust and ashes and
Divine Chastisement shall entangle them in the Hereafter. Such false
accusations may not befit Prophets but are worthy of disbelievers.

Surah al-Qamar - Verse 27
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا مُرْسِلُو النَّاقَةِ فِتْنَةً لَّهُمْ فَارْتَقِبْهُمْ
وَاصْطَبِرْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***27. Indeed, We are sending the she-camel as a test for them.
Therefore, we said unto Salih (as) to watch their end and be patient!***

The people of Thamud went to the extreme in denying Prophet Salih's (as)
Prophetic Call and said unto him derisively:

"If you are a Prophet, command the mount to send forth a red haired ten
month pregnant camel and we share the water with her such that she may
drink the water and provide us with milk and the next day we use the
water.”

To try them God Almighty granted their wish and it was through Divine
Will and Omnipotence that a red haired and ten month pregnant camel came
out of the mount thus addressing Prophet Salih (as):

"Watch and be patient so that you see what they will do to the
she-camel.”

Surah al-Qamar - Verse 28
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَبِّئْهُمْ أنَّ الْمَاء قِسْمَةٌ بَيْنَهُمْ كُلُّ شِرْبٍ
مُّحْتَضَرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***28. And We inform them that the water is to be shared between them
and the she-camel, each one of them receive the allotted share.***

Addressed to Prophet Salih (as), the blessed Verse in question is asking
him to inform the people of Thamud that they should divide the water
between themselves and the she-camel. There was seemingly a fountain
whose water sufficed to provide the people inhabiting the region with
water.

The people of Thamud were assigned to make use of the water one day and
leave it to the she-camel the next day and receive milk from her in
return. However, they rejected the offer and suffered the evil
consequences of their deeds and it will be reflected in the following
Verses.

Surah al-Qamar - Verses 29-30
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَنَادَوْا صَاحِبَهُمْ فَتَعَاطَی فَعَقَرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكَيْفَ كَانَ عَذَابِي وَنُذُرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***29. But they called their comrade and he took [a sword] and slew
[her].***  
***30. Then, how is My Torment and My Warnings?***

The disobedient, vain, and obdurate people made up their minds to slay
the she-camel though Prophet Salih (as) had warned them that if they
harm her in any way, they would be afflicted with torment.

But, they ignored his warning and called one of their comrades and asked
him to slay the she-camel. The Arabic word sahib may herein allude to
one of the chiefs of the people of ‘Ad who was one of their most
notorious scoundrels named in historical accounts as Qadara ibn Salif.
He was an ugly villain and one of the most inauspicious people of the
time.

The Arabic word ta‘ati originally denotes handling something or
embarking upon some act, but it also connotes fulfilling significant,
perilous, toilsome, and profitable tasks. It is worthy of not that all
these interpretations are possible in the blessed Verse in question,
since embarking upon slaying the she-camel required audacity.

Furthermore, it was toilsome and naturally entailed remuneration. The
Arabic word ‘aqar is cognate with ‘uqr originally denoting root and
basis, but employed as to camels, it connotes slaying or cutting sinews.
Different reports exist as to the manner of slaying the she-camel. Some
maintain that her sinews were severed with sword.

Some hold that Qadara lay in ambush behind a rock and shot her with an
arrow and then attacked her with a sword. The following blessed Verse in
question opens the account of the horrible torment of the disobedient
people: "Now observe the manner of My Torment and Warnings."

Surah al-Qamar - Verses 31-32
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أرْسَلْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ صَيْحَةً وَاحِدَةً فَكَانُوا كَهَشِيمِ
الْمُحْتَظِرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ يَسَّرْنَا الْقُرْآنَ لِلذِّكْرِ فَهَلْ مِن مُّدَّكِرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***31. Indeed, as the Recompense of their crime, We sent against them an
awful cry and the lightning and they became like the stalks scattered in
a pen by cattle owners.***  
***32. And verily, We have made the Qur’an easy to understand and
remember. Then is there anyone who will receive admonition?***

The blessed Verse 31 is saying that God Almighty sent a horrible cry
upon them; as a consequence of which, they turned into dried up and
mashed plants gathered as fodder for cattle by their owners. The Arabic
word sayha ad hoc denotes a loud cry from the heaven and it may connote
the awe-inspiring lightning flashing above their city.

The word hashim denotes fragile things like stalks. The word is employed
ad hoc in the sense of such stalks flailed and prepared as fodder by
cattle owners. It is also applied to the stalks scattered beneath them.
The Arabic word muhtadir is applied to one who gathers dried plants to
feed his cattle.

The metaphorical expression employed in the blessed Verse in question
regarding the torment of the people of Thamud is quite wondrous and
meaningful, since God Almighty did not send hosts from the heaven and
the earth to cause the perdition of the disobedient people, but smashed
everything within a wide expanse solely through a loud cry heard from
the heaven, an awe-inspiring lightning, an enormous explosion.

Their prosperous palaces and mansions turned into cattle fodder and
their corpses became like flailed plants scattered beneath cattle.
Comprehension of such meaning was rather hard for former peoples, but it
is not thus today owing to awareness as to the aftermath of explosions
shattering everything within their scopes.

It is however worthy of note that the Lightning of Divine Torment is not
to be compared to such explosions and thus it becomes evident that such
awe-inspiring lightning inflicted what a massive disaster upon such
disobedient people.

The second blessed Verse in question asks whether such admonitory and
excruciating fate is not sufficient to awaken mankind. Is there anyone
who receives admonition out of the Holy Qur’an and its vivid and crystal
clear expressions, accounts, and warnings?

[^1]: A building was ruined in Beijing, the capital of China, on whose
pillars it was inscribed that it had been erected in the second year
after the Cleaving of the Moon (Majma‘ al-Bayan, vol. 24, p. 11).

[^2]: See Shi‘i and Sunni exegetic sources including: Majma‘ al-Bayan;
Tafsir Burhan; Tafsir Safi; Tafsir Nur al-Thisqalayn; Tafsir Nimuna;
Tafsir Makhzan al-‘Irfan; Tafsir Nur; Atyab al-Bayan; Tafsir al-Mizan.

[^3]: Tafsir Durr al-Manthur, vol. 6, p. 133.

[^4]: in Dala’il

[^5]: transmitting on the authority of Anas

[^6]: 99:7-8

[^7]: Usul Kafi, vol. 2, p. 269.

[^8]: Raghib's Mufradat.

[^9]: 26:116

[^10]: 11:37


