Surah al-Rahman, Chapter 55, Verses 1 - 32
==========================================

**(The Most Gracious)**

**Section (juz’): 27**

**Number of Verses: 78**

General Overview of the Chapter
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

The Chapter has seventy eight Verses and it was reveled in Medina.

The designation of the Chapter derives from the first blessed Verse,

***"the Most Gracious"***

(al-Rahman), one of the Most Beautiful Names and Attributes of Allah.

Imam Kadim (as) said:

*"There is a bride [best thing] for everything, and that of the Qur’an
is Surah al-Rahman."*[^1]

The blessed Verse:

***"Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you both [jinn and
men] deny?"***

is reiterated thirty three times which constitutes the most reiteration
throughout the Holy Qur’an.

It would be of interest to know that the blessed Verse in questin
addresses both jinn and men asking them:

***"Which of the innumerable Blessings of your Lord will you deny?”***

It is worthy of note that Divine Warnings were reiterated in the
preceding Chapter:

***("My Torment and Warnings")***

and the blessed Chapter in question reiterates Blessings.

The preceding Chapter opened with an account of Resurrection and closed
with Divine Omnipotence:

***("In a seat of truth, near the Omnipotent Lord")***

and the blessed Chapter in question opens with Divine Graciousness and
closes with Divine Majesty and Honor

***("Blessed is the Name of your Lord, the Owner of Majesty and
Honor").***

Merits of Recitation of the Chapter
-----------------------------------

Numerous traditions have been narrated regarding the merits of
recitation of the Chapter,[^2] but we suffice to quote only one
tradition.

According to a tradition narrated from the Messenger of Allah (S):

*"One who recites Surah al-Rahman shall be granted Divine Graciousness
upon his inability to give thanks to Allah for all His Blessings and
shall be rewarded for his gratitude against Divine Blessings."*[^3]

Generally speaking, the blessed Chapter treats of different material and
spiritual Divine Blessings bestowed upon His servants encompassing them
all such that the blessed Chapter may bear the designations "Divine
Graciousness" or "Divine Blessings," as a consequence of which the
blessed Chapter opens with one of the Most Beautiful Divine Names and
Attributes,

***"the Most Gracious"***

(al-Rahman) reflecting Divine encompassing Mercy and it closes with
Divine Majesty and Glory.

Surah al-Rahman - Verses 1-2
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرَّحْمَنُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَّمَ الْقُرْآنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. The Most Gracious [Allah]!***  
***2. He taught the Qur’an.***

His Messenger (S) is a Mercy;

***("And We have sent you not but as a Mercy for the worlds [jinn and
mankind],").***

His Qur’an is also a Mercy;

***("And We send down the Qur’an that which is a healing and a Mercy to
those who believe,"***[^4]***).***

The Divine Attribute;

***"the Most Gracious"***

(al-Rahman) is attested 169 times 114 instances of which are to found in
the opening of Chapters

***("In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful").***

As mentioned above, the blessed Chapter reflects different Divine
Blessings, opening with the Divine Attribute;

***"the Most Gracious"***

(al-Rahman), a secret of His All-Encompassing Graciousness, since were
it not owing to this Attribute of His, such Blessings would not have
fallen into the shares of His friends and enemies.

The blessed Verses are saying that the Most Gracious Allah taught the
Holy Qur’an. Thus, the first and the most significant Blessing is
mentioned as teaching the Holy Qur’an. What an appealing and significant
expression. If we reflect correctly, the Glorious Qur'an is the source
of all Divine Blessings and the means to attain to any Blessing and
benefiting from all material and spiritual Blessings.

It is worthy of note that treating of the Divine Blessing of:

***"teaching the Qur'an"***

is mentioned prior to the creation of man and teaching him, but the
natural order would be to first make mention of the reverse order,
namely creation of man, the Blessing of teaching man speech, and then
teaching him the Holy Qur’an. However, the majesty and glory of the
Glorious Qur’an necessitates the order in question.

The other point is that the blessed Verse is a response to Arab
polytheists who upon hearing the Noble Prophet (S) calling them to
prostrate before the Most Gracious Allah asked:

"What is Graciousness?"

***("And when it is said unto them: 'Prostrate yourselves to the Most
Gracious Allah!' They say: 'And what is the Most Gracious? Shall we fall
down in prostration to that which you command us?' And it increases in
them only aversion."***[^5]***).***

The Holy Qur’an is saying that the Most Gracious Allah is One Who taught
the Qur’an, created man, and taught him speech.

It is worthy of note that second to "Allah" the Divine Attribute;

***"the Most Gracious"***

is the most encompassing concept from amongst the Most Beautiful
Attributes and Names of Allah, since we know that God Almighty possesses
two kinds of Graciousness, general and specific.

The Attribute;

***"the Most Gracious"***

reflects His All-Encompassing Graciousness.

The Divine Attribute;

***"the Most Merciful"***

(Rahim) designates His specific Graciousness bestowed upon the faithful
and the obedient.

It is seemingly owing to this reason that the Attribute;

***"the Most Gracious"***

is never applied to anyone other than God Almighty, unless it is
accompanied by the word

***"servant"***

(‘abd), but

***"merciful"***

may be applied to others, since All-Encompassing Graciousness only
belongs to God Almighty. In other words, specific mercy in its feeble
form may be found among mankind and other creatures.

According to a tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq (as),

***"the Most Gracious"***

(Rahman) is All-Encompassing and is solely a Divine Attribute, but

***"merciful"***

(rahim) is specific. In other words, the former is a specific name but
is all-encompassing, namely, it is a Divine Attribute reflecting that
His Mercy is All-Encompassing.

But,

***"merciful"***

is a general name with specific application, namely it may be applied to
anyone, but

***"merciful"***

is general name with specific application, i.e., it is applied to God
Almighty and His Creatures.

Likewise, the Noble Prophet (S) is mentioned in the Holy Qur’an as:

***"kind and merciful"***[^6]

(ra’uf al-rahim), but they designate limited and specific mercy.

Qur’an exegetes are not unanimous regarding the issue as to who received
the teaching of the Holy Qur’an. Some maintain that Gabriel, angels, the
Noble Prophet (S), and all mankind and even jinn received it.

Since the blessed Chapter in question treats of Divine Blessings
bestowed upon jinn and mankind, and the question:

***"Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you both [jinn and
men] deny?"***

is attested thirty one times following an enumeration of Divine
Blessings, the last interpretation sounds to be more appropriate, namely
God Almighty taught jinn and mankind the Holy Qur’an through His
Messenger, the Noble Prophet of Islam (S).

Surah al-Rahman - Verse 3
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَلَقَ الْإِنسَانَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***3. He created man.***

Following a treatment of the unique Blessing of teaching the Holy Qur’an
in the preceding Verse, the blessed Verse in question says:

***"He created man."***

It goes without saying that the word "man" (insan) designates mankind
rather than Prophet Adam (as), since he rather than the Noble Prophet of
Islam (S) will be mentioned in the following Verses, though the Noble
Prophet of Islam (S) is a man par excellence.

The All-Encompassing Blessing of speech which will follow serves as
another argument substantiating the general application of the word
"man." Thus, other interpretations are not seemingly true.

Indeed, creation of man as the most wondrous creature in the world of
existence, i.e. the macrocosm included in man, the microcosm, is an
unequalled Blessing, since each dimension of his being is a great
Blessing.

It is worthy of note that man begins its being as an unworthy semen,
narrowly speaking, a microscopic being afloat in that unworthy drop of
semen. Nonetheless, the being, thanks to Divine Lordship, proceeds on
the path of evolution and development such that he may be promoted to
the state of the most exalted and the noblest being in the world of
existence.

It is also worthy of note that the name of man follows the Holy Qur’an,
since the Holy Qur’an encompasses all the secrets of the world of
existence in their codified form and man is the synopsis of these
secrets in the form of coming into being and development and each and
every man reflects a version of this great and vast world!

Surah al-Rahman - Verse 4
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَّمَهُ الْبَيَانَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***4. He taught him speech.***

The blessed Verse in question makes a reference to one of the most
significant Blessings second to the creation of man, saying:

"God Almighty taught him speech."

The Arabic word bayan:

***("speech")***

enjoys a wide range of meaning, applied to whatever clarifies something.
Thus, it not only encompasses speech but also it connotes script,
writing, and different intellectual and logical arguments clarifying
complicated and sophisticated issues. The word encompasses all, though
the core meaning is speech.[^7]

Since men are habitually inclined toward speech, they underestimate it,
but the fact is that speech is one of the most sophisticated and the
most delicate of human acts.

It may even be said that nothing is as sophisticated and delicate as
speech, since sound production systems work together to produce
different sounds. Lungs pump down the air and emit the same in time
through larynx.

Vocals tracts reverberate and produce totally different sounds to
reflect satisfaction, wrath, requesting assistance, love, and hate. Then
such sounds are produced with speed and particular delicacy through the
tongue, lips, teeth, and the oral cavity. In other words, the monotonous
and prolonged sound emitting from the larynx is fashioned in different
forms and measures thereby different sounds are produced.

On the other hand, the coinage of words is raised such that owing to
intellectual developments, man coins different words to meet his
material and spiritual requirements. It is a source of surprise that
there exists no limit as to the quantity of vocabulary and the number of
languages spoken in the world is so large that it evades determination.

Novel words and languages are formed in time. Some say that the
languages of the world run to three thousand, but some even maintain
that the number exceeds the same.[^8] They were seemingly after
enumerating languages, since the number of regional dialects and accents
far exceeds the aforesaid numbers as there are many instances in which
the inhabitants of two adjacent villages speak two regionally different
languages.

Another point is the rules of syntax governing clauses and also
expression of arguments and feelings are carried out through intellect
and reason as the soul of speech. Thus, speech is peculiar to man.

It is true that many animals produce sounds to communicate but the
sounds produced by them is so limited in number and they are rather
vague compared to human speech which is of wide application and
boundless, since God Almighty has provided man with the required faculty
of speech.

Furthermore, with due consideration of the role of speech in the
developments of human life and the emergence and developments of
civilizations, one may certainly believe that it is solely thanks to
this great Blessing that mankind may pass down their knowledge and
experience from one generation to the following one and thereby cause
the advancement of knowledge and science and the developments in
civilizations, religions, and ethics. Put the case that such great
Blessing is withheld, human societies will rapidly move towards
regression.

If the word:

***"speech"***

herein be applied to script and writing and even different kinds of
arts, its extraordinary role in the life of mankind is furthered
clarified. Now it becomes crystal clear why mention is made of God
Almighty teaching man speech following the creation of man treated in
the blessed Chapter in question which encompasses a compendium of Divine
Blessings.

Surah al-Rahman - Verse 5
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الشَّمْسُ وَالْقَمَرُ بِحُسْبَانٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***5. The sun and the moon follow their measured out calculation.***

The blessed Verse in question treats of the fourth great Divine Blessing
bestowed by the God Almighty, the Most Gracious. The blessed Verse is
saying that the sun and the moon follow their courses with measured out
calculation.

The existence of the sun is one of the greatest Divine Blessings
bestowed upon man, since life would be unimaginable in the solar system
without the light and heat of the sun. It was mentioned above that any
motion on the earth springs from the solar light and heat. Growth of
plants and production of provision, precipitation, and blowing of winds
are all thanks to this Divine Blessing.

The moon, in its turn, plays a key role in human life. It is the light
of his dark nights, its gravity is the sources of ebb and flow in oceans
result in life in seas and watering of rivers flowing onto seas.
Besides, the fixed course of the twain circulations, that of the moon
round the earth and that of the earth round the sun results in the
orderly emergence of nights and days, years, months, and seasons.

They make human life order through which man may make use of the same
for his commercial, industrial, and agricultural activities. Without
such order, human life could never have any order.

It is worthy of note that not only the movement of these celestial
bodies are precisely measured out, but also the quantity of their mass
and gravity and their distance from the earth and from each other are
all well calculated, without which great disruptions would occur in the
solar system and consequently in human life.

It is also worthy of note that although the sun is seemingly motionless
in the solar system, but it should be kept in mind that it, along with
all its planets is moving in the milky way galaxy toward a specific
point, the star known as Vega, and such movement follows a certain order
and speed.

For further information, one may refer to 36:38—40:

***("And the sun runs on its fixed course for a term appointed. That is
the Decree of the Omnipotent, the Omniscient. And the moon, We have
measured for it mansions to traverse till it returns to like the old
dried curved date stalk. It is not for the sun to overtake the moon, nor
does the night outstrip the day. They all float, each in an orbit.").***

Surah al-Rahman - Verse 6
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالنَّجْمُ وَالشَّجَرُ يَسْجُدَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***6. And the plants and the trees both prostrate themselves to Him.***

According to Raghib’s Mufradat, the Arabic word najm is applied to
"star" and "stemless plant." The word originally denotes "rise," and the
designation najm is owing to its "rise."

It is common knowledge that all the food used by mankind originally
derives from plants, some of which are directly consumed by man and some
are used to feed those animals constituting human dietary ingredients.
It is applied to sea animals, since they feed on minute plants growing
in millions throughout water under sun light floating in between waves.

Thus the word najm is applied to small, creeping plants like pumpkin and
cucumber and the word shajar designates types of plants with stems,
stalks, and trunks, like crops and fruit bearing trees.

The Arabic verbal form yasjudan; ("the two prostrate themselves")
connotes unconditional submission against the rules of creation in vein
with human benefits, a Divinely appointed fixed course which they follow
without any alteration.

It also alludes to their monotheistic secrets since each leaf or seed
contain wondrous Signs of Divine Greatness and Omniscience;

***("Each leaf is a book of Divine Omniscience").***

Some also maintain that the Arabic word najm may connote stars, but the
aforesaid exegesis is more consistent with the contextual meaning of the
blessed Verse.

Surah al-Rahman - Verse 7-8
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسَّمَاء رَفَعَهَا وَوَضَعَ الْمِيزَانَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألَآ تَطْغَوْا فِي الْمِيزَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***7. And the heaven: He raised it high, and He set up two
Balances.***  
***8. In order that you may not transgress Balance.***

Following a treatment of Divine Graciousness and the blessings of
teaching, speech, calculation of the sun, the moon, and prostration of
creatures which implies Divine relation with man and nature, the blessed
Verses in question discuss the manner of man's relation with society.

Maintaining the balance refers to moderation as per which immoderation
and inflicting loss is unjustifiable. It is worthy of note that the
fifth creature upon which Divine Graciousness and Mercy are bestowed is
the heaven that enjoys an exalted state.

The Arabic word sama’ ("heaven, sky") is cognate with sumuw
("exaltedness, height, elevation from the earth") and the clause:

***"He raised it high"***

may connote the exaltedness of planets, stars, galaxies, and celestial
spheres, such that these creatures are both higher and more exalted than
the earth, since heavenly bodies are quantitatively and qualitatively
higher than the earth and whatever exists on it.

The point is that man is the synopsis of all earthly and heavenly
creatures and nobler and more exalted that most of the existent beings.

***"He set upon two Balances"***

is that setting up the two Balances constitute the sixth Manifestation
and Gracious Emanation. Balance is employed for weighing and assaying
something by something else like balance and scale, even if the thing
happens to be immaterial, like assaying knowledge by something else.

It also connotes the equality and equilibrium between the constituent
elements of the thing, as it is said that the constituents of these two
things are in equilibrium. Some maintain that balance is used for
weighing and assaying and maintaining perceptible and immaterial
equilibrium, since balance is a polysemous word with different
implications.

Balance may be applied in all matters like beliefs and ethics and
whatever may be assayed in everyday and natural issues in human society
and civilization so that people may not be wronged in transactions and
they may not incur loss and damage but the balance be maintained, namely
justice be administered in human society. It may entail what exists in
equilibrium like limitation of the irascible and concupiscent faculties.

The blessed Verse 8 provides an interesting conclusion of the same
adding that the goal of setting up balance in the world of existence is
that you may maintain the balance and refrain from transgressing the
bounds. You are also a part of this great world and you may never live
inconsistently with it.

There is a system and a balance in this world and you have to have the
same. Without such balance and order, the world will perish. If you lack
order and balance in your lives, you will tread the path to perdition.
The truth behind monotheism is that the prevailing principles of it are
all the same everywhere.

Surah al-Rahman - Verse 9
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأقِيمُوا الْوَزْنَ بِالْقِسْطِ وَلَآ تُخْسِرُوا الْمِيزَانَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***9. And observe the weight with equity and do not make the balance
deficient.***

Failing to attend to balance, equity, fairness, and justice in respect
to the rights of people will lead man to immoderation and injustice.
Islam provides people with significant and precise injunctions for the
maintenance of justice and balance such that according to traditions, a
judge wearing tight shoes is not supposed to issue verdicts lest the
tightness of the shoes may affect his judgment and lead him to haste and
intemperance thereby he may err as to the administration of justice.

According to another tradition, valuable commerce rests upon truth.

According to a tradition narrated from Imam ‘Ali (as):

*"Merchants are wrong-doers and wrong-doers shall abide in Hellfire,
unless his transactions be based on truth."*[^9]

Imam ‘Ali (as) ordered that adulterated coins be cast into wells so that
they may not be used for transactions.[^10]

He walked in the market of Kufa and at times stopped in the middle of
the market saying:

*"O merchants! Ask God Almighty for good. Find Divine Blessing in being
lenient toward people. Refrain from telling lies in transactions.
Abstain from injustice. Be not involved in usury. The said tradition is
attested in Kafi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, Majalis, and Tahdhib.”*

It is worthy of note that the blessed Verse emphasizes maintaining
balance and justice saying:

***"Observe the weight with equity and do not make the balance
deficient."***

The word:

***"balance"***

is attested thrice in these blessed Verses, though it was possible to
use pronouns in the second and third instances. It reflects that the
word balance (mizan) is employed in three different senses and using
pronouns may not do justice in conveying the meanings and the contextual
meaning of the Verses also bear witness to the same, since the first
instance implies the balance, criterion, and laws set up by God Almighty
throughout the world of existence.

The second instance treats of abstention of human beings from
disobedience in all the matters concerning individual and social lives
which are naturally more limited. The third instance emphasizes the
issue of weighing in the narrower sense of the word saying that one may
not make the balance deficient in weighing things and the last instance
is more restricted in scope.

Thus, there is an interesting consistency in the Verses in the hierarchy
of balance from larger circles toward smaller ones. The significance of
balance in human life in any of the aforesaid senses is such that taking
out the balance in the narrowest sense will entail chaos, problems, and
disagreement. The broader the sense, the more disorder will prevail.

Based on the above, it is clarified that the reason behind the
interpretation of balance as the presence of Imam (as) is that the
presence of the Infallible Imam (as) serves as a criterion for assaying
truth and falsehood which may lead to perception of truth and finding
guidance. Interpretation of balance to the Holy Qur’an is in this light.

It is, however, worthy of note that all these blessed Verses treat of
Divine Blessings reflecting that the existence of balance in the
entirety of the world of existence, human society, social relations,
commerce, and transactions are all Divine Bounties.

Surah al-Rahman - Verse 10-11
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْأرْضَ وَضَعَهَا لِلْأنَامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِيهَا فَاكِهَةٌ وَالنَّخْلُ ذَاتُ الْأكْمَامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***10. And He created the earth for mankind.***  
***11. Therein are fruits and magnificent date-palms.***

The blessed Verses in question descend from the heaven onto the earth,
saying:

"God Almighty created the earth for the life of mankind.”

The Arabic word anam is interpreted differently by Qur’an exegetes as
mankind, jinn and men, and any animate being. It is worthy of note that
the contextual meaning indicates that jinn and men are being herein
intended.

The earth which is mentioned herein as a remarkable Divine Blessing is
mentioned in other Qur'anic Verses as "cradle" serves as a secure and
serene abode whose significance may not be normally perceived by most of
us, but an earthquake disturbs everything and volcanic eruption may bury
a city beneath magma, fire, and smoke.

Such phenomena indicate that the serene earth is such a great Blessing,
particularly if we reflect upon what scientists say concerning the
velocity of the earth's rotation on its axis and its circling around the
sun, the significance of such serenity despite the staggering velocity,
it is further clarified that it entails different types of motion.

The employment of the past verbal forms wadha‘a ("set up") and rafa‘a
("raised") regarding the earth and the heaven both embodies a delicate
expression in terms of juxtaposition or contrast and a meaningful
allusion to the submission of the earth and its resources against
mankind.

As it is reflected in the Holy Qur’an[^11]:

***"He it is Who had made the earth obedient to you. Therefore walk in
its path and eat of His provision. And to Him shall be the
Resurrection."***

The blessed Verse 11 treats of the tenth Blessings, namely the
provisions, saying that there are fruits and magnificent date palms. The
Arabic word fakiha denotes any kind of fruit and some interpret it as
any kind of fruit but dates which is unjustifiable. Date palms are
mentioned separately, but the repetition may reflect the significance of
dates and date palms.

The word akmam is the plural form of kum designating the sheath covering
fruits. Kumma denotes sleeve covering arm and hand and kum is the night
cap covering the head. The fruit of palm trees is initially covered by a
sheath. Then, the fruit splits the sheath. The depiction used herein may
refer to its astounding beauty or the benefits concealed in the sheath.
It contains juice and essence which are both nutritive and medicinal.

Besides, like a womb, the sheath fosters the fruit for a while and
preserves it from blights. The sheath will be removed when the fruit may
be exposed to sunshine and air. Above all, the peculiar condition of
dates is that it is initially in the sheath and then it splits and forms
clusters making it facile to be picked. Were tall date palms like other
fruit bearing trees like apple, it would be so hard to harvest the
produce.

Surah al-Rahman - Verse 12
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْحَبُّ ذُو الْعَصْفِ وَالرَّيْحَانُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***12. And also corns, with leaves and stalks for fodder and
sweet-scented plants.***

Other earthly benefits include crops, like wheat, barley, millet, and
lintel growing from the earth on which man feeds. The Arabic word ‘asf
denotes the stalk and leaf of grain preserving it until it grows fully.

After harvesting and flailing, they will be used as fodder. Another
benefit of the earth is growing sweet scented plants, but the Arabic
word rayhan may be applied to all flowers and sweet scented plants by
smelling which man may derive pleasure.

Surah al-Rahman - Verse 13
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِأيِّ آلَآء رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***13. Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you both [jinn and
men] deny?***

Reiteration of issues constitutes significant requirements for creating
culture.

It is used at times for reminding different Blessings, like the blessed
Verse in question:

***"Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you both deny?"***

Repetition may also be used to warn sinners, like

***"Woe unto the liars at that time."***

It is worthy of note that following an enumeration of different material
and immaterial Blessings, the blessed Verse in question thus addresses
jinn and men:

***"Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you both deny?"***

Such Blessings are most precious, Blessings encompassing all your lives,
each of which serves as a telling token of Divine Omnipotence,
Graciousness, and Love. How may one deny them? The rhetorical question
is employed herein to bid the addressee to make affirmations as to
Divine Blessings bestowed upon jinn and men.

Thus, according to the tradition narrated in the beginning of the
exegesis of the Chapter bids us to reply by saying:

*"We do not deny any of your Blessings.”*

Although the preceding blessed Verses solely make mention of mankind
without making the slightest reference to jinn, but the following
blessed Verses reflect that the antecedent of the dual pronoun kuma

***("both of you")***

are jinn and men.

It is worthy of note that by mentioning such rhetorical question, God
Almighty makes jinn and men encounter the reality to reflect upon such
issues and without recourse to any other injunction ask themselves:

"Could any of these Divine Blessings be denied?"

If the answer is negative, why do they not recognize their Lord? Why do
they not make use of showing gratitude toward their Lord as a means of
recognizing His Lordship? Why do they not prostrate themselves at His
Divine Threshold?

The phrase:

***"which of"***

(bi-ayya, lit. "to which") indicates that each of these Blessings is a
telling token of His Lordship, Graciousness, and Beneficence, let alone
all His Blessings.

The least reflection upon the aforementioned twelve Blessings (the Holy
Qur’an, creation of man, teaching speech, well measured calculation of
time, creation of plants and all kinds of trees, creation of the heaven,
predominance of rules, creation of the earth with its characteristics,
creation of kinds of fruit, creation of date palm, creation of crops,
creation of flowers and sweet scented plants) along with the details,
delicacies, and secrets concealed in each of them will suffice to make
man show his gratitude toward God Almighty and cause him to search for
obtaining knowledge as to the source of all these Blessings.

It is for the same reason that God Almighty asks the rhetorical question
following an enumeration of His Blessings. The rhetorical question will
be asked thirty one times in the following blessed Verses after
enumerating further Blessings.

Surah al-Rahman - Verses 14-16
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَلَقَ الْإِنسَانَ مِن صَلْصَالٍ كَالْفَخَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَخَلَقَ الْجَانَّ مِن مَّارِجٍ مِّن نَّارٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِأيِّ آلَآء رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***14. He created man from dry clay like the clay of pottery.***  
***15. And the jinn: He created from smokeless flames of fire.***  
***16. Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you both [jinn and
men] deny?***

The Arabic word salsal denotes "dry clay, argillaceous earth."

Fakhkhar designates

***"pottery clay."***

Marij indicates

***"flame."***

Following an enumeration of His Blessings, including making mention of
the creation of man in passing, the blessed Verses in question (14-16)
make an account of the creation of jinn and man.

It serves as a telling token of His Omnipotence and also provides
everyone with lessons, saying:

***"He created man from dry clay like clay of pottery."***

The word salsal denotes dry, rattling clay. The word fakhkhar is applied
to any kind of pottery which rattles upon being touched.

Different Qur’anic Verses and expressions regarding the source of human
creation clearly reflect that man used to be earth in the beginning:

***("O mankind! If you are in doubt about the Resurrection, they indeed
We have created you from dust, then from semen, then from a clot that We
may make it clear to you. And We cause whom We will to remain in the
wombs for an appointed term, then We bring you out as infants, then that
you may reach your age of full strength. And among you there is he who
dies and among you there is he who is brought back to the miserable old
age, so that he knows nothing after having known. And you see the earth
barren, but when We send down water on it, it is stirred and it swells
and puts forth every beauteous kind of growth,"***[^12]***)***

Then it is mingled with water and turns into clay:

***("He it is Who created you from clay and then decreed a term and
there is with Him another appointed term yet you doubt,"***[^13]***);***

***("And when your Lord said unto angels: 'I am going to create man from
dried rattling clay of foul smelling mud,"***[^14]***)***

Then it became sticky

***("Then ask them: 'Are they stronger as creation or those whom We
created?' Indeed, We created them of a sticky clay,"***[^15]***).***

Later on it dried up and became rattling pottery clay as mentioned in
the blessed Verse in question. How long did these stages take? How long
did man stop at each of these stages? What were the factors leading to
these transitional states? Our knowledge fails to uncover such secrets
as the knowledge thereof rests with God Almighty alone.

What is certain is that such expressions serve as telling tokens of a
reality which is significantly linked to educational issues of mankind –
the primeval mass forming human body was the most unworthy and the
lowliest of all matters to be found on the earth, but God Almighty
created such worthy creature out of such unworthy matter such that man
became the noblest of His creatures.

It is also worthy of note that the true value of human being is the
Divine Spirit as it is reflected in Qur’anic Verses:

***("Therefore, when I have fashioned him completely and breathed into
him the soul which I created for him, then fall down prostrating
yourselves unto him,"***[^16]***).***

Thus, man may find his path towards perfection through the recognition
of this truth such that he may know which way he is supposed to tread to
find his true value in the world of existence.

The blessed Verse 15 treats of the creation of jinn, saying:

***"And the jinn: He created from smokeless flames of fire."***

The Arabic word marij is cognate with maraj ("mingling, mixture") which
herein connotes different flames of fire, since blazing fire appears in
different colors, red, yellow, blue, and white. It is not known either
how jinn were created from such colorful flames of fire.

Likewise, other characteristics of jinn are known to us by the True
Dawn, namely the Glorious Qur’an, Divine Revelation. Our limited
knowledge may never allow us to deny nor to ignore such truths, as they
are proven through Divine Revelation, though they defy our knowledge. It
is worthy of note that most of the creatures known to us were created
out of water, earth, wind, and fire.

The source of human creation was water and earth but that of jinn is
wind and fire, even if, like ancients, we regard them simple and element
or like modern scientists who regard them to be composite, made up from
different constituent elements. Such duality in the origins of creation
causes many differences between the twain.

The blessed Verse 16 follows the enumeration of the Blessings one of
which was the creation of man. It reiterates the rhetorical question:

***"Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you both [jinn and
men] deny?"***

Surah al-Rahman - Verses 17-18
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبُّ الْمَشْرِقَيْنِ وَرَبُّ الْمَغْرِبَيْنِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِأيِّ آلَآء رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***17. The Lord of the two easts and the Lord of the two wests.***  
***18. Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you both [jinn and
men] deny?***

The blessed Verse 17 treats of another Divine Blessing saying that God
Almighty is the Lord of two easts and two wests. It is true that each
and every day in a year's time, the sun rises from a point and sets in
another, thus the number of easts and wests run to the number of the
days in a year, but taking into account the maximum northern and
southern axes of the sun, we notice that other easts and wests fall
between the twain.

Such order is the origin of the emergence of the four seasons of the
year engendering abundance and it actually emphasizes and completes the
contents of the foregoing blessed Verses treating of the well measured
calculation of the course of the sun and the moon and the existence of
the balance in the creation of the heavens.

Generally speaking, the blessed Verse reflects the precise order of
creation, motions of the sun and the moon and the Blessings thereby
bestowed upon man.

Some Qur’anic exegetes maintain that the two easts and the two wests
herein connote the rising and setting of the sun and the moon, but the
first interpretation is seemingly more appropriate, particularly owing
to the fact that a number of Islamic traditions make references to the
same and instance of which is a tradition narrated from the Commander of
the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (as) as per the exegesis of the blessed Verse in
question, he says that the easts of the beginning of winter and summer
are discrete.

Do you not see that the sun approximates and distances. It is a
reference to the rising of the sun in the heaven in summer and the
setting of the sun in winter.[^17]

The foregoing remarks clarify the reason behind Oaths like:

***"Therefore, I swear by the Lord of all the points of sunrise and
sunset in the east and the west that certainly We are
All-Mighty,"***[^18]***).***

The reason is that reference is made to all the easts and wests of the
sun during a year, whereas the blessed Verse in question makes a
reference to the solar ascending and descending arches.

Again, the following Verse thus addresses jinn and men asking them:

***"Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you both [jinn and
men] deny?"***

Surah al-Rahman - Verses 19-21
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَرَجَ الْبَحْرَيْنِ يَلْتَقِيَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَيْنَهُمَا بَرْزَخٌ لَآ يَبْغِيَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِأيِّ آلَآء رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***19. He let loose the two salty and sweet seas meeting together.***  
***20. Between them is a barrier so that none of them can
transgress.***  
***21. Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you both [jinn and
men] deny?***

The Arabic verbal form maraja designates:

***"let loose"***

and the Arabic noun barzakh denotes "a barrier between two things."
Resuming the account of Divine Blessings mention is made of seas, but
not all seas. The particular quality of certain seas is an astonishing
phenomenon serving as a token of Divine Absolute Omnipotence. It also
serves as a means of producing certain things used by men.

Thus, the blessed Verses are saying that He juxtaposed two different
seas while they meet; however, there is a barrier between the twain such
that one may not agitate and prevail over the other.

As it is reflected elsewhere in the Glorious Qur’an, the twain seas are
the salty and the sweet seas:

***"And it is He Who let loose the two seas: one palatable and sweet and
the other salty and bitter and He set a barrier and a complete partition
between them"***[^19]***.***

Qur’anic exegetes disagree as to the location of the two sweet and salty
seas and the fact that one does not prevail the other and the nature of
the barrier separating the twain.

However, mention was already made of the point in the exegesis of
Chapter 25 saying that great sweet rivers flowing into seas and oceans
usually form a sea of sweet water beside the coast thus repelling the
brine and it would be of interest to know that sweet and salty water,
owing to the difference in the degrees of thickness, do not intermingle.

A bird's eye view of discrete salty and sweet waters clearly shows the
partition between the twain. When the margins of the twain intermingle,
fresh sweet water substitutes the mingled waters, such that the
partition between the twain is visible at all times. It is interesting
that at the time of flow, the level of oceans is raised, such that sweet
water is repelled without being intermingled with the brine.

The blessed Verse 21 is again addressed to God's servants inquiring:

***"Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you both [jinn and
men] deny?"***

Surah al-Rahman - Verses 22-23
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَخْرُجُ مِنْهُمَا اللُّؤْلُؤُ وَالْمَرْجَانُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِأيِّ آلَآء رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***22. Out of both seas come out pearl and coral.***  
***23. Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you both [jinn and
men] deny?***

Resuming the account of Divine Blessings, the blessed Verse 22 is saying
that pearl and coral come out of the twain seas. It is worthy of note
that interesting adornments are made of pearl and coral. They are also
used in medical treatments and they constitute commodities and
merchandise as well. Many benefits are accrued out of them. Thus, they
are being referred to as two Blessings.

Pearls are transparent and precious things fostered in mothers of pearl
in the depth of the seas. The larger they are, the more precious they
become. They are also used in many medical treatments. Former physicians
made different potions out of them for strengthening the heart, the
nervous system and warding off different kinds of breathing ailments,
fear, kidney and eye complications, bad breath, kidney and bladder
stones, and jaundice.[^20]

Coral is herein interpreted by some exegetes as small pearl, but such
interpretation is far from being true. It is an animate being similar to
a twig growing in the depth of seas. It was regarded by scientists for
some time to be a kind of plant, but later on it became evident that it
belongs to the animal world. It sticks to the bottom of the sea and at
times covers a vast area to increase in time and form coral islands.

The best kind of coral is red in color and the redder, the more precious
it is. Besides serving as adornment, it is applied in medicine and many
benefits have been enumerated for the same. Instances of its medical
applications include potions made from it which are sued for
strengthening the heart, removal of viper's venom, strengthening of the
nervous system, treatment of diarrhea and womb bleeding. It is also said
that it is useful for treatment of epilepsy.

The following Verse further emphasizes on Divine Blessings saying:

***"Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you both [jinn and
men] deny?"***

A tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) regarding the exegesis of the
blessed Verse:

***"He let loose the two salty and sweet seas meeting together,"***

according to which:

*"‘Ali and Fatima (as) are two deep seas, none of the twain transgresses
the other out of the twain seas pearl and coral, namely Hasan and Husayn
(as) came out."*[^21]

The same point is also attested in Tafsir al-Manthur[^22]. It may be
attested in most of Shi‘i exegetic works, e.g. Tabarsi's Majma‘ al-Bayan
and also in Tafsir Burhan, Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn, Tafsir Safi, and
also in some of Sunni exegetic works with slight variations.

However, it is known that the Glorious Qur’an has different layers
thereby one single Verse may have several or tens of meanings. The
content of the aforesaid tradition derives from Qur’anic layers and is
not inconsistent with the literal meaning of the same.

Surah al-Rahman - Verses 24-25
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَهُ الْجَوَارِ الْمُنشَآتُ فِي الْبَحْرِ كَالْأعْلَآمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِأيِّ آلَآء رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***24. And His are the ships built, like mountains.***  
***25. Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you both [jinn and
men] deny?***

In the treatment of other Blessings, the Holy Qur’an did not make use of

***"His" (lahu),***

but regarding ships, Divine Revelation says:

***"His are built ships"***

intending to say that even the product built by you is also His, since
the idea, plan, and the physical strength required for building and
making things all spring from Him. Thus, the Holy Qur’an is saying that
ships floating in seas with sails resembling mountains are all
manifestations of Divine Graciousness. Mujahid is quoted as saying that
the Arabic word munsha’at is applied to sailing ships.

The point is that when you see the Signs of Divine Graciousness,
Omnipotence, and Greatness, note that Divine Favors include ships made
up of pieces of wood upon which you embark and travel in such vast seas.
Then, how do you deny your Lord's Bounties and Blessings. Who, other
than God Almighty, the Omnipotent, has given you such might and power?

Surah al-Rahman - Verses 26-28
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ مَنْ عَلَيْهَا فَانٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَبْقَی وَجْهُ رَبِّكَ ذُو الْـجَلَآلِ وَالْإِكْرَامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِأيِّ آلَآء رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***26. Whatsoever is on the earth is transient.***  
***27. And only the Essence of your Lord full of Majesty and Honor shall
remain forever.***  
***28. Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you both [jinn and
men] deny?***

The preceding blessed Verses treated of Divine Blessings and the blessed
Verse 26 is saying that the time of benefitting from these Blessings is
brief. Seize the opportunity since you are all transient. The contextual
meaning of the blessed Verse designates that all things are transient
and trifling in their essence, but what remains is Divine Essence which
is not subject to transience.

Now, a question arises here: how the question of transience may be
regarded as a Divine Blessing? Such transience may not lead to absolute
effacement and annihilation, but it is a window to the world of
everlastingness, a tunnel or path leading to the abode of
everlastingness. The world with all its bounties is a prison to
believers and a way out of this world is a way out of the dark and small
prison.

The blessed Verse 27 is saying that only the Honorable and Great Essence
of you Lord shall remain. The Arabic word wajh literally denotes "face,
countenance" perceived in the first encounter with someone, but employed
regarding God Almighty, it connotes His Pure Essence.

The blessed Verse 28 addresses creatures once more asking:

***"Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you both [jinn and
men] deny?"***

Surah al-Rahman - Verses 29-30
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَسْألُهُ مَن فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأرْضِ كُلَّ يَوْمٍ هُوَ فِي شَأنٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِأيِّ آلَآء رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***29. Whosoever is in the heavens and on earth begs Him to meet his
demands. Every day He is in some affair.***  
***30. Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you both [jinn and
men] deny?***

Invocation may be expressed through verbal or non-verbal language. Man
is in need of God Almighty at all times, whether he invokes him to meet
his demands or he fails to do likewise.

The point is that God Almighty is in the process of creation at all
times and each and every day He plans something anew and his meeting the
demands of the needy and those who invoke him to meet their needs is
likewise. One day He bestows might upon some people and the other day he
ruins them owing to their disobedience and committing sins.

One day He bestows health and youth and the other day He inflicts
weakness upon certain people. One day He removes grieves and sorrows
from hearts and the another day He causes certain people to feel grief
and sorrow.

In short, He creates something anew according to His Wisdom and the best
order. Attending to this truth clarifies our constant need for His Pre
Essence on the one hand and removes the veils of disappointment,
desperation, neglect, and vanity from hearts on the other.

***"Every day, He is in some affair."***

It is narrated from the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (as) that
in one of his sermons he said:

*"Praise and eulogy belong to God Almighty Who shall never die, nor
shall end the wonders of His creation, since He is in some affair each
and every day creating something new from nothing."*[^23]

According to a tradition narrated from the Noble Prophet of Islam (S)
regarding the exegesis of the blessed Verse in question, God Almighty's
affair include absolving people of their sins, removing their pains and
sorrows, causing certain people to have a more exalted state, and
denigrating some others.[^24]

It is also worthy of note that the Arabic word yawm employed herein is
the opposite of "night," since its semantic range encompasses a long
period of time and also hours and seconds, connoting that God Almighty
is in some affair at any time. The blessed Verse 30, following an
account of the constant Blessings and meeting the demands of all
creatures including those of the heavens and the earth asks the
rhetorical question:

***"Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you both [jinn and
men] deny?"***

Surah al-Rahman - Verses 31-32
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَنَفْرُغُ لَكُمْ أيُّهَا الثَّقَلَآنِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِأيِّ آلَآء رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***31. We shall attend to your records, O you two classes [jinn and
men]!***  
***32. Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you both [jinn and
men] deny?***

The Arabic verbal form sanafrughu does not here in connote bringing to
an end and completing something, but it designates giving special
attention and dealing completely with some significant affair. The
blessed Verse 31 is saying that attention shall be paid to the records
of all Blessings.

All the preceding blessed Verses so far treat of different material and
immaterial Blessings, but the blessed Verse 31 is saying that We shall
shortly attend to your records. O jinn and men! God Almighty shall
precisely attend to the records of all the deeds, words, and intentions
of the jinn and men and Rewards and Chastisements proportionate to their
words, deeds, and intentions shall be apportioned to them.

It is also worthy of note that according to the author of Tafsir Majma‘
al-Bayan, since jinn and men are superior to other creatures and possess
intellect, free choice, and distinction, they are being referred to as
thaqalan.

The blessed Verse 32 reiterates the rhetorical question:

***"Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you both [jinn and
men] deny?"***

[^1]: Wasa’il, vol. 4, p. 451.

[^2]: Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn; Tafsir Safi; Tafsir Burhan.

[^3]: Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn, vol. 5, p. 187.

[^4]: 17:82

[^5]: 25:60

[^6]: 9:128

[^7]: According to a tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) regarding
the exegesis of the blessed Verse "He taught him speech," he said:
"Bayan is applied to the Greatest Divine Name (ism a‘Ûam) through which
everything may be comprehended.” (Tafsir Majma‘ al-Bayan, under the
blessed Verse in question).

[^8]: Farid Wajdi's Encyclopedia, vol. 8, p. 368, s.v. Lugha.

[^9]: Furu‘ Kafi, vol. 5, p. 150.

[^10]: Kafi, vol. 5, p. 160.

[^11]: 67:15

[^12]: 22:5

[^13]: 6:2

[^14]: 15:28

[^15]: 37:11

[^16]: 15:29

[^17]: Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn, vol. 5, p. 190.

[^18]: 70:40

[^19]: 25:53

[^20]: Tuhfa Hakim Mu’min; Lughat-nama-yi DihkHuda; etc.

[^21]: Tafsir Qumi, vol. 2, p. 344.

[^22]: vol. 6, p. 42

[^23]: Usul Kafi; Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn, Tafsir Burhan, Majma‘
al-Bayan, under the blessed Verse in question.

[^24]: Majma‘ al-Bayan, under the blessed Verse in question; Ruh
al-Ma‘ani; Bukhari's Sahih.


