Surah al-Jathiya, Verses 23 - 37
================================

Surah al-Jathiya - Verse 23
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أفَرَأيْتَ مَنِ اتَّخَذَ إِلَهَهُ هَوَاهُ وَأضَلَّهُ اللَّهُ عَلَی
عِلْمٍ وَخَتَمَ عَلَی سَمْعِهِ وَقَلْبِهِ وَجَعَلَ عَلَی بَصَرِهِ
غِشَاوَةً فَمَنْ يَهْدِيهِ مِنْ بَعْدِ اللَّهِ أفَلا تَذَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***23. Have you seen him who takes his own vain desires as his god? And
Allah knowing [him as such] left him astray and sealed his hearing and
his heart and put a cover on his sight. Who then will guide him after
Allah? Will you not then remember?***

When one follows his vain desires and regards his concupiscence as
object of worship, they will turn into a cover covering his vision,
hearing, and heart. As a consequence, the Words of Truth may not affect
him. In this way, he is not worthy of being guided and thereby he is led
astray.

God has made available to man the means of deliverance from error, but
when he does wrong to himself and follows the path of error, he will be
deprived of Divine Guidance. It is not Divine Will to lead him astray,
but his deprivation from Guidance is mere error. It is for the same
reason that the Verse closes with the question;

***“Will you not then remember?”***

Surah al-Jathiya - Verse 24
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا مَا هِيَ إِلاّ حَيَاتُنَا الدُّنْيَا نَمُوتُ وَنَحْيَا وَمَا
يُهْلِكُنَا إِلاّ الدَّهْرُ وَمَا لَهُمْ بِذَلِكَ مِنْ عِلْمٍ إِنْ
هُمْ إِلاّ يَظُنُّونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***24. And they say: “There is nothing but our life of this world, we
die and we live [viz. a group departs and another group enters] nothing
destroys us except Nature and Time.” And they have no knowledge of it:
they are only wishful thinkers.***

The word dahr denotes the passage of time. Materialists maintain that
the passage of life time leads to human perdition.[^1] Following vain
desires blinds the eye of the heart such that he denies resurrection and
regards life restricted to transience.

According to this blessed Verse, those who take their vain desires as
their deities and obey Satan and concupiscence and thereby weaken their
intellect think that life is restricted to this mundane and transient
life and deny the life in the world to come, saying that life is nothing
save this mundane life in which we see the light and then we die and
nothing may destroy man except the passage of time.

Their words are not substantiated by knowledge since they have lost
their innate sound nature owing to following their vain desires. They
regard Divine Omnipotence as limited and falsely conjecture that the
world is limited to this mundane world.

By saying:

***“And nothing destroys us except Time”***

disbelievers mean the passage of time.

Surah al-Jathiya - Verse 25
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا تُتْلَی عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتُنَا بَيِّنَاتٍ مَا كَانَ حُجَّتَهُمْ
إِلاّ أنْ قَالُوا ائْتُوا بِآبَائِنَا إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***25. And when Our Clear Verses [concerning Resurrection] are recited
to them, their argument is no other than that they say: “Bring back our
[deceased] fathers, if you are truthful.”***

Qur’anic Verses are clear and enlightening. Instead of thinking about
Divine Ayat (“Verses, signs, evidence”) disbelievers ask for reviving
their ancestors.

***“And when”***

(wa idh) refers to the preceding Verse concerning the disbelievers’
false claims that when the Verses concerning proving Resurrection are
recited to them, they fail to provide an acceptable reply saying if the
prophets were truthful in proving Resurrection, bring our fathers back
to life so that they inform us of the other world and if they accepted
your words, we would accept them to be true.

Surah al-Jathiya - Verse 26
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلِ اللَّهُ يُحْيِيكُمْ ثُمَّ يُمِيتُكُمْ ثُمَّ يَجْمَعُكُمْ إِلَی
يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ لا رَيْبَ فِيهِ وَلَكِنَّ أكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لا
يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***26. Say: ‘Allah gives you life, then causes you to die, then He will
assemble you on the Day of Resurrection about which there is no
doubt.***

The system of creation follows an order dominating the world of
existence through the Will of the Wise God denying which stems from
ignorance. The evidence of Divine Omnipotence, Wisdom, and Justice is so
clear that there leaves no room for any doubt regarding Resurrection.

In the blessed Verse in question God Almighty says:

“O Muhammad, say unto these disbelievers denying Resurrection that God
makes you see the light out of human seed and will cause you to die
after the completion of this mundane life. Then, He will assemble you on
the Day of Resurrection and there is no room for entertaining doubts
regarding being assembled on the Last Day; though the majority of people
do not know.”

The Verse refers to the fact that if they knew, they would recognize the
order, harmony, and purpose of their own creation and would be capable
of perceiving the qualities of their life and death.

In this case, they could be certain that there is a significant purpose
behind man’s life and death – this worldly death is a preamble to
everlasting life, since the final purpose of this worldly death is that
what the Creator has placed in human faculty may be actualized and
attain to its final purpose through death and when something is
actualized it may find immortality; as the final purpose of man’s
creation is attainment to everlasting life, he will not be subject to
annihilation.

Therefore, following the end of the mundane world, all human beings who
have seen the light and have passed away successively shall be assembled
for everlasting life and shall meet their recompense; otherwise, human
existence, even the creation of the world were in vain and acting in
vain is far from Divine Threshold.

There is no doubt in it[^2] since the point is clear to the
knowledgeable, but the ignorant who neither know themselves nor are
aware of creation or resurrection and their intellects are entangled
with vain desires, nor are they capable of perceiving anything may
solely refer to the life after death only if their fathers were brought
back to life.

Surah al-Jathiya - Verse 27
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِلَّهِ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأرْضِ وَيَوْمَ تَقُومُ السَّاعَةُ
يَوْمَئِذٍ يَخْسَرُ الْمُبْطِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***27. And to Allah belongs the kingdom of the heaven and the earth. And
on the Day that Resurrection will be established – on that Day those
talking nonsense shall be losers.***

Bringing to life and causing to die is facile for God Almighty, since
existence is in His Hands. Worldly losses are trivial, but the losses to
be incurred on the Resurrection Day shall be significant. Those who deny
Resurrection shall be losers on that day.

The Verse in question is related to the preceding one. God Almighty is
the Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything is within the Sway
of that Omnipotent King. All the worlds of creation have come into
existence from non-existence through His Will. As the All-Praiseworthy
God is the Cause of the existence of possible beings, He is the cause of
their survival as well. Any alterations may be made in any being through
His Omnipotence.

On the Day of Resurrection, this world will turn into the other one and
the Day of Resurrection shall be established on which evil doers shall
be losers since they spend their life in vanity and ignorance. This
world resembles a commercial center and life is the merchant’s capital
from which he is supposed to accrue otherworldly gains, pure everlasting
life, and spiritual stations.

Failure to accrue gains despite the availability of the capital of life
to him may be likened to a bankrupt merchant having lost his capital
without accruing any gain from his worldly life. There will be nothing
in store for him save rue and regret for having lost his capital.

Surah al-Jathiya - Verse 28
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَرَی كُلَّ اُمَّةٍ جَاثِيَةً كُلُّ اُمَّةٍ تُدْعَی إِلَی كِتَابِهَا
الْيَوْمَ تُجْزَوْنَ مَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***28. And you will see [on the Day of Resurrection] each nation humbled
to their knees; each nation shall be called to its Record [of deeds].
This Day you shall be recompensed for what you used to do.***

On that Day everyone shall kneel down in terror. The system of creation
is kept in order and harmony and the records of human deeds are based on
evidence.

The blessed Verse is thus addressed to the Prophet (S):

“O Muhammad! You shall see that on that Day each and every nation shall
kneel out of fear and each nation shall be called to its Record of
deeds.”

The clause:

***“[Each nation] shall be called to its Records”***

apparently signifies that when on that Day all mankind shall stay
motionless on their knees out of severe fear and anxiety, the Records of
their deeds shall be opened and everyone will be called by his own
Record of deeds, since on that Day everyone shall be known by his deeds
rather than by his name and lineage. Everyone shall be recompensed
according to his deeds.

Some have said that everyone shall be called by the Divine Book revealed
to the prophet of his time and he will be asked whether he acted upon
Its Instructions. A number of points are worthy of note. Jathiya denotes
kneeling down at the time of fear, awe, humility, and submission.

According to the Holy Qur’an, three types of Books and Records are
mentioned for mankind on the Day of Resurrection:[^3]

There is a Record kept for everyone in which his deeds are recorded:

***“And We have fastened every man’s deeds to his neck and on the Day of
Resurrection We shall bring out for him a book which he will find wide
open.[It shall be said to him]: Read your book”***[^4]***.***

There is a Book for each nation in which social affairs are recorded in
it, as the blessed Verse in question reads:

***“Each nation shall be called to Its Book.”***

All nations have one single Book in which everything and the deeds of
everyone are recorded in it:

***“And the Book [of one’s records] shall be placed and you shall see
the sinners fearful of that which is [recorded] in it”***[^5]***.***

Surah al-Jathiya - Verse 29
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَذَا كِتَابُنَا يَنْطِقُ عَلَيْكُمْ بِالْحَقِّ إِنَّا كُنَّا
نَسْتَنْسِخُ مَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***29. This is Our Book that speaks about you with truth. Indeed, We
were recording what you used to do.***

There shall be nothing concealed on the Day of Resurrection. Everything
shall be put forward. The word kitab connotes that everything shall be
written down on that Day.

Again It is God who addresses them emphatically:

***“This is Our Book [viz. Record] that speaks about you with truth”***

and reveals your deeds. You could never believe then that your deeds
were being recorded somewhere; however, We had commanded [the angels] to
record all your deeds.

The word nastansikhu and its verbal noun istinsakh are originally
derived from n-s-kh denoting “to erase, take away,” e.g. erasing
something by something else; for instance, “The sun took away the shade
or shadow” (nasakhta al-shams al-dill). The word was later employed to
signify “to transcribe” a book from another book without the latter
being destroyed.

Some exegets say that

***‘the Book’***

in the Verse may indicate ‘Divine Book’ revealed to that nation, but

***‘the Book’***

ad hoc is apparently employed in the sense of ‘record of deeds’ and the
majority of exegets accept this view.

According to a tradition narrated from ‘Ali (as), the Commander of the
Faithful,

*“God sends down angels every day to record the deeds of men.”*

Following the narration of the mentioned tradition in Tibyan[^6] under
the Verse in question, Shaykh Tusi says:

*“By Nastansikhu it is meant that God Almighty commands the angels
responsible for recording the deeds to take from this group the deeds
worthy of recompense and deed them, but delete the rest, since the first
group record all the deeds.”*

Surah al-Jathiya - Verse 30
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأمَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ فَيُدْخِلُهُمْ
رَبُّهُمْ فِي رَحْمَتِهِ ذَلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْمُبِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***30. Then as for those who believed [in God] and did righteous good
deeds, their lord shall admit them to His Mercy. That shall be the
evident deliverance.***

The word fawz used in this Verse denotes triumph and attainment of good
together with security and fulfillment of wish. In the Holy Qur’an, the
word collocates with evident (mubin) and great (‘adim, kabir).

Instead of “They enter Paradise” (yadkhuluna fial-janna), it is said:

***“Their lord shall admit them to His Mercy” (yudkhiluhum rabbuhum fi
rahmatihi)***

denoting that the believers and the beneficent enjoy Divine Grace and
Mercy.

Following an expression of the fact that everyone shall be recompensed
according to the record of his deeds, the Verse in question says that
the deeds of the believers and the beneficent shall be assayed following
which their lord shall admit them to His Infinite Mercy.

Indubitably, this is felicity, merit, deliverance, and the final purpose
of mankind rather that of all creatures created for the sake of mankind.
It is through the creation of such perfect man that the Divine attribute
of Mercy is manifested without which the existence of the world became
non-existent.

The Divine Tradition:

*“Had it been not for your sake, I would have not created celestial
spheres”*

is addressed to Prophet Muhammad (S), since the perfect man is the final
purpose of the existence of the world.

Surah al-Jathiya - Verse 31
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأمَّا الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أفَلَمْ تَكُنْ آيَاتِي تُتْلَی عَلَيْكُمْ
فَاسْتَكْبَرْتُمْ وَكُنْتُمْ قَوْماً مُجْرِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***31. But as for those who disbelieved [it shall be said to them: Were
not our Verses recited to you? But you were arrogant and you were a
people who were sinners.***

Sins stem from disbelief and arrogance. Following an expression of the
believers’ and good doers’ sublime station, the blessed Verse,
addressing the disbelievers, reproaches them saying that they are
entangled with torment and chastisement on the Day of Recompense. Were
not Divine Verses recited to them by Divinely appointed Messengers?

Instead of accepting them and finding deliverance from the torment
recompensed owing to your own deeds, you ignored the words of the
prophets and declined to submit to Divine Command. They were arrogant.
Now they are sinners. Whenever the prophets said unto them that Divine
promises would be true and there would be no doubt regarding the
Resurrection Day, they replied that they had not found it to be true and
they disbelieved in such Hour.

Surah al-Jathiya - Verses 32-34
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا قِيلَ إِنَّ وَعْدَ اللَّهِ حَقٌّ وَالسَّاعَةُ لا رَيْبَ فِيهَا
قُلْتُمْ مَا نَدْرِي مَا السَّاعَةُ إِنْ نَظُنُّ إِلاّ ظَنَّاً وَمَا
نَحْنُ بِمُسْتَيْقِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبَدَا لَهُمْ سَيِّئَاتُ مَا عَمِلُوا وَحَاقَ بِهِمْ مَا كَانُوا بِهِ
يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقِيلَ الْيَوْمَ نَنْسَاكُمْ كَمَا نَسِيتُمْ لِقَاءَ يَوْمِكُمْ هَذَا
وَمَأوَاكُمُ النَّارُ وَمَا لَكُمْ مِنْ نَاصِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***32. And when it was said: “Indeed, Allah’s Promise is the truth and
there is no doubt about the coming of the Hour,” you said: “We know not
what is the Hour: we do not think it but as a conjecture, and we have no
firm convincing [in it].”***  
***33. And the evil of what they did shall appear to them, and that
which they used to mock at will completely encircle them.***  
***34. And it will be said: “This Day We shall forget you as you forgot
the Meeting of this Day of yours. And your abode is the Fire and there
is none to help you.”***

The characteristics of the disbeliever include suspicion and those of
the believer include inquiry, follow up, and attainment to certitude. On
the Day of Resurrection, in addition to the evil deeds committed,
disbelievers shall be encircled by the evil consequences of their evil
deeds.

Thus, according to Verse 32, whenever the prophets said unto you that
Divine Promises were true and there was no doubt for the establishment
of Resurrection, you replied that you did not think it but as a
conjecture and you were not firmly convinced in it.

It is mentioned in Verse 33 that their evil deeds committed in their
worldly life shall be manifest on the Day of Resurrection. In other
words disbelievers failed to perceive their arrogance against and denial
of Divine Verses nor did they understand their evil deeds stemming from
concupiscence and vain desires.

Thus the muddy water of this world covered their eyes and left them
deprived of truth such that they regarded their deeds as desirable
unaware of what would be in store for them owing to their derision of
Divine Verses.

Verse 34 demonstrates that afflicted by torment disbelievers shall be
told by the angels Divinely appointed for their tormenting that
Messengers of God reminded you of such a Day but you greeted them with
derision. Now that you are desperate, you shall be recompensed by
abandoning you to experience everlasting torment in the Hell. There
shall be no savior to save you from such torment.

Surah al-Jathiya - Verse 35
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكُمْ بِأنَّكُمُ اتَّخَذْتُمْ آيَاتِ اللَّهِ هُزُواً وَغَرَّتْكُمُ
الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا فَالْيَوْمَ لا يُخْرَجُونَ مِنْهَا وَلا هُمْ
يُسْتَعْتَبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***35. This is because you derided the Divine Verses and the life of the
world deceived you. So this Day they shall not be taken out from there
[Hell], nor shall they be returned to the worldly life [to seek Divine
Satisfaction].***

Being deceived and satisfied with mundane life leads man to deride
truths. Those who deride Divine Verses shall not find the path of
deliverance, nor shall their excuses be justified. The blessed Verse
warns disbelievers that this is the recompense for your deriding Divine
Verses springing from the fountainhead of Truth and ignoring the words
of the prophets.

Allured by mundane life, you forgot your origin and Resurrection. Like
as you failed to leave aside your disbelief, you shall not leave the
Hell. You may not embark on any desirable act as it is too late and
today is the Day of Recompense.

Surah al-Jathiya - Verses 36-37
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلِلَّهِ الْحَمْدُ رَبِّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَرَبِّ الْأرْضِ رَبِّ
الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَهُ الْكِبْرِيَاءُ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأرْضِ وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ
الْحَكِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***36. All the praises and thanks be to Allah, the Lord of the heavens
and the Lord of the earth, and the Lord of all that exists.***  
***37. The Majesty in the heavens is His, and He is the Omnipotent, the
All-Wise.***

The One God is the Creator of the heavens, the earth, and all that
exists. Verses 36 and 37 indicate that all the praises belong to the
Creator of the heavens, the earth, and whatever exists in them including
soul and bodies as well as what exists on the earth from among inanimate
beings, plants, and animals. He is the protector of all the worlds.

Generalization following specification indicates generality, i.e., the
Creator of the heavens and the earth is the same as the Creator of all
the worlds including the mundane world as well as the supernatural
worlds of intellects and souls and the infinite worlds existing between
them whose number is known by their Creator whose Majesty and
Sovereignty are manifest in the heavens and on the earth; He is the
Omnipotent Sovereign Who has arranged everything out of Wisdom in
harmony with the order of the world.

Thus, Majesty and Magnanimity solely belongs to Him.

It is attested in Divine Traditions that:

*“Sovereignty and Majesty solely belongs to My Essence. Whoever vies
with Me for these two Attributes, I shall cast him into the Hell.”*

The words rida’ (“cloak”) and izar (“shawl”) connote Divine
Encompassment and Self-Existence; like as cloaks and shawls encompass
the body, Divine Essence also encompasses all the worlds and anyone
attempting to vie with God for any or both of the twain Attributes shall
be cast into the abyss of the Hell.

[^1]: See Raghib’s Mufradat.

[^2]: 2:2

[^3]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 13, p. 348.

[^4]: 17:13-14

[^5]: 18:49

[^6]: vol. 9, p. 260


