Surah al-Ahqaf, Chapter 46, Verses 1 - 21
=========================================

**(The Curved Sand-Hills)**

**Section (juz’): 26**

**Number of Verses: 35**

General Contents of the Chapter
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.***

Placed at the beginning of the twenty sixth section of the Qur’an and
revealed in Mecca, the Chapter consists of thirty five Verses. The word
ahqaf is used in the sense of curved sand hills piled up due to the
action of the wind. The land of the people of ‘Ad was covered by sand
hills, hence the designation of Ahqaf.

The word appears in Verse 21 wherein the story of prophet Hud (Hod) and
the people of ‘Ad are being mentioned. The Chapter is the last one among
the seven Chapters beginning with detached or abbreviated letters HM
followed by the revelation and significance of the Qur’an.

Merits of the Chapter
---------------------

According to a narration narrated by Imam Sadiq (as):

*“One who recites Surah al-Ahqaf every night or every week is vouchsafed
against the fears of this world and the world to come.”*

Surah al-Ahqaf - Verses 1-3
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَنْزِيلُ الْكِتَابِ مِنَ اللَّهِ الْعَزِيزِ الْحَكِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا إِلاّ
بِالْحَقِّ وَأجَلٍ مُسَمّی وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا عَمَّا اُنْذِرُوا
مُعْرِضُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. HM.***  
***2. The revelation of [this] Book is from Allah, the Omnipotent, the
All-Wise.***  
***3. We created neither the heavens nor the earth nor all that is
between them except with truth and for an appointed term. But those who
disbelieve turn away from that whereof they are warned.***

Seven Chapters, namely Ghafir[^1], Fussilat[^2], Shura[^3], Zukhruf[^4],
Dukhan[^5], Jathiya[^6], and Ahqaf[^7] open with the detached letters HM
and are well known as the Seven HMs.

The reiteration of

***“HM the revelation of [this] Book”***

in a series of recurrent Chapters bears testimony to the fact that
fundamental and significant issues are to be reiterated. Divine Glory
(‘Izza) is one of the attributes of Allah, His Book[^8], His Messenger
(S), and believers[^9]. Divine Creation is based on Wisdom and Truth.

Encountering things of whose existential mysteries we are unaware may
not affect the Creator but it stems from the restrictions of our
knowledge as it is mentioned in the Holy Qur’an:

***“We have not created the heavens, the earth, and all that is between
them for mere play. We created them not except with truth; however, most
of them know not”***[^10]***.***

A meager attempt at attending to the verses following the detached
letters HM leads us to the fact that the Qur’an is from the springhead
of Divine Omniscience, Glory, Omnipotence, and Wisdom. It is the source
of Blessing, Bounty, and Grace. It is Illuminating and pondering on it
leads one to intellection. The revelation of the Qur’an is merely
possible from Omnipotent and All-Wise God, lying beyond the limited
human power.

The second Verse, besides the Book of Compilation (tadwin), deals with
the Book of Creation, making mention of the glory and truth of the
heavens and the earth saying:

***“We created neither the heavens nor the earth nor all that is between
them except with truth.”***

There is no single untrue word in His Book nor is there any unharmonious
and untrue thing in His System of Creation. Everything is well
calculated and stands in perfect harmony according to truth.

However, the world of creation has an end as it has a beginning.

In this vein, the Verse further adds:

***“We have appointed a term for it,”***

upon which the transient world will come to its end. Since this world is
true and purposeful, there should naturally exist another world in which
deeds be recompensed. Therefore, the truthfulness of this world bears
testimony to the existence of resurrection, or else it would have been
vain and abounding in wrong and oppression.

Despite the Truth of the Qur’an and the creation of the world,

***“those who disbelieve turn away from that whereof they are
warned.”***

On the one hand, Qur’anic Verses recurrently warn them of the Great
Tribunal awaiting them and on the other hand, the world of creation,
with certain orders of its, warns the negligent that everything shall be
reckoned; nonetheless, they heed neither of the twain warnings.

The present participle mu’ridhun “turning away,” from the root ‘-r-dh,
demonstrates that attending to the Ayat (“Verses; Signs”) of creation
and compilation may enable one to comprehend the Truth; however, they
turn away from Truth lest that it may not affect their passions and
lusts.”

Surah al-Ahqaf - Verse 4
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أرَأيْتُمْ مَا تَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ أرُونِي مَاذَا
خَلَقُوا مِنَ الْأرْضِ أمْ لَهُمْ شِرْكٌ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ ائْتُونِي
بِكِتَابٍ مِنْ قَبْلِ هَذَا أوْ أثَارَةٍ مِنْ عِلْمٍ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ
صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***4. Say: “Think you about all that you invoke besides Allah? Show me.
What have they created of the earth? Or have they a share in [the
creation of] the heavens? Bring a trace of knowledge [to substantiate
your claims] if you are truthful!”***

The word Athara denotes the traces and tokens of the existence of
something. The logic of Divine Oneness rests on such firm and
indubitable grounds that it may be used in debates with disbelievers to
defeat them.

In this vein, Imam Baqir (as) says:

*“The word*

*‘**Book**’*

*in this Verse denotes the Torah and the Bible and the word*

*‘**knowledge**’*

*signifies the words of the prophets’ successors.”*

The Prophet (S) in all matters related to his prophethood, even the
manner of debate with opponents, acts upon Divine Command.

Addressing the Noble Prophet (S), thus God Almighty says in this blessed
Verse:

*“O Muhammad! Ask those worshipping false deities believing in their
power to show Me what they have created on the earth thanks to which
they have become worthy of being worshipped and thanked.*

*Do they have any share in the creation of the heavens? Bring a book
unto Me preceding the Qur’an to substantiate your claim. Ask them to
show the tokens of their knowledge, if they are true in claiming the
veracity of their godhead.”*

The Verse in question indicates the logical argument produced to make
disbelievers comprehend that each and every claimant produces arguments
to substantiate his claims and each being has its own tokens. It is
particularly true about those standing higher on the hierarchy of being.
What characteristics have they found in the false deities in which
disbelievers have sought refuge and before them they prostrate
themselves invoking them to answer their prayers?

They merely fancy that they have made themselves close to such worthless
objects. Have they created anything ex nihilo to demonstrate that it
stands within their power? Have they shown any extraordinary knowledge?
Have you learned that they are related to heavenly beings?

The fact is that they lack any merits or privileges, but they are
worthless, inanimate objects fashioned by you who claim to be sensible,
knowledgeable, and humane. It stands against reason to seek refuge in
inanimate things.

In short, the Verse in question bears testimony to Its Divine Origin
demonstrating that whatever exists in the heavens and the earth and all
things between them have come to light through Truth and the Source of
Truth and the Verse substantiates Divine Oneness;

***(“No one affects existence save Allah”)***

and everything is from Him and is dependent on the Sublime Intellect.
They are all needful of the Absolute Self-Sufficient Being.

Surah al-Ahqaf - Verses 5-6
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ أضَلُّ مِمَّنْ يَدْعُو مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ مَنْ لا يَسْتَجِيبُ
لَهُ إِلَی يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ وَهُمْ عَنْ دُعَائِهِمْ غَافِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا حُشِرَ النَّاسُ كَانُوا لَهُمْ أعْدَاءً وَكَانُوا
بِعِبَادَتِهِمْ كَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***5. And he who is more astray than one who invokes [ones] besides
Allah who will not answer him till the Day of Resurrection and who are
unaware of their being invoked?***  
***6. And when mankind are gathered, they will become their enemies and
will deny their worshipping.***

The worst error is deviation from true recognition and one who turns
away from the Omnipotent, Omniscient, All-Hearing, and All-Seeing God
and turns to false deities will be entangled with such error, since none
but God Almighty may embark upon doing anything. Polytheistic and
mundane ties shall turn into animosity on the Resurrection Day.

The blessed Verse is a reproach to idolaters treading the path of error
and astrayness to the extreme since they are deeply sunk in ignorance to
the extent that they invoke the succor of false deities and objects of
worship:

***“other than Allah”***

including angels, jinn, and prophets. The Verse is a reference to the
fact that the only true object of worship and the Provider of Needs
(qadhi al-hajat) is God. According to the second Verse, whatever has
been regarded as their object of worship and support turn into their
enemies on the Day of Resurrection.

At the end, attention may be paid to the differences between God and
false deities in the life of mankind:

### The Role of God in the Life of Mankind

***“He is the Creator”***[^11]***.***

***“He is the Lord all that exists”***[^12]***.***

***“Allah is full of kindness toward mankind”***[^13]***.***

***“He is the All-Hearer of invocation”***[^14]***.***

***“He responds to the distressed”***[^15]***.***

***“He will surely guide them to His Paths”***[^16]***.***

***“He provides the pious with support”***[^17]***.***

***“He guides them unto growth”***[^18]***.***

***“The hearts find rest in the remembrance of Allah”***[^19]***.***

***“He has taught [man] by the pen”***[^20]***.***

***“If man thanks, He will give him more [of His
Blessings]”***[^21]***.***

***“And when I am ill, it is He who cures me”***[^22]***.***

***“And Who, I hope, will forgive me my faults on the Day of
Recompense”***[^23]***.***

### The Role of Deities Other Than God in the Life of Mankind

***They have no power over creation “They cannot create [even] a
fly”***[^24]***.***

***“They are unaware of their invocations to them”***[^25]***.***

***“They do not hear his invocation”***[^26]***.***

***“They have no power to remove the adversity from you”***[^27]***.***

***“They are their enemies.”***

***“They are unable to ward off adversity from you”***[^28]***.***

***“They harm them and profit them not”***[^29]***.***

To sum it up, mention may be made of Yusuf’s (Joseph) words to his
fellow inmates:

***“Are many different lords [gods] better or Allah, the One, the
Irresistible?”***[^30]***.***

Surah al-Ahqaf - Verse 7
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا تُتْلَی عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتُنَا بَيِّنَاتٍ قَالَ الَّذِينَ
كَفَرُوا لِلْحَقِّ لَمَّا جَاءَهُمْ هَذَا سِحْرٌ مُبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***7. And when Our Clear Verses are recited to them, the disbelievers
say of the truth when it reaches them: “This is plain magic!”***

Dominance of obduracy leads to the denial of the Clear Signs, i.e. the
illuminating Qur’anic Verses. The obdurate regarded the prophets’
miracles incredible, but interesting and weird;

***(“This is plain magic!”).***

The Verse in question demonstrates that disbelievers regarded Qur’anic
Verses as extraordinary since despite the fact that the Holy Qur’an was
revealed in eloquent Arabic and Arab polytheists were speakers of the
Arabic tongue, they knew that composing such Verses were beyond them;
nonetheless, the prejudice predominant at the time of pre-Islamic
ignorance in Arabia and the arrogance and vanity deeply rooted in the
hearts of polytheists impeded them from believing in the prophethood of
the Seal of the Prophets (S) and confessing that It is the Word of God,
so that whenever they heard a Verse, they attributed magic and sorcery
to the Noble Prophet (S).

Surah al-Ahqaf - Verse 8
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أمْ يَقُولُونَ افْتَرَاهُ قُلْ إِنِ افْتَرَيْتُهُ فَلا تَمْلِكُونَ لِي
مِنَ اللَّهِ شَيْئاً هُوَ أعْلَمُ بِمَا تُفِيضُونَ فِيهِ كَفَی بِهِ
شَهِيداً بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكُمْ وَهُوَ الْغَفُورُ الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***8. Or they say: “He has fabricated it.” Say: “If I have fabricated it
still you have no power to support me against [the Wrath of] Allah. He
knows best of what you say [engage in debates]*** ***among yourselves
concerning it! He is sufficient as a witness between me and you! And He
is the Forgiving, the Most Merciful.”***

The verbal form tufidhun is from the root f-w-dh (“to enter, to flow”).
If someone falsely claims to be a prophet, God shall disgrace him and no
one may impede his disgrace and support him against God. Obduracy and
impiety result in diverse contradictory words and conducts.

It is mentioned in the preceding Verse that polytheists and disbelievers
claimed that the Qur’an was magic and he Prophet (S) was a liar.

Addressing the Prophet (S), the Verse says unto him:

“O Muhammad (S)! Do disbelievers produce such false claims saying that
the Qur’an is your own fabrication?

God bids you to respond to them saying:

‘If I fabricate the Qur’an for your guidance and attribute it to Divine
Revelation, you shall have no power to do anything to my benefit and
save me from torment. God knows better as to what you say, viz. your
criticism and mockery regarding Divine Verses. God is sufficient for me
to be a witness between us. He is Most Forgiving and Most Merciful.’”

Surah al-Ahqaf - Verse 9
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ مَا كُنْتُ بِدْعاً مِنَ الرُّسُلِ وَمَا أدْرِي مَا يُفْعَلُ بِي
وَلا بِكُمْ إِنْ أتَّبِعُ إِلاّ مَا يُوحَی إِلَيَّ وَمَا أنَا إِلاّ
نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***9. Say: “I am not unprecedented among the Messengers nor do I know
what will be done with me or with you. I only follow that which is
revealed to me and I am but a plain warner.”***

The word bid’ indicates something novel and unprecedented. The Noble
Prophet’s (S) opponents reacted as if no prophets preceded him and his
prophethood is something novel. The Prophet utters solely the Divine
Word and practically follows nothing save the Divine Revelation.
Therefore, his words and conduct may serve as a model for mankind.
Divinely appointed guides, even in substantiating their truthfulness,
act upon Divine Command.

The Verse in question says:

***“O Muhammad (S)! Say unto the disbelievers that you are not the first
divinely appointed prophet. You are not unaware of the preceding
prophets so as to regard my prophethood as falsity, but God Almighty,
out of His Grace and Mercy appoints prophets and messengers at all times
to provide mankind with Divine Guidance.”***

By saying:

*“I am unaware as to what God shall do with me and you,”*

it may be meant that the Prophet (S), despite his sublime station of
prophethood, is not fully aware of Divine Ordainments, but admits that
Omnipotence solely belongs to God and he does not command or forbid
people out of his taste, but he is totally obedient to Divine
Revelation.

He is Divinely appointed to fulfill his mission and his claim does not
transgress prophethood. In the same vein, he does not consider himself
to be independent in judgment and discretion. He is appointed to apprise
people of their evil deeds and warn them against the torment in store
for them out of evil deeds as a recompense of their vices.

Surah al-Ahqaf - Verse 10
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أرَأيْتُمْ إِنْ كَانَ مِنْ عِنْدِ اللَّهِ وَكَفَرْتُمْ بِهِ
وَشَهِدَ شَاهِدٌ مِنْ بَنِي إِسْرائيلَ عَلَی مِثْلِهِ فَآمَنَ
وَاسْتَكْبَرْتُمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***10. Say: “Tell me! If this [Qur’an] is from Allah and you deny it,
and a witness to it from among the Children of Israel testifies that
this Qur’an is like it and he believed while you are too proud [to
believe].” Verily, Allah guides not the people who are wrong doers.***

Wrong doing impedes insight and results in deprivation from Divine
Grace.

In the blessed Verse in question, God says:

*“O Muhammad (S)! Ask them to inform you of their sayings. If this
Qur’an is Revealed by God and a witness from the Children of Israel
bears witness to its veracity but you waxed proud and disbelieved in it,
what will be in store for you? Are you not from among wrong doers? God
shall not guide wrong doers.”*

It is reported that by

***“witness”***

(shahid) ‘Abd Allah ibn Salam is being meant. He was one of the ascetics
and scholars of the Children of Israel. By “like it” (mithlihi) the
verses and meanings of the Torah are being intended that testify to the
Qur’an as Divine Revelation and is consistent with it in terms of Divine
Teachings and Promises and Threats.

In short, the Verse signifies that the Noble Prophet (S) is Divinely
appointed by God to provide the Jews with guidance saying that as per
the testimony of their own scholars it is substantiated that the Qur’an
is Divine Revelation but they deny it out of their vanity. Are they not
wrong doers? Sunk in wrong doing, they are not guidable.

Surah al-Ahqaf - Verse 11
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَوْ كَانَ خَيْراً مَا
سَبَقُونَا إِلَيْهِ وَإِذْ لَمْ يَهْتَدُوا بِهِ فَسَيَقُولُونَ هَذَا
إِفْكٌ قَدِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***11. And those who disbelieve say of those who believe: “Had it [the
Islamic faith] been a good thing, they would not have preceded us
thereto!” And when they have not let themselves be guided by it, they
say: “This is an ancient lie!”***

The enemy does not enter from one single way and his words and logic are
not in the same vein.

At times he says:

“Islam is worthless or else we would have preceded in embracing it. He
sometimes says the call to embrace the Islamic faith is an age old and
precedent lie.”

The blessed Verse addresses either the disbelievers from Quraysh or the
Jews or disbelievers in general who were the Noble Prophet’s (S)
contemporaries. Since they regarded themselves as wealthy, noble,
magnanimous, scholars, and knowledgeable, they considered the Noble
Prophet’s (S) poor Companions, e.g. ‘Ammar, Suhayb, and Ibn Mas’ud as
unworthy and weakling.

To persuade the believers they said unto them that had there been merits
and felicity in following Muhammad (S), we would have preceded you in
embracing the Islamic faith. According to the blessed Verse, since
disbelievers did not find their way toward felicity and merits and were
deprived of guidance and their vanity and prejudice impeded their hearts
from being enlightened by the Qur’anic light and admitting the true
source of the Qur’an, they pretend ignorance and say this Qur’an is a
fabrication attributed by Muhammad (S) to God.

The content of the Verse resembles one[^31] as per which disbelievers
said that the Qur’an is nothing save ancient lies (in hadha asatir
al-awwalin).

Surah al-Ahqaf - Verse 12
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ قَبْلِهِ كِتَابُ مُوسَی إِمَاماً وَرَحْمَةً وَهَذَا كِتَابٌ
مُصَدِّقٌ لِسَاناً عَرَبِيّاً لِيُنْذِرَ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا وَبُشْرَی
لِلْمُحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***12. And before this was the Scripture of Musa (Moses) as a guide and
a mercy. And this is a confirming Book in the Arabic tongue to warn
those who do wrong and as glad tidings to good doers.***

Revelation of the Divine Book is a Divine tradition

***(“And before this was the Scripture of Musa”).***

Through the glad tidings included in preceding Scriptures, the Holy
Qur’an confirms them.

The antecedent of

***“before this”***

is the Holy Qur’an which is preceded by Torah, the Scripture of Musa
which had been Divinely Revealed as the precursor of all Divine
Scriptures as a Mercy demonstrating the Path of Guidance through the
Books of the Torah.

This Book, namely the Qur’an, which is revealed in the eloquent Arabic
tongue confirms what is included in the Torah and other Divine Books so
that it may inspire awe in disbelievers as to the torments of this world
and the world to come and threaten disbelievers and polytheists and bear
the glad tidings of Paradise and the stations prepared for them as
rewards of the good deeds to the pious and the beneficent.

Surah al-Ahqaf - Verses 13-14
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ قَالُوا رَبُّنَا اللَّهُ ثُمَّ اسْتَقَامُوا فَلا
خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلا هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اُولَئِكَ أصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا جَزَاءً بِمَا كَانُوا
يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***13. Indeed those who say: “Our Lord is Allah,” and thereafter stand
firm and straight [on the Islamic faith of Monotheism], on them shall be
no fear, nor shall they grieve.***  
***14. Such shall be the dwellers of Paradise, abiding therein [for
ever] – a reward for what [good deeds] they used to do.***

To say

***“our Lord is Allah”***

signifies nothing by its mere form, but it connotes the choice of the
True Path and standing firm on It. It is hard to stand firm on the True
Path, but it turns facile through a great reward like Paradise abounding
in bounties and devoid of grief. Thus hard tasks turn more convenient
though great rewards.

After threatening opponents and bearing glad tidings to the beneficent
believers, the blessed Verse enumerates the qualities of believers
standing firm on the True Path and the rewards to fall into their share
through their good deeds. Good doers (muhsinin) are those who utter
their belief, confirm from the bottom of their hearts, and stand firm on
the Path of True Religion in terms of faith and practice.

They need not fear of what is in store for them nor do they grieve as to
their past deeds.

Needlessness of fear and grief by believers standing firm on the Path
may refer to fears and grieves in the other worldly matters. On the
Resurrection Day, they stand near to God and are saved from the great
distress there.

They neither fear of torment nor are they grieved since as per the Verse
in question, negation of fear and grief from the beneficent may include
their mundane life and that to come, since one who fears God fears no
one but is enclosed within the enclosure of:

*“There is no god but Allah”*

(La ilaha illa ‘llah).

He does not grieve since one who loves God and seeks meeting his Lord
may not be grieved from mundane matters but such a person has joined
those regarding whom it is said:

***“God is satisfied with them and they are [satisfied] with Him.”***

It is worthy of note that it is solely through clemency and perseverance
that man may attain to perfect faith and certitude. It is not sufficient
to utter the declaration of the faith verbally and confirm it by heart
in order to attain to perfect faith.

The perfect believer is one who admits no impediments in his way attains
to the station of certitude by sight (‘ayn al-yaqin) or real certitude
(haq al-yaqin). Such attainment is possible through firm will to act. To
put it short, perfect faith depends on clemency, perseverance, and
standing firm so that one may struggle against his concupiscence and
ward off devils such that angels may find their ways into his heart and
he may attain to the station of peaceful soul (nafs al-mutma’inna).

Such a person may be termed as perfect believer and as per the Verse in
question; there will be no fear or grief for him.

The second Verse in question makes mention of another merit of good
doers and those standing firm on the Path of Faith, as per which they
are from among the dwellers of Paradise for good as a reward for their
good deeds in this world, admitting to Divine Oneness, standing firm in
their faith without any instability in their certitude and faith in
their mundane life. Paradise is the reward of those who act rather than
those who merely talk.

Surah al-Ahqaf - Verse 15
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَصَّيْنَا الْأِنْسَانَ بِوَالِدَيْهِ إِحْسَاناً حَمَلَتْهُ اُمُّهُ
كُرْهاً وَوَضَعَتْهُ كُرْهاً وَحَمْلُهُ وَفِصَالُهُ ثَلاثُونَ شَهْراً
حَتَّی إِذَا بَلَغَ أشُدَّهُ وَبَلَغَ أرْبَعِينَ سَنَةً قَالَ رَبِّ
أوْزِعْنِي أنْ أشْكُرَ نِعْمَتَكَ الَّتِي أنْعَمْتَ عَلَيَّ وَعَلَی
وَالِدَيَّ وَأنْ أعْمَلَ صَالِحاً تَرْضَاهُ وَأصْلِحْ لِي فِي
ذُرِّيَّتِي إِنِّي تُبْتُ إِلَيْكَ وَإِنِّي مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***15. And We have enjoined on man to be dutiful and kind to his
parents. His mother bears him with hardship. And she brings him forth
with hardship, and the bearing of him, and the weaning of him [lasts]
thirty months, till when he attains full strength and reaches forty
years, he says: “My Lord! Grant me the power and ability that I may be
grateful for Your Favor which You have bestowed upon me and upon my
parents, and that I may do righteous good deeds, such as please You, and
make my offspring good. Truly, I have turned to You in repentance, and
truly, I am one of the Muslims [submitting to Your Will].***

Being dutiful and kind to one’s parents is highly rewarded by God.

The phrase:

***“We enjoined”***

is attested five times in the Qur’an three instances of which are
employed for parents[^32]. Owing to the hardships of pregnancy,
delivery, and suckling, mothers enjoy a special privilege and deserve
further kindness. It is noteworthy that being dutiful and kind to one’s
parents does not depend on their being Muslims.

The basis of man’s life and his felicity and improvement rests on
unanimity, kindness, and philanthropy and his closest relations are his
parents who partially form his material existence. That is why God
Almighty enjoins man to do good to his parents.

In this vein, motherly love for her child is one of the wonders of the
world and one of the secrets of creation, since despite suffering so
many hardships and so much pain, however her child be ugly in form or
character, her love never turns into disgust. She bears the child for a
period of nine months and her delivery is very painful. She suckles her
child.

According to the Verse, such activities last thirty months. Therefore,
compared with fathers, mothers suffer further hardships; however,
fathers undergo many hardships for their children in other respects. In
bringing up their children, parents undergo many a hardship to provide
for their children’s provisions and education until their children reach
majority.

The verse connotes guidance through intellect since any fair individual
knows through their reason that they are dutiful against their parents
and the verse stands on such rational command.

The Qur’an[^33] says:

***“Is there any reward for good other than good?”***

which is a reference to the rational command in question.

However, when we compare this Verse with:

***“And worship Allah and do not associate false deities with Him in any
way and do good to your parents”***[^34]

which is attested in four Qur’nic Chapters for the sake of emphasis and
we take the large number of traditions and narrations narrated from the
Infallibles (as) we notice that the number is so large that enumerating
all of them will run to many a page.

Taking the Qur’anic Verses and the traditions and narrations bears
testimony to the fact that as per Divine Command doing good to one’s
parents is on a par with worshipping God based on which it is obligatory
to be dutiful to one’s parents and obey them unless their commands be
inconsistent with Divine Commands and those of His Messenger.

It is incumbent upon every individual to make every attempt to do good
to them and obtain their satisfaction at all times and to the extent
possible to do so since obedience to them and obtaining their
satisfaction are on a par with obedience to God and obtaining Divine
Satisfaction.

Man attains to the perfect state of physical and mental development when
he is forty years of age. It clearly demonstrates whether he treads the
path of felicity or is astray.

Thus God Almighty says that within a period of forty years, man may
proceed on the path of felicity and thus say in a state of need and
gratitude:

***“Bestow upon me the blessing that I may be grateful for the abounding
material and immaterial bounties granted to me and my parents and as a
token of gratitude act upon Your Satisfaction.”***

Such individual not only invokes God to respond to his needs but also
seeks felicity and welfare for his offspring.

He turns to the threshold of the Absolute Self-Sufficient God and
sincerely addresses God saying:

***“I have turned toward you. I have submitted to Your Will and
Command.”***

Experts of Islamic law have employed:

***“the bearing of him and the weaning of him [lasts] thirty months”***

and

***“the mothers shall give suck to their children for two whole
years”***[^35]

to conclude that pregnancy in the least lasts six months which together
with two months of suckling amount to thirty months.

Surah al-Ahqaf - Verse 16
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اُولَئِكَ الَّذِينَ نَتَقَبَّلُ عَنْهُمْ أحْسَنَ مَا عَمِلُوا
وَنَتَجَاوَزُ عَنْ سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ فِي أصْحَابِ الْجَنَّةِ وَعْدَ
الصِّدْقِ الَّذِي كَانُوا يُوعَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***16. They are those from whom We shall accept the best of their deeds
and overlook their evil deeds. [They shall be] among the dwellers of
Paradise – [this Paradise is] a promise of truth, which they have been
promised.***

The value of deeds lies in their being accepted;

***(“They are those from whom We shall accept …”).***

For instance, being dutiful and doing good to one’s parents and being
grateful to God leads to the acceptance of one’s good deeds and being
dutiful to and doing good to one’s parents and gratitude toward God
results in Divine Forgiving.

***“They”***

in this Verse refers to the people some of whose qualities are
enumerated in the preceding Verse. The Verse in question makes mention
of their good deeds and intentions accepted by God better than what they
have done. God forgives their sins and has promised them to enter
Paradise. His Promise is true and shall be fulfilled.

The Verse indicates that such Grace and Mercy are the rewards of three
good deeds of theirs:

1. Being dutiful and doing good to one’s parents

2. Their invocation and supplication to the Absolute Self-Sufficient for
the bounties granted to them and their parents

3. Their repentance and turning away from opposition to embracing the
Islamic faith in case of committing any sin or fault, since invocation
and supplication at the Threshold of the Omnipotent God as well as
repentance from committing sins and faults serve as two gates of Divine
Mercy and Grace.

Mention will be made of a number of traditions concerning showing
respect for parents:

The Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (as) said:

*“The most significant Divine obligation is to do good to one’s
parents.”*[^36]

The Messenger of Allah (S) Said:

*“Any good doing child who looks at his parents out of kindness is
granted the Divine Reward of pilgrimage to Ka’ba for each and every
look. He was asked concerning a child who looks kindly at his parents
one hundred times a day and he replied: “God is the Greatest and the
Most Pure”*[^37]*.*

The Messenger of Allah (S) Said:

*“A servant who is obedient to his parents and God shall dwell on the
highest place in Paradise”*[^38]*.*

The Messenger of Allah (S) Said:

*“One who obtains the satisfaction of his parents, has gained the
satisfaction of God and one who angers his parents, angers God”*[^39]*.*

The Messenger of Allah (S) Said:

*“One who wishes to have his life prolonged and his daily sustenance
increased should do good to his parents and provide for his blood
relatives”*[^40]*.*

Surah al-Ahqaf - Verses 17-18
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِي قَالَ لِوَالِدَيْهِ اُفٍّ لَكُمَا أتَعِدَانِنِي أنْ اُخْرَجَ
وَقَدْ خَلَتِ الْقُرُونُ مِنْ قَبْلِي وَهُمَا يَسْتَغِيثَانِ اللَّهَ
وَيْلَكَ آمِنْ إِنَّ وَعْدَ اللَّهِ حَقٌّ فَيَقُولُ مَا هَذَا إِلاّ
أسَاطِيرُ الْأوَّلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اُولَئِكَ الَّذِينَ حَقَّ عَلَيْهِمُ الْقَوْلُ فِي اُمَمٍ قَدْ خَلَتْ
مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ مِنَ الْجِنِّ وَالْأِنْسِ إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا خَاسِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***17. But he who says to his parents: “Fie upon you both! Do you hold
out the promise to me that I shall be raised up [from the grave
posthumously] when generations before me have passed away?” While they
invoke Allah for help [and say unto him]: “Woe to you! Believe! Verily,
the Promise of Allah is true.” But he says: “This [promise] is nothing
but the tales of the ancient.”***  
***18. They are those against whom the Word [of torment] is justified
among the previous generations of Jinn and mankind that have passed
away. Indeed, they are ever the losers.***

Unworthy children insult their parents;

***(“Fie upon you both!”)***

but faithful and compassionate parents seek God’s assistance to guide
their children and ask them to do good deeds and keep away from vices.

In the Verse in question, mention is made of unfaithful and ungrateful
individuals who are cursed by their parents:

***“He who says to his parents: ‘Fie upon you both! Do you hold out the
promise to me that I shall be raised up when generations before me have
passed away?’”***

Faithful parents do not desist before their obdurate son,

***“they invoke Allah for help [and say unto him]: ‘Woe to you! Believe!
Verily, the Promise of Allah is true.’”***

But he says:

***“This [promise] is nothing but the tales of the ancient.”***

What you say concerning the Last Day and Reckoning is superstitions and
legends of the ancients and I shall never submit to believing them.

The qualities enumerated in this Verse concerning such obdurate
individuals are as follows:

1. disrespect toward parents, since

***“Fie”***

refers to impurities and connotes insult and humiliation.[^41]

2. Such people not only disbelieve in the Last Day but also mock such
belief and regard it on a par with legends and superstitions

3. Enjoining them to embrace the true faith falls onto deaf ears as they
do not submit to the Divine Will and they are conceited with false pride
and ignorance. Compassionate parents make every attempt to rescue their
obdurate children from the abyss of ignorance and the painful torment in
the world to come; however, the unworthy children persist in their
disbelief and their parents find no other alternative but to leave them.

According to Verse 18:

“Obdurate disbelievers are those against whom the Word [of torment] is
justified among the previous generations of Jinn and mankind that have
passed away. Indeed, they are ever the losers [viz. they shall suffer
the painful chastisement and shall abide in Hell].

The reason is that they are all losers. What loss is worse that losing
all one’s capabilities and gaining the Divine Wrath? In comparing the
dwellers of Paradise and Hell in these Verses we notice that one group
attain to growth and development and the other loss all their
capabilities and turn into losers.

The former are grateful to God and their parents but the latter are
ungrateful and show their disrespect to their parents. The former shall
abide in Paradise near to God and the latter are the dwellers of Hell to
abide there among faithless people.

Each of them joins their lot. The former repent of their sins and faults
and submit to the Will of God and the latter are rebels sunken in false
pride. It is to be noted that the latter are obdurate in their deviation
from the true path and rely on their predecessors and shall be raised up
in Hell with their likes.”

Surah al-Ahqaf - Verse 19
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِكُلٍّ دَرَجَاتٌ مِمَّا عَمِلُوا وَلِيُوَفِّيَهُمْ أعْمَالَهُمْ
وَهُمْ لا يُظْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***19. And for all [viz. Jinn and mankind, the preceding and coming
generations], there will be degrees according to that which they did,
that He may recompense them in full for their deeds. And they will not
be wronged.***

Divine degrees and stations are consistent with human deeds.
Resurrection shall be a reward for the faithful and a chastisement for
evil doers

***(“He may recompense them in full for their deeds”).***

***“And”***

(wa) in

***“and for all”***

(wa li-kulli) refers to the last two Verses; the former concerns those
who embrace the true faith and submit to the Divine Will following their
maturity and development invoking God to grant success to them and their
parents, repenting their evil deeds and turning to God Almighty and the
latter concerns those who showed disrespect for their parents and denied
the veracity of the Resurrection Day. Each of them shall be granted
degrees of ascension consistent with their deeds.

Every act shall be recompensed in full and no one shall be wronged.

The Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فمن یعمل مثقال ذره خیرا یره و من یعمل مثقال ذره شرا یره
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So whosoever does good equal to the weight of an atom shall see it
and whosoever does evil equal to the weight of an atom shall see
it”***[^42]***.***

In short, the Verse apparently refers to the fact that degrees are the
results of deeds and since people are quite different in their deeds,
their degrees are quite different. Each and every individual’s degree is
determined by his qualities and morals acquired by himself in his
mundane life.

Surah al-Ahqaf - Verse 20
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ يُعْرَضُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا عَلَی النَّارِ أذْهَبْتُمْ
طَيِّبَاتِكُمْ فِي حَيَاتِكُمُ الدُّنْيَا وَاسْتَمْتَعْتُمْ بِهَا
فَالْيَوْمَ تُجْزَوْنَ عَذَابَ الْهُونِ بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَسْتَكْبِرُونَ
فِي الْأرْضِ بِغَيْرِ الْحَقِّ وَبِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَفْسُقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***20. On the Day when those who disbelieve will be exposed to the Fire
[it shall be said]: “You received your good things in the life of the
world, and you took your pleasure therein [without saving anything for
this day]. Now this Day you shall be recompensed with a torment of
humiliation, because you were arrogant in the land without a right, and
because you used to rebel against Allah’s Command.***

Diverse physical and mental torments shall be in store for evil doers on
the Resurrection Day beginning posthumously with reproach, humiliation,
losing one’s capabilities and bounties, and regretting their loss.

Concerning the manner of dying, Imam ‘Ali (as) in Nahj al-Balagha says:

*“In his last minute, man thinks about what he has done in his lifetime
(fi-ma afani ‘umrahu)”*[^43]*.*

The blessed Verse in question treats of the manner of torments of the
Resurrection Day, when disbelievers are exposed to Hell fire. It will be
said unto them that the bounties granted to you in your mundane life,
e.g. outward ones like health, property and wealth, delicious food and
inward ones such as intellect, intelligence, and bravery were spent
inappropriately rather than employing them for the attainment of
felicity, virtue, and perfection.

You spent them on the pleasures of the flesh and as a consequence of
ingratitude for such blessings, disobedience against Divine Command you
will pay for your ingratitude by suffering from a humiliating torment
(jaza’an wifaqan). Since recompense is supposed to be consistent with
deeds, false pride and vicious conduct shall be chastised by humiliating
torment (‘adhab al-hawn).

Surah al-Ahqaf - Verse 21
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاذْكُرْ أخَا عَادٍ إِذْ أنْذَرَ قَوْمَهُ بِالْأحْقَافِ وَقَدْ خَلَتِ
النُّذُرُ مِنْ بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِ ألَآ تَعْبُدُوا إِلاّ
اللَّهَ إِنِّي أخَافُ عَلَيْكُمْ عَذَابَ يَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***21. And remember [Hud] the brother of ‘Ad, when he warned his people
in Ahqaf. And surely, there have passed away warners before him and
after him [saying]: Worship none but Allah; truly, I fear for you the
torment of a mighty Day.”***

The proper noun Ahqaf is from hiqf (“flowing sand”) is applied to a
region covered by sand in the South of the Arabian Peninsula located
between the Yemen, Oman, and Aden in which the people of ‘Ad dwelt (cf.
Tahqiq fi Kalimat al-Qur’an).

Addressing His Messenger in this Verse, God says:

***“Remember ‘Ad’s brother [namely Prophet Hud (as)].”***

It is said that Hud (as) was ‘Ad’s brother by blood or from the latter’s
tribe. Hud (as) was asked to inspire awe in his Bedouin tribe and
threaten them.

God Almighty appointed Hud (as) as His Messenger to encourage the people
of ‘Ad to worship the One God saying unto them:

***“Do not worship any god other than the One God. I fear for you the
torment of a mighty Day.”***

[^1]: 40

[^2]: 41

[^3]: 42

[^4]: 43

[^5]: 44

[^6]: 45

[^7]: 46

[^8]: 41:41

[^9]: 63:8

[^10]: 44:38-39; 40:2-3; 41:2-4; 42:3-5; 43:2-3, 6; 44:3

[^11]: 55:3

[^12]: 1:2

[^13]: 2:143

[^14]: 3:38

[^15]: 27:62

[^16]: 29:69

[^17]: 38:2

[^18]: 13:28

[^19]: 13:28

[^20]: 96:4

[^21]: 14:7

[^22]: 26:80

[^23]: 26:82

[^24]: 22:73

[^25]: 46:5

[^26]: 35:14

[^27]: 17:56

[^28]: 17:56

[^29]: 2:102

[^30]: 12:39

[^31]: 6:25

[^32]: 29:8; 31: 14; 46:15

[^33]: 55:60

[^34]: 4:40

[^35]: 2:233

[^36]: Mizan al-Hikma, vol. 10, pp. 7-9

[^37]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 74, p.73

[^38]: Kanz al-’Ummal, vol. 16, p. 467

[^39]: Kanz al-’Ummal, vol. 16, p. 470

[^40]: Kanz al-’Ummal, p. 16, p. 475

[^41]: cf. Raghib’s Mufradat

[^42]: 99:7-8

[^43]: Sermon 109


