Surah Muhammad, Chapter 47, Verses 1 - 21
=========================================

**(Muhammad/The Fighting)**

**Section (juz’): 26**

**Number of Verses: 38**

General Overview of the Chapter
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

The Chapter has thirty eight Verses and is revealed at Mecca. The title
of the Chapter derives from the second Verse in which mention is made of
the name of the Noble Prophet Muhammad (S). The dominant theme of the
Chapter is jihad against the enemies of Islam hence Its designation “The
Chapter of Battle” (Surah al-Qital).

The main subject matter concerns believers and disbelievers, comparing
the twain in this world and the world to come, and the hypocrites’
sabotage in Medina. Mention is also made of issues regarding the
captivity and freedom of the prisoners of war, call to spend money in
Allah’s Cause, and forbidding obsequiousness and complacency in dealing
with the enemy.

It is narrated that whoever wishes to perceive the circumstances of the
Prophet’s (S) Household (as) and their enemies is supposed to recite the
Chapter in question.[^1] It is also reported that the Noble Prophet (S)
would recite the Chapter in his evening prayers.[^2]

The Merits of Reciting the Chapter
----------------------------------

According to a Prophetic tradition

*“One who recites Sura Muhammad, God will provide him with the streams
of Paradise.”*[^3]

Surah Muhammad - Verse 1
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَصَدُّوا عَنْ سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ أضَلَّ أعْمَالَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. Those who disbelieve and hinder [men] from the Path of Allah, He
will render their deeds vain.***

From among the one hundred and fourteen Chapters of the Holy Qur’an,
mention is made of reproaching and threatening the enemies in eleven
Chapters. The verse in question is one of such instances.

The Noble Verse reads:

***“Those who disbelieve and hinder men from the Path of Allah, God will
render their deeds vain.”***

The verse alludes to the Meccan polytheists and leaders of disbelief
serving as war mongers waging wars against the Islamic faith. They were
not only disbelievers but also employed diverse stratagems to hinder
people from the Path of Allah.

Some exegets, e.g. Zamakhshari in his Kashshaf, considering the meaning
of the following Verse which concerns faith, have interpreted sadd ad
hoc in the sense of:

***“turning away” (i’radh)***

from faith; however, taking the Qur’anic usage of the word into
consideration, the dominant sense of the word is “hindering and
impeding.”

***“Render their deeds vain”***

is used in the sense that “He” will make their plans ineffective and
fruitless, since reducing something serves as a metaphor for being
abandoned which necessitates perdition.

At any rate, some exegets take the sentence as an allusion to those who
provided people with the meat of the camels slaughtered at the battle of
Badr. Abu Jahl, Safwan, and Sahl ibn ‘Amr each slaughtered ten camels as
a token of thanksgiving.[^4] Such acts were of no avail with polytheism
and satanic stratagems hence their being rendered totally vain.

It is not apparently restricted to the sense in question rather all
their seemingly good deeds, e.g. providing aid to the needy and
hospitality, will be rendered vain owing to their faithlessness.
Furthermore, God Almighty will render all their acts performed for the
obliteration of Islam and defeating Muslims and also impedes them from
attaining to their goals.

Surah Muhammad - Verse 2
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ وَآمَنُوا بِمَا نُزِّلَ
عَلَی مُحَمَّدٍ وَهُوَ الْحَقُّ مِنْ رَبِّهِمْ كَفَّرَ عَنْهُمْ
سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ وَأصْلَحَ بَالَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***2. But those who believe and do righteous good deeds, and believe in
that which is sent down to Muhammad – for it is the truth from their
Lord – He will absolve them of their vices and will make good their
state.***

Having faith is insufficient for availing oneself of Divine Favors
rather one has to do good righteous deeds and follow the Messenger of
God:

***(“those who believe and do righteous good deeds and believe in that
which is sent down to Muhammad”).***

Regarding the Noble Verse in question exegets maintain that:

***“But those who believe”***

alludes to the Medinan Helpers (ansar) and “that which” (ma):

***“in that which is sent down” (bi-ma nuzzila)***

refers to the Qur’an; in other words the contextual meaning of the
clause in question is “those who believed in the Qur’an sent down to
Muhammad (S) by God and held that It is true, unchangeable, and standing
firm on Its basis to the Last Day and It is not exposed to alterations
like other Divine Books, e.g. the Torah, the Christian Bible, which have
been abrogated by the Holy Qur’an.

Those believing in the Qur’an and the prophethood of the Messenger of
God, the Seal of the Prophets (S) and did righteous good deeds as per
the Divine Decrees and Laws of the Islamic faith, God:

***“will make good their state” (aslaha balahum),***

namely their state will improve out of having faith in Islam, since
their conversion to the Islamic faith and having faith in it will alter
their inward states and refine their heart out of moral and inward vices
and corruption.

***“Will make good their state”***

concerns believers and contrasts with:

***“Will render their deeds vain”***

which falls to the share of disbelievers. In other words, in as much as
believers proceed on the path of improvement of their inward and outward
states through their faith, disbelievers will remain in error out of
their disbelief. It may also indicate that as disbelief will render good
deeds vain, faith, au contraire, will lead to purity and refinement of
heart.

Surah Muhammad - Verse 3
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ بِأنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا اتَّبَعُوا الْبَاطِلَ وَأنَّ
الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّبَعُوا الْحَقَّ مِنْ رَبِّهِمْ كَذَلِكَ يَضْرِبُ
اللَّهُ لِلنَّاسِ أمْثَالَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***3. That is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood, while those
who believe follow the truth [sent down] by their Lord. Thus does Allah
set forth for mankind their parables [for their awakening].***

One of the Qur’anic didactic techniques attested in a number of Verses
is to draw a distinction between the fates of believers and
disbelievers. In the Verse in question, belief and disbelief are
distinguished as per truth and falsehood which reveals the Qur’anic
logic in Its encounter with foes.

***“That”***

(dhalika) in the blessed Verse is a demonstrative pronoun whose
antecedent are the disbelievers and it signifies the vanity of their
deeds.

Since they followed their vain desires and proceeded on the path of
falsehood, their deeds reflect their inner self, even though seemingly
good, their deeds would be rendered vain since their motives rested in
the pleasures of the flesh rather than obtaining Divine Satisfaction and
were done out of disobedience to God and following their concupiscence
and Satan.

Whoever does such deeds, his deeds will be rendered vain and devoid of
truth since truth is restricted to God and the followers of falsehood
remain in error.

The Holy Qur’an says:

***“That is because Allah – He is the Truth and what they invoke besides
Him is falsehood”***[^5]***.***

Thus God strikes a parable saying that good and righteous deeds depend
on believing in Divine Unity and the prophethood of His Messenger. When
the heart rests truly on the firm ground of faith, deeds stemming from
it will be of effect and constancy since man’s truth lies in his heart
which accommodates faith and serves as the reservoir of piety. In case
it is corrupted through disbelief, all deeds will be rendered vain and
ineffective.

Thus it becomes evident that the recompense of one’s deeds depends on
the firmness or frailty of faith. The firmer one’s faith and certitude
become the effects and the rewards of one’s deeds will be higher and the
same will purify the heart from vices.

Surah Muhammad - Verse 4
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا لَقِيتُمُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فَضَرْبَ الرِّقَابِ حَتَّی إِذَا
أثْخَنْتُمُوهُمْ فَشُدُّوا الْوَثَاقَ فَإِمَّا مَنّاً بَعْدُ وَإِمَّا
فِدَاءً حَتَّی تَضَعَ الْحَرْبُ أوْزَارَهَا ذَلِكَ وَلَوْ يَشَاءُ
اللَّهُ لانْتَصَرَ مِنْهُمْ وَلَكِنْ لِيَبْلُوَ بَعْضَكُمْ بِبَعْضٍ
وَالَّذِينَ قُتِلُوا فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ فَلَنْ يُضِلَّ أعْمَالَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***4. Therefore, when you meet those who disbelieve [in battlefield],
smite [their] necks [when they fall into captivity] till when you have
killed and wounded many of them, then bind a bond firmly [lest they
flee] either for generosity or ransom until the war lays down its
burden. Thus [is God’s Command] But if it had been Allah’s Will [to send
down lightning, earthquake, and other disasters], He Himself could
certainly have punished them. But [He let you fight] in order to test
some of you with others. But those who are killed in the Way of Allah,
He will never let their deeds be lost.***

Athkhantumuhum derives from th-kh-n “totally vanquish the enemy.” Withaq
is used in the sense of “a bond used to tie someone or something, e.g. a
rope.”

As mentioned above, the preceding Verses serve as a prelude to prepare
Muslims for receiving a significant order concerning war.

It reads:

***“Upon confrontation with disbelievers on the battlefield attack them
with full force and smite their necks!”***

“Smiting their heads” is evidently employed in the sense of “smiting
them.” It is needless to say that warriors are not supposed to embark
upon doing the same but it would suffice to slay them. However, “smiting
their necks” evidently indicates taking their life and that it what on
which emphasis is laid.

At any rate, the Command ad hoc concerns engaging in war on the
battlefield, since laqaytum derives from l-q-y which in such instances
indicates “war.” Other pieces of evidence are to be found in the Verse
in question denoting the same idea, e.g. captivity of prisoners of war,
the word harb (“war”), and martyrdom for Allah’s cause.

In short, the word liqa at times denotes “meeting, encounter” and at
times it indicates “confronting on the battlefield.” Both senses are
attested in the Qur’an and the word in the Verse in question is used in
the latter sense.

Thus it becomes evident that those aspiring to spread anti-Islamic
propaganda claim that according to the Islamic doctrine, Muslims may
behead disbelievers upon confrontation with them; however, the claim
springs from ill will and ulterior motives otherwise the Verse per se
clearly demonstrates confrontation with the enemy on the battlefield.

It is needless to say that upon confrontation with the bloodthirsty
enemy on the battlefield, one has to attack severely and strike fatal
blows on the enemy or else he will perish. The instruction fully stands
to logic.

It further says that such fatal attacks are supposed to be pursued such
that the enemy falls down in which case defeated warriors are to be
taken as captives and they are supposed to be bound firmly:

***(“till when you have killed and wounded many of them, then bind a
bond firmly [lest they flee]”).***

The word athkhantumuhum derives from th-kh-n denotes harshness and
firmness hence indicating triumph and conquest and total subjugation of
the enemy.

The majority of exegets take the sentence in the sense of the immense
number and severity of slaying the enemy, the issue of slaughtering the
enemy rather than the original sense remains untouched.[^6]

At any rate, the verse indicates a measured military command to the
effect that defeated warriors are not supposed to be taken as captives
prior to the enemy’s total defeat since embarking upon the same may
jeopardize the position of Muslims engaged in war through their
preoccupation with the issue which may hinder them from their main
tasks.

The expression:

***“then bind a bond firmly [lest they flee]” (“fa-shuddu al-withaq”)***

with due consideration to the meaning of the word withaq (“rope”) is a
reference to making doubly sure that the captives are bound firmly lest
they liberate themselves and strike fatal blows.

The next sentence indicates the instruction concerning those taken
captive at war as per which following the war they may either be granted
freedom non gratia or they may be ransomed or exchanged with odd
numbers:

***(“either for generosity or ransom”).***

Therefore, prisoners of war may not be slain following the end of the
war but the leader of Muslims exercises his discretion to either ransom
or exchange them for odd numbers or set them free non gratia. It is
actually a kind of compensation to be borne by the enemy. The issue is
discussed in sources on Islamic law.

The Verse further adds that the status quo is supposed to be still
effective in which fatal blows are to be struck upon the enemy and a
number of them are supposed to be taken captive:

***“until the war lays down its burden.”***

One may desist from inflicting further blows when the enemy is totally
defeated and the flame of war is extinguished. Awzar is the plural form
of wizr denoting “heavy burden” and at times connoting “sins” since the
burden of the latter is borne by one who commits it.

It is interesting to note that the heavy burdens referred to in the
Verse are attributed to the war:

***“until the war lays down its burden.”***

The heavy burdens refer to diverse kinds of weaponry as well as the
responsibilities shouldered by warriors. It is solely at the end of the
war that they desist from shouldering them.

The Verse further adds that you are supposed to act upon the same
instructions:

***“but if it had been Allah’s Will, He Himself could certainly have
punished them”***

through lightning, earthquake, storm, and other disasters. Nonetheless,
there would be no ground for trials.

***“But [He let you fight] in order to test some of you with others.”***

It is actually the grounds lying behind engaging in war and the main
point of the opposition between the Truth and falsehood. It is through
such wars that the lines of true believers who act are separated from
those who merely talk.

Faculties and abilities flourish, perseverance and resistance are
invigorated, and the main goal of the mundane life which is
strengthening the power of faith and other human values are attained.
Had believers stepped aside preoccupied with everyday life and had God
intervened miraculously to defeat the polytheists’ and oppressors’
rebellions, a worthless, stagnant, and frail society would have come
into being and the Islamic faith would have been merely a name.

To sum up, one could say that to establish His Religion, God is needless
of our struggles. The point is that we need the sacred war on the
battlefield to improve our abilities.

The same idea is variously expressed in the Qur’an, for instance,

***“Do you think that you will enter Paradise before Allah tests those
of you who fought in His Cause and also tests those who are the
patient?”***[^7]***.***

The preceding Verse reads:

***“And that Allah may [through such battles] purify the believers from
sins and destroy the disbelievers.”***

The last sentence of the Verse in question treats of the martyrs fell in
such battles whom the Muslim community owes a great deal;

***“But those who are killed in the Way of Allah, He will never let
their deeds be lost.”***

Their troubles and pains will not be in vain but they will be all kept
in Divine Records.

Their sacrifices will be evident in this world since hearing:

*“There is no god but Allah”*

reminds Muslims that thanks to their sacrifices the chains of bondage
are broken and Muslims owe their good name to them.

Surah Muhammad - Verses 5-6
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَيَهْدِيهِمْ وَيُصْلِحُ بَالَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيُدْخِلُهُمُ الْجَنَّةَ عَرَّفَهَا لَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***5. He will guide them and set right their state.***  
***6. And will soon admit them to [high stations in] Paradise which He
has made known to them.***

Divine Guidance is permanent even after death and martyrdom. Martyrdom
for God’s Cause leads to all sins and faults to be forgiven and states
to be set aright. The Verses in question add three further bounties.

Firstly,

***“He will guide them”***

which indicates Guidance toward high stations, great deliverance, and
Paradise as Divine Reward.

Secondly,

***“He will set right their state,”***

i.e., He bestows peace of mind and spirituality upon them, sets them in
harmony with Divine angels, and invites them to His Feast through His
Mercy.

The last bounty is that He

***“will soon admit them to [high stations in] Paradise which He has
made known to them.”***

Some exegets maintain that God not only expresses the qualities of the
Garden of Paradise but also specifies the attributes and signs of their
palaces in Paradise such that upon being admitted to Paradise, they
immediately depart for their palaces.[^8]

Some exegets take ‘arafaha from ‘arf (“fragrance, perfume”) saying that
God admits to Paradise throughout which the guests may enjoy the sweet
smell.

Some also hold that taking into consideration the Verse:

***“Think not of those who are killed in the Way of Allah as dead. Nay,
they are alive, with their Lord, and they have provision”***[^9]***,***

it becomes evident that:

***“set right their state”***

is on a par with everlasting life through which martyrs are prepared to
stand in the presence of Allah with the veils and coverings
removed.[^10]

It would be appropriate to make mention of a number of traditions
concerning martyrs.

According to a Prophetic tradition:

*“There is a better deed above another ending in martyrdom in the Way of
Allah, above which no better deed is imaginable.”*[^11]

According to a tradition narrated on the authority of Imam Baqir(as):

*“There is no single drop dearer to God except for the drop of the blood
shed in His Way or the drop of tears shed at night for His awe. There is
no step dearer to God but the one taken for helping blood relatives or
the one taken to participate in the holy war for God’s Cause.”*[^12]

The discussion may be concluded with a tradition narrated on the
authority of Imam ‘Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha (as).

Quoting his forefathers from the Messenger of God (S) he says:

*“The first one to enter Paradise is the martyr.”*

Surah Muhammad - Verse 7
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِنْ تَنْصُرُوا اللَّهَ يَنْصُرْكُمْ
وَيُثَبِّتْ أقْدَامَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***7. O you who believe! If you help Allah, He will help you, and make
your foothold firm.***

Whoever bears aid to the Islamic faith through his thought, speech, and
deeds, God will also bear him assistance.

Man is a very limited creature and the assistance borne to the Religion
of God is very restricted, but God is infinite and His Help springs from
His Infinite Power. Addressing believers, the noble Verse says that if
they help Allah, He will help them, and their foothold will be firm in
the way of Truth. Helping God is on a par with helping His Religion and
Messenger (S).

Whoever helps God’s Religion, i.e., the Islamic faith revealed to
Prophet Muhammad (S) by any means possible to him through his life,
property, pen, with attempts at helping to establish Islam, hinder
corruption in religion, and bear assistance to believers through any
possible means has helped God and strengthened His Religion and in
return, God will strengthen his will to carry out his mundane and
otherworldly tasks conveniently.

***“And make your foothold firm”***

demonstrates that He will make the helpers of God’s Religion to
persevere such that they may not deviate from the True Path by satanic
temptations.

It is narrated from Qatada that

*“It is incumbent upon God to bear aid to one helping His Religion since
He says:*

***‘If you help Him, He will help you.’***

*It is also incumbent upon Him to increase His bounties to those who
thank Him since He says:*

***‘If you be grateful, I will increase [your bounties].’***

*He will remember him who remembers Him since He says:*

***“If you remember Me, I will remember you.”***

*It is also incumbent upon God to keep His Promise to those who keep
their promise since He says:*

***‘Keep My Promise and I will keep yours.’”***

Surah Muhammad - Verses 8-9
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فَتَعْساً لَهُمْ وَأضَلَّ أعْمَالَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ بِأنَّهُمْ كَرِهُوا مَا أنْزَلَ اللَّهُ فَأحْبَطَ أعْمَالَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***8. But those who disbelieve, for them is destruction, and [Allah]
will make their deeds vain.***  
***9. That [destruction] is because they dislike thatwhich Allah has
sent down; so He has made theirdeeds fruitless.***

The word ta’s indicates “slip, stumble, fall into the river.” Comparison
is one of the best methods of education.

Concerning martyred believers a preceding Verse reads:

***“He will never let their deeds be lost.”***

Regarding disbelievers the Verse in question reads:

***“[He] will make their deeds vain.”***

The contrast is a good tiding to the believers struggling in Allah’s
Cause.

Addressing believers, the Qur’an says:

***“[He will] make your foothold firm.”***

Concerning disbelievers, the penultimate Verse says:

***“For them is destruction,”***

which originally denotes that they will stumble over the precipice.

According to the last two Verses, those who disbelieved were humiliated
and destroyed. God made them stumble on the battlefield thus rendering
their attempts vain. They disliked the Qur’an revealed to His Prophet
(S) as a consequence of which they were defeated and humiliated and
their deeds were rendered fruitless.

According to Manhaj, it is narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) that
the Verse in question indicates that disbelievers disliked ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib’s merits, as a consequence of which they deviated from the Right
Path and their deeds were rendered vain, since doing righteous good
deeds are based on belief in Divine Unity, sincerity in worshipping God,
belief in Divine Guidance, and loving the Prophet (S) and his pure
offspring (as).

It is worthy of note that:

***“What God sent down”***

is employed to denote different things one of which is the Commander of
the Faithful, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib’s (as) Imamate.[^13]

Surah Muhammad - Verse 10
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أفَلَمْ يَسِيرُوا فِي الْأرْضِ فَيَنْظُرُوا كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ
الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ دَمَّرَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلِلْكَافِرِينَ
أمْثَالُهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***10. Have they not traveled through the earth and seen what was the
end of those before them? Allah destroyed them completely, and a similar
[fate is in store for] disbelievers.***

Dammara derives from the root d-m-r denotes “destroy, annihilate,
demolish.” Collocated with the preposition ‘ala, it indicates emphasis.

Addressing the negligent astray in ignorance, the blessed Verse asks:

*“Why do they not travel on the earth to see the traces of the peoples
of the past and see that they were destroyed by Us owing to their denial
of the prophet and harassing them. They should know that their
destruction was due to their disbelief and disobedience. We destroyed
the peoples of the past and such fate awaits these disbelievers.”*

Surah Muhammad - Verse 11
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ بِأنَّ اللَّهَ مَوْلَی الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَأنَّ الْكَافِرِينَ
لا مَوْلَی لَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***11. That is because Allah is the Protector of those who believe, and
the disbelievers have no protector.***

The disbelievers who did not apparently enjoy any support in this world
relied solely on God and He will be their Protector on the Last Day.
Having faith leads to being granted Divine support and disbelief and
finally it leads to losing it. The polytheists’ and disbelievers’
support will be ineffective on the Last Day.

The antecedent of the demonstrative pronoun

***“that”***

(dhalika) in the blessed Verse in question is the preceding Verse. The
believers’ dignity, honor, and triumph is due to the fact that they
helped God’s Religion, as a consequence of which they enjoyed Divine
Protection.

The token of God’s Friendship toward His servant is that the latter is
obedient to his conscience. His heart is the home of love and friendship
toward God and it is through his faith, piety, and helping God’s
Religion that such great bounty has fallen to his share.

***“And the disbelievers have no protector”***

since it is through their disbelief that disbelievers have failed to
receive Divine bounties as a result of which they have not protector.
Thus, all creatures turn into his obedient host. They all become his
helpers and friends and at Divine Command render him aid whenever
necessary and set right his state.

Surah Muhammad - Verse 12
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُدْخِلُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الْأنْهَارُ وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا
يَتَمَتَّعُونَ وَيَأكُلُونَ كَمَا تَأكُلُ الْأنْعَامُ وَالنَّارُ
مَثْویً لَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***12. Certainly Allah will admit those who believe and do righteous
good deeds to Gardens [of Paradise] under which [i.e., trees] rivers
flow while those who disbelieve enjoy themselves [in worldly life] and
eat as cattle eat and [finally] the Fire will be their abode.***

Admitting believers to Paradise is a token of Divine Guardianship.
Believers doing righteous good deeds are under Divine Protection and He
makes them enter Paradise. Deriving pleasures in life is permitted
within the limits of Divine Laws. What lie beyond such limits are
beastly pleasures.

In this blessed Verse, God Almighty promises believers and those who
have done righteous good deeds that Gardens of Paradise will fall into
their share beneath whose trees the rivers of Divine Mercy are
incessantly flowing. The people of Paradise shall abide in them forever.
The bounties of Paradise will be granted through his Grace and
Beneficence. His Mercy will be permanent since He is of Permanent
Bounties and He is of Abundant Beneficence.

He warns disbelievers that believers will abide in the bountiful
Paradise whereas those who disbelieve in Divine Unity and the Last Day
but are solely preoccupied with pleasures of the flesh and eat as cattle
eat and the abode of such people will be Hellfire.

It is said elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an that the recompense of deeds
should be consistent with the deeds committed (jaza’an wifaqan).
Believers help the Religion of God and His Messenger (S) as a
consequence of which God helps and befriends them and they will enjoy
His Grace and Mercy in this world and the world to come; whereas
disbelievers turned away from Truth and followed their mundane and false
desires.

They were preoccupied themselves with the mundane pleasures and did not
take one single step toward Truth and spirituality hence their abode is
the Fire.

***“Allah is not unjust to His servants”***[^14]***.***

Surah Muhammad - Verse 13
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَأيِّنْ مِنْ قَرْيَةٍ هِيَ أشَدُّ قُوَّةً مِنْ قَرْيَتِكَ الَّتِي
أخْرَجَتْكَ أهْلَكْنَاهُمْ فَلا نَاصِرَ لَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***12. And many a [people of a] town, stronger than [the people of] your
town which has driven you out We have destroyed. And there was no helper
for them.***

The Prophet of Islam’s (S) migration was based on his own will, but
Meccan disbelievers drove him into dire circumstances which led him to
emigrate from Mecca.

That is why God says that the people of Mecca were responsible for his
emigration:

***(“has driven you out”).***

In this blessed Verse God warns disbelievers that many an inhabitant of
towns were stronger than Meccans in terms of power but Meccan and
Qurayshi disbelievers drove the Prophet (S) out of his hometown. God
rendered them hopeless such as the ancient peoples like ‘Ad and Thamud
who were strong and powerful and their physical prowess failed to save
them from torment since, as mentioned in the above Verse, God is the
Friend and Protector of believers.

He will not help disbelievers against torments and afflictions.

Surah Muhammad - Verse 14
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أفَمَنْ كَانَ عَلَی بَيِّنَةٍ مِنْ رَبِّهِ كَمَنْ زُيِّنَ لَهُ سُوءُ
عَمَلِهِ وَاتَّبَعُوا أهْوَاءَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***14. Is he who is on a clear proof from his Lord, like those for whom
their evil deeds that they do are beautified for them while they follow
their own lusts?***

The prophethood of the Prophet of Islam (S) is accompanied with clear
proofs. He is Divinely appointed to proclaim the Divine Message. He has
nothing of his own to profess and he lays emphasis on the same.
Certainly believers rely on proofs whereas disbelievers rely on their
vain desires.

The noble Verse draws a distinction between the people of Truth and
those of falsehood. He produces clear proofs as to his Divine
prophethood. The Holy Qur’an is both the Noble Messenger’s (S) miracle
and the Book of Law. It is a clear proof demonstrating his Truth since
Divine Word is inimitable in terms of eloquence and inclusion of secrets
such that Arab eloquent orators and scholars worldwide failed to produce
one single verse like It.

Is such individual on a par with one devoid of spiritual perfection? Are
not their vices beautified for them through satanic embellishment? Are
they not followers of their concupiscence? The wise know that these two
individuals are not alike.

Surah Muhammad - Verse 15
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَثَلُ الْجَنَّةِ الَّتِي وُعِدَ الْمُتَّقُونَ فِيهَا أنْهَارٌ مِنْ
مَاءٍ غَيْرِ آسِنٍ وَأنْهَارٌ مِنْ لَبَنٍ لَمْ يَتَغَيَّرْ طَعْمُهُ
وَأنْهَارٌ مِنْ خَمْرٍ لَذَّةٍ لِلشَّارِبِينَ وَأنْهَارٌ مِنْ عَسَلٍ
مُصَفّی وَلَهُمْ فِيهَا مِنْ كُلِّ الثَّمَرَاتِ وَمَغْفِرَةٌ مِنْ
رَبِّهِمْ كَمَنْ هُوَ خَالِدٌ فِي النَّارِ وَسُقُوا مَاءً حَمِيماً
فَقَطَّعَ أمْعَاءَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***15. The description of Paradise which the pious have been promised
[is that] in it are rivers of water the taste and smell of which are not
changed, rivers of milk of which the taste never changes, rivers of wine
delicious to those who drink, and rivers of clarified honey therein
for*** ***them is every kind of fruit and forgiveness from their Lord.
[Are these] like those who shall dwell forever in the Fire and be given
to drink boiling water so that it cuts up their bowels.***

Those who keep away from the transient pleasures of the flesh through
piety will attain to permanent felicity;

***(“the pious have been promised”).***

Imam Husayn (as) says

*“Divine Forgiveness falling to the share of the people of Paradise is
the best bounty for them.”*

Then the Noble Imam refers to the Qur’anic verse:

***“But the greatest bliss is the Good Pleasure of Allah. That is the
supreme success”***[^15]***.***

The Verse depicts the Paradise awaiting the pious saying that there are
four rivers in Paradise for the pious.

Firstly,

***“rivers of water”***

in which pure and permanent water flows unlike that of the world whose
taste and color will not change through stagnation but its purity and
taste will be the same. It is this world which is subject to permanent
alteration whose elements are at all times in the process of generation
and corruption.

The elements of the world to come will not be subject to change since as
per the Holy Qur’an

***“Verily, the home of the Hereafter – that is the life
indeed”***[^16]***.***

Secondly,

***“rivers of milk”***

in Paradise,

***“whose taste never changes”***

resemble water in terms of purity. The milk is not like that of this
world that goes sour shortly and becomes useless. The milk, like the
water, is incessantly flowing since the milk and water in Paradise
spring from the purity of the hearts of the pious.

Thirdly,

***“rivers of wine,”***

represent all kinds of intoxicant drinks. Unlike the wine in this world,
that of Paradise is tasty, delicious, joyful, and invigorating.

Fourthly,

***“rivers of clarified honey”***

are prepared for the pious in Paradise.

The word:

***“clarified”***

indicates that heavenly honey is pure and devoid of impurities. It is
unlike the honey in this world mingled with wax and other things which
is to be purified.

***“Therein for them is every kind of fruit and forgiveness from their
Lord.”***

Heavenly bounties for the pious are not restricted to these four rivers
but all kinds of fruit and any imaginable or unimaginable bounty will be
prepared for them.

Those aspiring to find such bounties are supposed to know that Divine
Favors and heavenly bounties are reserved for the pious in the
Hereafter:

***(“the pious have been promised”).***

It is noteworthy that the seeds of such bounties are to be sown in our
hearts in this world so that they bear fruit. In other words, one has to
struggle in order to attain to the disposition of piety. The disposition
of piety is to be acquired in this world such that it bears fruit in the
Hereafter in the form of three rivers. God strikes parables in the Holy
Qur’an to express many a meaning and secret of creation without which
man may not perceive them through his intellect.

Qur’anic Verses are the mines of secrets and abundant delicacies
contained in Their words whose esoteric meaning is solely perceptible
to:

***“those deeply rooted in knowledge,”***

namely the Infallible Imams (as).

According to a recurrently transmitted Prophetic tradition, through
performing deeds and prayers of supererogation (nawafil) man attains to
a state in which his vision, hearing, and touch turn into those of
Truth. The self of such man is annihilated and he is absorbed in God
such that he finds everlasting life in Him.

Are such pious believers immersed in the rivers of Mercy and those
enjoying His Infinite Bliss are on a par with those whose abode will be
Hellfire for good as they are disfavored?

***“[Are these] like those who shall dwell forever in the Fire and shall
have to drink boiling water so that it shall cut up their bowels.”***

Any wise person knows that the pious believer is not on a par with the
polytheist and/or the dissimulating disbeliever. The former will immerse
in the rivers of Divine Mercy enjoying Divine Infinite Bounties for good
and the latter will be disfavored and afflicted with different kinds of
torment. How may they stand on a par?

Surah Muhammad - Verse 16
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ يَسْتَمِعُ إِلَيْكَ حَتَّی إِذَا خَرَجُوا مِنْ
عِنْدِكَ قَالُوا لِلَّذِينَ اُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ مَاذَا قَالَ آنِفاً
اُولَئِكَ الَّذِينَ طَبَعَ اللَّهُ عَلَی قُلُوبِهِمْ وَاتَّبَعُوا
أهْوَاءَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***16. And among them are some who [apparently] listen to you till when
they go out from you, they say to those who have received knowledge:
“What has he said just now? Such are men whose hearts Allah has sealed
and they follow their vain desires.***

Addressing the Prophet (S) the Verse says that the disbelievers who are
nominal Muslims attend your sessions and listen to the Qur’an, but they
neither believe in your prophethood nor in the Book revealed to you.
They are neither able to recognize it as the Divine Book nor do they
understand it.

Upon meeting your followers who know your words they say contemptuously
and mockingly: “about what the man is talking?” O Prophet (S)! Your
words are not beyond human understanding, but it is through their grudge
and animosity that God seals their hearts so that they are unable to
perceive the truth and they follow their vain desires.

Surah Muhammad - Verse 17
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ اهْتَدَوْا زَادَهُمْ هُدی وَآتَاهُمْ تَقْوَاهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***17. While as for those who accept Guidance, He increases their
guidance and bestows on them their piety.***

Accepting Divine Guidance by man leads to Its increase by God. Piety is
the Divine Reward bestowed upon those who accept the Guidance;

***(“[He] bestows on them their piety”).***

The Verse refers to the guided whose guidance is increased upon
listening to the Revelation through which the truth of piety and the
light of knowledge illuminate their hearts leading them from the shadows
of ignorance to the light of knowledge.

Surah Muhammad - Verse 18
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَهَلْ يَنْظُرُونَ إِلاّ السَّاعَةَ أنْ تَأتِيَهُمْ بَغْتَةً فَقَدْ
جَاءَ أشْرَاطُهَا فَأنَّی لَهُمْ إِذَا جَاءَتْهُمْ ذِكْرَاهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***18. Do they [disbelievers in order to believe] then await [anything]
other than the Hour that it should come upon them suddenly? But some of
its portents have already come and when it is on them [on the Day of
Resurrection] how can they benefit then by their reminder?***

Ashrat is the plural form of sharat (“portent, sign, indication”).

As per a Prophetic tradition,

***“but some of its portents have already come”***

refers to his prophethood,[^17] since the last Messenger has Divinely
appointed, the last Divine Book has been revealed, and men have been
provided with the last decisive Argument. Thus any sin, corruption,
disbelief, and denial will make the Last Day occur earlier.

The world al-Sa’a;

***(“the Hour”)***

is usually employed in the sense of Resurrection, but it may also
indicate Divine Wrath and annihilation of men in this world which will
be a prelude to the torments of Resurrection.

Ibn ‘Abbas narrates that at the farewell pilgrimage (hajjat al-wida’) on
which Salman the Persian was the most intimate Companion of the Noble
Prophet (S), Prophet Muhammad (S) said:

*“Should I inform you of the portents of Resurrection? They are
negligence in establishing daily prayers, following vain desires,
cherishing the wealthy, exchanging religion for worldly
possessions.”*[^18]

Some traditions refer to more than one hundred portents for the coming
of Resurrection.

The Verse in question warns disbelievers and polytheists that an ounce
of precaution is better than a pound of cure saying that those who await
the advent of resurrection should know that it will come all of a
sudden.

***“The portents have already come”***

since the Seal of the Prophets (S) has been Divinely appointed in the
last days (akhir al-zaman). According to a Prophetic tradition recorded
in Manhaj, the Noble Prophet (S) pointed at two fingers of his saying
that the Resurrection and I are attached like these two fingers. Some
other portents have already come and others are to come in time.

***“When it is on them [on the Day of Resurrection] how can they benefit
then by their reminder?”***

Surah Muhammad - Verse 19
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاعْلَمْ أنَّهُ لا إِلَهَ إِلاّ اللَّهُ وَاسْتَغْفِرْ لِذَنْبِكَ
وَلِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ وَاللَّهُ يَعْلَمُ مُتَقَلَّبَكُمْ
وَمَثْوَاكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***19. Therefore, know that there is no god but Allah and ask
forgiveness for your sin, and also for [the sin of] believing men and
believing women. And Allah knows well your moving about and your place
of rest.***

The clause;

***“ask forgiveness for your sin”***

is also attested elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^19].

With due consideration to the fact that all prophets are infallible,
there are grounds for such asking for forgiveness:

Asking for forgiveness is a kind of worshipping God even if no sin has
been committed.

It may ad hoc indicate avoidance from doing what is preferable (tark
al-ula). In other words, the Prophet (S) was supposed to do preferable
acts but he abstained from doing them.

Asking for forgiveness may turn into a common practice for people.

It leads to attaining supreme stations by the Prophet (S).

It may connote asking for forgiveness for the sins committed by people
in respect of the Prophet (S).

Asking for forgiveness is not at all times for one’s sins and faults,
but perceiving that he is so inferior against Divine Glory and
Greatness, man asks for forgiveness.

Addressing His Prophet (S) God Almighty says unto him:

***“know that there is no god but Allah and ask forgiveness for your sin
and also for [the sin of] believing men and believing women.”***

Imami scholars are unanimous in maintaining that prophets, particularly
the Seal of the Prophets (S), are infallible.

***“Your sin”***

(dhanbika) may either indicate abstaining from doing preferable acts or
preoccupation with mundane affairs. It is narrated from the Prophet (S)
that he asked forgiveness of God seventy times a day. It was for his
preoccupation with carrying out the tasks of promulgation of the Islamic
faith and attending to the affairs of his prophethood.

It is in the Qur’an that he is a man like other men;

***(“Verily, I am a human being like you”).***

Owing to the restrictions of human nature, preoccupation with any matter
may at times hinder one from attending fully to God.

It is to be noted that his preoccupation with attending to the affairs
of his prophethood was out of is obedience to God and acting upon His
Command but:

***“the good deeds of those disfavored by God are like the faults of
favorites of God.”***

That is why he is asked to ask for forgiveness for himself and
believers. In other words, he is asked to turn away from people
following the communication of the Message and attend fully to the
glorification of God. It is a source of hope to believers that the Noble
Prophet (S) is asked to pray for their forgiveness.

His prayer will not remain unanswered unless we really have faith in God
and His Messenger. It is worthy of note that the Prophet (S) with his
supreme station is required to ask for forgiveness let alone us since we
commit sins and neglect our duties at all times.

Asking for forgiveness of “the All-Forgiving of sins” and turning away
from opposition to God lead to turning toward God and are regarded per
se as an act of worship.

The Verse ends in:

***“Allah knows well your moving about and your place of rest.”***

In other words, God is fully aware of the acts committed by man as well
as his abode in the Hereafter. Past, present, and future make no
difference to His Omniscience.

Narrating on the authority of Hudhayfa Yamani, Tabarsi records that the
former said unto the Prophet (S) that he had a sharp tongue and as a
consequence was afraid of ending up in Hell for that sake. The Noble
Prophet (S) asked him why he was not asking for forgiveness as he [the
Prophet (S)] was asking for the same one hundred times a day.

According to a Prophetic tradition, uttering:

*“I ask forgiveness of God”*

and

*“There is no god but Allah”*

are the best devotions since God Almighty says in a Qur’anic Verse:

***“Therefore know that there is no god but Allah and ask forgiveness
for your sin, and also for [the sin of] believing men and believing
women.”***[^20]

It is to be noted that asking for forgiveness of God may not be solely
done verbally but true repentance lies in being regretful from
committing sins and intending to not turn to sins and mere praying for
forgiveness is of no avail.

According to a Prophetic tradition recurrently narrated:

*“Regret [from committing sins] is asking for forgiveness,”*

in other words, regret from committing sins forms the basis of asking
for forgiveness of God. However, such regret necessitates intending to
abstain from committing further sins. It may be said that true asking
for forgiveness lies in repentance and intention as to committing no
further sins; nonetheless, praying for forgiveness and other
requirements attested in traditions and narrations are the conditions of
perfect repentance.

The repentant ask for forgiveness of the All-Forgiving of sins by heart
and tongue.

Surah Muhammad - Verse 20
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَوْلا نُزِّلَتْ سُورَةٌ فَإِذَا
اُنْزِلَتْ سُورَةٌ مُحْكَمَةٌ وَذُكِرَ فِيهَا الْقِتَالُ رَأيْتَ
الَّذِينَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ مَرَضٌ يَنْظُرُونَ إِلَيْكَ نَظَرَ
الْمَغْشِيِّ عَلَيْهِ مِنَ الْمَوْتِ فَأوْلَی لَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***20. Those who believe say: “Why is not a Chapter [of the Qur’an] sent
down [regarding jihad]? But when a decisive Chapter is sent down and
jihad is mentioned therein, you will see those in whose hearts is a
disease looking at you with a look of one fainting to death. But it
[death] was better for them.***

A number of believers await the declaration of jihad and make mention of
their preparedness to engage in it;

***(“Those who believe say …”).***

Such declaration should be based on Divine Revelation and Command. The
Verse concerns the believers whose hearts are not touched by faith and
await Revelation inquiring why a Chapter has not been sent down so that
we may act upon it. Nonetheless, upon the Revelation of a Chapter
regarding jihad they become anxious as if they suffer from heart
disease.

They look at the Prophet (S) as if they are on death bed. But the best
thing leading to their felicity is to obey God’s Command and that of His
Messenger as well as uttering good words to the effect that they have
heard the Command and they Obey It;

***(“We hear and obey”).***

Now that they disobey the Command, death is better for them.

Surah Muhammad - Verse 21
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طَاعَةٌ وَقَوْلٌ مَعْرُوفٌ فَإِذَا عَزَمَ الْأمْرُ فَلَوْ صَدَقُوا
اللَّهَ لَكَانَ خَيْراً لَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***21. Obedience and carefully considered words [were better for them].
And when the matter [jihad] is resolved on, then if they had been true
to Allah [and engage in jihad wholeheartedly] it would have been
[certainly] better for them.***

Believers are wholeheartedly obedient before the Divine declaration of
jihad

***(“obedience”).***

Words and deeds are to be both accurate and well considered;

***(“obedience and carefully considered words [were better for
them]”).***

People with frail faith are afraid of engaging in jihad. They not only
disobey the Command but they also attempt at justifications and
irrelevant words.

Their pretexts are mentioned in different instances in the Holy Qur’an,
e.g. inability to engage in jihad,

***“insecurity of their families, insecurity of their houses,”***

***“hot weather,”***

being tempted to commit sin in case of engagement in jihad, looking at
Roman maids will tempt us into getting involved in sedition (at the
battle of Tabuk). The Holy Qur’an says that their deserting is the
sedition.

Other pretexts to refrain from engagement in jihad include:
inappropriate time designated for battle, preferably postponed

***“for the fear of evading incurring loss and suffering from
disaster.”***

The verse in question says that it would be better to obey the Command
and say good words rather than uttering such pretexts. In other words,
it says that it would be better for them if they speak and act
wholeheartedly when the declaration of jihad is decisive, since they
will lead to their pride and honor in this world and great reward,
felicity, and salvation in the hereafter.

The clause:

***“the matter is resolved on”***

basically indicates decisiveness but taking the preceding and the
following Verses into consideration it connotes “jihad.”

[^1]: Majma’ al-Bayan [Exegesis].

[^2]: Maraghi’s Exegesis.

[^3]: Majma’ al-Bayan, vol. 9, Sura Muhammad.

[^4]: Ruh al-Ma’ni, vol. 26, p. 33.

[^5]: 22:62

[^6]: Ibn al-A’rabi is quoted in Lisan al-’Arab as saying “Athkhana idha
ghalaba wa qahara” (“The word athkhana is employed upon conquering and
subjugation”).

[^7]: 3:142

[^8]: Majma’ al-Bayan, vol. 9, p. 98.

[^9]: 3:169

[^10]: al-Mizan, vol. 18, p. 244.

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 100, p.15.

[^12]: Ibid, p. 14.

[^13]: Majma’ al-Bayan, under the blessed Verse in question.

[^14]: 8:51

[^15]: 9:72

[^16]: 29:64

[^17]: Majma’ al-Bayan.

[^18]: Nur al-Thiqalayn [Exegesis].

[^19]: 40:55

[^20]: Manhaj al-Sadiqin.


