[INTRODUCTION]
==============

This long article is a part of Martyr Murtada Mutahhari's book Ashna'i
ba 'ulum-e Islami (An Introduction to the Islamic Sciences). The book
consists of seven parts:

(1) logic

(2) philosophy

(3)*al-kalam* (Muslim scholastic philosophy)

(4)*'irfan* (Islamic mysticism)

(5)*usul-e fiqh* (the principles of jurisprudence)

(6)*fiqh* (Islamic jurisprudence)

(7)*hikmat-e 'amali'* (practical philosophy or practical morality).

All the seven parts together serve both as a comprehensive survey of the
fundamentals of different branches of Islamic sciences and a general and
comprehensive perspective for the proper understanding of the basic
teachings of Islam along with the main points of difference among
various sects of Muslims.

This work of Martyr Mutahhari is the best introduction to Islamic
philosophy and jurisprudence. From this view,*Ashna'i ba 'ulum-e Islami*
deserves to be prescribed as the basic text for all the students of
Islamic studies. It is also very useful for non-specialists who wish to
acquaint themselves with Islam.

All the introductory books written so far are either by the Orientalists
and are naturally biased and fail to give true picture of the
development of different Islamic sciences or are written by Muslim
scholars who consciously or unknowingly incorporate in the body of books
certain misleading notions propagated by the Western scholars of Islam
about Muslirn philosophy and its various branches. It also can be said
with some justification that no other available introductory text in
this field covers all Muslim sects and their specific views. Martyr
Murtada Mutahhari's exposition and evaluation of various theories is
objective and unbiased, which is the most essential condition for a book
to be prescribed as an introductory text.

In this part, dealing with*'ilm al-kalam* , the author has discussed the
main doctrines of kalam and their subsequent modifications with special
reference to*Mu'tazilah* ,*Asha'irah* and Shi'ah schools of kalam. But
he has not ignored other schools and has referred to their relevant
doctrines wherever it was necessary for the full understanding of the
problem under discussion.]

*'Ilm al-kalam* is one of the Islamic sciences. It discusses the
fundamental Islamic beliefs and doctrines which are necessary for a
Muslim to believe in. It explains them, argues about them, and defends
them.

The scholars of Islam divide Islamic teachings into three parts:

(i) Doctrines (*'aqa'id* ): These constitute the issues which must be
understood and believed in, such as, the Unity of God, the Divine
Attributes, universal and restricted prophethood, etc. However, there
are certain differences between Muslim sects as to what constitutes the
basic articles of faith (*usul al-Din* ) in which belief is necessary.

(ii) Morals (*akhlaq* ): These relate to the commands and teachings
relating to the spiritual and moral characteristics of human beings,
such as, justice,

God-fearing (*taqwa* ), courage, chastity, wisdom, endurance, loyalty,
truthfulness, trustworthiness, etc., and prescribe 'how' a human being
should be.

(iii) The Law (*ahkam* ): Here the issues relating to practice and the
correct manner of performing acts, such as, prayers (*salat* ), fasting
(*sawm* ),*hajj, jihad, al-'amr bil ma'ruf wa al-nahy 'an al-munkar* ,
buying, renting, marriage, divorce, division of inheritance and so on,
are discussed.

The science which deals with the first of the above-mentioned is*'ilm
al-kalam* . The study of the second is*'ilm al-'akhlaq* (ethics). The
study of the third is called*'ilm al-fiqh* (the science of
jurisprudence). That which is subjected to division in this
classification is the corpus of Islamic teachings; that is, those things
which constitute the content of Islam. It does not include all those
Islamic studies which form the preliminaries for the study of Islamic
teachings, such as, literature, logic, and occasionally philosophy.

Secondly, in this classification the criterion behind division is the
relationship of Islamic teachings to the human being: those things which
relate to human reason and intellect are called*'aqa'id* ; things which
relate to human qualities are called*akhlaq* ; and those things which
relate to human action and practice are included in*fiqh* .

As I shall discuss in my lectures on*'ilm al* -*fiqh* , although fiqh is
a single discipline from the viewpoint of its subject, it consists of
numerous disciplines from other viewpoints.

In any case,*'ilm al-kalam* is the study of Islamic doctrines and
beliefs. in the past, it was also called "*usul al-Din* " or "'Ilm
al-tawhid wa al-sifat".

The Beginnings of Kalam:
------------------------

Though nothing definite can be said about the beginnings of*'ilm
al-kalam* among Muslims, what is certain is that discussion of some of
the problems of kalam, such as the issue of predestination (*jabr* ) and
free will (*ikhtiyar* ), and that of Divine Justice, became current
among Muslims during the first half of the second century of Hijrah.
Perhaps the first formal centre of such discussions was the circle of
al-Hasan al-Basri (d. 110/728-29). Among the Muslim personalities of the
latter half of the first century, the names of Ma'bad al-Juhani (d. 80/
699) and Ghaylan ibn Muslim al-Dimashqi (d. 105/723) have been
mentioned, who adamantly defended the ideas of free will (*ikhtiyar* )
and man's freedom. There were others who opposed them and supported
predestination (*jabr* ). The believers in free will were called
"*qadariyyah* " and their opponents were known as "*jabriyyah* ".

Gradually the points of difference between the two groups extended to a
series of other issues in theology, physics, sociology and other
problems relating to man and the Resurrection, of which the problem
of*jabr* and*ikhtiyar* was only one. During this period, the
"*qadariyyah* " came to be called "*Mu'tazilah* " and the "*jabriyyah* "
became known as "*Asha'irah* ". The Orientalists and their followers
insist on considering the beginnings of discursive discussions in the
Islamic world from this point or its like.

However, the truth is that rational argumentation about Islamic
doctrines starts with the Holy Qur'an itself, and has been followed up
in the utterances of the Holy Prophet (S) and especially in the sermons
of*Amir al-Mu'minin*

Ali (A). This despite the fact that their style and approach are
different from those of the Muslim*mutakallimun* .[^1]

Inquiry or Imitation?
---------------------

The Holy Qur'an has laid the foundation of faith and belief on thought
and reasoning. Throughout, the Qur'an insists that men should attain
faith through the agency of thought. In the view of the Qur'an,
intellectual servitude is not sufficient for believing and understanding
its basic doctrines. Accordingly, one should take up a rational inquiry
of the basic principles and doctrines of the faith. For example, the
belief that God is One, should be arrived at rationally. The same is
true of the prophethood of Muhammad (S). This requirement resulted in
the establishment of*'ilm al-'usul* during the first century.

There were many reasons which led to the unprecedented realization of
the necessity for the study of the fundamentals of the Islamic faith
amongst Muslims and the task of defending them, a realization which led
to the emergence of prominent*mutakallimun* during the second, third,
and fourth centuries. These were: embracing of Islam by various nations
who brought with them a series of (alien) ideas and notions; mixing and
coexistence of the Muslims with people of various religions, such as,
the Jews, the Christians, the Magians, and the Sabaeans, and the ensuing
religious debates and disputes between the Muslims and those peoples;
the emergence of the Zanadiqah[^2] in the Islamic world - who were
totally against religion - as a result of the general freedom during the
rule of the 'Abbasid Caliphs (as long as it did not interfere in the
matters of state politics); the birth of philosophy in the Muslim
world - which by itself gave birth to doubts and skeptical attitudes.

The First Problem:
------------------

Apparently, the first problem which was discussed and debated by the
Muslims was that of predestination and free will. This was very natural,
since it is a primary problem linked with human destiny and which
attracts the interest of every thinking adult. Perhaps it is not
possible to find a society which has reached intellectual maturity in
which this problem was not raised. Secondly, the Holy Qur'an has a large
number of verses on this subject, which instigate thought in regard to
this problem.[^3]

Accordingly, there is no reason to try to seek another source for the
origin of this problem in the Islamic world.

The Orientalists, habitually, make an effort, in order to negate the
originality of the Islamic teachings, to trace the roots, at any cost,
of all sciences that originated amongst Muslims to the world outside the
domains of Islam, in particular the Christian world. Therefore, they
insist that the roots of*'ilm al-kalam* should be acknowledged to lie
outside Islam, and they make similar attempts with regard to the study
of grammar, prosody (and perhaps semantics, rhetoric, and studies of
literary and poetic devices), and Islamic*'irfan* .

The problem of determinism and free will (*jabr wa ikhtiyar* ) is the
same as the problem of predestination and Divine Providence qada' wa
qadar, the first formulation relates to man and his free will, while the
second one

relates to God. This problem also raises the issue of Divine Justice,
because there is an explicit connection between determinism and
injustice on the one hand, and free will and justice on the other.

The problem of justice raises the issue of the essential good and evil
of actions, and the latter in its turn brings along with it the problem
of the validity of reason and purely rational judgements. These problems
together lead to the discussion of Divine wisdom (that is the notion
that there is a judicious purpose and aim behind Divine Acts)[^4] , and
thereby, gradually, to the debate about the unity of Divine Acts and the
unity of the Attributes, as we shall explain later.

The formation of opposite camps in the debates of kalam, later acquired
a great scope, and extended to many philosophical problems, such as,
substance and accident, nature of indivisible particles which constitute
physical bodies, the problem of space, etc. This was because, in the
view of the*mutakallimun* , discussion of such issues was considered a
prelude to the debate about theological matters, particularly those
related with*mabda'* (primeval origin) and*ma'ad* (resurrection). In
this way many of the problems of philosophy entered*'ilm al-kalam* , and
now there are many problems common to both.

If one were to study the books on kalam, specially those written after
the 7th/l3th century, one would see that most of them deal with the same
problems as those discussed by philosophers - especially, Muslim
philosophers - in their books.

Islamic philosophy and kalam have greatly influenced each other. One of
the results was that kalam raised new problems for philosophy, and
philosophy helped in widening the scope of kalam, in the sense that
dealing with many philosophical problems came to be considered necessary
in kalam. With God's help, we hope to give an example of each of these
two results of reciprocal influence between philosophy and kalam.

Al-Kalam al-'Aqli and al-Kalam al-Naqli:
----------------------------------------

Although*'ilm al-kalam* is a rational and discursive discipline, it
consists of two parts from the viewpoint of the preliminaries and
fundamentals used by it in arguments:

**(i) 'aqli (rational);**

**(ii)*naqli* (transmitted, traditional).**

The*'aqli* part of kalam consists of the material which is purely
rational, and if there is any reference to*naqli* (tradition), it is for
the sake of illumination and confirmation of a rational judgement. But
in problems such as those related to Divine Unity, prophethood, and some
issues of Resurrection, reference to naql - the Book and the
Prophet's*Sunnah* - is not sufficient; the argument must be purely
rational.

The*naqli* part of kalam, although it consists of issues related with
the doctrines of the faith - and it is necessary to believe in them -
but since these issues are subordinate to the issue of prophethood, it
is enough to quote evidence from the Divine Revelation or the definite
a*hadith* of the Prophet (S), e.g. in issues linked with*imamah* (of
course, in the Shi'ite faith, wherein belief in*imamah* is considered a
part of*usul al-Din* ), and most of the issues related with the
Resurrection.


