DEFINITION AND SUBJECT MATTER OF 'ILM AL-KALAM:
===============================================

For a definition of*'ilm al-kalam* , it is sufficient to say that, 'It
is a science which studies the basic doctrines of the Islamic faith
(*usul al-Din* ). It identifies the basic doctrines and seeks to prove
their validity and answers any doubts which may be cast upon them.'

In texts on logic and philosophy it is mentioned that every science has
a special subject of its own, and that the various sciences are
distinguished from one another due to their separate subject matter.
This is certainly true, and those sciences whose subject matter has a
real unity are such. However, there is nothing wrong if we form a
discipline whose unity of subject matter and the problems covered by it
is an arbitrary and conventional one, in the sense that it covers
diverse, mutually exclusive subjects, which are given an arbitrary unity
because they serve a single purpose and objective. In sciences whose
subject has an essential unity, there is no possibility of overlapping
of problems. But in sciences in which there is a conventional unity
among the issues dealt with, there is nothing wrong if there is an
overlapping of issues. The commonness of the problems between philosophy
and kalam, psychology and kalam, or sociology and kalam, is due to this
reason.

Some Islamic scholars have sought to define and outline the subject
matter of*'ilm al-kalam* , and have expressed various opinions. But this
is a mistake; because a clear-cut delineation of the subject of study is
possible for only those sciences which have an essential unity among the
problems dealt with. But in those sciences in which there is a
conventional unity of problems dealt with, there can be no unity of
subject. Here we cannot discuss this issue further.

The Name "'Ilm al-Kalam":
-------------------------

Another point is why this discipline has been called "*'ilm al-kalam* ",
and when this name was given to it. Some have said that it was called
"kalam" (lit. speech) because it gives an added power of speech and
argument to one who is well-versed in it. Some say that the reason lies
in the habit of the experts of this science who began their own
statements in their books with the expression "*al-kalamu fi kadha* ".
Others explain that it was called "kalam" because it discussed issues
regarding which the Ahl al-*Hadith* preferred to maintain complete
silence. Yet according to others this name came to be in vogue when the
issue whether the Holy Qur'an (called "*kalamullahi* ") ,the Divine
Utterance[^5] , i.e. the Holy Qur'an) is created (*makhluq* ) or not,
became a matter for hot debate amongst the Muslim - a controversy which
led to animosity between the two opposite camps and bloodshed of many.
This is also the reason why that period is remembered as a "time of
severe hardship" -*mihnah* . That is, since most of the debates about
the doctrines of the faith revolved around the huduth (createdness,
temporality) or the qidam (pre-eternity) of the "Utterance" or kalam of
God, this discipline which discussed the principal doctrines of the
faith came to be called "*'ilm al-kalam* " (lit. the science of the
Utterance). These are the

various opinions that have been expressed about the reason why*'ilm
al-kalam* was given this name.

The Various Schools of Kalam:
-----------------------------

The Muslims differed with one another in matters of the Law (*fiqh* ),
following differing paths and dividing into various sects, such as
Ja'fari, Zaydi, Hanafi, Shafi'i, Maliki and Hanbali, each of which has
a*fiqh* of its own. Similarly, from the viewpoint of the doctrine, they
divided into various schools, each with its own set of principal
doctrines. The most important of these schools are: the Shi'ah,
the*Mu'tazilah* , the '*Asha'irah* , and the Murji'ah.

Here it is possible that the question may arise as to the reason behind
such regretful division of the Muslims into sects in matters dealing
with kalam and*fiqh* , and why they could not maintain their unity in
these spheres. The difference in matters of kalam causes disunity in
their Islamic outlook, and the disagreement in the matter of*fiqh*
deprives them of the unity of action.

Both this question and the regret are justified. But it is necessary to
pay attention to the two following points:

(i) The disagreement in issues of*fiqh* among the Muslims is not so
great as to shatter the foundations of the unity of doctrinal outlook
and mode of practice. There is so much common in their doctrinal and
practical matters that the points of difference can hardly inflict any
serious blow.

(ii) Theoretical differences and divergence of views is inevitable in
societies in spite of their unity and agreement in principles, and as
long as the roots of the differences lie in methods of inference, and
not in vested interests, they are even beneficial; because they cause
mobility, dynamism, discussion, curiosity, and progress. Only when the
differences are accompanied by prejudices and emotional and illogical
alignments, and lead individuals to slander, defame, and treat one
another with contempt, instead of motivating them to endeavour towards
reforming themselves, that they are a cause of misfortune.

In the Shi'ite faith, the people are obliged to imitate a living
mujtahid, and the mujtahidun are obliged to independently ponder the
issues and form their independent opinions and not to be content with
what has been handed down by the ancestors. Ijtihad and independence of
thought inherently lead to difference of views; but this divergence of
opinions has given life and dynamism to the Shi'ite*fiqh* . Therefore,
difference in itself cannot be condemned. What is condemnable is the
difference which originates in evil intentions and selfish interests, or
when it centres around issues which drive Muslims on separate paths,
such as the issue of*imamah* and leadership, not the difference in
secondary and non-basic matters.

To undertake an examination of the intellectual history of the Muslims
so as to find which differences originated in evil intentions, vested
interests, and prejudices, and which were a natural product of their
intellectual life, whether all points of difference in the sphere of
kalam should be regarded as fundamental, or whether all problems
in*fiqh* should be regarded as secondary, or if it is possible that a
difference in kalam may not be of

fundamental significance whereas one in*fiqh* may have such importance -
these are questions which lie outside the brief scope of this lecture.

Before we take up the schools of kalam for discussion, it is essential
to point out that there has been a group of scholars in the Islamic
world which was basically opposed to the very idea of*'ilm al-kalam* and
rational debate about Islamic doctrines, considering it a taboo and an
innovation in the faith (bid'ah). They are known as "Ahl al-*Hadith* ."
Ahmad ibn Hanbal, one of the imams of jurisprudence of the Ahl
al-*Sunnah* , stands foremost among them.

The Hanbalis are totally against kalam, Mu'tazilite or Ash'arite, not to
speak of the Shi'ite kalam. In fact they are basically opposed to logic
and philosophy. Ibn Taymiyyah, who was one of the eminent scholars of
the Sunni world, gave a verdict declaring kalam and logic as 'unlawful'.
Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti, another figure among the Ahl al-*Hadith* , has
written a book called Sawn al-mantiq wa al-kalam 'an al-mantiq wa
al-kalam ("Protecting speech and logic from [the evil of]*'ilm al-kalam*
and the science of logic").

Malik ibn Anas is another Sunni imam who considers any debate or inquiry
about doctrinal matters to be unlawful. We have explained the Shi'ite
viewpoint in this matter, in the introduction to Vol.V of*Usul-e
falsafeh wa rawish-e riyalism* .[^6]

The important schools of kalam, as mentioned earlier, are:
Shi'ah,*Mu'tazilah* ,*Asha'irah* , and Murji'ah. Some sects of the
Khawarij and the Batinis, such as the Isma'ilis, have also been
considered as schools of Islamic kalam.[^7]

However, in my view, none of these two sects can be considered as
belonging to the schools of Islamic kalam. The Khawarij, although they
held specific beliefs in the matters of doctrine, and perhaps were the
first to raise doctrinal problems by expressing certain beliefs
about*Imamah* , the*kufr* (apostasy) of the fasiq (evil-doer, one who
commits major sins), and considered the disbelievers in these beliefs as
apostates, but they did not, firstly, create a rationalist school of
thought in the Muslim world, and, secondly, their thinking was so much
deviated - from the viewpoint of the Shi'ites - that it is difficult to
count them among Muslims. What makes things easy is that the Khawarij
ultimately became extinct and only one of their sects, called
"Abadiyyah" has some followers today. The Abadiyyah were the most
moderate of all the Khawarij, and that is the reason why they have
survived until today.

The Batinis, too, have so much liberally interfered in Islamic ideas on
the basis of esotericism that it is possible to say that they have
twisted Islam out of its shape, and that is the reason why the Muslim
world is not ready to consider them as one of the sects of Islam.

About thirty years ago when the*Dar al-Taqrib Bayna al-Madhahib
al-'Islamiyyah* was established in Cairo, the Imamiyyah Shi'ah, the
Zaydiyyah, the Hanafi, the Shafi'i, the Maliki and the Hanbali sects,
each of them had a representative. The Isma'ilis tried hard to send a
representative of their own; but it was not accepted by other Muslims.
Contrary to the Khawarij, who did not create a system of thought, the
Batinis, despite their serious deviations, do have a significant school
of kalam and philosophy. There have emerged among them important
thinkers who have left behind a

considerable number of works. Lately, the Orientalists have been
showering great attention on the Batini thought and works.

One of the prominent Isma'ili figures is Nasir Khusrow al-'Alawi (d.
841/1437-38), the well-known Persian poet and the author of such famous
works as Jami' al-hikmatayn, Kitab wajh al-Din, and Khuwan al-'ikwan.
Another is Abu Hatam al-Razi (d. 332/943-44), the author of A'lam
al-nubuwwah. Others are: Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani, the author of Kashf
al-mahjub (its Persian translation has been recently published), who
died during the second half of the 4th/l0th century; Hamid al-Din
al-Kirmani, a pupil of Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani, has written a large
number of books about the Isma'ili faith; Abu Hanifah Nu'man ibn Thabit,
well-known as Qadi Nu'man or "the Shi'ite Abu Hanifah" (i.e. Isma'ili);
his knowledge of*fiqh* and*hadith* is good, and his well-known book
Da'a'im al-'Islam has been printed by lithotype several years ago.


