MU'TAZILAH:
===========

We shall begin our discussion - and we shall explain later why - with
the*Mu'tazilah* . The emergence of this sect took place during the
latter part of the first century or at the beginning of the second.
Obviously*'ilm al-kalam* , like any other field of study, developed
gradually and slowly attained maturity.

First we shall enumerate the principal Mu'tazilite beliefs, or what is
better to say, the basic and salient points of their school of thought.
Second, we shall point out the well-known Mu'tazilite figures and speak
of their fate in history. Then we shall give an account of the main
outlines of the transitions and changes in their thought and beliefs.

The opinions held by the*Mu'tazilah* are many, and are not confined to
the religious matters, or which according to them form an essential part
of the faith. They cover a number of physical, social, anthropological
and philosophical issues, which are not directly related with the faith.
However, there is a certain relevance of these problems to religion,
and, in the belief of the*Mu'tazilah* , any inquiry about the matters of
religion is not possible without studying them.

There are five principal doctrines which, according to the*Mu'tazilah*
themselves, constitute their basic tenets:

(i) Tawhid, i.e. absence of plurality and attributes.

(ii) Justice (*'adl* ), i.e. God is just and that He does not oppress
His creatures.

(iii) Divine retribution (*at-wa'd wa al-wa'id* ), i.e. God has
determined a reward for the obedient and a punishment for the
disobedient, and there can be no uncertainty about it. Therefore, Divine
pardon is only possible if the sinner repents, for forgiveness without
repentance( *tawbah* ) is not possible.

(iv)*Manzilah bayna al-manzilatayn* (a position between the two
positions). This means that a fasiq (i.e. one who commits one of the
"greater sins," such as a wine imbiber, adulterer, or a liar etc.) is
neither a believer (mu'min) nor an infidel( *kafir* ) ; fisq is an
intermediary state between belief and infidelity.

(v)*al-'amr bil ma'ruf wa al-nahy 'an al-munkar* [bidding to do what is
right and lawful, and forbidding what is wrong and unlawful]. The
opinion of the*Mu'tazilah* about this Islamic duty is, firstly, that the
Shari'ah is not the exclusive means of identifying the ma'ruf and the
munkar; human reason can, at least partially, independently identify the
various kinds of ma'ruf and munkar. Secondly, the implementation of this
duty does not necessitate the presence of the Imam, and is a universal
obligation of all Muslims, whether the Imam or leader is present or not.
Only some categories of it are the obligation of the Imam or ruler of
Muslims, such as, implementation of the punishments (*hudud* )
prescribed by the Shari'ah, guarding of the frontiers of Islamic
countries, and other such matters relating to the Islamic government.

Occasionally, the Mu'tazilite mutakallmun have devoted independent
volumes to discussion of their five doctrines, such as the
famous*al-'Usul al-khamsah* of al-Qadi 'Abd al-Jabbar al-'Astarabadi (d.
415/ 1025), a Mu'tazilite contemporary of al-Sayyid al-Murtada 'Alam
al-Huda and al-Sahib ibn 'Abbad (d. 385/995).

As can be noticed, only the principles of tawhid and Justice can be
considered as parts of the essential doctrine. The other three
principles are only significant because they characterize
the*Mu'tazilah* . Even Divine Justice - although its notion is
definitely supported by the Qur'an, and belief in it is a necessary part
of the Islamic faith and doctrine - has been made one of the five major
doctrines because it characterizes the*Mu'tazilah* . Or otherwise belief
in Divine Knowledge and Power is as much an essential part of the
Islamic faith and principal doctrine.

Also in the Shi'ite faith the principle of Divine Justice is considered
one of the five essential doctrines. It is natural that the question
should arise: what is particular about Divine Justice that it should be
counted.among the essential doctrines, though justice is only one of the
Divine Attributes? Is not God Just in the same manner as He is the
Omniscient, the Mighty, the Living, the Perceiver, the Hearer and the
Seer? All those Divine Attributes are essential to the faith. Then why
justice is given so much prominence among the Divine Attributes?

The answer is that Justice has no advantage over other Attributes. The
Shi'ite*mutakallimun* have specially mentioned justice among the
principal Shi'ite doctrines because the Ash'arites - who form the
majority of the Ahl al-*Sunnah* - implicitly deny that it is an
Attribute, whereas they do not reject the Attributes of Knowledge, Life,
Will, etc. Accordingly, justice is counted among the specific doctrines
of the Shi'ah, as also of the*Mu'tazilah* . The above-mentioned five
doctrines constitute the basic position of the*Mu'tazilah* from the
viewpoint of kalam, otherwise, as said before, the Mu'tazilite beliefs
are not confined to these five and cover a broad scope ranging from
theology, physics and sociology to anthropology, in all of which they
hold specific beliefs, a discussion of which lies outside the scope of
these lectures.

The Doctrine of al-Tawhid:
--------------------------

Beginning with tawhid it has various kinds and levels:*al-tawhid
al-dhati* (Unity of the Essence),*al-tawhid al-sifati* (Unity of the
Attributes, i.e., with the Essence),*al-tawhid al-'af'ali* (Unity of the
Acts),*al-tawhid al-'ibadi* (monotheism in worship).

### Al-Tawhid al-dhati

###

It means that the Divine Essence is one and unique; it does not have a
like or match. All other beings are God's creations and inferior to Him
in station and in degree of perfection. In fact, they cannot be compared
with Him. The idea of*al-tawhid al-dhati* is made clear by the following
two [Qur'anic] verses:

***Nothing is like Him. (42:11)***

***He does not have a match [whatsoever]. (112:4)***

### AI-Tawhid al-sifati

###

It means that the Divine Attributes such as Knowledge, Power, Life,
Will, Perception, Hearing, Vision, etc. are not realities separate from
God's Essence. They are identical with the Essence, in the sense that
the Divine Essence is such that the Attributes are true of It, or is
such that It manifests these Attributes.

### Al-Tawhid al-'af'ali

###

It means that all beings, or rather all acts [even human acts] exist by
the Will of God, and are in some way willed by His sacred Essence.

Al-Tawhid al-'ibadi: It means that except God no other being deserves
worship and devotion. Worship of anything besides God is shirk and puts
the worshipper outside the limits of Islamic tawhid or monotheism.

In a sense*al-tawhid al-'ibadi* (tawhid in worship) is different from
other kinds of tawhidi, because the first three relate to God and this
kind relates to the creatures. In other words, the Unity of Divine
Essence, His Uniqueness and the identity of the Essence and Attributes,
the unity of the origin of everything - all of them are matters which
relate to God. But tawhid in worship, i.e. the necessity of worshipping
the One God, relates to the behaviour of the creatures. But in reality,
tawhid in worship is also related to God, because it means Uniqueness of
God as the only deserving object of worship, and that He is in truth the
One Deity Worthy of Worship. The statement "la ilaha illallah"
encompasses all aspects of tawhid, although its first signification is
monotheism in worship.

*Al-tawhid al-dhati* and*al-tawhid al-'ibadi* are part of the basic
doctrines of Islam. It means that if there is a shortcoming in one's
belief in these two principles, it would put one outside the pale of
Islam. No Muslim has opposed these two basic beliefs.

Lately, the Wahhabis, who are the followers of Muhammad ibn 'Abd
al-Wahhab, who was a follower of Ibn Taymiyyah, a Hanbali from Syria,
have claimed that some common beliefs of the Muslims such as one in
intercession (*shafa'ah* ) and some of their practices such as invoking
the assistance of the prophets (A) and holy saints (R) are opposed to
the doctrine of al-tawhid al-'ibadi. But these are not considered by
other Muslims to conflict with al-tawhid al-'ibadi. The point of
difference between the Wahhabis and other Muslims is not whether any one
besides God - such as the prophets or saints - is worthy of worship.
There is no debate that anyone except God cannot be worshipped. The
debate is about whether invoking of intercession and assistance can be
considered a form of worship or not. Therefore, the difference is only
secondary, not a primary one. Islamic scholars have rejected the
viewpoint of the Wahhabis in elaborate, well-reasoned answers.

Al-tawhid al-sifati (the Unity of Divine Essence and Attributes) is a
point of debate between the*Mu'tazilah* and the*Asha'irah* . The latter
deny it while the former affirm it.*Al-tawhid al-'af'ali* is also
another point of difference between them, with the difference, however,
that the matter is reverse; i.e. the*Asha'irah* affirm it and
the*Mu'tazilah* deny it.

When the*Mu'tazilah* call themselves "ahl al-tawhid", and count it among
their doctrines, thereby they mean by it*al-tawhid al-sifati* ,
not*al-tawhid al-dhati* , nor*al-tawhid al-'ibadi* (which are not
disputed), nor*al-tawhid al-'af'ali* . Because, firstly,*al-tawhid
al-'af'ali* is negated by them, and, secondly, they expound their own
viewpoint about it under the doctrine of justice, their second article.

The*Asha'irah* and the*Mu'tazilah* formed two radically opposed camps on
the issues of*al-tawhid al-sifati* and*al-tawhid al-'af'ali* . To
repeat, the

*Mu'tazilah* affirm*al-tawhid al-sifati* and reject*al-tawhid
al-'af'ali* , while the Ash'arite position is the reverse. Each of them
have advanced arguments in support of their positions. We shall discuss
the Shi'ite position regarding these two aspects of tawhid in the
related chapter.

The Doctrine of Divine Justice:
-------------------------------

In the preceding lecture I have mentioned the five fundamental
Mu'tazilite principles, and explained the first issue, i.e. their
doctrine of tawhid. Here we shall take up their doctrine of Divine
Justice.

Of course, it is evident that none of the Islamic sects denied justice
as one of the Divine Attributes. No one has ever claimed that God is not
just. The difference between the*Mu'tazilah* and their opponents is
about the interpretation of Justice. The*Asha'irah* interpret it in such
a way that it is equivalent, in the view of the*Mu'tazilah* , to a
denial of the Attribute of Justice. Otherwise, the*Asha'irah* are not at
all willing to be considered the opponents of justice.

The*Mu'tazilah* believe that some acts are essentially 'just' and some
intrinsically 'unjust.' For instance, rewarding the obedient and
punishing the sinners is justice; and that God is Just, i.e. He rewards
the obedient and punishes the sinners, and it is impossible for Him to
act otherwise. Rewarding the sinners and punishing the obedient is
essentially and intrinsically unjust, and it is impossible for God to do
such a thing. Similarly, compelling His creatures to commit sin, or
creating them without any power of free will, then creating the sinful
acts at their hands, and then punishing them on account of those sins -
this is injustice, an ugly thing for God to do; it is unjustifiable and
unGodly. But the*Asha'irah* believe that no act is intrinsically or
essentially just or unjust. Justice is essentially whatever God does.
If, supposedly, God were to punish the obedient and reward the sinners,
it would be as just. Similarly, if God creates His creatures without any
will, power or freedom of action, then if He causes them to commit sins
and then punishes them for that - it is not essential injustice. If we
suppose that God acts in this manner, it is justice:

Whatever that Khusrow does is sweet( *shirin* ) .

For the same reason that the*Mu'tazilah* emphasize justice, they
deny*al-tawhid al-'af'ali* . They say that*al-tawhid al-'af'ali* implies
that God, not the human beings, is the maker of human deeds. Since it is
known that man attains reward and punishment in the Hereafter, if God is
the creator of human actions and yet punishes them for their evil
deeds - which not they, but God Himself has brought about - that would
be injustice( *zulm* ) and contrary to Divine Justice. Accordingly,
the*Mu'tazilah* consider*al-tawhid al-'af'ali* to be contrary to the
doctrine of justice.

Also, thereby, the*Mu'tazilah* believe in human freedom and free will
and are its staunch defenders, contrary to the*Asha'irah* who deny human
freedom and free will.

Under the doctrine of justice - in the sense that some deeds are
inherently just and some inherently unjust, and that human reason
dictates that justice is good and must be practised, whereas injustice
is evil and must be abstained from - they advance another general
doctrine, which is more comprehensive, that is the principle that
"beauty"( *husn* ) and "ugliness"

( *qubh* ) , (good and evil), are inherent properties of acts. For
instance, truthfulness, trustworthiness, chastity and God-fearing are
intrinsically good qualities, and falsehood, treachery, indecency,
neglectfulness, etc. are intrinsically evil. Therefore, deeds in
essence, before God may judge them, possess inherent goodness or evil
(husn or qubh).

Hereupon, they arrive at another doctrine about reason: human reason can
independently judge (or perceive) the good or evil in things. It means
that the good or evil of some deeds can be judged by human reason
independently of the commands of the Shari'ah. The*Asha'irah* are
against this view too.

The belief in the inherent good or evil of acts and the capacity of
reason to judge them, upheld by the*Mu'tazilah* and rejected by
the*Asha'irah* , brought many other problems in its wake, some of which
are related to theology, some to human predicament; such as, whether the
Divine Acts, or rather, the creation of things is with a purpose or not.
The*Mu'tazilah* claimed that absence of a purpose in the creation is
"qabih" (an ugly thing) and so rationally impossible. How about a duty
which is beyond one's power to fulfil? Is it possible that God may
saddle someone with a duty which is over and above his capacity?
The*Mu'tazilah* consideied this, too, as "qabih", and so impossible.

Is it within the power of a believer (mu'min) to turn apostate? Does the
infidel( *kafir* ) have any power over his own infidelity (*kufr* )? The
answer of the*Mu'tazilah* is in the affirmative; for if the believer and
the infidel had no power over their belief and infidelity, it would be
wrong( *qabih* ) to award and punish them. The*Asha'irah* rejected all
these Mu'tazilite doctrines and held opposite views.

Retribution (al-wa'd wa al-wa'id):
----------------------------------

"Wa'd" means promising award and "wa'id" means threat of punishment.
The*Mu'tazilah* believe that God does not break His own promises (all
Muslims unanimously accept this) or forego His threats, as stated by the
Qur'anic verse regarding Divine promise:

Indeed God does not break the promise. (13:31)

Accordingly (the*Mu'tazilah* say), all threats addressed to the sinners
and the wicked such as the punishments declared for an oppressor, a liar
or a wine imbiber, will all be carried out without fail, except when the
sinner repents before death. Therefore, pardon without repentance is not
possible.

From the viewpoint of the*Mu'tazilah* , pardon without repentance
implies failure to carry out the threats (wa'id), and such an act, like
breaking of promise (khulf al-wa'd),is "qabih", and so impossible. Thus
the Mu'tazilite beliefs regarding Divine retribution and Divine
forgiveness are interrelated, and both arise from their belief in
inherent good and evil of deeds determinable by reason.

Manzilah Bayna al-Manzilatayn:
------------------------------

The Mu'tazilite belief in this matter emerged in the wake of two
opposite beliefs in the Muslim world about the faith (*'iman* ) or
infidelity (*kufr* ) of the fasiq. For the first time the Khawarij
maintained that committing of any of

the capital sins (*kaba'ir* ) was contrary to faith (*'iman* ) and equal
to infidelity. Therefore, the perpetrator of a major sin is a kafir.

As we know, the Khawarij emerged after the incident of arbitration(
*tahkim* ) during the Battle of Siffin about the year 37/657-58 during
the caliphate of Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali (A). As the Nahj al-Balaghah
tells us, Amir al-Mu'minin (A) argued with them on this issue and
refuted their viewpoint by numerous arguments. The Khawarij, even after
'Ali (A), were against the caliphs of the period, and staunchly espoused
the cause of al-'amr bi al-ma'ruf wa al-nahy 'an al-munkar, denouncing
others for their evil and calling them apostates and infidels. Since
most of the caliphs indulged in the capital sins, they were naturally
regarded as infidels by the Khawarij. Accordingly, they were adversaries
of the current politics.

Another group which emerged (or was produced by the hands of vested
political interests) was that of the Murji'ah, whose position with
regard to the effect of capital sins was precisely opposite to that of
the Khawarij. They held that faith and belief is a matter of the heart.
One should remain a Muslim if one's faith - which is an inner affair of
the heart - were intact, evil deeds cannot do any harm. Faith
compensates all wickedness.

The opinions of the Murji'ah were to the benefit of the rulers, and
tended to cause the people to regard their wickedness and indecencies as
unimportant, or to consider them, despite their destructive character,
as men worthy of paradise. The Murji'ah stated in unequivocal terms,
"The respectability of the station of the ruler is secure, no matter how
much he may sin. Obedience to him is obligatory and prayers performed in
his leadership are correct." The tyrannical caliphs, therefore, backed
them. For the Murji'ah, sin and wickedness, no matter how serious, do
not harm one's faith; the perpetrator of the major sins is a mu'min, not
a kafir.

The*Mu'tazilah* took a middle path in this matter. They maintained that
the perpetrator of a major sin is neither a mu'min, nor he is a kafir,
but occupies a position between those two extremes. This middle state
was termed by the*Mu'tazilah* "manzilah bayna al-manzilatayn."

It is said that the first to express this belief was Wasil ibn 'Ata', a
pupil of al-Hasan al-Basri. One day Wasil was sitting with his teacher,
who was asked his opinion about the difference between the Khawarij and
the Murji'ah on this issue. Before al-Hasan could say anything, Wasil
declared: "In my opinion the perpetrator of the major sins is a fasiq,
not a kafir." After this, he left the company, or as is also said, was
expelled by al-Hasan al-Basri - and parting his way started propagating
his own views. His pupil and brother-in-law 'Amr ibn 'Ubayd also joined
him. At this point Hasan declared, "'I'tazala 'anna", i.e. "He [Wasil]
has departed from us." According to another version, the people began to
say of Wasil and 'Amr "'I'tazala qawl al-'ummah", i.e. "they have
departed from the doctrines held by the ummah," inventing a third path.

Al-'Amr bi al-Ma'ruf wa al-Nahy 'an al-Munkar:
----------------------------------------------

Al-'amr bi al-ma'ruf wa al-nahy 'an al-munkar is an essential Islamic
duty, unanimously accepted by all Muslims. The difference occurs only in
the limits and conditions related to it.

For instance, the Khawarij believed in it without any limits and
conditions whatsoever. They believed that this twofold duty must be
performed in all circumstances. For example, when others believed in the
conditions of probability of effectiveness (of al-ma'ruf) and absence of
any dangerous consequences as necessary for this obligation to be
applicable, the Khawarij did not believe in any such restrictions. Some
believed that it is sufficient to fulfil the duty of al-'amr wa al-nahy
by the heart and the tongue i e one should support al-ma'ruf and oppose
al-munkar in his heart and use his tongue to speak out for al-ma'ruf and
against al-munkar. But the Khawarij considered it incumbent to take up
arms and to unsheathe one's sword for the sake of fulfilling this duty.

As against them there was a group which considered al-'amr wa al-nahy to
be subject to the above conditions, and, moreover, did not go beyond the
confines of the heart and the tongue for its sake. Ahmad ibn Hanbal is
counted among them. According to this group,a bloody uprising for the
sake of struggling against unlawful activities is not permissible.

The*Mu'tazilah* accepted the conditions for al-'amr wa al-nahy, but, not
limiting it to the heart and the tongue, maintained that if the unlawful
practices become common, or if the state is oppressive and unjust, it is
obligatory for Muslims to rise in armed revolt.

Thus the belief special to the*Mu'tazilah* in regard to al-'amr bi
al-ma'ruf wa al-nahy 'an al-munkar - contrary to the stand of the Ahl
al-*Hadith* and the Ahl al-*Sunnah* - is belief in the necessity to rise
up in arms to confront corruption. The Khawarij too shared this view,
with the difference pointed out above.

Other Mu’tazilite Notions and Beliefs:
--------------------------------------

Whatever we said in the last two lectures was related to the basic
doctrines of the*Mu'tazilah* . But as we mentioned before,
the*Mu'tazilah* raised many an issue and defended their opinions about
them. Some of them were related with theology some with physics, some
with sociology, and some with the human situation. Of the theological
issues, some are related to general metaphysics (umur 'ammah) and some
with theology proper (ilahiyyat bi al-ma'na al-'akhass).[^8] Like all
other*mutakallimun* , the intended purpose of the*Mu'tazilah* by raising
metaphysical questions is to use them as preparatory ground for the
discussion of theological issues, which are their ultimate objectives.
So also the discussions in the natural sciences, too, serve an
introductory purpose for them. That is, the discussions in the natural
sciences are used to prove some religious doctrines, or to find an
answer to some objections. Here we shall enumerate some of these
beliefs, beginning with theology:

### Theology:

###

(i) Al-tawhid al-sifati (i.e. unity of the Divine Attributes)

(ii)*'Adl* (Divine Justice).

(iii) The Holy Qur'an (*Kalam Allah* ) is created (*kalam* , or speech,
is an attribute of Act, not of the Essence).

(iv) The Divine Acts are caused and controlled by purposes (i.e. every
Divine Act is for the sake of some beneficial outcome).

(v) Forgiveness without repentance is not possible (the doctrine of
retribution -*wa'd wa wa'id* ).

(vi) Pre-eternity( *qidam* ) is limited to God (in this belief, they are
challenged only by the philosophers).

(vii) Delegation of a duty beyond the powers of the mukallaf (*al-taklif
bima la yutaq* ) is impossible.

(viii) The acts of the creatures are not created by God for five
reasons;[^9] the exercise of Divine Will does not apply to the acts of
men.

(ix) The world is created, and is not pre-eternal (only the philosophers
are against this view).

(x) God cannot be seen with the eyes, either in this world or in the
Hereafter.

### Physics:

###

(i) Physical bodies are made up of indivisible particles.

(ii) Smell relates to particles scattered in air.

(iii) Taste is nothing but the effect of particles.

(iv) Light is made up of particles scattered in space.

(v) Interpenetration of bodies is not impossible (this belief is
attributed to some*Mu'tazilah* ).

(vi) Leap (of particles) (i.e. tafrah)[^10] is not impossible (this
belief, too, is attributed to some*Mu'tazilah* ).

### Human Problems:

###

(i) Man is free, endowed with free will; not predetermined (this
problem, the problem of the nature of human acts whether [created by God
or man], and the problem of Divine Justice, all the three are
interrelated).

(ii) Ability (istita'ah); that is, man has power over his own acts,
before he performs them or desists from them.

(iii) The believer (mu'min) has the power to become an infidel and the
infidel( *kafir* ) is able to become a believer.

(iv) A fasiq is neither a mu'min, nor a kafir.

(v) Human reason can understand and judge some matters independently
(without the prior need of guidance from the*Shari'ah* ).

(vi) In case of conflict between reason and*Hadith* , reason is to be
preferred.

(vii) It is possible to interpret the Qur'an with the help of reason.

### Political and Social Problems:

###

(i) The obligatory nature of al-'amr bi al-ma'ruf wa al-nahy 'an
al-munkar, even if it necessitates taking up of arms.

(ii) The leadership (*imamah* ) of the Rashidun Caliphs, was correct in
the order it occurred.

(iii) 'Ali (A) was superior to the Caliphs who preceded him (this is the
view of some of the*Mu'tazilah* , not of all. The earlier*Mu'tazilah* -
with the exception of Wasil ibn 'Ata' considered Abu Bakr as the best,
but the majority of the latter*Mu'tazilah* considered 'Ali (A) as
superior).

(iv) Evaluation and criticism of the Companions of the Prophet (S) and
their deeds is permissible.

(v) A comparative study and analysis of the state policies of 'Umar and
'Ali (A).

These represent a sample of the issues touched by the*Mu'tazilah* ,
which are far more numerous than what we have referred to. In some of
these problems, they were contradicted by the*Asha'irah* , in some by
the philosophers, in some by the Khawarij, and in some by the Murji'ah.

The*Mu'tazilah* never submitted to Greek thought and did not accept
Greek philosophy indiscriminately, which entered the Islamic world
contemporaneous with the emergence and rise of the*Mu'tazilah* . On the
other hand, with great courage, they wrote books against philosophy and
philosophers, boldly expressing their own opinions. The controversy
between the*mutakallimun* and the philosophers benefited both kalam and
philosophy. Both of them made progress, and in the course of time came
so close to each other that there did not remain any disagreement except
on few issues. An elaborate discussion of the reciprocal services of
kalam and philosophy, and an exposition of the essential differences
between the two, are outside the scope of these lectures.

Trasitions in the History of the Mu’tazilah:
--------------------------------------------

Obviously, all the above-mentioned problems were not posed at one time
and by any single individual. Rather, they were raised gradually by
several individuals, expanding the scope of*'ilm al-kalam* .

Among these mentioned, apparently the oldest problem was that of free
will and determinism, in which the*Mu'tazilah* , of course, sided with
free will. This is a problem which is posed in the Qur'an. That is, the
Qur'an refers to this issue in a manner which stimulates thought on the
subject. Because some verses clearly indicate that man is free, not
coerced in any of his acts. On the other hand, there are verses which,
with equal clarity, indicate that all things depend on the Divine Will.

Here the doubt arises that these two types of verses contradict each
other. Accordingly, some explained away the verses upholding free will
and supported determinism and predestination, while others explained
away the verses which refer to the role of Divine Will and Intention,
and sided with human freedom and free will. Of course, there is a third
group which sees no contradiction between those two sets of verses.[^11]

Moreover, this controversy between freedom and fate is frequently taken
up in the utterances of 'Ali (A). Therefore, it is almost
contemporaneous with Islam itself. However, the division of Muslims into
two opposite camps, one siding with free will and the other with fate,
took place in the second half of the lst/7th century.

It is said that the idea of free will was first put into circulation by
Ghaylan al-Dimashqi and Ma'bad al-Juhani. The Banu Umayyah were inclined
to propagate the belief in fate and predestination among the people,
because it served their political interests. Under the cover of this
belief that "everything is by the Will of God" - "amanna bi al-qadri
khayrihi wa sharrihi" - "We believe in fate, bring as it may good or
evil" - they justified their oppressive and illegitimate rule. As a
result, they repressed any notions

of free will or human freedom, and Ghaylan al-Dimashqi and Ma'bad
al-Juhani were both killed. During that period the supporters of the
belief in free will were called "Qadariyyah".

However, the problem of the infidelity or otherwise of the evildoer
(*kufr* al-fasiq) had become a subject of controversy even before the
issue of freedom and fate, because it was raised by the Khawarij during
the first half of the first century about the time of the caliphate of
'Ali (A). But the Khawarij did not defend this view in the fashion of
the*mutakallimun* . Only when the problem was raised among
the*Mu'tazilah* , with the emergence of their doctrine of manzilah bayna
al-manzilatayn, it took on the colour of a problem of kalam.

The problem of fate and freedom (*jabr wa ikhtiyar* ) automatically
brought in its wake such other problems as these: the problem of Divine
Justice; the rational and essential goodness or badness (husn aw qubh
dhati wa*'aqli* ) of things and acts; dependence of Divine Acts on
purposes; impossibility of saddling a person with a duty exceeding his
capacities, and the like.

During the first half of the 2nd/8th century one Jahm ibn Sakfwan (d.
128/745) voiced certain beliefs regarding the Divine Attributes. The
writers of intellectual and religious history of Islam (*milal wa nihal*
), claim that the problem of*al-tawhid al-sifati* (that the Divine
Attributes are not separate from the Divine Essence - which
the*Mu'tazilah* call their "doctrine of tawhid") and the problem of nafy
al-tashbih, also called asl al-tanzih, (which means that nothing can be
likened to God) was expressed for the first time by Jahm ibn Safwan,
whose followers came to be called the "Jahmiyyah." The*Mu'tazilah*
followed the Jahmiyyah in their doctrines of tawhid and tanzih, in the
same way as they followed the Qadariyyah on the issue of free will. Jahm
ibn Safwan himself was a Jabrite (i.e. a supporter of fate or
predestination). The*Mu'tazilah* rejected his view of fate but accepted
his view of tawhid.

The foremost among the*Mu'tazilah* , who established Mu'tazilism
(al-'i'tizal) as a school of thought is Wasil ibn 'Ata', who, as
mentioned earlier, was a pupil of al-Hasan al-Basri, and who parted
company with his teacher in the course of a difference, to establish his
own school. Two different versions of the cause why the*Mu'tazilah* came
to be called by this name were mentioned earlier. Some others say that,
in the beginning the term "mu'tazilah" was used to refer to a group of
persons who remained neutral during the events of the Battle of al-Jamal
and the Battle of Siffin, such as Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas, Zayd ibn Thabit,
and 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar.

Later when the issue of the faith or infidelity of fasiq was raised by
the Khawarij, Muslims divided into two camps. One group of them took the
third path, dissociating itself from the rest, being indifferent to
their debates. They adopted the same kind of neutral attitude with
regard to a theoretical problem as those like Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas had
adopted in the midst of the heated social political climate of their
time. This attitude caused them to be called "mu'tazilah" the
"indifferent," a name which permanently stuck to them.

Wasil was born in the year 80/699 and died in 141/758-59. His views were
limited to those on the negation of the Attributes [as distinct from the
Essence of God], free will, manzilah bayna al-manzilatayn, al-wa'd wa
al-wa'id, and opinions on some differences among the Companions.

After Wasil came 'Amr ibn 'Ubayd, who extended and gave final shape to
the views of Wasil. After him came 'Amr ibn Abi al-Hudhayl al-'Allaf and
Ibrahim ibn Sayyar al-Nazzam. Abu al-Hudhayl and al-Nazzim, both, are
considered eminent Mu'tazilites. Kalam got its philosophical colour at
their hands. Abu al-Hudhayl studied philosophical works and wrote books
in their refutation. Al-Nazzam presented certain views in the sphere of
physics, and it was he who offered the view that bodies are constituted
of atoms. Abu al-Hudhayl died, most probably, in the year 255/869, and
al-Nazzim in 231/845-46.

Al-Jahiz (159/775-254/868), the famous author of the al-Bayan wa
al-tabyin, is another eminent Mu'tazilite of the 3rd/9th century.

During the rule of the Banu Umayyah, the*Mu'tazilah* did not have good
relations with the ruling authorities. During the early days of the Banu
al-'Abbas, they took on a neutral stand.[^12] But during the rule of
al-Ma'mun, who was himself learned in literature, sciences and
philosophy, they attracted the ruler's patronage. Al-Ma'mun, and after
him al-Mu'tasim and al-Wathiq, were staunch patrons of the*Mu'tazilah* .
All the three caliphs called themselves Mu'tazilites.

It was during this period that a heated controversy began extending to
all corners of the vast Islamic dominions of the period. The issue under
debate was whether Speech is an attribute of the Divine Act or an
attribute of the Essence. Whether it is created and temporal (*hadith* )
or uncreated and eternal( *qadim* ) like Divine Knowledge, Power, and
Life. The*Mu'tazilah* believed that the Qur'an is created (in time) and,
therefore, is a creation of God (*makhluq* ) and so temporal. They also
maintained that belief in the pre-eternity of the Qur'an amounted to
infidelity (*kufr* ).

The opponents of the*Mu'tazilah* , on the contrary, believed in the
pre-eternity and uncreatedness of the Qur'an. Al-Ma'mun (r. 198/813 to
218/833) sent out a circular that any believer in the pre-eternity of
the Qur'an would be liable to punishment. Many persons were thrown into
prison and subjected to torture.

Al-Mu'tasim (r. 218/833 to 227/842) and al-Withiq (r. 227/842 to
232/847) also followed al-Ma'mun's practice. Of those who went to the
prison during that time was Ahmad ibn Hanbal. This policy remained in
force until al-Mutawakkil assumed power (r. 232/847 to 247/861).
Al-Mutawakkil was not inclined in favour of the*Mu'tazilah* , and also
most of the people were opposed to them. As a result the*Mu'tazilah* and
their admirers suffered a reverse, nay, a reprisal. In the purges that
followed, much blood was shed and homes were ruined. The period is
remembered by Muslims as the times of "*mihnah* " - times of adversity
and trial.

The*Mu'tazilah* never recuperated after this, and the field was left
open forever for their opponents: the Ahl al-*Sunnah* and the Ahl
al-*Hadith* . Nevertheless, there appeared some prominent personalities
even during the following periods of their decline, like, 'Abd Allah ibn
Ahmad Abu al-

Qasim al-Balkhi, well-known as al-Ka'bi (d. 319/ 931); Abu 'Ali
al-Jubba'i (d. 303/915-6); Abu al-Hashim al-Jubba'i (d. 321/933) the son
of Abu 'Ali al-Jubba'i; Qadi 'Abd al-Jabbar (d. 415/1024); Abu al-Hasan
al-Khayyat; al-Sahib ibn 'Abbad, al-Zamakhshari (d. 538/1144); and Abu
Ja'far al-'Iskafi.


