ASHA'IRAH:
==========

From the preceding lecture it became clear that the ideas and notions
which led to the emergence of the Mu'tazilite school took birth during
the latter half of the first century of Hijrah. The approach of
the*Mu'tazilah* , in fact, consisted of the use of a kind of logical and
rational method for understanding the basic doctrines of the Islamic
faith. Obviously, the first condition for such an approach is belief in
the freedom, independence, and validity of reason. It is also evident
that the common people at large are not used to ratiocination and
intellectual analysis, and always tend to equate "religiosity" with
"credulity" and intellectual submission to the apparent meanings of the
Qur'anic verses and in particular of the a*hadith* . They tend to
consider every attempt at independent and original interpretation as a
kind of rebellion against religion, specially if the dominant politics
deem it in their interests to support this attitude, and more specially
if some religious scholars propagate such an outlook, and particularly
so when such scholars really believe in their literalist outlook and are
inflexible and fanatical in practice. The attacks of the Akhbaris on the
Usuliyyun and the mujtahidun, and the attacks of some fuqaha' and
muhaddithun against philosophers in the Islamic world had their roots in
such an approach.[^13]

The*Mu'tazilah* had a deep-rooted interest in understanding Islam and
its propagation and defence against the atheists, the Jews, the
Christians, the Magians, the Sabaeans, the Manichaeans, and others. They
even trained missionaries and dispatched them to various regions.
Nevertheless, their existence was threatened by the literalists, who
called themselves "Ahl al-*Hadith* " or "Ahl al-*Sunnah* ." They were
ultimately stabbed in the back, weakened and gradually became extinct.

Despite it all, in the beginning, that is until the end of the 3rd/9th
century and the beginning of the 4th/l0th, there existed no rival school
of kalam - as was later to emerge - that could challenge the*Mu'tazilah*
. All opposition occurred under the claim that the views of
the*Mu'tazilah* were against the externals of the*hadith* and
the*Sunnah* . The leaders of the Ahl al-*Hadith* , such as Malik ibn
Anas and Ahmad ibn Hanbal, basically considered any debate, inquiry or
argument connected with the matters of faith as unlawful( *haram* ) .
Therefore, the Ahl al-*Sunnah* not only did not have any system of kalam
challenging the*Mu'tazilah* , but also they were opposed to kalam
itself.

About the late 3rd/9th century and the early 4th/l0th, a new phenomenon
took place. That was the appearance of a distinguished thinker who had
received instruction in Mu'tazilite teachings under Qadi 'Abd al-Jabbar,
and had mastered them. He rejected Mu'tazilite tenets and inclined
towards the doctrines of the Ahl al-*Sunnah* . Since, on the one hand,
he was not a man devoid of genius, and on the other was equipped with
the tools used by the*Mu'tazilah* , he established all the doctrines of
the Ahl al-*Sunnah* on a rational basis, and gave them the form of a
relatively closely-knit intellectual system. That distinguished person
was Abu al-Hasan al-'Ash'ari (d. circa 330/941-42). Al-'Ash'ari - as
against the view of his predecessors among Ahl al-*Hadith* , like Abmad
ibn Hanbal - considered debate and argument, and use of the tools of
logic in the matter of the doctrines of the

faith as permissible, citing evidence from the Qur'an and the*Sunnah* to
support his claim. He wrote a treatise entitled "Risalah fi istihsan
al-khawd fi*'ilm al-kalam* " ("A Treatise on Appropriateness of Inquiry
in 'Ilm al-Kalam).[^14]

It was at this point that the Ahl al-*Hadith* were divided into two
groups: the*Asha'irah* , or the followers of Abu al-Hasan al-'Ash'ari,
who considered kalam as permissible; and the Hanbalis, or the followers
of Ahmad ibn Hanbal, who considered it unlawful. In our lectures on
logic we have already mentioned that Ibn Taymiyyah, a Hanbali, wrote a
book on unlawfulness of logic and kalam.[^15] There was another reason
why the*Mu'tazilah* became detestable in the eyes of the people. It was
the period of calamity or "*mihnah* ," and the*Mu'tazilah* under the
patronage of the caliph al-Ma'mun, wanted to coerce the people into
accepting their belief in the createdness of the Qur'an. This
regimentation brought in its wake bloodshed, imprisonment, torture and
exile, which shook the Muslim society. The common people considered
the*Mu'tazilah* responsible for that havoc, and this earned them greater
disfavour with the public.

These two causes contributed to the public welcome at the emergence of
the school of Ash'arism. After Abu al-Hasan al-'Ash'ari, other
distinguished personalities appeared in this school, who strengthened
its foundations. Among them following can be mentioned: Qadi Abu Bakr
al-Baqillani (a contemporary of al-Shaykh al-Mufid), who died in the
year 403/1012-13 Abu Ishaq al-'Asfara'ini (who is considered as
belonging to the generation after al-Baqillani and al-Sayyid al-Murtada
'Alam al-Huda); Imam al-Haramayn al-Juwayni, the teacher of al-Ghazali;
Imam Muhammad al-Ghazali, the author of Ihya' 'ulum al-Din himself (d.
505/1111-12); and Imam Fakhr al-Din al-Razi.

Of course, the Ash'arite school underwent gradual changes, and
particularly in the hands of al-Ghazali kalam somewhat lost its
characteristic colour and took on the hue of*'irfan* (Sufism). Imam
al-Razi brought it close to philosophy. After Khwajah Nasir al-Din
al-Tusi wrote his book Tajrid al-'i'tiqad more than ninety per cent of
kalam assumed the colour of philosophy. After the publication of the
Tajrid, all*mutakallimun* - including the*Mu'tazilah* and
the*Asha'irah* - followed the same road which was trodden by that great
philosopher and Shi'ah mutakallim.

For instance, the latter works of kalam such as al-Mawaqif and Maqasid
and the commentaries written upon them - all took on the colour of the
Tajrid. It may be said that, in fact, the more time has elapsed since
Abu al-Hasan al-'Ash'ari, the more the leading Ash'arites have moved
away from him, bringing his doctrines closer to the views of
the*Mu'tazilah* or those of the philosophers.

Now we shall list the main doctrines of al-Ash'ari, which are aimed at
defending the basic principles of the Ahl al-*Sunnah* , or attempting a
rational justification of their beliefs.

(i) The Divine Attributes, contrary to the belief of the*Mu'tazilah* and
the philosophers, are not identical with the Divine Essence.

(ii) The Divine Will is all-embracing. The Divine providence and
predestination encompass all events (this belief, too, is contrary to
the view held by the*Mu'tazilah* , though in agreement with those of the
philosophers).

(iii) All evil, like good, is from God (of course, this view is a
logical corollary, in al-Ash'ari's view of the above belief).

(iv) Man is not free in his acts, which are created by God (this belief,
too, in al-Ash'ari's view, necessarily follows from the doctrine of
all-embracing nature of the Divine Will).

(v) Acts are not intrinsically good or evil, i.e. husn or qubh of deeds
is not intrinsic, but determined by the Shari'ah. The same is true of
justice. What is 'just', is determined by the Shari'ah not by reason
(contrary to the belief of the*Mu'tazilah* ).

(vi) Grace( *lutf* ) and selection of the best for creation (al-'aslah)
are not incumbent upon God (contrary to the belief of the*Mu'tazilah* ).

(vii) Man's power over his actions does not precede them [there is no
istita'ah qabl al-fi'l], but is commensurate and concurrent with the
acts themselves (contrary to the belief of the Muslim philosophers and
the*Mu'tazilah* ).

(viii) Absolute deanthropomorphism (tanzih mutlaq), or absolute absence
of similarity between God and others, does not hold (contrary to the
Mu'tazilite view).

(ix) Doctrine of acquisition: Man does not 'create' his own acts; rather
he 'acquires' or 'earns' them (this is in justification of the Ahl
al-*Sunnah* 's belief in the creation of human acts by God).

(x) Possibility of the beatific vision: God shall be visible to the eyes
on the Day of Resurrection (contrary to the view of the*Mu'tazilah* and
the philosophers).

(xi) The fasiq is a believer (mu'min) (contrary to the view of the
Khawarij, who consider him kafir, and contrary to the Mu'tazilite
doctrine of manzilah bayna al-manzilatayn).

(xii) There is nothing wrong about God's pardoning someone without
repentance. Similarly, nothing is wrong about God's subjecting a
believer to chastisement (contrary to the Mu'tazilite position).

(xiii) Intercession (*shafa'ah* ) is justifiable (contrary to the
Mu'tazilite position).

(xiv) To tell a lie or break a promise is not possible for God.

(xv) The world is created in time (*hadith* ) (contrary to the view of
the philosophers).

(xvi) The Qur'an is pre-eternal( *qadim* ) ; however, this is true of
al-kalam al-nafsi (meaning of the Qur'an), not al-kalam al-lafzi - the
spoken word (this is in justification of the Ahl al-*Sunnah* 's belief
in the pre-eternity of the Qur'an).

(xvii) The Divine Acts do not follow any purpose or aim (contrary to the
view of the philosophers and the*Mu'tazilah* )

(xviii) It is possible that God may saddle a person with a duty beyond
his power (contrary to the belief of the philosophers and
the*Mu'tazilah* ).

Abu al-Hasan al-'Ash'ari was a prolific writer, and as reported had
compiled more than two hundred books. As many as a hundred are

mentioned in his biographical accounts, though, apparently, most of
those works have perished. The most famous of his works is Maqalat
al-'Islamiyyin, which has been published. It is a very disorderly and
confused work. Another one printed is al-Luma', and perhaps other of his
works may have also appeared in print.

Abu al-Hasan al-'Ash'ari is one of those individuals whose ideas,
regrettably, exercised a great influence on the Islamic world.
Nevertheless, later, his works have been put to severe criticism by
philosophers and the*Mu'tazilah* . Ibn Sina, in al-Shifa; has refuted
many of his ideas without mentioning his name. Even some of his
followers, such as Qadi Abu Bakr al-Baqillani and Imam al-Haramayn
al-Juwayni revised and modified his views about predestination and
createdness of( *human* ) acts.

Imam Muhammad al-Ghazali, although an Ash'arite who has to a great
extent established and strengthened the Ash'arite doctrines, has put
them on a different foundation. Through al-Ghazali, kalam was brought
closer to*'irfan* and Sufism. Mawlana Muhammad al-Rumi, the author of
the Mathnawi, is, in his own way, an Ash'arite; but his deep Sufi
inclinations gave a different colour to all the issues of kalam. Imam
Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, who was familiar with philosophic thought,
transformed al-'Ash'ari's kalam, further strengthening it.

The triumph of the Ash'arite school cost the Muslim world dearly. Its
triumph was the victory of the forces of stagnation over freedom of
thought. Despite the fact that the battle between Ash'arism and
Mu'tazilism is related to the Sunni world, even the Shi'ite world could
not remain unaffected from some of the stultifying effects of Ash'arism.
This triumph has particular historical and social reasons behind it, and
certain political events effectively contributed to it.

As mentioned earlier, during the 3rd/9th century, the caliph al-Ma'mun,
himself an intellectual and a man of learning, rose to the support of
the*Mu'tazilah* . After him al-Mu'tasim and al-Wathiq also followed
him - until al-Mutawakkil assumed caliphate. Al-Mutawakkil played a
basic role in the victory of the Ahl al-*Sunnah* 's doctrines, which
acquired dialectic foundations after one hundred years at the hands of
al-'Ash'ari. To be sure, had al-Mutawakkil's way of thinking been
similar to that of his predecessors, Mu'tazilism would have had a
different fate.

The rise of the Seljuq Turks to power in Iran was another effective
factor in the triumph and propagation of the Ash'arite ideas. The
Seljuqs did not believe in the freedom of thought. They were the
antithesis of the Buyids, some of whom were men of scholarship and
literary merit. Shi'ism and Mu'tazilism flourished in the Buyid court.
Ibn al-'Amid and al-Sahib ibn 'Abbad, the two learned ministers of the
Buyids, were both anti-Ash'arites.

Here we do not intend to support Mu'tazilite doctrines, and later we
shall expose the feebleness of many of their beliefs. However, that
which deserves appreciation in the*Mu'tazilah* is their rational
approach - something which also became extinct with them. As we know, a
religion so rich and resourceful as Islam needs a kalam which has an
unshakeable faith in the freedom of reason.


