THE SHI'ITE KALAM:
==================

Now it is time to take up Shi'ite kalam, if only briefly. Kalam, in the
sense of logical and rational argument about the principal doctrines of
Islam, has a special and distinguished place in the Shi'ah tradition.
The Shi'ite kalam, on the one hand, emerges from the core of
Shi'ite*hadith* , and, on the other, is mixed with Shi'ite philosophy.
We have seen how, in the early centuries, kalam was considered to be
inimical to the*Sunnah* and the*hadith* by the Ahl al-*Sunnah* . But the
Shi'ite kalam not only does not come into conflict with the*Sunnah* and
the*hadith* , it is firmly rooted in the*Sunnah* and the*hadith* . The
reason is that the Shi'ite*hadith* , contrary to the Sunni corpus
on*hadith* , consists of numerous traditions in which profound
metaphysical or social problems have been dealt with logically and
analysed rationally. But in the Sunni corpus such analytic treatment of
these subjects is missing. For instance, if there is any mention of such
problems as that of Divine providence and preordination, the
all-embracing Will of the Almighty, the Divine Names, Attributes, or
such topics as the soul, the life after death, the final reckoning, the
Sirat, the Balance, or such issues as*Imamah* ,*khilafah* , and the
like, there is no argument or rational explanation of the topics
mentioned. But in the Shi'ah corpus on*hadith* , all such issues have
been dealt with in a rational and discursive manner. A comparison
between the list of the chapters of the six Sihah and that of
al-Kulayni's al-Kafi will make this quite clear.

Accordingly, "kalam", in the sense of rational and analytical treatment
of problems, is found in the Shi'ah*hadith* . This is the reason why the
Shi'ah were not divided into two groups like the Sunnis were into "Ahl
al-*Hadith* " and "Ahl al-Kalam."

It was on the basis of the Sunni textual sources that we stated, in the
former lectures, that the first doctrinal issue to become a subject of
controversy was the issue of the*kufr* of a fasiq, brought up by the
Khawarij during the first half of the first century. Then emerged the
problem of freedom and fate, which was raised and argued by two
individuals by the names of Ma'bad al-Juhani and Ghaylan al-Dimashqi.
The belief they professed in this matter was contrary to the one held
and propagated by the Umayyad rulers. Thereafter, during the first half
of the second century, the notion of the unity of Divine Attributes and
Essence was posed by Jahm ibn Safwan. Thereupon, Wasil ibn 'Ata' and
'Amr ibn 'Ubayd, the founders of the Mu'tazilite school, adopting the
belief in free will from Ma'bad and Ghaylan and the doctrine of the
unity of Divine Essence and Attributes from Jahm ibn Safwan, and
themselves innovating the doctrine of manzilah bayna al-manzilatayn in
the issue of the faith or infidelity of fasiq, initiated debates in some
other issues, thus founding the first school in Islamic kalam.

This is how the Orientalists and the scholars of Islamic studies in the
West and the East explain and interpret the origins of rational
speculation and debates in the Islamic world. This group, advertently or
mistakenly, ignores the profound rational and demonstrative arguments
advanced for the first time by Amir al-Muminin 'Ali (A). The truth is
that the rational approach in Islamic teachings was first initiated by
'Ali (A) in his sermons and discussions. It was he who for the first
time initiated profound

discussion on the subjects of Divine Essence and Attributes,
temporality( *huduth* ) and pre-eternity( *qidam* ) , simplicity
(basatah) and compositeness( *tarkib* ) , unity( *wahdah* ) and
plurality (kathrah), etc. These are recorded in the Nahj al-balaghah and
other authentic texts of Shi'ah*hadith* . These discussions have a
colour, perfume and spirit which are totally distinct from the
approaches of the*Mu'tazilah* and the*Asha'irah* to the controversies of
kalam, or even from that of the Shi'ah scholars, who were influenced by
their contemporary kalam.

In our Sayr dar Nahj al-balaghah ("*A Journey Through the Nahj
al-balaghah* "), and in our preface to the Vol. V of*Usul-e falsafeh wa
rawish-e riyalism* , we have discussed this matter.

Sunni historians confess that from the earliest days the Shi'ite
thinking was philosophical in approach. The Shi'ite intellectual and
theoretical approach is opposed not only to the Hanbali thinking - which
fundamentally rejects the idea of using discursive reasoning in
religious belief - and the Ash'arite approach - which denies the
independence of reason and subordinates it to literalist appearance -
but also to the Mu'tazilite thinking with all its predilection for
reason. Because, although the Mu'tazilite thought is rational, it is
dialectical or polemical (*jadali* ), not discursive or demonstrative
(*burhani* ).

In our lectures on the basics of Islamic philosophy, where we have
clarified the difference between peripatetic (hikmat al-mashsha') and
illuminationist (hikmat al-'ishraq) philosophies, we have also explained
the difference between dialectical (Mu'tazilite and Ash'arite) kalam and
mystical or intuitive approaches to philosophical issues.[^16] That is
the reason why the majority of Islamic philosophers have been Shi'ah.
Only the Shi'ah have preserved and kept Islamic philosophy alive, since
they acquired this spirit from their Imams (A), particularly from the
first Imam, Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali (A).

The Shi'ah philosophers, without having to mould philosophy into kalam
and without transforming rational philosophy into dialectical
philosophization, consolidated the doctrinal basis of Islam under the
inspiration of the Qur'anic Revelation and the guiding principles of
their spiritual leaders. If we wish to enumerate the
Shi'ah*mutakallimun* , that is those who have applied rational thought
to the doctrines of the Faith, we shall have to include a group of
muhaddithun as well as a group of Shi'ah philosophers among them.
Because, as said earlier, both the Shi'ite*hadith* and the Shi'ite
philosophy have accomplished the function of*'ilm al-kalam* to a greater
extent than kalam itself.

But if by "*mutakallimun* " we mean only that group which under the
Mu'tazilite or Ash'arite influence had resorted to the tools of
dialectical reasoning, we are forced to select only a particular group
of them. However, we see no reason to concentrate our attention on this
particular group only.

If we leave the utterances of the infallible Imams (A) about doctrines,
delivered in the forms of sermons, narratives, or prayers, the first
Shi'ah writer to compile a book on doctrines of faith was 'Ali ibn
Isma'il ibn Mitham al-Tammar. Mitham al-Tammar himself was an orator,
expert in debating, and was one of the closest companions of*Amir
al-Mu'minin* 'Ali

(A). 'Ali ibn Isma'il was his grandson. He was a contemporary of 'Amr
ibn 'Ubayd and Abu al-Hudhayl al-'Allaf, the famous figures of kalam
during the first half of the second century, who were from the first
generation of the founders of Mu'tazilite kalam.

Among the companions of al-Imam al-Sadiq (A), there is a group of
individuals, referred to as "mutakallim" by the Imam (A) himself, such
as Hisham ibn al-Hakam, Hisham ibn Salim, Humran ibn A'yan, Abu Ja'far
al-'Ahwal - known as "Mu'min al-Taq" - Qays ibn Masar, and others.

Al-Kafi relates the story of a debate between this group and an opponent
in the presence of al-Imam al-Sadiq (A), which pleased him. This group
lived during the first half of the second century, and was trained in
the school of al-Imam al-Sadiq (A). This shows that the Imams of the Ahl
al-Bayt (A), not only themselves engaged in discussion and analysis of
the problems of kalam, they also trained a group of their pupils for the
sake of conducting such debates and arguments. Among them Hisham ibn
al-Hakam distinguished himself only in*'ilm al-kalam* , not in
tafsir,*fiqh* , or*hadith* . Al-Imam al-Sadiq (A) used to treat him with
more respect than others even when he was a raw youth, and used to offer
him a preferred seat. All are in agreement that the Imam paid him so
much respect just because of his expertise in kalam.

By showing preference for Hisham the mutakallim over other pupils,
experts in*hadith* and*fiqh* , al-Imam al-Sadiq (A), in fact, wanted to
raise the status of kalam as against*hadith* and*fiqh* . Obviously, such
an attitude of the Imams (A) played a decisive role in the promotion
of*'ilm al-kalam* , and as a result, gave the Shi'i thought a
dialectical and philosophical character.

Al-Imam al-Rida (A) personally participated in debates in which
al-Ma'mun invited*mutakallimun* of various schools to take part. The
records of such meetings are preserved in the Shi'i texts.

It is indeed very amazing that the Orientalists should be completely
silent about all such events pertaining to the efforts of Amir
al-Mu'minin 'Ali (A) and ignore the role of the Infallible Imams (A) in
the revival of rational inquiry in matters of religious doctrine.

Fadl ibn Shadhan al-Nishaburi, a companion of al-Imam al-Rida (A),
al-Imam al-Jawad (A), and al-Imam al-Hadi (A), whose tomb is in
Nishabur, apart from being a faqih and a muhaddith, was also a
mutakallim. He is reported to have written a large number of books.

The Nawbakht family produced many illustrious personalities, most of
whom were*mutakallimun* . Fadl ibn Abi Sahl ibn al-Nawbakht, a
contemporary of Harun, was attached with the famous Bayt al-Hikmah
library, and well-known as a translator from Persian into Arabic; Ishaq
ibn Abi Sahl ibn al-Nawbakht; his son, Isma'il ibn Ishaq ibn Sahl ibn
al-Nawbakht; his another son, 'Ali ibn Ishaq; his grandson, Abu Sahl
Isma'il ibn 'Ali ibn Ishaq ibn Abi Sahl ibn al-Nawbakht, (called "shaykh
al-mutakallimin" of the Shi'ah), Hasan ibn Musa al-Nawbakht, a nephew of
Isma'il ibn 'Ali, and several others of this family - all are
Shi'i*mutakallimun* .

Ibn Qubbah al-Razi in the 3rd/9th century, and Abu 'Ali ibn Miskawayh,
the famous doctor of medicine and the author of*Tahdhib al-'akhlaq* *wa*

*tathir al-'a'raq* , during the early 5th/11th century, are also
Shi'i*mutakallimun* .

The Shi'i*mutakallimun* are many. Khwajah Nasir al-Din al-Tusi, the
famous philosopher, mathematician, and the author of the Tajrid
al-'I'tiqad, and al-'Allamah al-Hilli, the well-known faqih and
commentator of the Tajrid al-'I'tiqad, are well-known*mutakallimun* of
the 7th/13th century.

Khwajah Nasir al-Din al-Tusi, himself a learned philosopher, created the
most solid work of kalam through his writing of the Tajrid al-'I'tiqad.
Since its compilation, the Tajrid has attracted the attention of
all*mutakallimun* , whether Shi'ah or Sunni. Al-Tusi has, to a great
extent, brought kalam out of dialectical labyrinth and made it closer to
discursive (rational) philosphy. During the latter ages, kalam almost
completely lost its dialectical form. All thinkers became followers of
discursive (rational) philosophy, and, in fact, left the camp of
dialectical philosophy to join philosophy proper.

The Shi'ite philosophers after al-Tusi brought the essential problems of
kalam into philosophy, and applied the philosophical methods of enquiry
to the study and analysis of these problems with greater success than
attained by the*mutakallimun* who employed the older methods. For
example, Mulla Sadra or Mulla Hadi Sabzawari, though they are not
usually counted among*mutakallimun* , have been far more influential in
Islamic thought than any of the*mutakallimun* .

It is a fact that if we compare their approach to that of the basic
Islamic texts, such as the Qur'an, the Nahj al-balaghah, and the prayers
and traditions transmitted from the Ahl al-Bayt (A), we shall find this
approach and style of reasoning to be closer to that of the original
teachers of the faith. Here we are compelled to be content with these
brief references only.


