THE SHI'I STANDPOINT:
=====================

In this lecture it is necessary to briefly explain the Shi'ite views on
the issues current among the Muslim*mutakallimun* . Earlier, while
explaining the Mu'tazilite viewpoint, we stated that the*Mu'tazilah*
considered their five doctrines, viz., tawhid,*'adl* , al-wa'd wa
al-wa'id, manzilah bayna al-manzilatayn, and al-'amr bi al-ma'ruf wa
al-nahy 'an al-munkar, as being fundamental to their school of thought.
We have also said that the reason for giving prominence to these
doctrines above all other Mu'tazilite beliefs lies in the fact that they
characterize their school and distinguish it from the schools of their
opponents. It should not be construed that these five principles
constitute the basic doctrines of the faith (*usul al-Din* ) in the eyes
of the*Mu'tazilah* , and that all the remaining beliefs are regarded as
subsidiary.

The Shi'ite scholars - not the Shi'ite Imams (A) - from the earliest
days, have also introduced five doctrines as being characteristic of
Shi'ism. They are: tawhid,*'adl* , nubuwwah,*imamah* , and*ma'ad*
(Resurrection). It is generally said that these five are the basic
tenets of the faith (*usul al-Din* ) and the rest have a subordinate
significance, or are "furu' al-Din". Here, inevitably, the question
arises that if by "*usul al-Din* " we mean the doctrines belief in which
is essential for being a Muslim, they are not more than two: tawhid and
nubuwwah. Only these are the two beliefs contained in the Shahadatayn
("'ashhadu 'an la ilaha illallahu wa 'ashhadu 'anna Muhammadan
rasulullah") Moreover, the second testimony is related in particular to
the prophethood of Muhammad (S), not to prophethood in general, and the
prophethood of other prophets is not covered by it. However, belief in
the prophethood of all the other prophets (A) is a part of the*usul
al-Din* , and faith in it is compulsory for all believers.

If by*usul al-Din* we mean the doctrines faith in which is an essential
part of the faith from the Islamic viewpoint, then belief in other
matters, such as the existence of the angels - as explicitly stated by
the Qur'an - is also essential for faith.[^17] Furthermore, what is
special about the Attribute of*'adl* (justice) that only this Divine
Attribute should be included in the essential doctrine, to the exclusion
of all other attributes, such as Knowledge, Life, Power, Hearing or
Vision? If the belief in the Divine Attributes is necessary, all of them
should be believed in; if not, none ought to be made the basis of the
faith.

Actually, the fivefold principles were selected in such a manner so as,
on the one hand, to determine certain tenets essential to the Islamic
faith,and on the other to specify the particular identity of the school.
The doctrines of tawhid, nubuwwah, and*ma'ad* are the three which are
essential for every Muslim to believe in. That is, these three are part
of the objectives of Islam; the doctrine of*'adl* being the specific
mark of the Shi'ite school.

The doctrine of*'adl* , although it is not a part of the main objectives
of the Islamic faith - in the sense that it does not differ from the
other articles of faith pertaining to Knowledge, Life, Power, etc -, but
is one of those doctrines which represent the specific Shi'i outlook
with regard to Islam.

The article on*imamah* , from the Shi'ite viewpoint, covers both these
aspects, i.e. it is both a part of the essential doctrines and also
characterizes the identity of the Shi'ite school.

If faith in the existence of the angels is also, on the authority of the
Qur'an, essential and obligatory, then why was it not stated as a sixth
article of the faith? The answer is that the above-mentioned articles
are part of the objectives of Islam. That is, the Holy Prophet (S)
called the people to believe in them. This means that the mission of the
Prophet (S) prepared the ground for the establishment of these beliefs.
But the belief in the angels or in the obligatory duties, such as prayer
and fasting, is not a part of the objectives of the prophethood; it
rather forms an essential accessory of it. In other words, such beliefs
are essential accessories of faith in prophethood, but are not the
objectives of prophethood.

The issue of*imamah* , if viewed from a socio-political standpoint or
from the viewpoint of government and leadership, is similar to that
of*'adl* . That is, in that case, it is not an essential part of the
faith. However, if viewed from a spiritual viewpoint - that is from the
viewpoint that the Imam, to use the terminology of*hadith* , is
the*hujjah* (proof) of God and His khalifah (vicegerent), who in all
periods of time serves as a spiritual link between every individual
Muslim and the perfect human being - then it is to be considered as one
of the articles of faith.

Now we shall take separately each of the particular doctrines of Shi'ite
kalam, including the above-mentioned fivefold doctrines:

(i) Tawhid:
-----------

Tawhid is also one of the fivefold doctrines of the*Mu'tazilah* , as it
is also one of the*Asha'irah* 's, with the difference that in the case
of the*Mu'tazilah* it specifically means*al-tawhid al-sifati* , which is
denied by the*Asha'irah* . On the other hand, the specific sense of this
term as affirmed by the*Asha'irah* is*al-tawhid al-'af'ali* , which is
rejected by the*Mu'tazilah* .

As mentioned above,*al-tawhid al-dhati* and al-tawhid al-'ibadi, since
they are admitted by all, are outside the scope of our discussion. The
conception of tawhid upheld by the Shi'ah, in addition to*al-tawhid
al-dhati* and al-tawhid al-'ibadi, also includes*al-tawhid al-sifati*
and*al-tawhid al-'af'ali* . That is, in the controversy regarding the
Attributes, the Shi'ah are on the side of*al-tawhid al-sifati* , and in
the debate on human acts, are on the side of*al-tawhid al-'af'ali* .
Nevertheless, the conception of*al-tawhid al-sifati* held by the Shi'ah
is different from the same held by the*Mu'tazilah* . Also, their notion
of*al-tawhid al-'af'ali* differs from the notion of the same held by
the*Asha'irah* .

The conception of*al-tawhid al-sifati* of the*Mu'tazilah* is synonymous
with the idea of the absence of all Attributes from the Divine Essence,
or is equivalent to the conception of the Divine Essence being devoid of
all qualities. But the Shi'i notion of*al-tawhid al-sifati* means
identity of the Attributes with the Divine Essence.[^18] For an
elaborate discussion of this issue one should study works on Shi'ite
kalam and philosophy.

The Shi'i conception of*al-tawhid al-'af'ali* differs from the one held
by the*Asha'irah* . The Ash'arite notion of*al-tawhid al-'af'ali* means
that no creature is of any consequence in the scheme of things, and
everything is

directly ordained by God. Accordingly, He is also the direct creator of
the deeds of the human beings, and they are not creators of their own
acts. Such a belief is similar to the idea of absolute predestination
and has been refuted through many an argument. However, the notion
of*al-tawhid al-'af'ali* upheld by the Shi'ah means that the system of
causes and effects is real, and every effect, while being dependent on
its proximate cause, is also dependent on God. These two modes of
dependence do not operate in parallel but in series. For further
clarification of this subject see my book Insan wa sarnewisht ("Man and
Destiny").

(ii) 'Adl:
----------

The doctrine of*'adl* is common between the Shi'ah and the*Mu'tazilah*
.*'Adl* means that God bestows His mercy and blessings and so also His
trials and chastisement according to prior and intrinsic deservedness of
beings, and that Divine mercy and trial, reward and punishment are
determined in accordance with a particular order or law (which is also
of Divine origin).

The*Asha'irah* deny this notion of*'adl* and such an order. In their
view, the belief in*'adl* in the sense of a just order, as outlined
above, necessitates God's subjection and subordination to something else
and thus contradicts His Absolute Power.*'Adl* in itself implies several
corollaries which shall be referred to while explaining other doctrines.

(iii) Free Will and Freedom:
----------------------------

The Shi'ah doctrine of free will is to some extent similar to that
of*Mu'tazilah* . But the two differ with regard to its meaning. Human
freedom or free will for the*Mu'tazilah* is equivalent to Divine
resignation( *tafwid* ) , i.e. leaving man to himself and suspension of
the Divine Will from any effective role. Of course, this, as proved in
its proper place, is impossible.

Freedom and free will, as believed by the Shi'ah, mean that men are
created as free beings. But they, like any other creature, are entirely
dependent on the Divine Essence for their existence and all its
multifarious modes, including the mode of action, all of which are
derived from and are dependent on God's merciful care, and seek help
from His Will.

Accordingly, free will and freedom in Shi'ism occupy an intermediate
position between the*Ash'arite* (absolute) predestination (*jabr* ) and
the Mu'tazilite doctrine of freedom( *tafwid* ) . This is the meaning of
the famous dictum of the Infallible Imams (A:): "la*jabr* a wa la
tafwida bal 'amrun bayna 'amrayn":

Neither Jabr nor tafwid; but something intermediate between the two
(extreme) alternatives.

The doctrine of free will is a corollary to the doctrine of Divine
Justice.

(iv) Inherent Morality or Immorality of Deeds (*Husn wa Qubh Dhati* ):

The*Mu'tazilah* believe that all deeds are inherently and intrinsically
either good or evil. For example, justice is intrinsically good and
oppression is inherently evil. The wise man selects the good works and
abstains from bad deeds. And since God the Almighty is Wise His Wisdom
necessitates that He should do good and abstain from 'evil. Thus the
inherent goodness or badness of acts on the one hand, and the Wisdom of
God on the other, necessitate that some acts are "obligatory" for God
and some "undesirable."

The*Asha'irah* are severely opposed to this belief. They deny both the
inherent goodness or badness of acts and the applicability of such
judgements as "obligatory" or "undesirable" to God.

Some Shi'ah thinkers, under the influence of the Mu'tazilite kalam,
accepted the Mu'tazilite view in its above-mentioned form, but others,
with greater insight, while accepting the doctrine of inherent morality
or immorality of acts, rejected the view that the judgements of
permissibility or undesirability are applicable to the Divine
realm.[^19]

(v) Grace( *lutf* ) and Choice of the Best (*intikhab al-'aslah* ):

There is a controversy between the*Asha'irah* and the*Mu'tazilah*
whether or not Grace or 'choice of the best' for the good of human
beings is a principle which governs the universe. The*Mu'tazilah*
considered grace as a duty and obligation incumbent upon God.
The*Asha'irah* denied Grace and 'Choice of the best.'

However, the principle of grace is a corollary to the doctrine of
justice and the doctrine of the innate goodness or badness of deeds.
Some Shi'ite*mutakallimun* have accepted the doctrine of grace in its
Mu'tazilite form, but others who consider it absolutely wrong to apply
the notion of "duty" and "obligation" to God, advance another version of
the doctrine of the "choice of the best," which it is not possible to
elaborate here.

(vi) Independence and Validity of Reason:
-----------------------------------------

Shi'ism affirms a greater independence, authority and validity for
reason than the*Mu'tazilah* .

According to certain indisputable traditions of the Ma'sumun (A), reason
is the internalized prophetic voice in the same way as a prophet is
reason externalized. In the Shi'ite*fiqh* , reason (*'aql* ) is
considered as one of the four valid primary sources of the Law.

(v) 'Aim' and 'Purpose' of Divine Acts:
---------------------------------------

The*Asha'irah* reject the notion that the Divine Acts may be for one or
several purposes or aims. They state that possession of a purpose or
goal is solely applicable to man and other similar creatures. But God is
above such matters, since having a purpose and aim implies subjection of
a doer to that purpose or aim. God is free from and above every kind of
limit, restriction, and subordination be as it may the limit imposed by
a purpose.

The Shi'ah affirm the Mu'tazilite belief with regard to purposiveness of
Divine Acts. They believe that there is a difference between the purpose
of the act and the purpose of the doer. That which is impossible is that
God may seek to satisfy some purpose of His own through His Acts;
however, a purpose or aim which is directed to the benefit of a creature
is not at all incompatible with Divine perfection and the supremacy of
His self-sufficing Essence.

(vi) The Possibility of Bada' (Divine abrogation of predestiny):
----------------------------------------------------------------

Bada' is possible in Divine Acts, in the same way as it occurs in the
abrogation of the Divinely decreed laws. An elaborate and satisfactory
study

of the issue of bada' may be found in such profound philosophical books
as al-'Asfar.

(ix) Vision (ru'yah) of God:
----------------------------

The*Mu'tazilah* vehemently deny the possibility of seeing God with the
eyes. They believe that one may only have faith in God, a faith which is
rooted in the mind and the intellect. That is, one can acquire a firm
conviction in the depth of one's soul and mind in the existence of God,
and this is the highest kind of faith one may attain. God can by no
means be seen or observed. This is testified by the Qur'an when it says:

***The sights do not perceive Him, and He perceives the sights, and He
is All-subtle (incapable of being perceived) and All-knowing (i.e.
perceives the eyes and the rest of things). (6:103).***

The*Asha'irah* , with equal vehemence, assert that God can be seen with
the eyes, but only on the Day of Resurrection. They also cite as
evidence certain Qur'anic verses and prophetic traditions to support
their claim. One of the verses they cite is:

***(Some) faces on that Day shall be bright, looking towards their Lord.
(75:22-23)***

The Shi'ah believe that God can never be seen with the eyes, neither in
this life nor in the Hereafter. Nevertheless, the highest kind of faith
is not an intellectual one. The intellectual faith is 'ilm al-yaqin. A
higher level of faith than that of the intellect is 'ayn al-yaqin -
certitude of the heart. 'Ayn al-yaqin (lit. certitude by sight) means
witnessing God with the heart, not with the eyes. Thus, though God
cannot be seen with the eyes, He is 'visible' to the heart. 'Ali (A) was
once asked, "Have you seen God?" He replied, "I have not worshipped a
god whom I have not seen. But He is visible to the hearts, not to the
eyes." The Imams (A) were asked whether the Prophet (S) saw God during
his Ascension (mi'raj). Their reply was: "With the eyes? No. With the
heart? Yes." In this matter only the Sufis have a viewpoint resembling
the Shi'ah position.

(x) The Faith or Infidelity of the Fasiq:
-----------------------------------------

On this issue, which has often been referred to earlier, the Shi'ah
position is in agreement with that of the*Asha'irah* , but is different
from the views of the Khawarij (who believe that a fasiq is kafir) and
the*Mu'tazilah* (who believe in manzilah bayna al-manzilatayn).

(xi) The Infallibility ('ismah) of the Prophets and the Imams:
--------------------------------------------------------------

This belief is characteristic of the Shi'ah who hold that the prophets
(A) and the Imams (A) are infallible and do not commit any major or
minor sin whatsoever.

(xii) Forgiveness (maghfirah) and Intercession (shafa'ah):
----------------------------------------------------------

On this issue, also, the Shi'ah differ from the cut-and-dry Mu'tazilite
position that anybody who dies without repentance cannot possibly get
the benefit of Divine forgiveness or (the Prophet's) intercession.
Similarly, their position is also at variance with the indulgent and
extravagant notion of*shafa'ah* held by the*Asha'irah* .[^20]


