Chapter 70: Decline In The Muslim World
=======================================

The second decline of the Muslim world, its Dark Age, dates roughly from
the beginning of the twelfth/eighteenth century to the middle of the
thirteenth/ nineteenth century. With the exception of Indonesia where
decadence started earlier, all the Muslim countries witnessed a terrible
decline not only in their political status but also in their
intellectual and cultural life soon after the awakening of Europe from a
long slumber, an awakening which was the result of her intellectual,
scientific, and philosophical movements.

While the Otto­mans lost their glory after Sulaiman the Magnificent, the
Safawids after Shah \`Abbas the Great, and the Mughuls in India after
Aurangzib, the European nations went from strength to strength,
acquiring more and more territories and trade centers from the Muslim
rulers, defeating them on land and sea, and finally pronouncing the
Muslim empires to be suffering from incurable diseases.

Several reasons have been assigned to this catastrophe, some of which
will be discussed in the course of this chapter. Broadly speaking, the
reasons are either political or non-political; hence our discussion of
them has been divided into two parts-the first dealing with political
causes, and the second with the non-political ones. Since the political
causes were a little different in each case, the great Muslim empires of
this period have been treated separately. Non-political causes, however,
have been discussed together.

A. Political Causes of the Catastrophic Decline
-----------------------------------------------

### 1. Turkey

Sulaiman the Magnificent was the last and the greatest of the first ten
Ottoman Sultans who together in a period of three centuries raised
Turkey from nothing to one of the most dreaded and powerful empires of
the world. But climax is generally followed by decline, so we find signs
of decadence appearing in the later part of Sulaiman's reign. According
to Kotchi Bey, a Turkish historian, the decline or at least the signs of
decline are visible towards the end of Sulaiman's reign can be
attributed to the following causes.

Sulaiman did not participate regularly in the deliberations of the
Council of State but listened to the discussions only from behind a
veil. His successors dispensed even with this formality. The result was
that the king, instead of profiting from the mature and seasoned advice
of the councilors, acted arbitrarily or was in most cases swayed by the
opinion of his harem and the prejudiced views of flatterers and
fortune-seekers.

Sulaiman would appoint men to offices of trust and responsibility
without their having them pass through the grades of lower offices,
e.g., Ibrahim was promoted from the post of Master of the Pages to that
of Grand Vizier. The criterion of appointments to high offices of the
State was friendship, flattery, and the recommendation of the harem and
not merit, experience, or intelligence. Sulaiman permitted his favorite
viziers to amass wealth. Rustam Pasha, a son-in-law of Sulaiman,
remained Grand Vizier for fifteen years. He was skilled, in the art of
filling the Government treasury through exactions of large amounts of
money from persons appointed to State offices.

These exactions fixed during Sulaiman's own time became arbitrary and
exorbitant later in the hands of his successors, so much so that the
office of tax-collector went to the highest bidder. State officials
whether high or low tried their utmost to amass as much wealth as
possible by fair or foul means.

This tendency to grow richer and richer through corruption, nepotism,
and exploitation, though immediately beneficial, often led the officials
concerned into troubles. The bare fact that an officer was enormously
rich was a sufficient proof of his being dishonest and corrupt, and,
therefore, a sufficient ground for his being exposed to condemnation.
Many rich officers lost their lives on charges of corruption, and their
property was confiscated by the Government.

The immediate effect of these malpractices was not great, but in course
of time, especially when the Turkish Empire fell on evil days, they
assumed enormous importance and became potent causes for its downfall.

A brief mention may be made of the Janissaries who revolted against
Sulaiman the Magnificent when he withdrew from Vienna in 936/1529
realizing the futility of his campaign. The Janissaries were a military
force recruited from the Christian youth. They came into being during
the reign of Murad I (760/1359-790/1389). They not only proved a weapon
of rare strength in wars against the enemies of the Ottoman Empire, but
also, because of their loyal­ty and devotion, helped the Sultans in
keeping turbulent forces under control.

The Janissaries were a useful instrument in the hands of strong Sultans,
but in the times of degenerate Sultans they became a kind of Praetorian
Guard, dictating the deposition of Sultans and the nomination of their
successors. In the eleventh/seventeenth and the twelfth/eighteenth
centuries, they became a menace to the State and were given short shrift
by Mahmud II in 1242/1826.

Another important event which took place during the reign of Sulaiman
the Magnificent was his granting of preferential treatment to France in
matters of trade and commerce, and also his allowing her to establish
consular courts and exercise judicial rights over the French subjects in
the Ottoman Empire. This was done to counteract, through alliance with
France, the power of the Holy Roman Empire in South-East Europe. After
Sulaiman, when the Sultans lost their prestige, other Christian powers
demanded the same political and commercial concessions as were accorded
to the French and obtained them as a matter of fact.

This proved very dangerous. It not only led the foreign Christian powers
to foment troubles on the plea that discrimination was practiced against
the Christians but it also made the Christian subjects look to
anti-Ottoman powers for help and survival. The loyalty of the Christian
subjects thus became divided; indeed, their loyalty to outside powers
exceeded their loyalty to the Ottoman Sultans. To every subsequent
reform that the young Turks aimed at, "capitulations" served as a major
handicap.

It was not possible to weld the Christians into the body politic, so
they were jealous of their separate entity. Their separatist feelings
were fanned partly by the agents of foreign Christian powers and partly
by the mishandling of the situation by the unintelligent and
unimaginative Sultans of the later period.

The Sultans who succeeded Sulaiman possessed neither the imagination nor
the political acumen necessary to keep a vast empire intact. They
frittered away their energies in petty squabbles, meaningless intrigues,
and frivolous avocations. Little did they realize that in an age of
technology and science their old weapons would prove worse than useless.
Their defeat in 1094/1683 sealed their fate in Europe. But for the
mutual bickering of the European powers, the Ottoman Empire could not
have maintained its frontiers for any length of time. Then there was the
growth of Western imperialism and also the emergence of Russia as a
strong centralized State, both of which turned the scales against the
Turks.

In the twelfth/eighteenth century the Muslim empires all over the world
began to show signs of weakness and decay. This synchronized with the
rapid strides of the European powers in technology and industry. These
powers had developed superior naval military equipment as well as war
strategy. The Muslim powers, quarrelling as they were among themselves,
sought for the latest weapons from the Europeans who found thus a
splendid chance to enter into the complexities of Oriental political
intrigues and turn them to their advantage.

They meddled in the affairs of the Mughul Empire in India, the Mamluk
rulers of Egypt, the Safawid monarchs of Persia, and, last but not
least, the Sultans of the Ottoman Empire. The interfering powers were
the English, the French, the German, the Dutch, the Spaniards, the
Portu­guese, and the Russians. This will show that practically every
European power, impelled by her superior technical skill and actuated by
commercial and imperialistic ambitions, set out to bring under their
dominance as much of the Muslim world as they possibly could. The Muslim
powers were no match for them.

During this period, the Turks made several attempts to reform the army
and the administration of the Ottoman Empire. These reforms go by the
name of *tanzimat*. They were undertaken to save the Empire which had
been enfeebled externally and internally, but for one reason or another
they all failed.

After the Crimean War, the Turkish Empire continued to decline so much
so that it came to be known as the "sick man of Europe"-a sick man whose
days were numbered.

The question then is, why did Turkey suffer so miserably that her
condition was declared to be incurable, not only by her foes but also by
her friends? Many causes have been pointed out in answer to this
question. It is said that the in-conclusive wars between the Ottoman and
Persian Empires during the tenth/sixteenth to twelfth/eighteenth century
weakened and exposed them both to European commercial penetration; that
the Ottoman principles of adminis­tration were actuated by a desire for
the well-being not of the State but of the sovereign; that the tenure of
the Pashas was very short and that their high office could be purchased
by bribery; and that the authority of the Sultans was weakening as the
brief noontide of the Ottoman Empire passed.

It is also alleged that the Ottomans had been in Europe for over two
hundred years-an extremely long time for an Oriental dynasty to retain
its aggressive­ness. Moreover, the tactics which had sufficed against
the lions of Hungary had become hopelessly antiquated by the middle of
the eleventh/seventeenth century. Coupled with these causes was the
degeneracy of the Sultans. The supreme power of the State had fallen
into the hands of the viziers or those of the harem-the centers of
intrigues and corruption.

More explicitly, the allegation is that it was neither the Sultan who
governed, nor the viziers who administered; the power was actually in
the hands of necromancers and purchased slave-girls. Moreover, there
were outrageous taxes and general corruption in the army, in which
promotions were likewise made through bribery and not on merit.

Even after all this has been admitted, it remains a fact that the
explanation in terms of external and internal factors would be
incomplete unless one keeps in view the machinations of foreign powers
which finally destroyed the Empire. "It was not corruption, not
misgovernment, not inefficiency-that spelt the ruin of the Ottoman
Empire. These things had always been present, but the Empire had
remained. What destroyed it in the end was the pressure of European
ambitions.... The Ottoman Empire died of Europe. "[^1]

### 2. Persia

Two powers, the Uzbeks (Uzbegs) in Turkestan and the Safawids in Iran,
arose after the break-up of the Timurid power. It was at the hands of
Shaibani Khan, the first ruler of the Uzbeks, that Babur, the founder of
Mughul dynasty in India, suffered defeat. Because of his discomfiture,
Babur turned his attention to India and laid the foundation of an empire
which lasted till 1274/1857.

The Safawids began as leaders of a Shi'ite dervish-order in Azharbaijan
and turned to politics after the collapse of the Timurid Empire when
every chieftain took advantage of the chaotic conditions and tried to
establish himself. In 904/1499 their leader Isma'il proclaimed himself
the leader of all Shi'ites, and three years later he took the title of
Shah. To the Safawids belongs the credit of making Persia a nation once
again. The rise of the Safawid dynasty marks the restoration of the
Persian Empire and the re-creation of Persian nationality.

The Safawid State reached its peak during the reign of Shah 'Abbas the
Great. With a few exceptions, the successors of Shah 'Abbas were a band
of incompetent persons who reveled in atrocities, and exhibited utter
indifference to serious matters of the State. The major cause of the
misfortune of the Persians is associated with the interference of the
Europeans in the internal affairs of Muslim countries on one pretext or
another.

The Napoleonic invasion of Egypt in 1213/1798 marks the beginning of
modern history in Iran. Napo­leon's plan to reach India through Iran was
taken seriously by the English. Hence they advanced from the east. With
Russia on the north and the English on the east Persia was virtually
encircled. It was only on the Turkish side that her frontiers remained
undisputed. Due to encirclement, Persia could do nothing but promote the
cause of Britain and Russia in turn.

Many wars were fought between Persia and Afghanistan at the instance of
Britain or Russia. Both these powers, however, extended their sphere of
influence to consolidate and protect their respective interests. There
was nothing to choose between the Russians and the British; both vied
with each other in the matter of exploitation and territorial
aggrandizement.

The intrigues of the West in Iran should not be made a ground for
putting the responsibility of Iranian decline on the shoulders of the
West alone. The Iranians themselves were mainly responsible for it. If
one's own house is in disorder, one should not blame others for making
capital out of it. In a country where political cohesion is lacking,
where there is intellectual stagna­tion, religious intolerance,
despotism, and authoritarianism, and where there is sloth, apathy, and
indifference, it would not be surprising if it sinks. During this period
Iran did not produce a single thinker of repute in any branch of
knowledge. With the exception of a few poets, prose-writers, and
historians there was no person worth mentioning.

### 3. India

The third great Muslim empire, i.e., that of the Mughuls in India, was
at its zenith during the times of Akbar, Jahangir, Shah Jahan, and
Aurangzib. After Aurangzib, who died in 1119/1707, there was a rapid
decline. The causes of the decline of the Mughul Empire were many. The
Ottoman Empire reached its peak during the regime of Sulaiman the
Magnifi­cent, the Safawids' in the reign of Shah 'Abbas the Great, and
the Mughul Empire in the time of Aurangzib. As Sulaiman the Magnificent
and Shah 'Abbas the Great were followed by a long line of incompetent
successors, so was Aurangzib.

In the authoritarian type of society, if kingship becomes hereditary, it
is inevitable that many kings should be found with little or no
initiative. And once rot sets in, it is very difficult to check it. In
Muslim Empires one weakling was followed by another and that by still
another and thus what had been achieved by the personal valor of a few
great per­sons disappeared in no time. All the successors of Aurangzib,
without excep­tion, were persons of low worth.

They reveled in sensuous pleasures neglecting the onerous duties of the
State. Instead of remedying the evils that had crept into the Mughul
body politic, they kept themselves busy in luxuries and petty intrigues.

The Mughul nobility was in no better condition. They were also corrupted
by a life of affluence, ease, and indolence. Along with the Mughul
nobility, the army also deteriorated.

The foreign powers were quick to perceive the incapacity and rottenness
of the Mughul army and also of the persons who presided over the destiny
of the Mughul Empire.

In 1152/1739, Nadir Shah invaded India. By his orders not only were the
inhabitants of Delhi massacred but also the entire wealth of the Mughuls
was taken away. Nadir's invasion left the Mughul Empire "bleeding and
pros­trate." And then it was given no time to recuperate as Nadir Shah's
invasion was followed by a wave of invasions conducted by an Afghan
chief of the Abdali clan, known as Ahmad Shah Abdali.

From 1161/1748 to 1181/1767, Ahmad Shah led several expeditions and
inflicted a series of defeats on the Mughuls, leaving them, after each
invasion, very much weaker than before. His invasions not only broke the
back of the Mughul army, but also left the country financially crippled.
Like Nadir Shah he took away everything he could lay his hands on,
leaving the country destitute. These invasions hastened the
dismemberment of the tottering Empire.

During the reign of Aurangzib, Hindus had started raising their heads
here and there, taking advantage of the unwieldiness of the Empire and
the long absence of the monarch from the capital. They were also
dreaming of reviving their past by establishing a Hindu Empire like that
of Asoka or Harsha. Hence the Rajputs, the Satnamis, the Bundels, the
Sikhs, and the Jats of Mathura revolted against Aurangzib and kept him
busy till his end. After his death the turbulent elements grew stronger.
A few new Muslim States-the 'Deccan, Oudh, and the Bengal Subah-which
were practically independent of the titular Delhi Emperor, though
outwardly avowing allegiance to his nominal authority, also arose and
added to this confusion.

Neither the Muslims nor the Hindus were destined to build lasting
king­doms on the ruins of the Mughul Empire. The nation which ultimately
succeed­ed to found a mighty empire greater than any which India had
witnessed hitherto entered the portals of India in the guise of traders,
seeking commercial privileges and concessions. Having secured a
foothold, they began interfering in the internal affairs of the State in
one pretext or another. Ultimately, because of their cleverness,
superior military strategy, and latest war materials, they wiped off all
the forces contending for supremacy on the Indian soil and became the
undisputed masters of the sub-continent for one century and a half.

These were the British who, acting on the maxim "flag follows trade,"
took advantage of the military weakness, intellectual stagnation, and
mutual differences of the rulers, both Hindu and Muslim. True, there
were other European powers like the Dutch, the Portuguese, and the
French fighting for supremacy, but none of them succeeded against
British diplomacy and naval strength and also perhaps against the
Britons' superior knowledge of the Eastern mind.

The British, like the Dutch in Indonesia, and like themselves and the
Rus­sians in Persia and the Ottoman dominions, played off one ruling
power in India against another till these were exhausted and the British
became the masters of the land. The War of Independence in 1273/1857 was
the last effort on the part of the masses to throw off the foreign yoke.

But it failed miserably and, on the charge of engineering the revolt,
the last Mughul ruler was exiled by the British to Rangoon where he died
in extreme penury. That sounded the death-knell of the great Mughul
Empire. After the War of In­dependence the Indian Muslims were almost
dead politically, intellectually, and socially. It was the darkest
period for the Muslims of India.

As it always happens when a great culture is at its zenith, the symptoms
of its decline begin to reappear, even so it is during its darkest
periods that the faint rays of light appear, unless its spark of life is
dead and it is destined to speedy extinction. This period of decadence
was not a period of unmitigated gloom. One good thing that happened was
the development of the Urdu language--a mixture of Persian, Arabic,
Hindi, and Sanskrit words, but altogether a new language with infinite
capacity to develop and to expand. Another good thing was the birth of
Shah Wali Allah whose teachings and contributions to the culture and
thought of the Indian Muslims will be found in another chapter of this
work.

### 4. Indonesia

Among the causes which led to the break-up of the Muslim rule in
Indonesia the most important was the intrusion of the foreign powers,
the Portuguese, the Spaniards, the English, and the Dutch. The first to
arrive in the country were the Portuguese, who at the end of the middle
ages had built up a formidable naval power and had gained valuable
ex­perience of sea-warfare through a long series of exploration and
piratical adventures. They were, moreover, charged with a strong
crusading spirit which impelled them to destroy Islam.[^2]

To the religious motive was added, in course of time, an intense
economic urge to wrest the trade monopoly from the Arabs. "Happily it
was possible to serve God and Mammon at the same time, for by striking
at Arab trade in the Indian Ocean, Portugal aimed a blow at the Ottoman
Empire, which drew the major part of its revenue from the spice
monopoly."[^3]

Because of their superior war strategy, the Portuguese, notwithstanding
the opposition of the Arabs and other Muslim traders, could expand their
power and influence in no time. Their first viceroy, Francis de Almeida,
had no desire to extend his sphere of influence beyond the Malabar Coast
and was anxious to remain contented with the commercial gains of that
area. His successor, Don Affonso Albuquerque, however, realized that, in
order to increase revenue resources to maintain the growing power of the
Portuguese, and also to curb the maritime activities of the Muslim
traders, who could collect the produce of the Spice Islands, Bengal,
Siam, and China from Malacca, it was necessary that the policy of his
predecessor should be given up. Accordingly he invaded Malacca on July
1, 1511, under his expansionist program. In the opinion of Crawford, his
main motive was to spread Christianity[^4] and to crush the growing
power of Islam through the extension of the Portuguese power and
blockading of the Muslims' economic resources.

It was during the tenure of Don Affonso Albuquerque that Francis Xavier,
a Portuguese Christian evangelist of outstanding merit and ability, was
invited to Malacca in 952/1545 with the express object of spreading
Christianity among the natives.[^5] Francis Xavier was well known for
his proselytizing activity, which was financially and militarily backed
by the Portuguese Government. If the Europeans of those days acted on
the principle that the flag followed the trade, they also realized that
the perpetuation or stabiliza­tion of their imperialistic and colonial
program required a vigorous policy of conversions to their faith.

The primary object of Portuguese infiltration in these islands was
indeed commercial exploitation, but to this purpose nothing was more
helpful than the creation of a solid block among the natives who,
because of their religious affinities, would support the foreign
government in all matters. As a result of Francis Xavier's missionary
efforts, the Portuguese language, culture, and religion came to the
notice of the Indonesians. The Portuguese sphere of influence increased
and a few nature-worshippers renounc­ed their tribal religion and
embraced Christianity. On the whole, the Christian missionary program
met a grand failure in Malacca and elsewhere, for nowhere could
Christianity supplant Islam. The Spice Islands had been con­verted to
Islam and no amount of coercion or persuasion could lead the inhabitants
away from it. .

After their conquest, the Portuguese promulgated laws to crush the
com­mercial activities of Muslim and Indian traders. In this mission
Albuquerque had the support of an exiled Muslim Jaja Utimutis and a
non-Muslim officer, Ninachetuen. A reign of terror started in Malacca.
All anti-Portuguese activities were put down with a strong hand.

The Portuguese exploited the internal differences and the mutual
jealousies of the native rulers. Ambassadors came to Malacca from the
Sultans of Siam, Annam, Java, and Sumatra to seek the goodwill of the
Portuguese and to obtain from them modern weapons of warfare which they
could use against their rivals. All this helped the Portuguese to
establish themselves firmly on the Indonesian soil. Military alliance
with some of the important rulers of the islands encouraged Albuquerque
to dispatch his fleet to weaker and less organized islands.

It was not difficult for the Portuguese to subjugate small
principalities scattered here and there over the islands, for where
their military strategy failed, their political diplomacy succeeded. The
annals of the Spice Islands are replete with tales of Portuguese
atrocities, horror, and deceit. Sir Hugue Clifford describes the
Portuguese as swarming into Asia in a spirit of brigandage.[^6] Their
cruel and capricious behavior was stimulated by their crusading zeal.

The Spaniards were the second foreign power to exploit the Indonesians;
they were drawn towards these islands by the enormous profits which the
Portuguese had made out of their monopoly of the spices. Thus, war
ensued between the two, which continued for three years. In 936/1529, a
treaty was concluded between the contending powers, according to which
both Spaniards and Portuguese could rule over different parts of
Malacca. Till 937/1530, the Spaniards and the Portuguese were the only
two foreign powers contending for supremacy in political domination and
commercial exploitation of the Indonesians. They were helped in their
designs by the internal differences and mutual jealousies of the ruling
chiefs who frequently sought the help of the foreigners to overthrow
their rivals.

As in India the English took advantage of the mutual quarrels of the
rajahs of the Deccan and Karnatak, so did the Portuguese and the
Spaniards exploit the dissensions of the ruling chiefs of Indonesia.
Acting on the policy of "divide and rule," the foreign powers conspired
to break up the unity of the Muslim Sultans of the islands and later
used them as an instrument in the furtherance of their commercial
designs. The natives were struck by the superior strategy and war
technology of the foreigners and curried favor with them to obtain their
expert advice and the latest war instruments.

Despite their agreement on their respective sphere of influence in the
island of Malacca, the Portuguese and the Spaniards could not desist
from waging war against each other. Finally, the Spaniards suffered
reverses and were expelled from the Spice Islands in 947/1540. For
forty-five years after the expulsion of the Spaniards the Portuguese
ruled over the Islands. Their death ­knell was sounded by the arrival of
the Dutch in 1003/1595. Thus, the third foreign power which was destined
to rule over Indonesia for about four hundred years, that is from June
2, 1595, to December 27, 1949-a period of colonialism longer than that
vouchsafed to any power so far-was the Dutch.

The Dutch could claim superior war technology and also better war
strategy in their struggle against the local potentates, but what helped
those most was disintegration prevailing in Indonesia in the
eleventh/seventeenth and twelfth/eighteenth centuries and even earlier.
The rulers were weakened by internecine wars and were often compelled to
contract disadvantageous pacts of military and commercial nature to
obtain the latest military weapons from the Dutch and secure their
support and blessings in their own designs.

The harmful nature of these pacts can be gauged from the fact that in
about a hundred years, that is to say, between 1088/1677 and 1191/1777,
the whole of Java lay at the feet of the intruders and what was worse
its "merchants and ship­builders lost their occupations and the
fisheries and forests were no longer profitable. The Javanese became a
people of cultivators and the economic content of their social life was
stunted." [^7]

The Dutch introduced a system of indirect administration through which
they utilized the native aristocracy for the furtherance of their own
designs.

The decadent elements of the Indonesian society were supported by the
arms of the Dutch so long as they helped them in the commercial
exploitation of the populace, that is to say, so long as they deposited
in the Dutch coffers whatever amount the Dutch wanted from the different
sections of the society. The result was appalling. While the utterly
rotten aristocracy acquired great powers with regard to the populace, it
degenerated into a pliable tool in the hands of the Dutch and lost its
independence.

Before the arrival of the Dutch, the Chinese had their trading concerns
in Java, though much limited in scope. The Dutch looked on them with a
favorable eye, as it was felt by them that there were no people in the
world that served them better than the Chinese; too many of them could
not be brought to Batavia.[^8]

Consequently, the Chinese were increasingly absorbed in the country's
economy. Not only did they retain imports as originally planned but they
also took part in the exports of the Dutch East India Company. Because
of the privileges and powers which the Chinese enjoyed, their relations
with the natives resembled those of the appointed aristocrats.

At the beginning of the twelfth/eighteenth century the Company stood at
the zenith of its power. But it collapsed in 1213/1798 and the
Indonesian territory was placed under the direct authority of the Dutch
Government. The aristocratic members of the Indonesian society, however,
continued to occupy the topmost positions. To strengthen their
positions, the offices which they held were made hereditary, and they
were allowed to retain a certain percentage of the crop collected from
the natives.

The aristocratic nominee of the Dutch Government was answerable to the
Dutch officer above him and not to the peasantry whom he kept under
strict bondage. The peasants were required not only to pay fixed
land-tax, but also to sow crops needed by the Government and to put in
labor to the amount desired by his foreign and local bosses. The result
of this tyrannous system was that Indonesia was often visited by
widespread famines which took a heavy toll of human and animal life.

As the entire trade was in the hands of the Dutch and the Chinese, the
Indonesians could acquire neither trading experience nor contact with
the market economy. In the words of Van der Kolff, the cultivation
system "caused a gap between the producer and the market whereby there
was no knowledge of the market, no outlet for enterprise, and no
possibility of develop­ing a native trading class."[^9]

Moreover, the Dutch-Chinese monopolists fleeced the peasant to such a
degree that it killed all his creative qualities and initiative as a
farmer. The taxes were so heavy that the peasant was forced to borrow
money from the Chinese, the only source of credit, who lent money at
ex­orbitant rates of interest. The peasant could pay back the money in
kind only; consequently, he was forced to sow the crop acceptable to the
creditor and to sell the same at the rate fixed by him.

The Dutch paid no attention to the education of the native inhabitants
of the colonies except that they allowed a few families to benefit from
learning. According to governmental records, public primary schools were
instituted in 1266/1850. There were no secondary schools. No library
worth the name was to be found in Indonesia before 1235/1819.
Officially, a library with about 20,000 books came into existence in
1262/1846, but no native was allowed to enter its precincts till
1313/1895. It contained Dutch books mostly. The number of Arabic books
was negligible.

Politically and intellectually, the Muslim civilization could not sink
lower than it did in Indonesia by the middle of the
thirteenth/nineteenth century.

B. Non-Political Causes
-----------------------

Several non-political causes can be assigned to the general decay of the
Muslim society during the period under review. As these causes operate
in all parts of the Muslim world with varying degrees of intensity, it
would be better to discuss them all at one place. The political fall of
the Muslims was conditioned by factors both external and internal.

As the external factors were almost in all cases due to the interference
of the Europeans, so the internal factors were in almost all cases due
to the intellectual, moral, and spiritual bankruptcy of the Muslims
themselves. Thus, primarily the Muslims them­selves were responsible for
their decadence. The machinations of the imperial­istic nations were
helped, or shall we say abetted, by the inefficiency of Muslim rulers
and the colossal ignorance of the masses.

So long as the Muslims were in the vanguard of knowledge, they led the
civilized world in culture, science, and philosophy. But as soon as they
lost interest in free and independent inquiry, they ceased to exist as a
dynamic force. Not only in Indonesia which was ruled and exploited by a
colonial power for a long time, but also in Persia, Turkey, and India
where the semblance of Muslim power existed for some time, one finds
absence of interest in scientific pursuit or genuine philosophical
quest.

No one can deny the great urge for inductive study that existed among
the Muslims in the first few centuries of their era. Nor can one deny
the priceless contributions of the Muslims to the world of scientific
and cultural thought. Islam can boast of its splendid thinkers in every
discipline and in every department of human life. There are great names
in the field of physics, medicine, geography, mathematics, astronomy,
history, and linguistics-to mention only a few out of the several
branches of human knowledge wherein the Muslims scored triumph by virtue
of their painstaking study and inductive methods of investigation.

But it is surprising as well as regrettable to note that not a single
scientist of any repute existed in the entire Muslim world from the
beginning of the twelfth/eighteenth century to the middle of the
thirteenth/nineteenth century. On the other hand, what one finds in this
period is a condemnation of the modern scientific knowledge because of
its supposedly anti-religious tendencies.

While the Muslims gloried in the achieve­ments of the past, they
neglected the new weapons of inquiry which the West had discovered with
the progress of science and technology. The result was a terrible
catastrophe. Whereas the other nations progressed, imbued as they were
with modern spirit of inquiry, the Muslims frittered away their energies
in fruitless controversies of a theological and trans-empirical nature.
Instead of imbibing the results of modern science and conducting
inductive inquiries, what they did was to question the compatibility of
modern know­ledge with their mistaken views of religion and to pooh-pooh
it because of its materialistic import.

None really understood the meaning of materialism or for that matter the
meaning of spiritualism. What was done, however, was that a dichotomy
was created between the two and in all discussions spiritual­ism was
overweighed, and materialism run down with all the force that ignor­ance
could muster.

Since the Muslims in the four countries mentioned above lacked the
capacity to cope with the demands of the modern scientific world, they
regressed as it were to the past and took refuge in the long exploded
myths and dreams­ which were very good for the time for which these were
conceived and nurtured but quite out of date in the modern world. Little
did they realize that a passionate clinging to the past is an indication
of mental morbidity which lead eventually to death and destruction. As
individuals regress or get fixated under the stress of life, so do
nations. When the realities of life are hard and unpalatable, decadent
communities like neurotic individuals take refuge in the past and find
solace in their earlier achievements.

Generally speaking, the Muslims of this period evinced no knowledge of
that great principle of movement in the social structure of Islam,
technically called *ijtihad*. This principle has been variously
interpreted by jurists, but all seem to agree, despite their
differences, that a reinterpretation of the Qur'anic injunctions for
legalistic and extra-legalistic needs of a society is not at all
forbidden by Islam. On the other band, there are *ahadith* of the
Prophet which strongly commend the exercise of independent and free
inquiry in the domain of jurisprudence and the enactment of laws for the
welfare of the community.[^10]

No doubt, there are differences among the jurists as regards the nature
and scope of ijtihad. But the existence of this principle and its
operation in the early stages of Muslim society is a clear proof of the
fact that Islam never accepted a static view of human society. The
present is never a replica of the past, nor is future a copy of the
present. If exact duplica­tion and identity is abhorred by the course of
historical events, how can socio-political enactments of one age apply
in totality to the socio-political re­quirements of another age?

The Muslims of all the four countries under review preferred to rest on
their oars and blindly accepted the interpretations of the past.
Acceptance of freedom is not an easy task; it involves great dangers as
Eric Fromm has amply shown. The human mind flees from freedom,
especially if it entails fresh responsibilities and new ventures in the
domain of thought. The Muslims miserably lacked the courage to think for
themselves and consequently flew to the past for shelter. But the
inevitable result of mental procrastination was the creation of a
society extremely rigid and immobile in outlook and intellectual
framework.

Blind imitation of the past became the hallmark of the Muslims. The
verdicts of Imams and jurists were accepted more in letter than in
spirit. While the jurists and other religious thinkers never claimed
infallibility or finality for their legal and theological decisions, the
Muslims thought that the last word had been said on the subject and that
amendment or departure amounted to sacrilege. The early thinkers
interpreted and applied the tenets of Islam according to the needs and
requirements of their time. But to suppose, as the Muslims did, that
their solutions were true for all times indicated incapacity to think
afresh in accordance with the changing needs of society.

Not only were the early jurists quoted in support of legal and social
pro­nouncements, but also the sayings of the Prophet, quite a good many
of which lacked authenticity. No one can deny the relevance of Hadith,
provided its authenticity is guaranteed by unimpeachable evidence and
criteria of sound historical criticism. Some *ahadith* do certainly meet
these requirements, but not all.

Unfortunately, the religious divines of this period were not mentally
equipped to sift the fabricated and cooked *ahadith* from the genuine
ones. Hence all sorts of *ahadith* were dug up to lend authority and
weight to what­ ever the divines wanted. As most of them had no
acquaintance with old or contemporary scholarship, they relied on cheap
commentaries and second ­rate catechism. In this way what passed for
authority was not the Qur'an or *Hadith* or the decisions of jurists,
but the presentation of them by ignorant and bigoted persons.

As a result of reactionary tendencies, reason became the target of
attack and even an object of ridicule. It was contended that reason was
foreign to religious truths and led only to their distortion and
misrepresentation. Con­sequently, all domains of knowledge were given
scant attention and their findings were not properly appreciated.
Science was discredited on the plea that it led to materialism, and
philosophy was opposed as intellect was debarred from entering the
portals of divine knowledge. Science and philosophy con­demned, what
remained was a fairy tale, very comforting to the ignoramus but
extremely injurious to the nation as a whole.

The Muslim mind continued to be fed, for a century and a half, on
fiction and myths. The result can be well imagined. Not only was there a
dearth of scientific thinking in this period but also an absence of
genuine philosophical activity. In the heyday of Islam there existed
thinkers of great repute; they built their philosophies on the teachings
of the ancients but they also made splendid contributions of their own
to the storehouse of human knowledge. The States created the proper
atmosphere for intellectual pursuits.

Throughout the length and breadth of the Islamic world as it existed
during the period under review, one misses freshness and originality of
thought. Philosophy requires a soil and a climate to grow and develop
and where the conditions of a society are such that neither the proper
soil nor the appropriate climate is available; it is hard to find any
activity which can be characterized as critical or intellectual.

Another force which worked negatively for the Muslims was mysticism.
There is nothing basically wrong with mysticism as such. Every great
religion has a mystic strain and so has every great philosophy, for
mysticism is the assertion of a trans-empirical reality which is one and
ineffable, bears resem­blance to the human self, and can be realized
through intuition and self-abnega­tion.

Mysticism records its strong protest against the intellectualization of
philosophy. It maintains that the Ultimate Reality, union with which is
sought by the mystics in their moment of contemplation, is attainable
not through the exercise of ratiocinative processes or
logico-mathematical techniques but through the operation of intuitive
faculty which enables one to see face to face.

As the preceding chapters have amply shown, among the Muslims there had
been great mystics who delved deep into the realm of the spirit and had
moments of great insight. They enriched the literature of mysticism by
their valuable experiences and observations. In the Dark Age, however,
with which we are concerned here, mysticism ceased to exist as a live
force and, instead, degenerated into a mode of escape from the hard
facts of life. According to Karl Mannheim, absorption in transcendental
problems is a characteristic of decadent and retrogressive
societies.[^11]

Instead of grappling with problems that face them, they retreat to the
world of transcendence and waste their time in discussing vague and
nebulous questions. All mystics in Islam, how­ever, were not escapists.
Some of them, at least, indeed the very best of them, did realize the
urgency and the imperativeness of the problems facing the society of
their time.

But to a large majority of mystics, unfortunately, interest in worldly
affairs was of secondary importance; what interested them primarily was
their preoccupation with the external form of mystical practices. They
decried the ordinary criteria of knowledge, much as the ignorant
*mullas* did. The mystics of earlier periods had described the mystic
state as the direct experience of Reality, but now the so-called mystics
even preached that ignorance was an advantage in the pursuit of
holiness. The cumulative effect of this doctrine was that the masses
lost their faith in the exercise of reason and regarded it as a Satanic
force leading to heresy and atheism.

But the baneful effect of the degenerate type of mysticism was not
confined simply to the indictment of intellectual inquiry. It had
far-reaching con­sequences, for as Iqbal says, "The emphasis that it
laid on the distinction of *zahir* and *batin* (appearance and reality)
created an attitude of indifference to all that applies to Appearance
and not to Reality."[^12] is The spirit of total other worldliness,
Iqbal observes further, "obscured men's vision of a very important
aspect of Islam as a social policy."

A one-sided concern with transcendentalism indicates, according to
psychoanalysts, a state of mental infantilism. In so far as the path
generally adopted by the so-called mystics of this dark period and their
followers ceased to be that of deep contemplation of or of wrestling
with problems through scientific understanding and experimental control,
it was at best the path of least resistance; it de­generated into a path
of controlling supernatural agencies through the recita­tion of certain
liturgical formulas or by wearing certain amulets and practicing certain
charms.

As the percentage of literacy became appallingly low in the Muslim
world, the credulous masses troubled by want and privations could be
easily deluded into thinking that the recitation of certain words could
rid them instantaneously of all their ills. These short-cuts were
offered by the Sufis to the disciples who avowed solemn faith in them.
In nearly all Muslim countries there arose a long line of hereditary
*pirs* who claimed direct and immediate contact with eternal verities
and professed to ensure the spiritual uplift of their votaries provided
they had unshakable faith in them.

Thus, along with unquestioning obedience to the divine Law as embodied
in the Qur'an and the Sunnah, there arose the need for implicit faith in
the spiritual leadership of the *pir* one chose for oneself. Thus the
simple folks were saddled with an authority more terrible and tyrannous
in nature than that of the traditions of a degenerate society.

Mystic ideas were transmitted to the disciples only after having induced
in their minds a high state of receptivity. What was thus accepted under
stress of emotions took firm roots in their souls and could not be
dislodged by any amount of logic or re-education. Consequently, there
arose among the masses a cult of saint-worship. The unwary and credulous
people did obeisance to the *pirs* as if they were the incarnations of
God on earth.

Offerings were made to them in all sincerity; they were required by the
disciples to get their desires granted, to ensure their salvation, and
to secure their union with God. The practice of saint-worship soon
developed into the habit of shrine-worship. Annual pilgrimages to the
shrines of saints became the occasions to celebrate their death
anniversaries as national fairs. The saints would be haloed in mists of
lore and legend, and the oft-told tales of their marvels were bathed in
glory of their spiritual effulgence. Little wonder if superstition
flourished and reason remained an outcast.

Pre-deterministic and fatalistic ideas became an essential part of the
creed of the masses. Hence epidemics, floods, famines, and deaths
happened at the appointed hours and nothing could be done to avoid them.
This tendency was encouraged amongst the Muslims by their appalling
ignorance of science and the cheap methods of faith-healing placed at
their disposal by the clever *pirs* and the so-called Sufis. Fatalism
flourishes in darkness and there was enough of it to spare in the Dark
Age of Islam. The occurrence of an epidemic, poverty, flood, or drought
presents a challenge to a scientist's ingenuity and technological skill.
To a fatalist nothing comes as a challenge, for he is safely enwrapped
in his acquiescence and resignation.

Mysticism not only bred fatalistic tendencies, it also encouraged
indifference to social morality. As the *pir* was supremely concerned
with the betterment of his soul, so was his protege. For the spiritual
uplift of the soul the culti­vation of another-worldly attitude,
asceticism, and renunciation came as necessary prescriptions.
Self-denial and detachment were deemed the highest virtues.

The prevalence of saint-worship and adherence to the mystic cult left no
scope for the development of practical ethics. The masses could be
easily aroused to a high pitch of indignation if one uttered a word
against a so-called saint, but they would not be stirred if sanitation
was neglected or if delinquency prevailed. In this period it was not
noticed that for self-realiza­tion the performance of civic duties was
as essential as the performance of the spiritual duties. The neglect of
social and practical ethics cancelled all pro­grammes of humanitarian
activity and left the Muslims far behind in the task of social and
political reconstruction.

No Muslim country seriously thought of a social welfare programme for
the regeneration of the masses. If anything happened in that direction,
it was just by chance and not as a result of some well-planned scheme.
The society was left to drift-to sink or to swim as it may. The chances
of its sinking exceeded those of swimming, and it actually did sink
under the severe demands of life and the world around. The decline was
all round. The Muslims lost their empires; the Muslim society went to
pieces; science and philosophy disappeared. Even fine arts and minor
arts which were the distinguishing features of the second period of
revival languished painfully.

The excellent traditions of the early painting were lost; most of the
artistic activity confined itself to producing bad copies of the
paintings of the early masters. The same degeneration appeared in minor
arts. In lite­rature too there was all-round deterioration; traditional
poetry encouraged by the princes retained its charm, but created no new
forms. The greatest poet in the Indian sub-continent before Ghalib was a
weeping poet. Prose became a string of long-drawn-out phrases,
cumbersome and involved on the whole.

The Muslims were at the lowest ebb in about 1266/1850. The kings and the
nobles took to a life of lewdness and lasciviousness; the masses were
ignorant and apathetic; the administration was bureaucratic and
autocratic; and what is worse, no attempt was made to appreciate and
profit by the scientific and technological developments taking place
around them. The West took advantage of the incompetence of the rulers
and the hollowness of the Muslim society. They had superior weapons,
better ships, more effective techniques, strategy, and diplomacy. In
addition, they had qualities of character which the Muslims ceased to
possess.

If the strength of a nation is to be measured in terms of the awareness
of a challenge and its acceptance, it can be said that during the second
decline, the Muslim nations all over the world excelled one another in
their lack of understanding of the Western challenge. The West regarded
the solidarity and expansion of the Muslim dominions a serious threat to
its imperialistic and colonial programme. Hence it was out to throw off
the Muslims by whom the challenge was hardly understood. Accordingly,
their response was as weak as their understanding of the challenge.

Bibliography
------------

### Turkey

G. E. Kirk, The Middle East, London, 1959; M. P. Price, A History of
Turkey, George Allen & Unwin, London, 1956; Lord Eversley, The Turkish
Empire, Lahore, 1957; H. A. Gibbons, Foundations of the Ottoman Empire,
Oxford University Press, 1916; A. Toynbee and K. Kirkwood, Turkey, Benn,
1926; Halide Edib, Turkey Faces West, Yale University Press, 1930;
Merriman, Suleiman the Magnificent, Harvard University Press, 1944; G.
Young, Constantinople, Methuen, 1926; Gibb and Bowen, Islamic Society
and the West, Oxford University Press, 1950; Bernard Lewis, The Arabs in
History, London, 1950; P. K. Hitti, History of the Arabs, New York,
1937; Ernest Barker, The Crusades, London, 1923; R. Bullard, Britain and
the Middle East, London, 1951; J. A. R. Marriot, The Eastern Question,
London, 1918; G. Lenczowski, The Middle East in World Affairs, Ithaca,
N. Y., 1956; A. Aaron­sohn, With the Turks in Palestine, 1956; C. C.
Adams, Islam and Modernism in Egypt, 1933; H. Bowen, Middle East Window,
1942; T. W. Arnold; The Caliphate, 1924; Sir Charles Eliot, Turkey in
Europe, 1907; Sir Mark Sykes, The Caliph's Last Heritage, 1915.

### Persia

G. Lenezowski, Russia and the West in Iran, 1918-1948, London, 1949; E.
G. Browne, A Literary History of Persia, 4 Vols., Cambridge, 1951.

### India

V. A. Smith, Oxford History of India; Cambridge History of India, Vol.
IV; Sir Jadunath Sarkar, History of Aurangzib, Vols. I-V; Moreland,
India from Akbar to Aurangzib; Lane-Poole, Medieval India; Edwards &
Garret, Moghal Rule in India; Owen, The Fall of Moghal Empire; Irvine,
The Later Moghals; Cunningham, History of the Sikhs; Duff, History o f
the Marahtas; H. G. Rawlinson, India, London, 1952; R. C. Majumadar, H.
C. Raychaudhuri and K. Datta, An Advanced History of India, London, Vol.
I, 1960.

### Indonesia

G. M. Kahim, Nationalism and Revolution in Indonesia, New York, 1959; B.
J. Schrieke, The Effect of Western Influence on Native Civilisation in
the Malay Archipelago, Batavia, 1929; J. S. Furnwall, Netherland India,
A Study of Plural Economy, New York, 1941; H. D. Burger, De Ontsbuting
van Java's Binneland voor het wereld verkeer, Wageningen, 1934; W. J.
Cator, The Economic Position of the Chinese Netherland Indies, Chicago,
1936; K. J. Pelzer, Pioneer Settlement in the Asiatic Tropics, New York,
1945; G. H. Bousequet, Dutch Colonial Policy Through French Eye, New
York, 1940; J. 0. M. Brock, The Economic Development of Netherland
Indies, New York, 1942; J. Crawford, History of the Indian Archi­pelago,
3 Vols., Edinburgh, 1820; C. Day, The Policy and the Administration of
the Dutch in Java, New York, 1904; Sir Stanford Raffles, History of
Java, 3 Vols., London, 1830; A. Vandenbosch, The Dutch East Indies,
California, 1944; H. Mitchel Franz and G. E. Taylor, The Far East in the
Modern World, New York, 1956.

[^1]: ' Elie Kedoure, England and the Middle East, Bowes and Bowes,
1956, p. 14.

[^2]: D. G. E. Hall, A History of South-East Asia, London, 1955, p. 197.

[^3]: Ibid.

[^4]: History of the Indian Archipelago, Edinburgh, 1820.

[^5]: Coleridge, The Life and Letters of St. Francis Xavier, London,
1872, Vol. I.

[^6]: Sir Hugue Clifford, Further India, London, 1904, p. 48.

[^7]: J. S. Furnivall, Netherlands India, A Study of Plural Economy, New
York, 1941. pp. 43-44.

[^8]: Cf. George Dlcturnan Kahim, Nationalism and Revolution in
Indonesia, New York, 1959, p. 8.

[^9]: "European Influence on Native Agriculture," in Schricke, The
Effect of West Civilisation in the Malay Archipelago, Batavia, 1929, p.
116.

[^10]: Sir Mohammad Iqbal, The Reconslruelion o/ Religious Thought in
Islam, Lahore, 1951, p. 148.

[^11]: Karl Mannheim, Ideology and Utopia, New York, 1936, pp. 59-88.

[^12]: Iqbal, op. cit., p. 150.


