Chapter 71:  The Silver Lining,  Development Of The Urdu Language, Grammar, And Literature
==========================================================================================

A
-

Rekiiah, Hindi, Hindwi, Zuban-i Dilhi, Gujri, Zuban-i Urdi-i Mu'alla­
all these names[^1] were given to Urdu at the various stages of its
progress by the Muslim rulers of and other settlers in India. It was
also called "the language of the Moors."[^2] The name Hindustanis[^3]
popularized by the Euro­peans was also used by some writers in the early
period.

Here, it would be interesting to trace the origin of the word "Urdu" and
briefly give its history. Urdu is a word of Turkish origin, found in the
earlier literature in various forms, such as *Ourda*, *Ourdah, Ourdou*,
and Urdu, and means "camp," "alighting place," "army post," "an army,"
or a "part thereof." It also means tent, camp bazaar, fort, or a royal
place (cf. Nur al­Absar, MS. in the library of Dr. Mubammad Shafi',
Lahore). After under­going several changes the word filtered into
Persian books after the Mongol invasion of Iran. After the invasion of
Eastern Europe by Batu Khan it also entered into the languages of
Europe.

It was, perhaps, Babur who introduced the word "Urdu" into India, and
during the reign of Akbar it was used as a term for the royal camp or
the royal mint. During the subsequent periods, we find the usage of
*Urdi-i Mu'alla* for the residential quarters belonging to Government
officers (civil area) and *Urdu Bazar* (the market attached to this
area).

It is generally admitted that the word "Urdu" as the name of a
particular language is associated with one of these two later
expressions. That is to say, Urdu meant the language of the royal camp.
But it would be wrong to assume on the basis of this fact that the Urdu
language took its origin during the period of Shah Jahan. The term
"Urdu" in this special sense appears to have been in vogue since the
time of Aurangzeb. Actually it came into being soon after the invasion
of India by Muslims from the North. Shah Murad of Lahore was perhaps the
first writer who used the word "Urdu" for the language itself in one of
his letters written in 1196/1782. The other early writers who used this
word for the language were Mushafi (1211/1796) and Gilchrist
(1194/1780).

In a way, Urdu is not exclusively the creation of the Muslims. Its birth
is the direct result of their contact with the Hindus, who jointly with
the former have developed it down to recent times. The contribution of
the Muslims to its development is, however, more substantial, rather
monumental, as compared with that of the Hindus or the Europeans[^4] who
also played a creditable role in its advancement. Considered from the
point of view of quantity as well as quality, spirit as well as
atmosphere, Urdu is predominantly a language of the Muslims, although
the services of the other co-workers in the field can in no case be
under-rated.

Urdu was popularized by Muslim mystics and saints and patronized by
Muslim kings and rulers. Some of the Muslim emperors, kings and
princess[^5] themselves composed Urdu verses and compiled *diwans* of
Urdu poems. Its literature was enriched from Islamic sources. The
Muslims, therefore, were mainly, though not exclusively, the architects
of this language.

Let us now assess and determine the nature and extent of Muslim
contribu­tion to the creation and development of Urdu. Urdu took its
shape first in the Punjab and Delhi during the Ghaznawid and the early
Sultanate period[^6] when the first powerful commingling of Hindu-Muslim
cultures occurred, causing a productive intermixture of Muslim (i.e.,
Persian, Turkish, and Arabic) languages with *Padkrits* (the Apabhransa
of the Punjab and the *Khari Boli* of Delhi, Meerut[^7] and the
adjoining areas) of Northern India.

This situation had its effect in two directions. First, it created a
hybrid form of speech used by Hindus and Muslims in the bazaars with a
sprinkling of Arabic, Persian, and Turkish words; subsequently, it
developed into a crude vehicle of lyrical utterances (cf. Amir Khusrau's
*Rekhtahs*). Secondly, it caused an infiltration of Hindi words into
Arabic and Persian books on the one side and of Persian and Turkish
words into Hindi books on the other. The *Kitab al-Saidanah* of
al-Biruni and the early lexicographical works in Persian written in
India contain a large number of Hindi words and idioms, and Chand's
Prithvi Raj Rasa[^8] and, later, *Ad Granth* of Nanak embody large
materials drawn from Muslim sources.[^9]

But, apart from this linguistic fusion, a distinct language came into
being with the passage of time as an admixture of Persian and Arabic
words and expressions in use more in Muslim circles, with a clear bias
towards Muslim cultural modes and attitudes. Persian enjoyed the status
of the Court language, but side by side with it this new language too
kept on progressing from one stage to another.

From Delhi, this new language reached Gujarat and the Deccan where its
growth and initial popularity awakened the first serious literary
activities under the \`Adilshahi and Qutbshahi rulers,[^10]0 some of
whom were themselves good poets of Urdu. Earlier, the Sufis[^11]1
employed this polyglot for their missionary work and wrote religious and
mystic treatises in it.

Gradually, it attained a literary status in the South before it was
employed by writers in the North, where in due course it became popular
during the post-Aurangzeb period, during which Hatim, Mir, Sauda, Dard,
and others wrote excellent poetry in it. Then the centre shifted to
Lucknow and other places, till in 1215/1800, the Fort William College
was established by the British at Calcutta where deliberate efforts were
made to simplify Urdu style under the name of Hindustani, which
encouraged a revival of interest in secular, non-communal, and local
aspects of its literature.

These efforts, however, did not succeed fully because Urdu had already
assumed a specific shape and complexion more akin to Persian and other
Muslim literatures, and it was not then possible to divest it of its
predominantly Muslim stamp. They, in a way, encouraged parting of the
ways, and led to the creation of the modern Hindi with a distinct Hindu
spirit drifting largely away from Urdu and the "lingua franca"
Hindustani.

So, by 1303/1885, Urdu, which was hitherto a common language of the
Hindu-Muslim intelligent­sia, came to be claimed as a language, more or
less, of the Muslims. About the same time, Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan
advocated this claim simultaneously with the declaration of the Muslims
to exist as a separate politico-cultural group in India and the issue
was thus decided once for all. Later, the pro­tection and preservation
of Urdu became one of the basic grounds for demand­ing a separate
homeland for the Muslims.

B
-

This brief history would prove the fact of active association of the
Muslims with Urdu since its origin, though not to the exclusion of other
communities (Hindus and Europeans) whose contribution to its progress is
certainly creditable. For a considerable time the Hindus took keen
interest in the advancement of Urdu as if it were their own language.

It attracted their enthusiasm due to the spirit of catholicity existing
in its mystic poetry, taste for which had already been cultivated by
them through Persian which had become a part of their education ever
since the reign of Akbar.'[^12]2 With the intensification of the
communal consciousness, however, certain sections of the Hindus created
a gulf between Hindi and Urdu which went on increasing till the country
was partitioned and the shape of things changed altogether.

The Europeans played their role a bit differently. They used Urdu for
official purposes, simplified it for common use, compiled dictionaries
and grammars[^13]3-and patronized it so long as it served their ends.

Principally, therefore, Urdu has been a concern and' creation of the
Muslims; but from another point of view it is positively a joint
production of the Hindus and the Muslims (although its distinct bias
towards Islamic culture can never be denied).

C
-

Lets discuss about Urdu composition and grammar now. It is agreed that
whatever form Urdu took ultimately, it is essentially an Indian language
which developed on the grammatical pattern of Sureseni *Prakrits*.
Therefore, it follows the same rules of grammar as any other branch of
this group, and its basic alphabet is also the same. But the complete
Urdu alphabet is richer and is a combination of Hindi and Arabic-Persian
sounds. In certain cases the Hindi sounds have been softened and in
certain others amplified according to the phonetic rules of Persian and
Urdu.[^14]4

Urdu is, therefore, a more advanced language than the *Prakrits* so far
as sounds and vocabulary are concerned. It has borrowed a large number
of nouns and adjectives from other Muslim languages, in addition to the
recent borrowings from European languages. Most of the verbs, pronouns,
and prepositions belong to Hindi but the structure of the sentence has
been very much determined by Persian.

The main Muslim contributions to Urdu grammar are: adoption of Arabic
terminology, application of the rules of word formation (in plurals and
adjectival compounds), and introduction of the Persian *kasrah-i idafat*
(vowel mark "i" to denote possession) instead of its Hindi form *ka, ki,
ke*.

During certain periods of strong Persian influences, even the sentence
scheme was made to follow the Persian sentence arrangement. Conversely,
however, certain Arabic and Persian plurals (like many other words) also
underwent change according to the Hindi usage,[^15]5 particularly in the
early Urdu literature.

These modifications in the grammatical structure of Urdu have been of
benefit to it in several ways. The *kasrah-i idafat* has the advantage
of economy over Hindi *ka, ki, ke*. The Persian compounds (*murakkabat*)
also have the same value, with additional rich rhythmic properties, so
useful in paragraphs and stanzas. Conciseness in lyrical utterances too
has always been a favorite mode of expression with the
Muslims-accomplished mostly by the use of *kasrah-i idafat* and "concise
compounds," although these features have some­times been misused in the
form of "dead" adjectival compounds or unnecessary "Arabicized" plurals.
And it is a relief to find that the Persianized sentence structure of
Urdu composition has particularly vanished with the advent of the
Western literary influences.

In the course of centuries, Urdu borrowed[^16]6 thousands of words and
phrases (nouns, adjectives, adverbs, and conjunctive prepositions) from
Arabic, Per­sian, Turkish, and Pashtu,[^17]7 as it did also from
European languages[^18]8 on a limited scale. The *Farhang-i Asliyyah*
contains 7,584 Arabic, 6,041 Persian, 17,505 Urdu, and 21,644 Hindi
(plus European) words. These figures have further changed due to the
recent coinage of terms[^19]9 (technical and literary) and infiltration
of more Arabic (religious) words under the influence of the revivalist
movement of Pakistan.

It may be noted that this Persian-Arabic vocabulary in Urdu is not
merely a "dead" equivalence; it represents an extension and enrichment
of ex­perience. It reflects a new attitude to life and a peculiar tone
and color, not present in other Indian languages.

The Urdu language combines the virility and vigor of Turkish, the
grandeur and dignity of Arabic, the polish and grace of Persian, in
addition to the original homeliness of Hindi expressions. This has made
Urdu richer in tone­, color and literary effects, so very important for
a perfectly expressive style.

The incorporated Arabic-Turkish-Persian vocabulary in Urdu belongs to
the various departments of life: administration, social activity,
agriculture, art, religion.[^20]0 Literature, etc., and represents a
gradual expansion of culture in India caused by the fresh wave of life
awakened by the vigorous Muslim spirit, following in the wake of
immigrations from Iran and Turan.

Urdu also borrowed in literary artistry. It adopted the Arabic-Persian
prosody for metrical scansion, but rarely did it employ the Hindi
*Pingal*, except during the recent periods when 'Azmat Allah Khan and
other song­writers have attempted to revive Hindi meters.

We may now refer to the development of literary style, first in
accordance with the Persian patterns, and afterwards based on the
European (mostly English) models. All the reform movements in Urdu
literature (before 1857) were invariably directed to achieve, first, the
closest approximation of Urdu to the Persian literary forms of
expression, and, secondly, the effective adjustment of the language to
the *riiz marrah* and *muhawarah* (i.e., the natural speech of men).

Thus, although the reformers insisted on every­day spoken language and
discarded phonetically and rhetorically incongruous words, yet in order
to achieve true literary beauty they always advocated the adoption of
pictorially, musically, and emotionally proper Persian and Arabic words.
From Wali and Hatim down to Nasikh and Dhauq, the same process of
assimilation continued. The literary ideals of Persians became the main
goals to be reached by Urdu writers, and they remained so till the
literary taste changed in modern times.

The distinctive characteristics of the Persianized form of literary
expression were: a tendency towards elaboration, affectation and
floridity; sumptuousness of detail in the narrative; love of grandeur
and grotesqueness; imaginativeness even when realistic delineation was
required; preponderance of wit; and fondness for metaphor, allegory, and
symbolism in poetry. Conciseness in lyrical poetry is another
distinctive feature borrowed from the Persian *ghazal*. Simplicity and
directness in style were later introduced by writers at the Fort William
College and also by the poet Ghalib and the reformer Sir Sayyid Abmad
Khan.

Sometimes, there is a touch of insincerity in the literary style of the
Persian models, but these models when reformed have helped Urdu literary
expression, to gain in force, vigor, and dignity of tone, rarely found
in the sister languages of India.

D
-

In classical poetry, the chief forms- *ghazal, qasidah, ruba'i,
mathnawi,* etc.­were borrowed from Persian. *Ghazal*, a short poem of a
few verses (commonly between seven and twelve), mainly devoted to love
themes, interspersed with other subjects of philosophical and mystical
nature, is essentially a lyrical form, insisting on conciseness,
economy, and beauty of diction.

In this form, each couplet is complete in itself but is interwoven into
the whole, by means of a common rhyme and a common metre, and sometimes
by an undercurrent of a common mood apparent in the tone though not
necessarily in the subject. In Urdu as in Persian, g/azal attracted to
its fold several great poets such as Wali, Mir, Dard, Sauda, Mushafi,
Atish, Momin, Ghalib, and later Hali, Iqbal, Hasrat, and some of the
prominent modern poets like Hafiz, Firaq, and Faid (Faiz) who have
adapted it to the changed mental atmosphere of the modern age.

*Qasidah* (panegyric or praise-poem), a form more lengthy in size and
more complex in structure and content, requires an unusual command over
language and also great constructive ability. It may be noted that
*qasidah* is not confined to praise and that it has also been employed
successfully for subjects of descriptive, narrative, dramatic, and
subjective nature. The chief *qasidah*-writers in Urdu are Nuzrati,
Sauda, Insha', and Dhauq, whose art in this particular branch can
compete with that of the best *qasidah-*writers in Persian, at least, in
their care for the externalities of technique, if not for internal
beauties. To this list, one may add Ghalib, who introduced some changes
in the structure of *qasidah*.

Another form is *mathnawi* which is originally meant for narration of a
longer chains of events of historical or fictional nature, and is
distinguished from other forms in that each couplet in it has a separate
rhyme in consonance with a uniformity in the metre scheme. The most
outstanding maLknawis in Urdu are those written by Mir Taqi Mir
(*Darya-i 'Ishq*), Mir Hasan (*Sehr al-Bayan*), Daya Shankar Nasim
(*Gulzar-i Nasim*), and Shauq Lakhnawi (*Zehr-i 'Ishq*).

Out of the remaining poetical forms, special reference seems necessary
to *shehr ashob*-a form used by Persian and Turkish writers, more or
less for humorous themes but employed by the Urdu poets such as Mir and
Sauda for serious subjects of social and political import. Another very
important branch of Urdu poetry is *marthiyah*, which derived its name
from Arabic *ritha*' (elegy) and took a peculiar narrative shape in
Urdu. It has some resemblance to epic forms and deals with the tragic
events of Karbala (a place in Iraq where Imam Husain, the grandson of
the Holy Prophet, and a small party of his kinsmen and followers,
courageously fought against a much larger army deputed by Yazid, an
Umayyad ruler, and lost their lives). The prominent *marthiyah*-writers
were Anis and Dabir whose *marthiyahs* are the best representatives of
this art. Mirza Rafi' Sauda and Dabir had also contributed to its
progress earlier.

*Rekti* (poems, as though, written by women, with peculiar female
attitudes towards love and with characteristically female ways of
speech) means, literally, "the feminine form of *rekhtah*" (one of the
names for Urdu, and later for Urdu poetry as a whole, or for Urdu
*ghazal* alone). It is more or less in the nature of a "feminine"
burlesque or parody of love-poems written by men. In most of such poems,
the tone is non-serious, rather comic, sometimes bordering on license
and obscenity. The chief representative poets of this literary form are
Rangin and Jan Sahib, although its earliest specimens are also found in
the Deccani period of Urdu poetry.

We may mention in passing the *ruba'i* (quatrain), the *musaddas*
(Hali's Musaddas being the most prominent), *wasukht* (ironical
love-poems), *qit'al* (the fragmentary and episodic poems written more
or less on the model of shorter *qasidahs* or quatrains), and a few
other forms such as *mukhammas* (quintet), *mustazad*, etc. These forms
were adopted from Persian and were employed by almost all the famous
poets. Recently, the Hindi *git* and *doha* forms have been revived in
Urdu by poets such as Hafiz, Maqbul Ahmadpuri, Mukhtar Siddiqi, Jamil
'Ali, and others, while some of the European forms have been given
currency by 'Azmat Allah Khan, Faid, Rashid among many others whose
poems deserve a high place in Urdu poetry for perfection of technique
and construction.

In its emotional moods Urdu poetry differs from Hindi poetry despite the
fact that some of its attitudes (e.g., towards the sex of the lover) and
imagery in it were borrowed by Urdu poets in the Deccani period, and
also to some extent in recent times, but the general atmosphere of Urdu
poetry has been throughout Persian, except in the part produced under
Western influences.

The most important poets of Urdu (Wali, Mir, Sauda, Dard, Mushafi,Atish,
Mir Hasan, Nazir, Ghalib, Isma'i1, Hali, Iqbal, and others) are Muslims,
but the contribution by Daya Shankar Nasim, Shafiq Aurangabadi,
Chakbast, Surur, Mahrum, Firaq, Anand Narain Mulla, and others who are
Hindus is equally creditable and cannot be ignored in any history of
Urdu poetry.

The spirit of Urdu poetry like that of Persian poetry, when serious, is
passionately lyrical; when mystical, deeply reflective; when humorous,
intensely witty and at times ironical. Muslim narrative poetry in the
classical period has rarely been realistic and its descriptions are more
imaginative than real and objective.

The poetry of the Hindu poets of Urdu could be some­what different but
they too followed in most cases the general spirit of Urdu poetry. In
recent times, Firaq has tried to infuse a Hindu devotional spirit in it
but his is a solitary instance. The modern Urdu poets have copied some
Western models as well, but most of the original Persian forms still
persist. Iqbal, a unique literary figure in the Muslim world, has given
a new meaning to the old forms and symbols, but the aura of his poetry
is also patently Per­sian. Iqbal is also responsible for giving Urdu
poetry a deeply Islamic and philosophical color.

Some Europeans too have written good Urdu poetry but none of them can be
considered a first-rate poet, and none of them has introduced the
European spirit into it. Nevertheless, Urdu poetry has recently received
much inspiration from European (particularly English) models, and has
accepted changes in content and tone, and, to a limited extent, in form.
For instance, some attempts have been made, especially in most recent
times, to employ free verse and blank verse for long and short-long
poems, and to write sonnets and cantoes.

It is, however, in content that European influences are markedly
noticeable. One might refer here to the national as well as the "nature"
themes in modern. Urdu poetry which clearly bear the European stamp both
in attitude and in diction. The chief representatives of the national or
political poetry are Hali, Mibli, Akbar, Z, afar 'Ali Khan, Chakbast,
Iqbal, Josh, Faid, and certain other modern poets, while Isma'il
Merathi, Mebs\_har, Be-Nazir, and some others who wrote for children,
may be called the nature poets of Urdu. The classical Urdu poetry has in
its own way dealt with nature also. Nazir Akbar­abadi may be cited as
the most prominent poet of this line.

The case of Urdu prose is the same as that of Urdu poetry so far as
forms employed in the classical period are concerned. But the share of
non-Muslims in prose is more noteworthy especially in literary history,
*tadhkirah*-writing (biographical dictionaries of poets), and fiction.
Saksena's History of Urdu Literature has so far been the best, and Siri
Ram's *Khumkanah*-a dictionary of poets-is a monumental work of
considerable worth. In fiction, Sarshar. Prem Chand, and Krishn Chandr
(among the moderns) and Nihal Chand (among the old) occupy a conspicuous
place. The vast "fiction literature" (*dastan* and *hikayat*) has
borrowed largely from Sanskrit sources, as also from European channels
so far as the novel and the short story are concerned.

E
-

Comparatively speaking, Urdu prose is of recent growth and most of the
prose literature of old Persian atmosphere is rather undeveloped and is
in a crude literary shape. From *Sab-Ras* (All-Juice), a mystical
allegory translated from Persian by Wajhi (c. 1045/1635), up to *Bagh-o
Bahar* (The Flower Garden and the Flower Season), a tale of the four
dervishes by Mir Amman (c. 1217/1802), there is a big gap, except for
*Nau Tarz-i Murassa'* which is an outstanding work of the Persian model
and *Dastan-i Rani Kaitki* by Insha' representing a new model. Then came
Ghalib and Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan, Hali, Shibli, and the modern
prose-writers who enriched Urdu prose drawing much from European sources
and wrote biographies, histories, essays, novels, stories, theological
and philosophical works, and books of literary criticism and science. In
Osmania University, quite a large number of European books have been
translated into Urdu.

Here, it would be proper to bring out prominently the role of Ghalib and
Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan in the development of Urdu prose style. It may be
noted that the credit of simplifying the literary Urdu language for the
first time, after it had become laborious, affected, and merely
decorative under the influence of high-flown Persian style current in
India during the earlier periods, goes to the prose-writers of the Fort
William College, Calcutta (founded by the British East India Company in
1215/1800), such as Mir Amman, Sher Ali Afsos, Haidar Bakhsh Haidari,
and others.

Yet the personal emotive prose of Ghalib with touches of wit and
delightful irony (as reflected in his Urdu letters) and the natural
style of Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan, reflected in all of his works
particularly in his "Essays," broadened the possibilities of Urdu prose
enabling it to become an effective vehicle, not only for literary
expression but also for the expression of emotional, philosophical, or
scientific content.

Sir Sayyid Ahmad insisted, not only on simplicity, naturalness, and
ease, but also on the purpose, truth, sincerity, and earnestness of the
author. Again, while Ghalib is inimitable, Sir Sayyid tremendously
influenced his age, especial­ly the group of his associates in the
Aligarh movement, such as Hali, Shibli, Nadhir Ahmad Dhaka' Allah and
others who enriched Urdu literature abundant­ly by producing works of
unusual merit on various subjects.

Side by side with these prose-writers, we find Muhammad Husain Azad,
once Professor at the Government College and the Oriental College,
Lahore. He was with Hali a co-founder of the Natural School of Urdu
poetry and was perhaps the most popular stylist of Urdu, even though he
did not belong to the immediate circle of Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan. He
chose to write in a manner which, though not simple and direct, was yet
expressive, rich, and graceful. The three main qualities of his prose
are its beauty, artistry, and grandeur, and so far none has surpassed
him in excellence. Some of his notable works are *Ab-i Hayat* (a history
of Urdu poetry), *Sakhundan-i Faris* (a history of Persian literature),
*Nairang-i Khayal* (a collection of essays), and *Darbar-i Akbari* (a
history of the Emperor Akbar).

Drama is the weakest spot in Urdu literature and whatever exists in this
branch has been borrowed from and inspired by the European models. Ahsan
Lakhnawi, Agha Hashr, and Sayyid Imtiaz 'Ali Taj are the most
outstanding figures in this field.

Most of the writers of Urdu prose are Muslims. Hence, the general
stylistic atmosphere is also the same as is associated with the Muslim
genius.

The works on biography and Islamic history produced at Dar
al-Musannifin, Azamgarh (now in India), reflect an intensely Islamic
spirit. Similarly, most of the works on socio-political subjects embody
Muslim inclinations.

In the field of fiction, i.e., romances (*dastan-I adab*), novels and
short stories, we witness a variety of tastes, because in these branches
Muslims and non-Muslims have taken almost equal part, introducing new
elements drawn from different sources, beautifully fused together.

The romances (or *dastan-I adab*)[^21]1 should naturally come first.
This kind of literature is based on or adopted and borrowed from Arabic
and Persian as well as from Hindi sources, and manifests a mixture of
various racial and cultural elements. For instance, there is emphasis on
nature and phantasy in stories of Sanskrit origin, on action and
sensuality in stories of Arabic origin, on adventure and extravagance in
stories associated with Turan and Khurasan, on occultism and on fabulous
and imaginative pleasure in those associated with Iran. The Hindu
element in the *dastans* is also conspicuous, although the number of
Hindu writers of *dastan* is not so very large.

The atmosphere in earlier novels of Urdu, as represented by Nadhir
Ahmad, Sharar, Tabib, and Rashid al-Khairi is predominantly Islamic,
while local life has been depicted in the more modern novels (for
instance, in the novels of Prem Chand) and in Urdu short stories, as
represented by Manto, Krishn Chandr, Rajindar Bedi, 'Ismat Chaghta'i and
others, who under the influence of the Progressive Writers' movement
have manifested the spirit of realism as fostered in European,
particularly Russian, literature, and adapted it to the circumstances of
indigenous life.

F
-

The recent trends in Urdu literary criticism are also directly inspired
by the European critical theory and practice. The modern Urdu criticism
manifests a clear departure from the old practical criticism, largely
based on old rhetorics and stylistics, specimens of which are to be
found mostly in *tadhkirahs* (bio­graphical dictionaries of poets) and
other stray writings.

Shibli, Hali, Azad, and Imdad Imam Athar were the first to reorient Urdu
criticism along new lines. They tried to apply the principles of
European criticism to classical Urdu and Persian literature, in a
somewhat imperfect manner, for they could not get rid of their old
inclinations and in practice had to rely on old standards.

The *Muqaddimah* (Introduction) to poetry by Hali, the *Shi'r al-'Ajam*,
a history of Persian poetry by Shibli, *Ab-i Hayat* (a history of Urdu
poetry) by Muhammad Husain Azad, and *Kashif al-Haqa'iq* (The Revealer
of Critical Principles) by Imdad Imam Athar are some of the note­worthy
books on criticism belonging to the earlier period of modern influences.
Later on, however, Urdu criticism made tremendous progress and fell in
line with the more modern criteria of literary judgment. The notable
figures in this field are Qadri, Zor, Athar, Niaz, Majnun, Firaq, Al-I
Ahmad Surur, Ihtisham Husain, Kalim al-Din Ahmad, and a few others.

G
-

To summarize, Urdu is a joint achievement of several communities, but
Muslim contribution to its creation and development is outstanding. The
language is basically Indian but it developed largely in accordance with
the Muslim (particularly Persian) genius and taste. The attitudes in the
classical Urdu literature are mostly in tune with those existing in all
Muslim literatures.

Urdu is decidedly a wonderful manifestation of the synthetic capacity of
the Muslims which succeeded in evolving out of heterogeneous elements a
language which can now be regarded as one of the most powerful languages
of the Indo­ Pakistan sub-continent and one of the two official
languages of Pakistan.

Bibliography
------------

Graham Baily, *History of Urdu Literature*, 1932; Ram Babu Saksena,
*History of Urdu Literature*, 1927; S. Ijaz Husain, *Short History of
Urdu Literature*, 1953; Mohan Singh D1wanah, *Urdu Literature*; Hamid
Hasan Qadri, *Dastan-i Tarik-i Urdu*, 1941; Shams Allah Qadri, *Urdu-i
Qadim*, 1343/1924; Nasir Husain Khayal, Mughul our Urdu, 1933; Tara
Chand, *Influence of Islam on Indian Culture*, 1936; Muhammad Yahya
Tanha, *Siyar al-Musannifin*, 1924; Sayyid Muhammad, Arbab-i Natr-i
Urdu, 1937; 'Abd al-Haqq, Marhum Dihli College, 1933; Garcin de Tassy,
Magdlat, 2 Vols., 1943; Muhyi al-Din Zor, Urdu *Shahpare*, 1929; Urdu ke
Asalib-i Bayan, 1949; Sir Abdul Qadir, Famous Urdu Poets and Writers,
1937; Ahsan Farugi, *Urdu* *Nawil ki Tanqidi Tarikh*, 1951; 'Ali 'Abbas
Husaini, *Nawil ki Tarikh-o Tangid*; S. Wiqar 'Azim, *Hamdri Dastanen*;
Yusuf Husain Khan, *Urdu Ghazal*,1948; 'Abd al-Qadir Sarwari, *Urdu
Mathnawi ka Irtiqa*', 1940; Jadid Urdu Sha'iri, 1939; A. L. Siddiqi,
*Lakhnow ka Dabistan-i* *Sha'iri*, 1944; Nur al-Hasan Hashmi, *Dilli ka
Dabistan-i Sha'iri*, 1949; 'Abd al-Hayy, *Gul-i Ra'na;* 'Abd al­ Salam
Nadawi, *Shi'r al-Hind*.

[^1]: Mahmnd Khan Shairani, Pan jab men Urdu, 1st edition, pp. 1-23

[^2]: Hobson Jobson, 1903, p. 417.

[^3]: Wajhi in his prose book Sab-Ras (c. 1040/1630) calls it Zuban-i
Hindustani. Cf. Sab-Ras, Anjuman Taraqqi-i Urdu, 1932, pp. 11, 16.

[^4]: Ram Babu Saksena, History of Urdu Literature, 1927, p. 4.

[^5]: For instance Muhammad Quli Qutub Shah, heh \`Alam Aftab, Babadur
Sh5h Zafar, Wajid 'Ali Shah Akhtar, etc.

[^6]: Mahmad Khan Shairani, op. cit. (Mu'in al-Adab edition), p. 3;
Mas\`ud Husain Khan, Tarikh-i Zubkn-i Urdu, p. 139.

[^7]: Sabzwari, Urdu Zuban ka Irtiqa', 1956, p. 87, says: "Urdu and Pali
come from common source." He asserts that Urdu does not come from
Suraseni Apabhransa, or Braj, or Haryani, or Bundeli,nor from Punjabi
(ibid., p. 86). Pundit Kaifi, Kaifiyyal, p. 31, thinks that Amir
Khusrau's Rekhtahs were in Apabhransa of Suraseni Prakrit: also see
Saksena, op. cit., pp. 2 sqq. Al-Biruni visited the Punjab during the
early Ghaznawid period. The "local" words used by him in his Kitab
al-Saidanah are called by him al-Hindiyyah-apparently synonymous with
the "Punjab" Apahhransa; cf. S. M. Abdullah, "Arabi Tasanif men
Hindustani Alfazz," Oriental College Magazine, May 1943.

[^8]: Shairani doubts its period, op. cit., p. 121. Also see Mas\`fid
Husain Khan, op. cit., pp. 115 sqq., who thinks that some parts of it
must have been written during the early Ghulaman period.

[^9]: S. M. Abdullah, Farsi men Hindu'on ka Hissah, Anjuman Taraqqi-i
Urdu, pp. 277-89.

[^10]: 0 Nasir al-Din Has\_hmi, Deccan mein Urdu, 1926, pp. 16, 40 seq.

[^11]: 1 Abd al-Hagq, Urdu ki Taraqqi men Sufiya' ka Hissah, 1939, pp. 4
seq

[^12]: 2 S. M. Abdullah, Farsi men Hindu'on ka Hissah, pp. 4 seq.

[^13]: 3 The first grammar of Urdu was written perhaps by J. J. Koetler
('Abd al-Haqq, Qaw'id-i Urdu, 1951, Preface, pp. 11 seq.) and Insha' was
the first "local" writer who dealt with problems of Urdu grammar in
Darya-i Latafat. It may, however, be noted that some preliminary
discussions are also found in the Muthmir (MS. University of the Panjab)
of Khan Arzu (a writer of Muhammad Shah period). Among several European
writers and poets, Dr. Gilchrist, John Shakespeare, Fallen, Fransu, and
Hederly Azad were the notable scholars who produced books in Urdu;
Garcin de Tassy may also be considered to be among those who wrote about
Urdu.

[^14]: 4 Sabzwari, op. cit., pp. 105 sqq. and 'Abd al-Hagq, Qawa'id-i
Urdu, pp. 4-9

[^15]: 5 Shairani's article: "Sab-Ras," Oriental College Magazine,
November 1934, and "Introduction to Diwanzadah Hatim" (MS. University of
the Panjab).

[^16]: 6 Muhammad Husain Azad, Ab-i Hayat, 14th edition, pp. 27 sqq.,
and Ahmad Din's Sargudhas\_ht-i Aijaz, 1932, pp. 137 8qq., and 236 8qq.;
also see 'Abd al-Majid Salik's Muslim Thaga/at Hindustan Men, 1st
edition, pp. 515 sqq

[^17]: 7 Imtiaz 'Ali 'Arshi, Oriental College Magazine, May 1948, pp.
28.

[^18]: 8 'Abd al-Hagq, "Dakhil Alfaz," Urdu, July 1949, pp. 15 sqq

[^19]: 9 Wahid al-Din Salim, Wadi' Istilahat-i 'llmiyyah, 1931, pp. 7
sqq.

[^20]: 0 For the influence of Islam on Urdu poetry, see I'jaz Husain,
Madhhab-o Sha'iri, 1955, pp. 66 sqq. Also see Azad, op. cit., pp. 16
sqq.

[^21]: 1 Cf. Giyan Chand, Urdu ki Natbri Dastanen. 1954, p. 37.


