Lesson 9: Revelation and Prophethood Part 2
===========================================

We have said that human beings desire to reach wellÂ­being. The way of
well-being must be taken to achieve it. In order to take that way,
universal laws must be understood.

![](/sites/default/files/teach004.jpg)

**Limitations:** The human being knows that the circle of his or her
knowledge, no matter how extensive, is limited. From the point of view
of quality, a person can never claim that he or she knows everything.
However much knowledge increases, that which is not known becomes
greater and clearer.

![](/sites/default/files/teach005.jpg)

**Time,** whether in the past or in the future, is one of the thousands
of boundaries which limit the consciousness of a human being. Thoughts
can only go to a certain point. He or she cannot know about the far past
nor the future. The human being has still not succeeded in understanding
the self, what kind of a creature he or she is.

The greatest scholars today refer to mankind as 'the unknown creature'.
It is clear that one must first come to know a phenomenon as the basic
preliminary required to then discover the evolutionary laws and laws of
completion of that phenomenon. When we still do not recognize a creature
by the name of human being, when its actions are still paradoxes for us,
how can we then come to know the highest completion and well-being of
that person and then give weight to it and guidelines?

**Acceptance of Error:** The history of thought of humanity is full of
errors. Many of these errors have then dominated the history of human
thought for years, even centuries as the final principles. Is it not
true that the idea that the earth was the center of the universe and
that the sun revolved around it did not hold away in human thought for
over 2000 years? Was it not a law which no one doubted? We know that
there is no opinion given by any scholar which can be claimed to be 100%
an expression of the truth and one that will hold forever. Thus any
thought which comes from human beings is capable of being erroneous.

Acceptance of Influences: Another of the weaknesses of human thought is
that no matter how pure a human being be, he or she will be influenced
by other factors. A person cannot separate the self from all external
effects because a human being is not just thought but contains feelings,
emotions and sensations as well. Each plays an important role in the
development of the human being.

An effect confronting another effect exists within the thoughts of a
human being along with his or her other dimensions which causes an
influence upon the power and strength of thought of that person and
prevents one from reaching a unity of thought and practice. The decision
making capacity of the human being in the final phase is always affected
by the various dimensions which exist within that them.

In addition to the inner dimension, the social environment and economic
conditions of the place of living and the growth of a person, the
customs and traditions are all external factors which affect human
thought. The judgments and opinions of the majority of people always
contain clear veins like prejudice, individual desires, attention to
individual and group interests, self-worship, sometimes worship of a
group which then poison then prevents the individual from discriminating
between truth and falsehood, truth and error, in particular in social
issues and then causes the deviation of many people.

It must be noted that the effects of these factors usually take the form
of unconscious absorptions, in particular when inner factors affect the
thoughts of individuals. Most often the individual cannot determine what
motives affected his or her judgment.

In addition to all of these weak points, there is no doubt that the
evolution of human thought gradually takes place within humanity. Thus
before intelligence is completed, one cannot rely upon an incomplete
intellect which is capable of erring to answer the increasing needs
which arise when the individual seeks well-being.

These limitations in the sense of recognition of human being negates the
self-sufficient thoughts of the individual intellect in the guidance
upon the way towards perfection and well-being. The limitations show the
continual need for relations with another source which does not contain
these limitations and insufficiencies.

As an example, the human being by accepting the limitations of
consciousness, in particular, at the edge of metaphysics at the same
time that a great sense of wonder and amazement has arisen within the
mind, and looking towards it with great desire, knows that most of his
or her questions will remain unanswered. Can the human being answer this
question - does human life continue after death or is death the end of
life? How can a person be an effective factor in his or her own eternal
life which one considers to possibly exist and then arrange his or her
present life accordingly?

It is here that one must pay special attention. The need of the human
being for a conscious Source which is unlimited, does not err, is a
guarantor and not affected by other influences become felt. If such a
relation did not exist, all of humanity would have to use all of its
strengths and energies to find this lost One and to never stop until It
was found. From what has been said, can we say what this Source is?

Summary of the Lesson
---------------------

In order for the human being to reach the stage of well-being, he or she
must recognize certain guidelines and universal laws.

The source of the sense of recognition of humanity has certain
deficiencies: It is limited, capable of erring and accepts outside
influences.

In order to determine the needs of the human being in the area of
recognition, a Source is necessary which is unlimited, incapable of
erring and does not accept outside influences.

Questions to ask yourself
-------------------------

1. List the ways and means which brings consciousness to the human
being.

2. Describe the deficiencies and insufficiencies of the source of human
recognition.

3. Why is it that without complete understanding of the human being, we
cannot make laws for them?

4. Can revelation and prophethood eliminate the deficiencies that human
beings face in the area of recognition?


