Lesson 11: Resurrection Part 1
==============================

One day we will leave this home. That which we have to think about is
what will happen after death. This is important otherwise we will not
have determined anything about the sunset for death is a reality which
reaches everyone, whether or not they so desire.

Is death the end of life? Is death non-being, destruction, annihilation
and the end or is death a change and a connection from one world to
another? Do you recall that in our discussion of world view we said: One
of the three questions which naturally arises from an individual is: Is
the life of every individual human being limited to these few years of
life in this world and is death the end of human life or is it that real
human life which is eternal and forever begins at the time of death and
this short life in this world is an introductory phase for structuring
one's eternal fate with one's deeds?

***"What is the life of this world but amusement and play? But verify
the home*** ***in*** ***the hereafter, that*** ***is*** ***life indeed,
if they*** ***but*** ***knew."(29:64)***

In reality that which is destroyed and torn asunder at death is the
material form of a human being but the truth of a human being which is
one's very spirit and non-material dimension. This is never destroyed.
Rather, according to the Holy Quran,

***"And they say, 'What! When we lie hidden and lost in the earth shall
we indeed be in a creation renewed?' Nay, they*** ***deny*** ***the
meeting with their Lord. Say, ‘The*** ***Angel of Death, put In charge
of you, will take the souls then you shall be brought back to your
Lord.' " (32:10-11)***

In order to attain the most correct and real answer to this question, we
will study three issues which are the principle bases of it: First, the
human being eternal; second, the possibility for the resurrection; and,
third, proof of the resurrection.

The Human Being Is Eternal
--------------------------

As proving the existence of a world after death without the concept of
the subsistence and eternality of the human being makes no sense, in
this section, the two-dimensionality of the human being will be
discussed. We ask the question: Is there anything other than the
material frame within the existence of the human being which we call
spirit which is capable of subsisting or is the human being solely
determined by this very material dimension?

The Human Being is a Two Dimensional Being
------------------------------------------

The two-dimensionality of the human being is accepted by all of the
various contemporary schools of thought. There is no doubt among them
that in addition to the material dimension of the human being, it also
has another dimension which separates it from other creatures. That
which the various opinions held differ upon is whether or not the
spiritual dimension of the human being follows its material dimension or
not. Does it originate from there or is it independent? In other words,
does its authenticity belong solely to the material dimension or does
the spiritual dimension also have authenticity?

The material schools of thought generally believe that the spirit and
spiritual dimension of the human being stems from the material. They
believe it to be the reflection of the material dimension. Opposed to
this, other schools of thought believe that the spirit has authenticity
and independence.

The Spirit in Material Schools
------------------------------

Material schools of thought accept that the world is the monopoly of the
material and in general they deny the existence of the metaphysical.
They justify the existence of non-material phenomena by showing them to
be the effects of the material. As to the spirit (and spiritual
phenomena), these schools of thought busy themselves with justifications
and vain fantasies. Materialists say: The true spirit is not separate
from the material and physical dimension of the human being. They claim
that the incorrect knowledge of former scholars who said, "The spirit is
independent and after death will be reborn," is clear.

Dr. Arani says about this, "In the past ages the belief was held that
the spirit is independent. Descartes assumed the spirit to be a fluid.
Gnostics believed that the spirit is in love with the body. The new
science has drawn a red line around these fantasies which prove that the
spirit does not exist as an independent entity but rather stems from the
material."

Materialists accept the fact that the spirit and spiritual phenomena are
material and are among the particularities of the material because they
believe that everything which exists is either material or has the
particularities of materiality and that no particularities can be found
which do not relate to the material.

Dr. Arani says, "From that which has been said, the following must be
accepted as the definition of the spirit and life: 'The spirit and life
consist of particularities determined by a special material facility.
What we mean by special facility is those very cells or nerve cells.
Thus the spirit has no external existence. Rather they are particular to
a living form."

In describing the above, he says, “If material organs find the special
time-place relationship to each other, they will possess the spirit and
the spirit consists of these very relationships of the material organs
which have a spirit.

Originality and Independence
----------------------------

In the previous discussions, this point has been intimated that
experimental sciences are not able to prove or disprove the existence of
non-material creatures like the spirit. Now let us see if there are
other ways to prove the independence of the spirit and to be able to
recognize it or not?

The best method of bringing consciousness to humanity from among the
phenomena of the world is to move from cause to effect. Each one of us
in our daily lives have been able to make correct judgments about the
existence of a phenomenon or about its particularities and how it works
without having had any direct contact with it. That is, we have only
seen its effects and based upon that we have expressed an opinion. In
the area of independence or non-independence of the spirit we can apply
this same method and then, in this way, come to know the particularities
of spiritual phenomena and their originality and independence.

Once we study the particularities of the spirit and its effects, we see
that these particularities do not coincide with the spirit being
material. There are clear proofs and living examples of its
non-materiality. We will briefly study this in the following:

Unity and Stability of the Personality
--------------------------------------

Even though we may have doubts about many things, there is no doubt
about the fact that we exist. This is the lowest common denominator of
the level of knowledge and awareness of each and every human being.
Every human being knows that he or she exists. There is no doubt about
this. We discover ourselves and we are certain about our existence. Our
awareness of ourselves which is explained by the word 'I', is the
clearest bit of knowledge we have and it requires no proof or reasoning.

On the other hand, we also know that the 'I' or 'self’ from the time of
birth until the end of life was, is and will always be, one unit.
Neither is change seen in it, nor can any multiplicity be assumed nor
may it be divided up. It has no parts and essentially such a thing is
not conceivable. And also even though we, throughout our lifetime, lose
many of our characteristics or gain some, that which is described by the
word 'I' has remained stable.

Now let us see what that stable unit which does not contain any change
or multiplicity is. Is it a stable unit, unchangeable, without parts and
indivisible or multiple cells in our body which every seven years
totally changes? Is this ‘I’ or ‘self’ in every individual those very
brain cells which according to Dr. Arani (who popularized Marxism 30
years ago in Iran), have a relationship among themselves which relates
to both numbers and multiplicity and one which is destroyed when the
cell dies and is re-established with the birth of new cells or is
another creature involved?

If the 'I' of each individual consists of cells and their time-place
relationship, a 70 year old human being will at least 10 times during
his lifetime become other than that 'l' and his 'I' will have changed.
Each person, then, would contain innumerable parts.

It is sometimes said that physiology has proven that the brain cells are
stable and that these cells every so often are enlarged and then reduced
in size but they do not change in number. The spirit has the same
characteristics as the brain. As the cells of the brain are stable, and
never decrease or increase, it would appear that the spirit is also a
stable form.

But attention must be paid to the fact that that which has been proven
by physiology is the following: The numbers of the cells of the brain do
not increase or decrease, not that the atoms which formed them do not
change. Thus the brain cells are also not stable and like the other
cells or the body, every seven years give their place to new cells. In
addition to this, these explanations can never describe the unity of the
personality of the human being.

This particularity (the unity and stability of the self) makes us turn
our attention to the non-materiality of the spirit. This indication
alone is sufficient so that it becomes clear that the claims of Mr.
Arani that "science has drawn a circle of destruction upon the existence
of the spirit as an independent entity," Is nothing other than an absurd
slogan. Science in this area has no right to give either a negative or
positive answer because science has greater humility than to negate
something which is beyond its domain.

Greater still, experimental sciences are not able to negate or affirm
any phenomena whether it be material or non-material. They can never
bring proof to negate the existence of something. The only conclusion
that science and experience can bring is that in such and such an area
of experiment, such and such was not found. It is clear that the
non-finding and lack of awareness of the existence or non-existence of a
phenomenon in no way proves its existence. From what has been said it
becomes clear how absurd the words, "until the time does not come that
we can cut the spirit with a knife, we will not believe in it," are.

The Substance of Perception
---------------------------

One of the spiritual phenomena is perception. The particularities of
perception make the subtraction of the spirit and spiritual phenomena
manifest. In order to make this clear, we will do a quick study of the
substance of perception.

Every material creature has three characteristics: place, change and
being capable of division. Now it must be seen whether or not any of
these three characteristics can be found in the sense of perfection or
not. If these three characteristics exist in the sense of perception, it
is a material thing and if the sense of perception does not contain
these three characteristics, it is clear that the proof of the
non-materiality of perception has been proven. Now we will turn to each
of these three and weigh them carefully with perception.

Place
-----

Many times thousands and even millions of people have participated in
demonstrations. Perhaps you have stood aside and watched the people. As
far as the eye can see you are surrounded by people who are in motion,
shouting slogans, fists clenched, they put the responsibilities or their
school of thought on display. Look carefully. Do you perceive the
multitude of people who have participated in the demonstrations? Have
you ever thought about the place of all these people? Is it possible
that these great forms which require hundreds of kilometers of space
will fit into the small space of brain cells? Without doubt, these forms
of ours exist and non-material organs of outs can hold them because it
is not possible to have such large forms fit into the small cells of the
brain.

Is it possible that the concept of external creatures be minutely
reflected in our eyes through our nerve cells and our mind conceive of
its size and we think that we have seen something in the size that it
really is.

But we must recognize the fact that these words can in no way prove that
the form of our perceptions has a place because, assuming this, we ask:
Where is the great form which our mind itself has enlarged? If this
great form which we perceive be material, it needs a place whereas our
brain and our nerve cells do not have the capacity to give a place to
it. Thus perceptions do not have such a place.

Change
------

With a bit of care and attention, we arrive at the conclusion that
perceptions are not capable of change and cannot be because if
perceptions were capable of change, they must, like other creatures,
change and be destroyed. With the passing of time, color changes and
takes on another form. This does not make sense that no perceivable
stable form remain in the mind of the human being.

It is clear that our mental form, after the passing of many years,
remains the same as it was to begin with and we can once again recall
it. For instance years ago we learned that Aristotle was the student of
Plato. If perceptions were capable of change, this fact must later take
a different form. Even the suggestion of something like this makes us
laugh. Thus perceptions do not change.

The Acceptance of Division
--------------------------

Conceive of a two meter long piece of wood. Now divide that into two
parts. Look carefully. You can never cut that piece of wood which you
conceived of. Why? If you were to really divide that wood into two
parts, the perception of your mind would still contain the two meter
long, piece of wood and you have only conceived of two pieces of wood,
each one meter long.

The best proof is when you are asked, "What did you divide up?" You
answer, "I divided up the two meter piece of wood into two one meter
pieces." The very indication of yours to the two meter piece of wood
which you first conceived of, still remains in your mind. Thus, it has
not been divided. Look at other perceptions. They are the same. Thus
perceptions do not accept division.

Now that we know that none of the three conditions of materiality exist
in perceptions, we can consciously make the judgment that perceptions
are not material. Thus now that it is clear that perceptions are
non-material phenomena, we can conclude that other than the human body
which contains the characteristics of materiality, there must be another
dimension so that the person observing these non-material phenomena
(perceptions) exist within the human being. That is that very thing
which we call the incorporeal spirit.

Summary of the Lesson
---------------------

1. A discussion of the resurrection can be divided into three sections:
The eternality of human beings, the possibility of the resurrection and
proving resurrection.

2. The two-dimensionality of human beings is accepted by all schools of
thought whether they be material or non­material ones and they only
differ as to the authenticity of the spiritual dimension.

3. The spirit or self of the human being which is contained with the
word 'I' has unity and stability and this is the greatest reason for its
being an incorporeal entity.

4. Experimental sciences for two reasons cannot deny the incorporeality
of the spirit. First, the spirit and spiritual phenomena are
non-material and experimental facilities are only material places to
study the effect of material things. Second, the only thing which
science can prove is that it has not discovered the spirit and
incorporeal things and this does not prove their non-existence.

5. Perceptions or our mental images neither have place, accept change
nor are they divisible. Thus they arc not material and they tell of the
existence or an incorporeal thing called spirit.

Questions to ask yourself
-------------------------

1. What is the opinion of materialists about the spirit and spiritual
phenomena?

2. Can experimental sciences make judgments about things like the
spirit? Why?

3. Which one of the characteristics of the spirit does not fit into its
being a material thing?

4.Why are perceptions incorporeal substances?


