Lesson 1: Human Beings, the World and Ideology
==============================================

In our world, with its unlimited number of creatures, the human being is
a creature who 'thinks', makes choices' and then ‘acts’.

On the surface, we are confronted by the behavior and acts of human
beings. For instance, we see a human being who 'oppresses'. We see
another human being who is 'oppressed'. Then we see a third human being
who is ‘indifferent’.

What are the motives and reasons for these various kinds of behavior?
Why is one an oppressor and another, oppressed, and a third,
indifferent?

Of course, many factors play an effective role in the reason behind why
a human being acts in a certain way. But let us not forget that we said
a human being is a creature who 'thinks' and then 'acts.’

There is no doubt that the way of thinking of human beings and how a
human being thinks has a great effect upon the choices that that person
makes and his or her acts. In other words, belief and one's way of
thinking or the ideology of a human being plays an important role in his
or her practice and behavior.

[Note: The word ideology, from the point of view of structure, means the
science of ideas or beliefs. An idea is something one thinks, knows or
imagines; a thought; a mental conception or image, notion, an opinion or
belief. Anything existing in the mind as an object of knowledge or
thought as an idea. 'Ideal', also from this root, means 'model',
‘exactly as one's beliefs are', or 'what one would wish for.'

But today the word 'ideology' has other meanings: First, in a general
sense, ideology means or refers to a school of thought and action and
the collection of all of the guidelines of that school of thought and
action whether at the level of thought or at the level of action. When
we use the word 'ideology' in these lessons, we refer to just this.

Second, ideology in the particular sense, refers only to the behavior of
a human being and the rules of practice (the do's and don’ts). In this
case, we will refer to this as a 'world view' or the basic ideas of a
school of thought and action.]

It is the general meaning of ideology, that is, a collection of
component’s of the belief system of human beings which are used for the
word maktab, school of thought and action. We say, "The ideology of
Islam as compared to other ideologies and schools of thought and
action..."

Thus ideology means a universal or total theory about the world of
existence along with or accompanied by a design for society. Because of
its harmony and solidarity, it defines the way human beings should live
and its goal is the well-being and the gradual development of humanity
towards perfection or completion.

In an ideology, the insights, tendencies, methods and actions of human
beings are defined and formed. Also, in an ideology, all of the basic
lines or ways, routes, of the life of a human being, the do's and
don’ts, the good and bad, the goals and means, the needs, pains and
treatment and the answers to all of the needs of human beings must be
made clear and defined.

In this way, the ideology of each human being or each society is the
source of inspiration of that person or that society in coming to know
something. This includes one's mission in life or the mission of a
country, one's duties or the duties of society, individual
responsibilities and society's responsibilities.

If we want to explain it in our own words, we can say 'the principles of
belief and action' which underlie and explain behavior and encounters of
human beings.

In the examples given at the beginning of the lesson, an individual who
because of self-interests, material interests and animal desires,
oppresses others, it is more often than not for the reason that he or
she only looks at the world from the point of view of materiality and an
animal-like life and he or she sees the sum total of life to be in these
few days.

Also, the person who defends the oppressed and who fights for them and
often even sacrifices his or her life in this struggle, these
self-sacrifices and also struggles are because that person worships
Truth and that person's beliefs are based upon spiritual values and the
principles of humanity.

The indifference of the third person who is only a spectator also, in
the first place, stems from the weakness of that person's beliefs and
faith in spiritual values and in general , this encounter is because of
the tendencies towards quick rewards and interests that are momentary
like material and animal interests.

The Role of a World View in Ideology
------------------------------------

Our age is an age of multiple ideologies and creeds. Various ideologies
exist where each one claims to alone be the leader and guide for human
beings. It believes itself to have a monopoly as the bringer of
well-being and gradual development of human beings towards perfection
and completion. Towards this end, it invites all human beings to follow
its tenets and ideology.

Each one of these ideologies and creeds, whether they want to or not,
are a perception of a general evaluation and finally, they offer a
particular interpretation and analysis of the world. Every ideology
looks at the world and human beings with a particular view and existence
is interpreted in a certain way. This total outlook or perception which
in reality is the infrastructure which forms an ideology is called
'world view’.

For instance, materialism is a world view based upon which existence is
equated to materiality and no truth exists above materiality. According
to the world view of materiality, the human beings is merely a material
creature which is destroyed upon death and in no way does an enlightened
future confront the human being.

Confronting materialism is the Divine world view and based upon it the
world is not limited or confined to materiality. Rather, the material
world is a world which is dependent and in need of essence 'from Him'
and 'towards Him'.

According to the Divine world view, the world of existence has a God and
a precise accounting or reckoning rules over the world. The changes in
the world do not merely materially obey the endless actions and
reactions The destiny of a human being and one's future obeys particular
criteria. The human being is not destroyed with death. In the next
world, after death, the rewards and punishments of one's deeds will be
seen.

In general, the ideologies which are prevalent in the world today are
one of these two world views. The basic lines of one’s desires or the
way of one's reaching towards them are either based upon a world view of
materiality or a Divine one. For instance, Marxism as one material
ideology today, claims by offering its ideology to be able to save some
of the groups of society and it has a world view based on materiality.
This is why we say that Marxism is the infrastructure of materiality
which its world view stands upon.

Confronting that today, Islam, as the last heavenly ideology, containing
the most complete Divine world view, that is, the world view of
monotheism, offers its ideology to the world of humanity. It calls or
invites all to follow its guidelines which bear the responsibility of
saving lost and alienated individuals of today. Its eternal questions to
all of humanity, in every age, in every century from whatever group,
whatever class and whatever race is this: Where do you come from? What
must you do: Its special message for alienated human beings in our age:
Oh mankind! Oh those who bear the mission of the Divine successors upon
their shoulders, you have forgotten God and as a result, you have
forgotten the self and your own mission. Today you are alienated because
you are alienated from God. Return to your 'self’. Your medicine is
this: Return to the selfhood of the self, the real and true self.

From the point of view of Islam, when a human being seeks the self, he
or she finds God. When God is forgotten, the self is forgotten. It is at
this moment that one becomes alienated and loses one's identity.

The human being is a wayfarer and religion is a way which the wayfarer
must take. The human being grows in two important dimensions: Thought
and action. A complete ideology and religion must guide human beings in
both the area of thought and in the area of practice. Thus the important
dimension of an ideology consists of the dimension or level of thought
and the dimension or level of practice. At the level of thought, a
principle phase and infrastructure exists which is that very world view
and in the second phase, based upon that world view, the ideals of human
beings are defined. And with the actions of a human being, they give a
connection which is sometimes called ideology (ideology in its
particular sense) which means that ideology, in truth, is the
intermediary or transition between a thought and action of a human
being.

(In the Islamic view, a thought, principle or strategy is then a
connection with the Divine precepts. It moves through the transition of
a system of beliefs which is called an ideology. And then from there, it
moves to the stage of culmination, that is, the practice of that Divine
principle.)

The practice of an ideology may also be divided into two sections. The
first consists of the constant and permanent precepts and criteria. We
normally refer to this part as the practice of religion and today it is
called the strategy of an ideology.

The second part is the changing methods which obey the conditions of
time and place and they change within the framework of strategies. This
section is the one which today is called tactics.

[Note: Here it is relevant to know that the authority or power of
‘leadership through a religious jurisprudent' (wilayat al-faqih) which
Islam gives to a religious jurisprudent’ who meets all of the conditions
of a religious authority relates to this very section on the tactics of
an ideology. That is, it is the religious jurisprudent who meets all the
conditions of a religious authority who relates to this very section on
the tactics of an ideology. That is, it is the religious jurisprudent
who meets all the conditions of a religious authority alone who can
assume the responsibility of being aware of the strategic issues of an
ideology which he has arrived at through reasoning from the basic texts
of religion throughout the various periods of history. The changing and
permanent relevant Islamic laws are expressed by him as well as all of
the duties which that Islamic law gives.]

Islam has in a complete way turned its attention to this issue with
Islamic laws that are permanent and changing and one of the eternal
secrets of this code is found at this very point.

![](/sites/default/files/teach-001.jpg)

In order to further clarify the point, we will bring forward issues on
the ideology of Islam: In the ideology of Islam, in the section on world
view, we say: The Creator of the Universe exists above these creatures.

In the section of the principles of ideology, we consider friendship
with the friends of God and enmity with His enemies.

In the section on strategy, in order to reach our goal, we say:

***"And prepare against them what force you can ...to frighten thereby
the enemy of God and your enemy and others besides them, whom you do not
know (but) God knows them; and whatever thing you will spend in God's
way, it will be paid back to you fully and you shall not be dealt with
unjustly." (8:60)***

That is, "Prepare yourselves and equip yourselves before the enemies of
God in such a way that any thought on their part to attack you or
aggress against you will be put aside."

The section on tactics contains the totality of the Islamic laws that
the leaders with belief brought (the Prophets, the Imams and the Imam's
successors) in a limited period of time and under particular
circumstances. As an example the stand of Ayatullah Mirza Shirazi
against the Tobacco concession may be mentioned.

It is also very important to know that a great section of the tactical
issues of Islam form the general issues of the permanent Islamic laws
which in various times and places take various branches. For instance,
the very existence of preparedness before the enemy which was mentioned
as being part of the section on strategy like 'preparedness' which is
the issue of a ruling for the general public in whatever time or place
has a new application.

It is clear that at the time of the descent of the revelation, it was to
make the swords, arrows, chain mail, horses; etc. ready. The application
was preparedness and in our times we have made ourselves ready with
modern weapons which can answer any unmanly attack of the enemies of God
and mankind.

Summary of the Lesson
---------------------

1. Ideology as the Principle of Beliefs and Practice is a total or
universal plan which is comprehensive and harmonized, whereby insights,
tendencies, methods and actions of human beings are determined and the
main purpose is to complete human beings and guarantee their well-being.

2. Every ideology is based upon basic principles which interpret a
particular view of the world. These basic principles which are the
infrastructure of thoughts of the ideology are called world view.

3. The ideology of Islam is based upon the Divine world view which is
that of monotheism:

***"Say: I am God, the One."(112:1).***

4. The Islamic world view can be summarized in one sentence: Everything
is from God and returns to God.

5. From the point of view of Islam, the reasons for the alienation of
human beings in our age is because they have forgotten God.

Questions to ask yourself
-------------------------

1. What do we mean by ideology and world view?

2. Explain the world view of Islam and the world view of Marxism.

3. What sections make up the rules of practice in an Ideology?


