Lesson 2: Humanology (Anthropology) Part 1
==========================================

Without a study of the structure of the existence of a human being and
the particularities which have separated human existence from the
existence of other creatures and animals, we will reach this conclusion
that a human being, without an inclination or tendency towards a school
of belief or faith and growing towards that, cannot enter the arena of
human life.

In order that we come to know the great design of a world view and
ideology in the structure of the existence of a human being and his or
her human life and also with the intention of understanding, to the
furtherest extent possible, the necessity for the non-elusive elements
of ideology, there is no choice but to endeavor to take our first steps
towards understanding the human being itself.

What kind of a creature is the human being? What particularities do we
contain that requires us to have a school of thought and action? Why do
animals not need to have an inclination towards a particular school of
thought and action?

In order that we come to understand the human being, it is necessary to
place the issue in the midst of other creatures who we sense, for ln the
opinion of some scholars, "The understanding of anything consists of
understanding it in relation to other things."

![](/sites/default/files/teach002.jpg)

In order to understand the human being among other sensible creatures,
we must first, of necessity, look at all the other creatures who have
the power of sensations.

There is no question about the fact that the human being is not part of
the inanimate world nor part of the plant world. The discussion begins
with the question, "Is it correct to separate the human being from other
animals and know it to have special qualities'?"

Some have the opinion that separating human beings from other animals
makes no sense. Now it is up to us to think about whether or not it is
correct for the human being to be understood separate from others.

This is not an unimportant issue and the answer is not a simple yes or
no. In a general sense, when the human being is compared to other
animals, if we ignore the three dimensional differences, we see there
are three other important basic differences: First, the dimension of
insight or consciousness; second, the dimension of inclination or
tendencies; third, the dimension of efforts or acts.

The Differences in Attitudes
----------------------------

There are four types of attitudes or methods of understanding in the
human being. Animals share three of them and the fourth one belongs
exclusively to the human being and this one causes the difference in
attitude.

Types of Attitudes
------------------

**1. Perceptions:** The direct understanding of perceptions. For
example, a flower is placed before you. You see it. That which you
perceive in the color and shape of the flower is a result of the
function of the power or faculty of perception.

**2. Imagination:** The indirect understanding of perceptions (the
storage area of perceptions).

For example, the flower you saw, when you come home, you still have it
in recollection and you understand it. In your home, no flower is before
you for you to directly understand but it has been stored in your
perceptions and it is something which you pay attention to without your
mind. This is called the faculty of imagination.

**3. Illusion:** The understanding of a particular meaning. The word
‘meaning’ refers to anything which is not capable of externally being
understood like kindness or hatred and the word 'particular' is in the
sense of logic. In logic it is said: Whenever a concept does not accept
more than one truth, it is called particular and whenever it is possible
that a concept have more than one truth, it is called 'universal'. For
instance, 'this chair' brings a concept to mind which the insight into
one truth does not accept. But 'chair’ brings multiple truths to mind.
The first is particular and the second is universal.

For example, to understand what illusion is, you come to know something,
i.e. your mother and father love you and you love them. This perception
is called illusion. Thus, love is a meaning and also because it is not
absolute (it is your love for them or their love for you). Thus it is
particular. As we have said, the understanding of a particular meaning
is called illusion.

Summary of the Lesson
---------------------

1. Humanity without inclination to a school of thought of faith and
following that cannot enter the life of a human being.

2. In a general sense, the human being differs in three basic, important
dimensions with other animals: a. the dimension of insight and
awareness; b. the dimension of tendency or inclinations; c. the
dimension of acts.

3. There are four types of comprehension in the human being, three of
which they share with other animals. The three that arc shared are: a.
perceptions, that is, the direct comprehension of sensibles; b.
imagination: the indirect comprehension of sensibles; c. illusion: the
comprehension of a particular meaning.

Questions to ask yourself
-------------------------

1. What does the human life of a human being depend upon?
2. In what dimension does the human being differ from other animals in
distinguishing perceptions?
3. Describe the insight of perceptions and imagination.
4. Describe the insight of illusion and give examples.
5. Do you accept the fact that these three kinds of comprehension are
shared between human beings and animals? Why?


