Lesson 4: Humanology (Anthropology) Part 3
==========================================

In the previous lesson we concluded that the human being is different
from other animals in the three dimensions of: insight or attitude,
inclinations and action or performance. What causes the human being's
superiority in the area of insight is not sensory organs and
comprehension, for there are many animals whose sensory range far
surpasses that of the human being. The secret of the human being's
superiority in the dimension of insight and awareness lies in the power
of thinking, deduction, reasoning and understanding the unknown through
what is known. It is this very same factor which broadens the human
being's knowledge and creates new awarenesses which are followed by new
innovations.

When we look into the area of inclinations, we observe that it is true
that the human being possesses a series of inclinations towards the
exalted and the metaphysical, seeking the transcendent, love for the
good and the benevolent, humanitarianism, seeking the truth and other
human inclinations and emotions. But if these tendencies are merely seen
as being esoteric and natural inclinations not concerned with awareness,
they will be unconscious and sometimes very weak just as instinctive
perceptions are.

These tendencies are most readily suppressed in face of the human
being's animal tendencies. Therefore the human being 's tendencies und
inclinations can emerge, actualize and grow in the correct direction
when they are concerned with awareness and controlled by reason.

Also in the area of action, it is correct to say that the scope of
action of the human being is much greater than that of the animal, but
it is quite obvious that the human value of these acts depends to what
extent they have been Influenced by human motives and to what extent the
human being has, in practice, succeeded in freeing the self from the
compulsory web of inhuman instinct and motives.

For instance, the human being becomes thirsty and hungry as his or her
instincts dictate or even becomes inclined to help the wretched and the
infirmed by arousing his or her emotions. The sensory inputs then
recognize the need and will perform the required action through the
hands, feet and other bodily organs. But the 'human' peculiarity of
these actions emerges when the will and decision for action depends upon
reason and logic in addition to instinctive and emotional motives. For
example, eating and drinking is done to keep healthy and the satiation
of emotions and sentiments is done in a framework of logical laws and
relies upon the guidance of reason.

We can now conclude that first, the basic factor of the human beings
advantage in all areas including insight, (inclinations and performance)
is when all the human being's forces and dimensions of existence be
covered by knowledge and thinking, be in the framework of rational laws
and be controlled and governed by reason. But should the human being's
reason, on the contrary, be condemned by his or her instinctive and
emotional inclinations, he or she would be placed on a slope of decline
and be lower and more misled than animals because of the damage that
would incur to his or her human and evolutionary talents. Of course, the
sense of judgment of the mind follows a series of basic criteria and
principles which we will discuss in the next lesson entitled 'world
view'.

Second, from what we have understood about the human being, we can
gather that while having many things in common with animals, the human
being has privileges particular to the self. Consequently, a kind of
dualism emerges from human life and existence. The human being comes to
possess two kinds of lives and two kinds of actions. One is the material
and animal life. The other, a spiritual and religious or cultural life.
It is at this point that one of the most basic and fundamental issues in
humanology is brought up. That is, where lies the originality of the
human being. Is the human being's material dimension primary or his or
her spiritual dimension? Which of these two form the infrastructure of
human life? Are these two aspects independent or is one the variable of
the other? It is at this crucial point where the path of many schools of
thought separate one from the other.

Is humanity the infrastructure or the suprastructure?
-----------------------------------------------------

The schools of thought which are popular today unanimously accept this
fact that besides the material, physical and animal interests and needs,
the human being also possesses a series of needs, emotions,
inclinations, pains and cures which do not directly spring from his or
her material and animal desires. It is these very same tendencies and
perceptions that construct humane cultural life and later shape the
spiritual aspect of human life. Science, philosophy, art, literature,
ethics, etc., are all different facets of the human being's cultural
life.

What is under dispute is this: Are these facets which make-up the
spiritual dimension of human life dependent upon the human being's
material and animal life, or rather do they enjoy originality and
independence?

Naturally, from the point of view of the world view of materialism, the
materialistic aspect is primary in human life. Marxism, as the most
common materialistic school of thought, believes in the primacy of an
economic monopoly in human life.

Based upon this idea, all human activities, views and inclinations
solely move upon and are dependent upon economic production. What forms
the infrastructure of a change in society is the improvement of the
tools of production. The result of this view is that, essentially, there
is no fundamental difference between the human being and the animal, for
although a cultural and immaterial dimension in the human being exists,
this dimension is totally dependent upon the human being's material and
animal life and possesses no independence.

According to this thesis, not only the primacy of human tendencies and
inclinations such as idealism, perfectionism, humanitarianism, ethics,
love for beauty and the arts, inclination towards benevolence, the
seeking of truth, etc., are negated but also that the human being's
capacities, thoughts and ideas could never be observed as a reality
since these views and thoughts merely reflect the economic condition of
society and the progress of the tools of production.

It is surprising that when ethics and humanity are discussed, the
advocates of these schools of thought, while considering human life as
being dependent upon animal needs and introducing the human being as
being merely a tool-making and productive animal, boasts about
philanthropy and humanism and present themselves as the adherents of
human values and would like to resolve this apparent contradiction with
this wrong justification, "We are materialists in philosophy and
idealists in ethics," unaware of the fact that they are destroying the
foundation of their philosophy and prove that in their opinion, ethics
has no philosophical or rational support.

The Human Being from the Point of View of Islam
-----------------------------------------------

According to Islam's realistic school of thought and action the human
being is a being which is born of matter but takes steps towards
emancipation from this bondage. The course of the human being starts
from the world of matter and continues towards dominating it. The more
the human being progresses in his or her evolutionary course, the more
he or she frees the self from the bounds which ties the self to matter.
It could be said, "It is true that in the past, the human being was more
dependent upon material and animal conditions but after achieving the
station of humanity, the human dimension, without being dependent on the
material and economic aspects, could independently grow as a genuine
aspect."

Therefore, the human being of the future will be a cultural person, free
of the determination of matter, and will freely bow only before the
ideals and values which are related to his or her human life. In our
opinion, This belief would be nothing other than faith in God and
serving Him which is accompanied by the human being's freedom from
servitude to all his or her self-made idols and all kinds of
multi-theism.

According to the humanology of Islam, the human being possesses a dual
nature. He or she has been moulded from the earth and the soul of God.
Thus, by using the God given talents and by utilizing his or her
will-power and choice, he or she could move on the path of evil or good
ad Infinitum.

Also from the view of Islamic philosophy, based on the hypothesis of the
movement of essence, the human being arises from a material and physical
origin and then ascends towards the metaphysical world.

By noting what we have so far understood about the human being, we can
more than ever comprehend the importance of cognition, world view, and
ideology in human life. Also, it would make us acknowledge the necessity
of an ideological debate as, first, the human being has many
deficiencies and short falls in his or her various dimensions of
existence from the very beginning.

Secondly, the human being is naturally inclined to remove these
deficiencies and raise the self towards perfection and prosperity.

Third, in order to achieve prosperity, the human being should inevitably
choose a way and tread it.

Fourth, various religions, faiths and schools of thought set many
different ways before the human being which sometimes are contrary and
opposed to each other.

Fifth, these ways could not be experimentally travelled. Besides, the
human life-span is too limited.

Sixth, knowing that all the ways cannot be treaded, the human being is
compelled to select one (the necessity for selection).

Seventh, it is obvious that discernment is necessary for selection (the
necessity for discernment).

Eight, in order to discern the correct path, he or she should have
standards and criteria.

Ninth, gaining standards and criteria would necessitate fundamental and
basic discussions, so that after accepting a definite world-view and
ideology, we would recognize the correct path from a dead-end and find
the way to prosperity and perfection.

Conclusion: Ideological discussions are of the utmost importance.

Summary of the Lesson
---------------------

1. In the area of insight, the differences between a human being and an
animal, rather, the secret to the higher position of the human being is
comparison to other animals is the human being's power of thought,
independence and ability to reach conclusions.

2. In the area of inclinations, the secret of the difference is the
shelter of the human being's consciousness, intellect and thought which
constructs or builds the human being's inclinations.

3. In the area of performance and action, also, act’s are human acts
when will-power and intellect or reason dominate over instincts, not the
reverse.

4. The human being contains two types of activity which, as a result,
brings about two types of life, a material and animal and a spiritual.

5. From the point of view of materialism, primacy exists in the material
dimension of the human being but from the Islamic point of view, the
human being is a creature who is born into the material but then frees
the self from the bondage of the material.

6. From the point of view of Islam, the human being contains a dual
nature which consists of the earth and the Spirit of God. Thus, by
taking advantage of his or her will-power and chasing either the good or
the evil. In any case, it is the human journey towards gradual
development and perfection.

Questions to ask yourself
-------------------------

1. What is the nature of the human being?
2. What does a materialist think about a human being?
3. Prove the necessity for reasonable and logical ideological
discussions.
4. What is meant by the word 'criteria’?


