Lesson 6: Monotheism: Part 1
============================

Islam as an ideology has its own particular world view. This world view
with its basic principles answers the essentials of the infrastructure
of human beings. Our present lesson is the parameters of monotheism as
the most basic principle of the Islamic world view. A world view is a
perspective whereby an ideology looks upon the world.

From the point of view of Islam, the world of nature is a dependent
reality and creation can only exist by relying upon the principle source
of existence. The realities which are comprehended by a human being
through the senses, without exception, consists of the following
particularities:

First, limitation. Take any phenomenon, from the largest planet to the
smallest atom, all are limited from the point of view of place and
space, that is, they occur in a special time and place and beyond that,
they do not exist

Second, general movement and transformation. All of the phenomenon of
nature follow or obey general movements and transformations and they are
continuously changing. No creature in this world remains exactly the
same from one moment to the next. The human being one day comes into
this world, passes through the age of youth, and, finally, reaches old
age. All plants and animals also follow the same pattern moving from
growth and transformation or towards destruction. This is a general law
for all phenomenon.

Third, being dependent and conditional. Look at yourself. See to what
extent you are dependent and conditioned by others. If your father had
not existed, would you have existed? If your mother had not existed,
would you have existed? How about if your grandfather and grandmother
had not existed? If sufficient food, air, housing, clothes and
temperatures not be provided for you, would you be able to continue
existing? All other creatures are the same. All of these 'ifs' which
relate to you and other creatures have, in reality, made you very
dependent and your existence dependent upon numerous conditions, one of
which plays a major role in the continuation or your life.

Fourth, is need. It is clear that a conditional and dependent creature
will also have needs. All of the bonds and chains by which nature keeps
you enchained and imprisoned are proof of your being in need. If anyone
of these ties should be cut; you would not continue to exist. For
instance, the need for air, nourishment, special temperatures. Each is
an example of the human beings' needs. Without air, how long can you
live?

If the earth's temperatures were to change just a fraction, no living
creatures would remain. All other phenomenon are the same. This is a
general law. No creature can live independently and without the need of
something other than self.

Fifth, relativity. Take any phenomenon into consideration whose
existence and completion or gradual evolution is relative, not absolute.
When we compare a 15 year old child with a 5 year old child, the first
is bigger, but this difference is relative and this same 15 year old is
smaller in relation to a 22 year old, that is, the smallness of one is
transformed into the largeness of the other. This is relative. All
phenomenon of nature have the same qualities, in their existence, in
their qualities. When we say so and so is very strong, we must realize
that he is relatively stronger than those under him but in relationship
to a creature which is above him, he is weak. Taking the strongest
person we can imagine, we can still imagine a person stronger. This is
proof of relativity. No matter who one assumes to be the most perfect in
this world, we can always assume another to be more perfect.

Thus, these particularities which we have gathered from information of
the creatures of the world of being, when placed next to each other, we
reach the following conclusion.

Limitation, movement, transformation, dependency, being conditional,
having needs and relativity, the intelligence of the human being
concludes that taking these particularities into consideration, one must
follow something unlimited, eternal, absolute, without need and
unconditional. Without this, the human being cannot remain and will be
destroyed.

The phenomena of this world are like worthless journeys which when
placed before the number one, they have meaning and find value but
without the number one, they are nothing, no matter how many they may
be.

This is why we say that the world exists through God and God is the
Nourisher. That which the Creator makes special for His creatures is
that the Creator is the essence of existence and being comes from Him.
But the existence of creatures does not come from themselves and they
must drink of the water of life.

If we turn to the Quran, it refers to all phenomena as signs or a sign.
This is because before any of the phenomena of the world appear, by
having need, they prove the existence of their Creator. Hadrat Ali said.
"I never saw a creature unless I first saw God; with that creature I saw
God and after that creature, again I saw God." This is the meaning of
the world view of Islam.

Summary of the Lesson
---------------------

1. The realities which the human being comes to understand through the
senses, without exception, contain the following: limitation of general
movement and transformation, dependency and being conditional, being in
need or having needs and relativity.

2. These particularities make the human being aware that this world must
then be supported by an unlimited, endless, absolute, needless and
unconditional Being.

Questions to ask yourself
-------------------------

1. What particular qualities do sensual realities contain?
2. What conclusion do you reach from studying these particularities?


