Lesson 7: Monotheism Part 2
===========================

Monotheism is the most basic principle of Islam. Based upon this, it is
not simply a mental exercise and conclusion. Monotheism relates to all
dimensions of human existence. It transforms the human being and the
world. In all dimensions of our existence, insight, inclinations and
actions, it plays an essential role.

Monotheism itself has multiple dimensions which are summarized in the
testimony, 'there is no god but God.'

**First: Oneness in Creation.** That is, all of the world with all of
its continuances and its single system which rules through the laws of
nature and holds each phenomenon as its particular proof. Each
phenomenon is a continuous truth but dependent upon the existence of the
Absolute One, having knowledge, awareness, power and Absolute justice.
The world is not empty and absurd but rather it is goal-oriented based
upon that which the Creator determines who then gave human beings
insight, wisdom, awareness and will-power. The responsibility of acting
as His vice-gerent upon the earth was given to the human being.

**Second: Oneness in obedience.** That is, there is nothing other than
God worthy of Absolute obedience. Obedience without questioning is
special to God. Islam announces that it will war with all leaders or
rulers who try to have absolute obedience to them.

**Third: Oneness in worship.** That is, no person or creature other than
God who is Absolute Perfection, the Source of all Good and Beauty is
worthy of worshipping. This principle also plays the important role of
negating all of the temples and places of idol worship. Muslims who
follow this principle must be in continual struggle with all of these
who rebel against God's commands, all Pharaohs, Shah of Shahs and all
satanic forces for it is these people and forces which seek to make
human beings their Slaves and enslave people to themselves and try to
have human beings bow before them. Based upon this dimension of
monotheism, human beings are freed from any kind of bondage. That is,
Muslims must also struggle against being enslaved by their own passions
and desires and worshipping desires and ego-centeredness. This is the
greater struggle (jihad al-akbar) and the fighting against the selfhood
of the self.

**Fourth: Oneness in Lordship.** That is, no one but God is the Lord or
Nourisher and Master of another. Only He is capable of Lordship.

**Fifth: Oneness in power.**

**Sixth: Oneness in devotion.** ("Praise belongs to God.") Taking the
other principles of social, psychological, ethical roles of monotheism
into consideration in the building of an ideal society and the ideal
human, being becomes clear.

Based upon monotheism, all human beings, rather all creatures, are the
created of the One God. All are only His servants. All superficial
benefits and superiorities which exist in human society lose their color
before monotheism and are negated.

The psychological examples of monotheism are also worthy of study. It
consists of a monotheist blessed with faith in God and who has among the
particularities and particular psychological conditions, the sense of
responsibilities, commitment, endless hope and understanding of the self
in relation to the world of existence, tireless efforts and love in
reaching the ideals and beliefs, self-sacrifices and the giving to
others of something which you yourself need, goal-oriented etc.

We have realized that God is the Source of existence. Whatever we have
is from Him. He is Perfect and Absolute, a Being without needs and
limitations. All the world of being which has a relative and imperfect
existence stem from that Absolute and Perfect Source.

All goodness, beauty and perfection come from His existence. All lacks,
insufficiencies and imperfections are from His non-being. We can
conclude that God is the Source of life Who has Absolute Existence, Who
is Eternal. Thus all goodness, perfections and beauty in an unlimited
and endless sense stem from His Being. They reach other creatures
through Him. He has no imperfection, insufficiency or ugliness because
ever imperfection is from non-being or not having which does not exist
in Absolute Beauty.

Yes. Knowledge, awareness, consciousness, power, life, wisdom, justice,
creation and forgiveness are all from Him. God Who is the Absolute and
Source of all Existence has Absolute Knowledge, Power, Life, Wisdom and
Justice and Endless Grace. All ignorance, lack of power and injustice
comes from His non-being and all are imperfect. The Divine is far from
any of these insufficiencies and uglinesses.

The first group are called the Permanent Qualities of God and the,
second, Privative Qualities of God.

Summary of the Lesson
---------------------

1. Monotheism is not simply a mental exercise but rather a belief and an
inner tendency which contains all of the existence of the human being in
its various dimensions.

2. The monotheist human being finds oneness in all of creation, in
obedience, in worship and finds an insight whereby the only conclusion
is an Absolute truth which is the Source for all existence, perfection,
beauty then turns to no other but God and submits to no other power.

Questions to ask yourself
-------------------------

1. What are the various dimensions of monotheism? What effect does a
monotheistic insight have upon the behavior of a monotheist?

2. List the psychological results of monotheism.

3. What do you know about God's Qualities?


