Lesson 8: Revelation and Prophethood Part 1
===========================================

The Universal Law of Guidance
-----------------------------

Throughout the world of nature, to the level of penetration of human
awareness and knowledge, from the smallest particle to the largest stars
and planets, every phenomenon, from the moment of the appearance of the
phenomenon, grows according to special principles and laws, moves, seeks
completion until, finally, reaches his or her final place.

This truth proves the fact that within every phenomenon there is an
inclination and special pull which directs the phenomenon towards final
completion. This universal law which is called 'the universal principle
of guidance’ in our school of thought and action and includes the entire
world of existence, which is the principle infrastructure of the world
view of Islam, that is, monotheism, as the Source and based upon that,
the Creator of the universe who is the Absolute Judge and Source of
Knowledge and Wisdom and Eternity guides all of the creatures upon the
way of completion, providing them with all of the means and
possibilities for growth and completion.

The Holy Quran says,

***'Our Lord is He Who gave unto everything its form and then guided***
***it.’*** ***(20:50)***

It is because this that we say our world is the world of Divine law.
Even people who deny the Source of the Creator believe that throughout
the world of existence, there is one thing which rules and that is law.

These schools of thought make efforts to fill the vacuum created by
dispensing with the belief in God with something in the name of the laws
of the material world. As an example, the Marxists make efforts to
introduce the contradictory laws of dialectics as the cause for being
and completion in the world and replace God with that. They are
negligent of the fact that assuming the correctness and accepting these
laws is itself the best proof of His existence, not the other way around
as they say that the existence of order in the universe does away with
any need for a ruling Creator or a Power in Creation.

This universal law or universal principle of guidance acts in a uniform
way in each kind of phenomenon in a proportion suitable to its
structure. It is a fact that the universal law of guidance acts in a
determined way in many phenomena like inanimate things or plants and
even in many animate forms but within the human being we witness the
fact that natural determination is broken or defeated. The law of
attraction, forces stemming from a center, etc. discussed in physics are
examples of the common laws whereby the earth, heaven, moon and sun are
placed upon a determined course in a predetermined manner and in this
way they continue their motion.

The Universal Law of Guidance in Plants
---------------------------------------

The special laws of plants which is to be discovered in the study of the
physiology of plants are but a small example of a part of the extension
of universal guidance. The wheat seeds, when placed within the heart of
the earth, if the particular circumstances exist like sufficient
humidity, the readiness of the earth, light and suitable temperatures
blossom and bring forth new plants. Natural laws have determined the
direction of the completion of these plants and all of its needs have
been provided for it to grow as seed, sprout, leaf and flower and grow
towards its final station.

The World of Animals
--------------------

In the world of animals, the common law of guidance operates in another
way. The Creator of the world in this phase has given instinctive forces
so that with the help of the determination of instincts, the natural
life of their development is made clear and they are guided towards the
final goal. An animal instinctively knows from the very first moments of
life what it must do to remain alive and what it must eat. In addition,
having learned from its teacher, nature, it knows what its food is. It
knows what things are suitable and what are harmful. At times of
sickness, it can even and that which will act as a remedy. Thus, in
truth, instincts are the principle guides of the life of animals. Of
course, recognizing the instinctive forces is done with the help of the
senses.

![](/sites/default/files/teach003.jpg)

We can conclude at this point that the law of guidance and determination
of the way is a common law. Inanimate objects obey determined laws of
physics and plants have their own special Jaws. Even though animals act
and move based upon their own particularities, but, in general, they are
condemned to following their own instinctive forces and in no way can
they show opposition to the rule of their instincts.

But what about the human being? When the turn of the human being comes
in complete amazement we realize that the form of the determining laws
of nature to a large extent give off color and are obliterated. No one
way has been determined for human beings. The human being is a creature
who often in life is faced by a cross-roads - no determined law is
imposed.

Even the pulling forces of instincts which play a basic role in leading
and guiding animals when it comes to human beings even though their
needs are greater than animals and more extensive, not only do instincts
not increase their activities but rather they are weakened.

Not only can a new born human being not determine its own food or
separate out that which is harmful but it cannot determine what is to be
consumed and the way of consuming. It must be show to learn. The human
being is the only animal which can confront instinctive forces and not
act according to them. Even though the human being shares the same
senses as animals, the extent of them in some animals is far greater
than that in human beings.

This question now arises that if the universal law of guidance is a
universal law and the entire world of existence falls in its realm, how
is this guidance felt in human beings? By recalling the fact that the
movement of human beings is not predetermined and that the instinctive
drives are not sufficient as guides, how can this vacuum be filled? What
force can fill the losses?

Here two issues must be studied. First, the needs of human beings so
that it becomes clear what needs one has in one's lifetime. Second, the
power and possibilities of human beings until it becomes clear what
power human beings have in order to meet their needs.

The Needs of Human Beings
-------------------------

All human beings despite of an of the differences that they have with
one another as to shape, color, environment, civilization, culture and
quality of life, all have one purpose which is behind their efforts in
life and that is to reach well-being. What is this well-being that all
are searching for? Even though opinions differ among the various groups
and human societies in interpreting this ideal, all agree that in order
to reach happiness, we must follow a way and laws and its guidelines. It
is here that once again we reach the point that we began our discussion.
The laws refer to that very leader of phenomena which rules over one's
destiny.

Yes. The Human being, like other phenomena, in order to follow the way
towards completion and in order to reach the final goal that is commonly
known as well­being, it is one with the well-being of society, the
importance and role of these universal guidelines will become more
clear.

Now this issue arises, how can we find this way? How will we discover
and recognize these laws? These laws are imposed upon other phenomena
but the human being is not like other animals to hang its head and
quietly follow the way nature has chosen for it. We know that nature has
not done this in relation to human beings.

We have said that the laws of human beings cannot be unconscious. A
human being is not blindly guided by instinct. The human being is a
conscious being. He or she must recognize the way. Here we reach one of
the most sensitive and important needs of human beings, that is, the
necessity for consciousness and recognition. Yes. Human beings want to
have well-being, that is, reach the highest of completions and in order
to attain this, they must take the way or well-being because nature has
not determined any certain way for them. To find the way of well-being
means to discover its laws and find the clear and distinct guidelines
which cannot be wrong. Thus before anything else, human beings need to
have recognition, recognition of the way, of the laws.

What does the human being want: well-being. What is the way towards
well-being: understanding the laws and universal guidelines.

Meeting Human Needs
-------------------

Every phenomenon in finding its completion develops needs which have
been met in nature in the best possible way. There is no creature which
needs a certain kind of food and the need not be met by nature. We have
realized that human beings need the sense of recognition. Now let us see
how that need is met. In order to attain consciousness and have
recognition, tools and a source for recognition is necessary. Without
sight, things visible cannot be seen. Without the sense of hearing,
nothing can be heard. What tools or source for attaining recognition and
consciousness are placed at the disposal of a human being? How are his
or her needs met?

The Source of Consciousness in the Human Being
----------------------------------------------

In order to attain consciousness and the sense of recognition which is
the most necessary and basic need he or she has, tools must be placed at
his or her disposal. The most important of these are: The sense and
experience; the intellect and the ability to think.

All of the achievements of the human being in the area of experimental
science and also in the human sciences is responsible for these two. The
human being with the senses and experiences of objective phenomenon
understand something by direct witnessing. With the help of the
intellect and thoughts of the truth, the non-sensibles are discovered by
means of their effects and signs.

The eyes, ears and remaining senses are like an ocean which spreads from
our inner self to the outside and makes us conscious of the world around
us. But many things cannot be directly sensed by the eyes or ears but
the human being with the air of the intellect by means of the signs seen
come to know of their existence. For instance, you know a teacher who
gives lessons is literate and has knowledge and consciousness but you do
not see his or her knowledge or literacy. Why do we say so and so is a
scholar?

As a result of his or her words or lessons because our intellect tells
us that a person who is not literate, cannot teach others so they gain
literacy. The human being with the help of the senses, experiences and
the intellect understands a great many things. But in spite of all of
this, we have to ask ourselves if the human being by only making use of
these tools can meet all of his or her needs? Based upon the law of
universal guidance, can the way to well-being and completion be attained
with the help of consciousness and the sense of recognition? Or is there
a need for outer ways and guidelines?

Summary of the Lesson
---------------------

1. The law of universal guidance is a law which exists throughout
nature.

2. The universal law includes .all of the phenomena whether they be
animate or inanimate, even animals who move according to their own
desire but in totality are condemned to their instincts.

3. The human being is the only creature which is not condemned
completely to the 'predetermined guidance' and can even confront the
tremendous pull of the instincts.

4. What does the human being want? Well-being. What is the way?
Recognition of the laws and universal guidelines.

5. Because the needs of all phenomena are met in nature, the human being
needs tools in order to develop the sense of recognition.

Questions to ask yourself
-------------------------

1. What is the universal law of guidance?

2. Can the existence of a law in the world of nature make the world
needless of God?

3. How does the universal law of guidance work in plants and animals?

4. Taking the needs of human beings into consideration, how does the
universal law of guidance relate to him or her?


