Alcohol and Alcoholism
======================

The term alcohol is applied to a wide range of organic chemical
compounds of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen in different proportions of
combination, with varying properties. Of these the most well-known are
the two alcohols, namely, the methyl or wood spirit and ethyl or the
wine spirits. Methyl alcohol is very much in demand in many industries.
It is a deadly poison even in small doses. Blindness is not an
infrequent consequence of its consumption in very minute quantities.

Ethyl alcohol is not so swift in its effects, though its slow-poisoning
effects are as frightful. For unknown ages it has continued to give rise
to moral, social and economic problems. Individuals, families, nations
and whole civilisations have succumbed to its invidious influence and
gone down to ignominious oblivion.

The saner elements of the whole world and of all ages have consistently
condemned its use, yet so deductive are the powers it exercises on a
certain build of the mind, that few countries have succeeded in
banishing its use as an intoxicant. Ever new labels and Scientific
techniques for its manufacture are invented by the votaries of Bachus to
rope in the unwary victims.

The old day's methods of fermenting liquor in the dung heaps as part of
the process has given place to the multi-millionaire projects for the
manufacture of wine spirits. Vast tracts of fruit growing lands that
would support the starving millions are reserved for destroying the
healthy stocks of humanity.

What was intended by Benign Providence for the growth and maintenance of
life and health has been diverted to channels of self-destruction and
disease by the so-called rational man.

Such morally, socially and economically destructive activities are being
carried on under the very eyes, nay the active patronage of the states
that cry themselves hoarse and champions of the common man's welfare.
Intoxicants are of many-fold benefit to the kuarish among the
politicians. They bring in revenue. They encourage crime and goondaism,
which are important factors in over-adding and corrupting the voters.

A stern warning against the liquor magnates growing political power was
issued by the late Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States of
America, in the following words. "It is now a question whether the
liquor interests are to dominate your parties, dominate your public life
and dominate your government."

As to how far the liquor interests exert their sinister influence may be
gathered from the following statement of a high police officer of
Chicago, Mr. J.N. Flynn. He says, "Every time I arrest a man who is
running a 'blue pig' (an illicit liquor shop). I find when I go to
court, that the representative of the brewery has been there before me.
He threatens whatever judge is sitting there with political death if he
doesn't listen to reason." Mr. Robert J. Northold, an attorney of the
same city stated that the breweries are behind the Chicago 'blue pig'
men and fight tooth and nail to have them discharged when we have them
arrested.

Lieutenant John McCarthy adds to the above statements the following:-"If
it was not for the politicians and the influence of the breweries, I
would drive the blind pigs' out of Rogers Park in four weeks."  
 Backed by the great political influence which the big business magnates
of the liquor trade have come to possess in the political life of the
Western Countries, they violate every instinct of decency and break or
evade every law made for their control with the single exception of the
law requiring them to pay tax.

The Rationales of the Revenues of State from Liquor
---------------------------------------------------

Businessmen in the liquor trade do not grudge the taxes they are called
upon to pay, simply because such taxes are shifted on to the pockets of
the consumers. A State which proposes to augment its revenues from
liquor is in no better position than a grabbing brewery, on a gigantic
scale.

By licensing the manufacturing and sale of this universally obnoxious
commodity, the state gets committed to a three fold function in the
demoralising process of corrupting its people to wit, permission,
protection and promotion. In a memorable speech delivered before the
British House of Lords on February 21, 1743, during the hey day period
of British hegemony Lord Chesterfield assailed the principle of
licensing liquor trade.

More than two hundred years back, this broad-minded statesman laid
emphasis on the evils that would spring from the licensing system that
was then being introduced. Speaking on the legislative measure on the
anvil, he thundered, "To pretend, my lords that the design of this bill
is to prevent or diminish the use of spirits, is to trample upon
common-sense and to violate the rules of decency as well as of reason.

For when did any man ever hear that a commodity was prohibited by
licensing its sale, or that to offer and refuse is the same action?
Surely it never before was conceded by any man entrusted with the
administration of public affairs, to raise taxes by the destruction of
the people.

For there is no doubt but those on whom the inventors of this tax shall
confer authority will be directed to assist their masters in their
design to encourage the consumption of that liquor from which such large
revenues are expected, and to multiply without end those licences which
are to pay a yearly tribute to the crown.

When I consider, my lords, the tendency of this bill, I find it
calculated only for the propagation of disease, the suppression of
industry, and the destruction of mankind. I find it the most fatal
engine that ever was pointed at a people-an engine by which those that
are not killed will be disabled and those who preserve their limbs will
be deprived of their senses."

This brilliant indictment of national policies by the saner elements of
the British political life, reverberates across the centuries as a
warning to the nations of the world. The short-sighted politicians
ignored the warning and in the short span of decades, the British Empire
has crumbled down to dust more ignominiously than any historically known
precedent of yore.

Only two decades back it was a boast that the sun never set in the
British Empire. Contrast this boast with the blatant fact that even in
the British Isles there is a persistent fog over clouding the sun most
of the year. Of the three potent factors responsible for such
catastrophic downfall - wine, women and wealth- the first one has
certainly been productive of the greatest evil.

Great statesmen like Lord Chesterfield, Edward Burke and Lord Acton
failed to convince the British people that this world could not be held
as a wine-shop of exploiters. "What is morally wrong cannot be
politically right," was the motto with the Saner among the British
leadership. The nation as a whole, however, voted Bachus and
Macchiavelli, with the inviolable consequence of such option-disgraceful
downfall.

Urdu verse: Fitrat afrad se igmaz bhi kar leti hai,  
 Naheen karti hai pih ganmon ke gunahon ko mauf.  
 (The Heavenly Order may connive at individual lapses, but there is no
atonement for national transgressions).

Revenues
--------

Revenues derived from the liquor traffic by a state are altogether
illusory. It is an admitted axiom of Economics, that all income is
dependent upon the productivity of labour and capital. Anything which
impairs that productivity will impair the national income.

A tax comes out of the pockets of the individuals and goes into the
common pocket of the nation. "For every million dollars recovered in
taxes, the nation pays many millions to the liquor business directly
through its constituent citizens, and many millions more in impaired
efficiency of its workers and in productivity sacrificed to the
parasitic business."

These observations of an astute economist of America, clearly point to
the folly of governments which seek to augment their revenues by
licensing liquor traffic. Even in budgetary figures, the governments
which opt 'dry', under certain conditions are never at a loss, for the
money saved by the consumer from liquor is by him re-routed to the
purchasing of usual goods, and the establishment of a healthier and more
efficient level of living.

The healthier physical, mental, moral and spiritual standard which
springs from a reformed outlook on life on the part of the individuals
composing the nation is the real asset of value to the individual no
less than to the nation. He would work more efficiently, earn more
munificently, spend more judiciously and thereby pay more taxes
indirectly, besides contributing solidly to the national fund by his
improved efficiency.

With temperance, which has been defined as moderation in the use of
every thing good and abstinence from the use of everything bad, in the
field of human activities and mutual relationships, a state is a pure
gainer on all counts increased efficiency and consequent increased
output and decreased waste of human energy.

Accuracy of judgement, avoidance of accidents, tactful handling of
colleagues and subordinates, observance of discipline, punctuality,
reticence in matters of confidence are all such matters that affect the
efficiency of the workers on the one hand and on the other relate to the
problems of temperance and drink. To the industrialised set-up,
therefore, the question of liquor traffic is even more important in its
economic bearing than one of academic morals.

Moderate Alcohol and Efficiency
-------------------------------

One of the outstanding figures of the World of science, says, "Work and
alcohol do not belong together, especially when work demands wide
awakeness attention, exactness and endurance."

Alcohol has been the subject of scientific investigation, as a problem
affecting almost every facet of human life-industrial economic,
administrative, social, political etc. Over and above its moral and
spiritual bearing on the individual as a component unit of the complex
human relationships. There is complete unanimity among the experimenters
as to the impairment of efficiency of the individual on all planes of
activity.

The exact amount of damage which a person suffers as a result of
consumption of even moderate quantities of alcohol, however, varies from
individual to individual according to each one's bodily and mental
blindness. A very considerable factor in laboratory experiments,
however, is that the person under observation is, so to say, in a
resisting mood, endeavouring to act as sober as possible. This naturally
affects the results. His efficiency does not sink to the level of a
relaxing, bragging drinker.

Another important factor which prevents the correct appraisement of the
depreciation in efficiency is the measured quantity, which is allowed in
the atmosphere of the laboratory, as a dose by itself. In actual life,
on the other hand, the same quantity is yet another dose piled upon the
leg-over effects of the previous doses. In the laboratory the person is
challenged to fight the effects, with all the success he can command,
while in actual life he endeavours to intensify the effect
psychologically.

The results of laboratory experiments, as such, fall very much below
those that accrue in actual life, Even with such conditions favouring
the alcohol in the laboratory, the state of affairs disclosed thereby is
a staggering revelation of the loss of efficiency suffered by a worker
even as the result of 'moderate' drink.

Alcohol Produces Paralysis of Judgement
---------------------------------------

It is admitted by the research scholars and experimenters in the field
that there can be no such thing as a moderate use of a poison. As Sir
Victor Horsely, M.D. the distinguished British Surgeon puts it, "In
reality we have no proof that a minimum and a permissible dose of
alcohol exists at all". Other eminent authorities agree with this
verdict of the British Surgeon, among them Sir Londer Brunton M.D. says:
"Alcohol produces progressive paralysis of judgement and this begins
with the first dose."

Dr. Mc Adam Eccles gives his considered opinion as follows, "A daily
moderate dose of alcohol taken in the form of alcoholic drink has a
tendency, quietly but surely to destroy the tissues of the body."

The world renowned physician Dr. Quensel of Leipzig says, "Even small
quantities of alcoholic drink may result in pronounced changes,
especially of the cystic functions, in a decrease in the clearness of
sensory perceptions, in the impairment of thought and judgement, in a
dulling of the finer emotions and in the inhibition and disturbance of
the coordination of movements "

Dr. Irwin H. Neil, superintendent of the Norfolk, State Hospital for
Inebriates (drunkards) at Norfolk Massachusetts, asserts that the
moderate drinker is even more liable to suffer from organic diseases
than the man who occasionally becomes drank.

"The small dose is particularly dangerous in jobs where alertness of
mind and body in the interests of the safety of the worker and his
charge, becomes essential for his efficiency. as in driving for example.
The heavily drunk driver is easily detected, in fact mostly
in-capacitated for any mischief.

The moderate dose, however, deludes him into the belief that he is in
possession of his faculties, while as a matter of fact, his driving
judgement as also his muscular coordination is badly impaired. Such a
person is naturally a menace to public safety as also to his own life on
the highway.

A slight swerve in the wrong direction, an inadvertent disregard of a
road signal. a small miscalculation in judgement may result fatally by
colliding with any of the millions of vehicles on the nationals'
highways or by over whelming some un-wary pedestrian, or even by dashing
against electric poles, trees and walls.

Dr. Benedict, director of the Nutrition laboratory of the Carnegie
Institute of Washington sums up the situation when he says that after
very moderate doses of alcohol, virtually all individuals are effected
with general depression of nerves and muscles, lessened sharpness of
vision, and lessened eye-hand motor co-ordination.

"The driver of an automobile in the traffic of a modern American city
has no business to undertake his task after drinking even these
so-called permissible amounts of alcohol, clearly dilution even to 2.75
per cent, cannot solve the alcohol problem, nor can it alter our
estimate of the effect of alcohol upon human efficiency. Inflexible
science say: Moderate user, keep off. For at least four hours after a
dose of alcohol formerly considered 'permissible' for you as a motor
vehicle operator, may well be considered a menace to Society."

Drinks are not to be Classed
----------------------------

This is not an individual doctor's personal opinion. But the verdict of
exhaustive vested interests of the manufacturers of all liquor products
are shrewdly trying to delude the gullible populace to believe that beer
and other so-called light drinks are not to be classed under alcoholic
drinks beverages. These drinks also have been subjected to searching
laboratory investigations, which have totally discredited the claims of
the brewers that they are in any way less poisonous.

They have been found to contain no food value. As a matter of fact, they
show the way to stronger and more persistent habits for drink. Dr.
Charles Gilbert Davis of Chicago arraigns beer in no un-equivocal terms.
Says he, "Beer produces disease of the stomach, kidneys, heart and
blood-vessels.

Owing to its diuretic affect, the alcohol in the beer is diverted to the
kidneys, which probably accounts for its destructive action on those
organs. It causes a deposit of morbid fat in the body especially around
the heart, enlarges that organ, and increases the work of the heart and
the blood vessels, manifested by the fatigue and shortness of breath of
all beer drinkers

Beer Deposits Fat Around the Heart
----------------------------------

Beer deposits fat around the heart, weakens its muscular walls, thickens
and enlarges the ventricles and if continued, ultimately cats short the
life of the individual. All of this has been proven time and again by
the post mortems of Bloinger, who has examined and weighed the hearts of
many beer drinkers. This is a terrible scientific arraignment of beer,
but it is true."

Dr. Struempell, the eminent German physiologist regards beer as no less
an enemy of Society than any other alcoholic drink. His verdict is
expressed in the following dear terms: Nothing is more erroneous from
the physicians' standpoint than to think of diminishing the destructive
effects of alcoholism by substituting beer for other alcoholic drinks.

The Scientific American, in describing the intellectual desolation and
brutalization resulting from the beer habit, has the following
unflattering remarks thereon: The most dangerous class of ruffians in
our large cities are beer drinkers.

Intellectually a Stupor amounting almost to paralysis arrests the
reason, changing all higher faculties into a mere animalism, sensual
selfish, sluggish, varied only by paroxysms of anger senseless and
brutal. In appearance the beer drinkers may be the picture of health,
but in reality he is most incapable of resisting disease.

A slight injury, a severe cold or a shock in the body or mind will
provoke acute disease ending fatally. Beer drinking in this country
produces the very lowest kind inebriety, closely allied to criminal
insanity.

Beer Makes People Ferocious and Beastly
---------------------------------------

"Beer makes people ferocious and beastly," is the testimony of the
French doctor, Fiessinger, to which may be added the remarks of the
Pacific Medical Journal which declares that beer is most animalizing,
inciting the user to deliberate and unprovoked crime. The following
words of a suffering house-wife are also note-worthy in this context.
"When my husband drinks whisky, he soon gets stupid; but when he drinks
beer, he runs after me with a knife."

These observations of the same elements of all lands and of all ages,
can be multiplied and infinitum. They are, however, quite enough to
discredit the claims of vested interests in behalf of beer and other
forms of the so-called "light sort of drinks."

There is no sort of alcoholic beverage and no minimum dose which can be
called safe for human consumption - in fact for any living organism. The
very living organisms of yeast which convert fruits and grains into
alcohol die when only thirteen and a half percent of the raw materials
have passed into.

Do not Indulge in Drink and Gambling
------------------------------------

The ill effects of alcohol are many while its advantages are few indeed.
Firstly, the alcoholics gradually lose the power of working with their
own strength and gradually slip into a condition where they cannot go on
with the artificial and borrowed stimulation from drinks; secondly, the,
will power of the alcoholic almost completely disappears in time, and
they are thus made the victims of various moral and physical weaknesses
which only degrade them.

There are also some people of a balanced temperament who keep their
drinking within limits. But it has been observed that even in such
cases, both, physical and moral damage undoubtedly takes place and had
they not taken even that limited quantity of alcohol, they would have
been better people in every respect.

In his book "Applied Pharmacy" Dr. A. J. Clark has listed the findings
of many experiments about the effects of alcohol consumption. Some
experts would convey an idea of the conclusions reached by scientists.

In 1920 Smith and McDougal demonstrated experimentally that in the first
stage of intoxication when the proportion in blood is less than 2
milligram per on cubic centimetre, apparently there is no effect on the
system of the drunkard. But detailed experiments show that the speed of
all activities and the general health are deleteriously affected. The
inhibiting force of the emotions weakens and the centres exercising
control over the emotion get so vitiated that every impulse of the
drunkard gets immediately manifested.


