The Effects of Alcohol
======================

The effects of alcohol are easily recognised at the second stage after
careful study. All activities get tainted. Gait becomes unsteady and
talk gets less circumspect. Well-developed movements become way-ward.
Self-control is seriously impaired. Man gets into a stupor in the third
stage, which borders on torpidity and stupefaction. Another increase in
the alcohol content of the system damages the respiratory system.

The use of alcohol to maintain temperature is also absurd. It should
never be used to counteract cold, for alcohol reduces the capacity to
preserve bodily heat. Experiments on animals have proved that those who
received alcohol were more readily killed by cold as compared with those
that received nothing of the sort.

Alcohol is beneficial for persons who get shelter in a warm place after
having been exposed to severe cold. Alcohol has little food value, for
it is not among the tissue building materials that replace shattered
tissues of the body.

There are two types of fuel-foods that maintain constant temperature of
the body, to wit, those that are stored in the body for use on
appropriate occasions. Alcohol is excluded from this category. It may,
however, be regarded as an easily assailable material, for it is
assimilated by the blood within five minutes and starts its action
accordingly.

Even with normal health the use of alcohol does not activate the nervous
system, rather it slows down the nervous process and renders their
activities unstable. It throws a light veil her the brain. A peculiar
effect of alcohol is that it lowers the scrutinizing potency and one's
actions in their crude form become satisfying to him. This defective
judgement persists for hours. Alcohol deteriorates the ability to bear
any kind of hard physical fatigue. Its use perverts action and brings on
fatigue quicker".

After this, it is little else but regrettable that people still being
themselves to become to enamoured of alcohol. It is a different matter
if alcohol is taken on a doctor's advice as medicine. But to get one's
self addicted to it, and become its' slave, is positively unbecoming of
the inherent dignity of man.

Besides, it is also a waste of good money. This is a case where man buys
mad men with his hard earned money. A person drinks this stuff only to
loss his senses and his power of reasoning, and stoops to more gibberish
nonsense. Not un-often we find ourselves revealing important information
to our very enemies under the influence of alcohol.

In short getting addicted to alcohol is like throwing one's self in the
gutters only to die in that muck. The house, the family all is pushed
into ruin, and there is no calamity which is too great for alcohol to
bring upon the heads of its worshippers. Alcohol, because of the
poisonous effects of the products, which is so dilute and of which the
higher potencies are obtained by the process of distillation.

Some Instructive Tests
----------------------

Some instructive tests that have been devised to measure the effect on
human efficiency, of calculated doses of alcohol, will be of interest to
the inquisitive reader. Thousands of studies, demonstrations and
laboratory experiments have been undertaken to gauge the mischief which
the use of alcohol perpetrate: on the working capacity of the
intellectual no less than of the manual worker.

To pile up all this evidence would be tedious indeed, and yet the
following typical experiment of Dr. J. J. Ridge of England has a value
of its own in demonstrating in a simple way the deterioration in
efficiency which invariably results from alcoholic drinks - both light
and strong, in small or large doses.

"Some years ago, I constructed instruments to test the effect of small
doses of alcohol on the sense of touch and muscular sense. The
instrument for testing consisted of two fixed upright points, about half
an inch apart, and between these a third point, which could be moved so
as to approximate to one or the other.

The individual moved the Centre until he considered that it was midway
between the two. The movement of point was registered on a dial. The
degrees on the dial were arbitrary, but fourteen experiments on five
persons showed that whereas the average divergence from the actual
centre, before taking alcohol, was represented by 115 degrees on the
dial, after taking alcohol these were 1898 degrees, and in no ease was
there any improvement.

Hence the sensitiveness of the touch is clearly deteriorated, by small
doses of alcohol, although the persons experimented on were quite
un-conscious of the attention. The nature of the experiment is also to
some extent a test of the judgement or power of perception, and it does
not show which link or links in the chain of sensation would chiefly be
affected."

Another demonstration of the effect of alcohol upon physical efficiency
took place on the occasion of a sixty-two mile walking match at Kiel
which was held to decide the championship in long distance walking among
German athletes. It was open to all, irrespective of their habits in
regard to alcohol.

The contestants in the match, however, were required to give full
particulars before hand to the committee in charge of the affair in this
behalf. Of the 83 contestants, there were 24 abstainers and yet they won
40 percent of the prizes. Among the remaining 59 persons, then were 2
who had used no alcohol for months in preparation for the contest. They
too won prizes. Among the first 25 men to reach the goal, 60 percent
were abstainers only 2 of the 24 abstainers failed to reach the goal
while 30 of the 59 drinkers were unable to complete the walk.

Yet another interesting test was undertaken by Lieutenant Bengt. Boy, of
Carts - Krona Grenadiers in the Swedish Army, and others, by way of
measuring exactly the effect of small doses of alcohol on target
shooting, which was at a distance of 200 feet. These tests covered a
series of experiments and were held on the regular army manoeuvre
grounds at Stockholm. "The experiments, carried out by six men, all
excellent marksmen, and all used to alcohol were divided into three
series each lasting several days. During the first and third series the
men were entirely abstinent. During the second series, lasting five
days, the men took a small definite amount of alcohol daily.

Three Kinds of Tests
--------------------

There were three kinds of tests. In the first and second tests, the men
took about two thirds of a wine glass of brandy (containing a little
more than an ounce of alcohol) from 20 to 30 minutes before the firing
and an equal amount of alcohol on the evening before.

In the precision test of shots, every man showed less precision, and
made fewer points when influenced by alcohol. In the quick firing test
each man fired a round of 30 shorts in 30 seconds, On the first series
of abstinent days, they hit the target, on the average, 23 out of 30
times. But the alcohol days told a different story.

The wind, the weather, and the light conditions were better than on the
abstinent days, yet the effect of so little alcohol as that in about two
glasses of beer twice a day cut down the average to only 3 hits is 30.
Again on the abstinent days, the firing improved and the men averaged 26
hits out of 30 shots.

"Third were the endurance tests, two trials of 200 shots each. Here the
amount of alcohol used was the least of all, less than two glasses of
beer (four fifth of an ounce of alcohol), taken half an hour before the
test, yet the result was the same. Although without alcohol the men made
359.5 points, on the alcohol days they made only 277.5 points, nearly a
third less."

"The men thought they were doing better on the alcohol days. One of the
corporals said after laying down the gun, "I am sure a man can shoot
better when he has had a little brandy", but the results proved how
grievously he misjudged."

Mental Efficiency
-----------------

Mind and body are so intimately linked that the effect on one is as a
matter of course, reflected with proportional intensity on the other.
The brain -as the instrument of the mind, is very deleteriously affected
by even very small doses of alcohol. In the words of Dr. Chapple of
London "Alcohol is a poison, having a specific affinity for the nerve
centres of the brain. and paralysing those centres in the inverse order
of their development the last developed suffering most."

In other words the higher qualities of the mind are attacked first and
suffer the most. "Civilized man equals the brute animal plus the brain
development. Alcohol blots out the higher brain development and leaves
the brute animal. Even a very little alcohol not showing itself in
drunkenness, has a damaging effect on the human brain." In these words
has been summed up the alcoholic affinity for the nervous centre as a
poisoning and denaturing factor.

The man who becomes intoxicated by the alcoholic poison, as such, "loses
first his sense of decency, his ability to think clearly and accurately
and to associate ideas. As his intoxication progresses it affects those
nerve and brain powers which control the senses. He begins to see
double, to be unable to control his movements, his powers of smell,
hearing and sight are distinctly lessened. It has been well-said that
intoxication epitomizes the whole history of insanity.

The man who becomes dead drunk within the space of a few hours undergoes
very much the same changes as the man who gradually becomes insane, and
he who keeps his association and motor senses slightly drugged all of
the time by moderate' drinking is not entirely a sane man. He is
constantly drunk to some degree and is therefore constantly insane to
some degree.

"The day has passed when any intelligent and informed person could boast
of the ability to 'carry liquor well'. Such ability is not a sign of a
strong body but of a weak brain. The brain which is not sensitive to
alcohol is an atavistic product." This is indeed a very unflattering
commentary on the alcohol poison by an eminent American authority on the
basis of direct experience of the situation prevailing around. But it is
a truth, pure and simple.

Alcohol is a Ready Solvent of Fat
---------------------------------

Alcohol is a ready solvent of fat, and the brain cells being composed
largely of fatty tissue are, as such, the peculiar domains of alcoholic
poison. In fact, as is well-established every poison has a peculiar
affinity for certain specific organs of the body, for instance lead for
the muscles of the wrist, mercury for the salivary glands, arsenic for
the stomach wall, Strychnine for the spinal cord, and alcohol for the
brain cells. The brain cells, once damaged, as it often happens in cases
of continued drinking, are never replaceable.

Experiments with particular reference to the damage which the brain
cellos suffer as a result of alcohol poisoning have been conducted by
physicians of note in Europe and elsewhere. They have demonstrated
beyond the shadow of doubt that the consumption of even very small
quantities of alcohol has a distinctly deleterious effects on mental
efficiency.

"One glass of beer will decrease the powers of memory, reason and
perception for a certain length of time, and steady so-called moderate
drinking produces an abiding impairment of the mental capability.
Investigations made by Dr. Alfred Stehr, in Germany disclosed a distinct
loss of efficiency on Mondays, after the drinking on Sundays, among a
group of workers in Dresden. This loss amounted to 28.5 percent.

Dr. Exner of Vienna, found as a result of his experiments to determine
the effect of alcohol on the ability of the subject to respond quickly
to a flash of light, that "A small quantity of alcohol would distinctly
lengthen the reaction time, and when the test was complicated by
requiring the subject to press a right or left telegraph key, as might
be suggested by the signal a very small quantity of alcohol was found to
increase greatly the liability to error. Another research worker Dr.
Krapelin has demonstrated that alcohol has virtually the same effect
upon mind and strain.

Whiskey Sans Spirit
-------------------

A news item as appeared in the Dawn of 23rd May 1969 is given below :

"Whiskey Sans Spirit"

i) London. May 22: The days when one can drown one's sorrows in alcohol
might be numbered in Britain.

ii) A group of Bristol University research workers claims to have.
discovered a way to take the alcohol out of the, alcoholic drinks
without changing. their taste in the slightest.

iii) An Official organisation, the National Research Development
Council, has agreed to finance further research in view of its interest
in particular for motorists.

iv) But not everyone feels the discovery is worthwhile, Medical
Professor, Dr. Francis Camps who recently carried out a study on
alcoholism, said on Monday that such research was a waste of public
money. He said that if people drank alcoholic drinks it was not for the
drink itself but for the alcohol it contained and its effects.

v) He also pointed out that the state takes 95 per cent of the price of
a bottle of whisky in tax to persuade people to stop drinking. It would
be to those a very profitable source of revenue."

A Psychological Truism
----------------------

It is a psychological truism that any habit which affects the workers
ability to judge quickly and accurately, or by which the faculties of
sight, hearing and touch are affected, greatly increases the liability
to accidents a mangled leg, a smashed hand, a cut finger or worse.

Now it has been scientifically established that alcohol has effects even
in the most moderate doses. It has a decidedly baneful influence on the
faculties of sight, hearing and touch. The judgments by eye measurements
are vitiated by alcohol. So is hearing rendered less acute. Such
impairment of the sense organs makes the worker less alert to respond
instantly to a danger signal, while increasing the brute tendency to
disregard the safety of others.

Drinkers Cause Accidents
------------------------

"The margin of safety in modern industry is small. It is measured too
frequently by fractions of an inch. Reduce the alertness and the
exactness with which the body responds to the necessities of labour, and
by so much you have increased the liability that the hand will be
misplaced that fraction that means mutilation". (U.S. Senate Document
No. 645, Vol. XI.)

A pamphlet issued by the Fidelity and casualty company, serves the
following stem warning: No man under the influence of alcohol even
slightly should be permitted to remain in the works, much less to work.
Nor should a man whose nerves have been rendered unsteady by the
habitual use of alcohol or by a recent debauch be permitted to operate
machinery or to carry on any dangerous work. He endangers not only his
own life, but the lives of others.

The Aetna Life Insurance company on the basis of their experience in the
fields of accidents and fatalities in the industrial sector have issued
the following valuable piece of advice of the industrialists.

It is advisable not to employ or to continue in employment men who are
known to be steady and hard drinkers. The regular use of intoxicants in
any quantity is bound in time to make a workman undesirable as regards
both his liability to cause accidents, and his efficiency.

It has already been shown that there is practically no line of
demarcation between the individual who has succumbed to insanity as a
result of mental or physical disease and the one who loses his sanity
under the intoxicating influence of alcohol, temporarily for a few hours
or for longer periods as a sufferer from the dread disease "delirium
tremens" which is translated "Drinker's Mama", what it actually is.

The inmate of the mental asylum, in fact, is more fortunate and less
pitiable than the person who has deliberately courted insanity by way of
an escape from reality through the self destruction channels of
alcoholic stupefaction. Both get out of touch with reality. The former
however, is excusable as having been the victim of circumstances chiefly
beyond his control.

The latter, on the other hand, has purposely repudiated the superb
grandeur of life gifted to him by the Infinite Bounty of the Supreme
Sovereign - by an abominable act of ingratitude for the most magnificent
favour-Life as the most splendid product of all Creation. Surely his
suffering is self-inflicted and as such a very heinous crime against
himself and against Society, on whom he would foist a drinker's progeny.

All professional men agree that a sizeable proportion of the inmates of
mental asylums comprise men who have been driven to that fate through
the pressure of alcohol on their mental faculties. As to what exactly is
the percentage of such victims in the asylum, authorities differ. Dr. F.
W. Terflinger's estimate puts the percentage at 20, on the basis of his
direct experience as medical superintendent of the Northern Hospital for
the Insane, while Dr. William G. McAllister, Superintendent of the
Philadelphia Hospital, asserts that 30 per cent of the inmates in the
insane wards of the Philadelphia Municipal Hospital are insane because
of drink.

Dr. Joseph Wiggles worth of England testifying before the
Interdepartmental committee on Physical Deterioration puts this figure
of alcoholic insanity at 29 per cent. All of these investigators agree
that the damage done to the mental faculties is much greater than is
indicated by these figures which express only a partial facet of the
alcoholic picture.

One eminent authority on Temperance, has sounded a note of warning to
the American people in these words; "In nearly every state the expenses
of caring for the insane is mounting rapidly due to a growing social
conscience, but in view of the fact that such a small proportion of our
mental defectives are now sheltered, the question of checking the
increase of insanity is pressing. We are in great danger of not being
able to stand the burden if it increases as rapidly as it has in the
last ten years."

Alcohol is Simply the Hub of a Vicious Wheel
--------------------------------------------

It must be remembered, that alcohol is simply the hub of a vicious
wheel. In the words of Dr. C. Kallick Millard, medical officer of health
for Leicester, England, "Indulgence in alcohol tends to inefficiency;
inefficiency tends to low wages and irregular employment; low wages
encourage bad housing and bad environment generally; bad environment
encourages further indulgency in alcohol."

Feeble Mindedness
-----------------

A commission, appointed to investigate feeble mindedness in new Jersey
(U.S.A.) reports that "moderate drinking, so-called, is the cause of a
great majority of the epileptic, feeble-minded and sub-normal children
in that State.

The historical study in this subject of investigation of the causes of
feeble-mindedness and mental deficiency, conducted very painstakingly by
Dr. Henry Herbert Goddard, Director of the Training School of Vineland,
N. J. forms a running commentary on the effects of alcohol on mental
faculties through several generations.

Under the title -The Kallikak Family" he has traced the story of that
family through six generations to a soldier, named Martin Kallikak, who
himself had four honourable generations behind him.

This soldier, probably under the influence of drink, raped the honour of
a feeble minded girl. From his legitimate wife he fathered six
generations of doctors, lawyers, judges, educators, traders, land
holders, with only 1 insane, only 15 children who died in infancy, none
feeble-minded.

From his other illegitimate sexual anion, the six generations comprising
480 individuals, the study discloses 143 feeble minded, with only 46
known to be normal 36 illegitimates, 33 prostitutes, 3 epileptics, 3
criminals 8 keepers of disreputable houses, with a large number of dying
in infancy.

Alcohol runs throughout the illegitimate line like a red streak. We have
such obnoxious phrases for most of them as "Alcohol is prevalent in the
family." An alcoholic, had three feeble-minded grand-parents"; Confirmed
alcoholic", "Feeble-minded and alcoholic", "Alcoholic and Syphilitic
woman", Seven children, two alcoholics and immoral, one died of delirium
tremens, others all alcoholics, leaving long line of descendents".

Here is food for serious thought. A single indiscretion on the part of a
hitherto respectable citizen leads Society with untold loathsome
material, the burden of the misdemeanours of each generation piling up
with ever cumulative effect, till Doomsday.

According to the Russian Paper 'Pravda' as quoted in the 'Millat' dated
2-4-1969 Alcohol is responsible for more than half of unnatural deaths,
for 40 % of the Divorces, for 85% of deaths due to fights, for 63 % of
deaths through drowning and for 98% of deaths through murder. Further
according to Pravda several Anti-Liquor Institutions are themselves
conniving the evil of drunkenness and many of the officials of the
Institutions are themselves addicted to the vice of drinking. The
solutions suggested by Pravda are the stoppage of wholesale of Liquor in
Public and the drinkers should not be allowed to move out in streets.

Crime and Indecency
-------------------

Another study in this field will bear brief mention. It is the story of
Max Jukes of New York -a drunkard-whose descendants covered almost all
fields of crime and indecency. 1200 of them were proved during the study
period to be occupying penal and charitable institutions.

They cost Society $1200,000, without giving any service in return. 310
were in poor houses with a high infantile mortality, amounting to 25
percent of the child birth; 440 were viciously diseased; 400 were
physically wrecked at an early age because of their own misdoings; 50
were notorious women; 7 were murderers; 60 were habitual thieves; 130
were convicted for miscellaneous crimes.

With such a black record of alcohol, the question often asked is "why
does not alcohol destroy the race which gives it such freedom of
operation?"

The same question, however, can be posed in regard to other vices like
indiscriminate sex relationships which are productive of the dread
miasmas of syphilis and gonorrhoea. The reply given to the question by
an American sage is as follows: Not the living but the dead are the
evidence against alcohol as against syphilis.

These racial poisons are not merely poisonous but, as the eminent Dr.
Sleeby remarks "are lethal". The race is being constantly degraded, but
it is constantly being redeemed by better influences.

There is, no doubt an extra-ordinary resisting power on the part of the
reproductive elements to alcohol as to other nocuous influences, but
these elements are subject to degeneration by alcohol as is evidenced by
the perversion of thought and conduct induced by its use in the
individual.

Guinea pigs, dosed with constantly increasing quantities of poison have
frequently offspring immune to a hundred times the dose that would be
fatal to the untreated guinea pig, but these offspring's of poisoned
parents are invariably dwarfed and possession of a vitality less
resistant to other assaults "


