The Part Played By Alcohol
==========================

The part played by alcohol in ruining lives juvenile as well as
adult-has been the subject of the day-to-day working of the land courts.
Here are reproduced some of the judgements of the United States Supreme
Court, which should serve as eye-openers for all those who view crime,
especially juvenile crime, with the horror it deserve as the chief cause
of the destruction of social harmony and happiness.

1. If a loss of revenue should accrue to the United States from a
diminished consumption of ardent spirit, she will be a gainer a thousand
fold in the health, wealth and happiness of the people.

2. We cannot shut out of view the fact, within the knowledge, of all,
that the public health, the public morals and the public safety may be
endangered by the several uses of intoxicating drinks, nor the fact
established by statistics accessible to everyone that the idleness,
disorder, pauperism and crime existing in the country are in some degree
at least, traceable to this evil.

3. That drunkenness is an evil both to the individual and to the State,
will probably be admitted. That its legitimate consequences are disease
and destruction of mind and body will also be granted. That it. produces
from four fifth to nine-tenth of all the crimes committed is the united
testimony of those judges, prison keepers, Sheriffs and others engaged
in the administration of the criminal law, who have investigated the
subject, that taxation to meet the expenses of pauperism and crime falls
upon and is borne by the people, follows as a matter of course. That its
tendency is to destroy the peace, safety and well-being of the people,
to secure which the first article in the Bill of Rights, declares all
free governments are instituted, is too obvious to be denied.

4. Probably no greater source of crime and sorrow has ever existed than
the Social drinking saloons. Social drinking is the evil of evils. It
has probably caused more drunkenness and has made more drunkards than
all other causes combined; and drunkenness is a pernicious source of all
kinds of crime and sorrow. It is a Pandora's box, sending forth
innumerable ills and woes, shame and disgrace, indigence, poverty and
wants. Social happiness destroyed, domestic broils and bickering
engendered, social ties severed, homes made desolate, families
scattered, heart-rending partings, sin, crime and untold sorrow, not
even hope left, but every-thing lost, an everlasting farewell to all
true happiness, and to all the nobler aspirations, rightfully belonging
to every true and virtuous human being.

5. The train of evils which marks the progress of intemperance is too
obvious to require comment. It brings with it degradation of character,
impairs the moral and physical energies, wastes the health, increases
the number of paupers and criminals, undermines the morals and sinks its
victims to the lowest depths of vice and profligacy.

6. It is still the prolific source of diseases, misery, pauperism, vice
and crime. Its power to weaken, corrupt, debauch and slay human
character and human life is not destroyed or impaired because it may be
susceptible of some innocent uses,

7. There is no statistically or economically better established
proposition, nor one to which a more general assent is given by reading
and intelligent minds, than this : That the use of intoxicating liquors
as drink is the cause of more want, pauperism, suffering, crimes and
public expense than any other cause-and perhaps it should be said-than
all other causes combined.

Every state applies the most stringent legal power to lotteries,
gambling, keeping gambling houses, and implements, and to debauchery and
obscenity, and no one questions the right and justice of it, and yet how
small is the weight of woe produced by all these united, when compared
with that which is created by the use of intoxicating drink alone.

8. The evils that result from the use of intoxicating liquors, generally
occur at the place where they are consumed, and tendency to crime and
pauperism follow in that place. By the general concurrence of opinion of
every civilized community, there are few sources of crime and misery to
Society equal to the dram shop, where intoxicating liquors in small
quantities to be drunk at the time, are sold indiscriminately to all
parties applying. The statistics of every state show a greater amount of
crime and misery attributable to the use of ardent spirits obtained at
these retail liquor saloons, than to any other source.

These are only a fee of the pronouncements of judgements of the highest
courts of the United states of America. They bring out clearly the
intimate connection that , subsists between the waves of crime, sweeping
that "civilized" community and the powerful potentials that alcohol
possesses as producers of the conditions that favour disorderly conduct.
These findings of the most eminent intellects are based on direct
experience of the day-to-day working of the legal system.

They unanimously condemn the role of alcohol as enemy No. 1, of peace
and order in a community, before which the judges, the legislators, and
the public leaders sit helpless. As far back as 1907, Judge Ira W.
Christian of the circuit court of Hamilton County (Indiana), pronounced
a judgment to the effect that a retail liquor shop is within itself a
public nuisance and that the statute authorising the licensing of such a
shop is unconstitutional.

Judge R. Samuel Artiman in his profoundly well-planned book, "The
Legalized Outlaw" has reproduced such cases very, adequately in their
bearing on crime and other evils in Society. His own judgment delivered
in the same year 1907, is among the most notable pronouncement in the
annals of American law-courts. This decision was to the effect that 11
the State of Indiana had no right to authorise the licensing of a saloon
and that the statute providing for so doing was unconstitutional.

The case was never taken in appeal to a higher court of law and the
decision stands unrevoked un-impeached to this day. It awakened
universal interest and wide discussion. Millions of copies of this
decision were distributed by public demand and it was printed as a
public document by the United States Senate as a "State Document, No,
384". The book referred to above, "The Legalized Outlaw " elaborates the
principles involved in this decision, giving the full text and complete
details of the case under review.

No one can view with equanimity the havoc played by liquor traffic in
the orderly management of the affairs of a community, far less the
judges whose chief responsibility is the maintenance of peace and order
in the Society. The really well. intentioned among them have tried to
bring to light the effect which alcohol has on ruining the lives of the
people and their domestic happiness through the criminal attitudes,
which it engenders in the minds of its victims.

A Few Quotations
----------------

If drink is an evil thing, let us prohibit it to all races in this
country. Republic of South Africa Mr. R.B. Durrant

First the man takes a drink, then the drink takes the man. Japanese
Proverb.

This (alcohol) poison is a recognised poison. We all know this. The
noxious effects of alcohol are as obvious as the, light of moon day sun.
It is common knowledge that it is a poison, and yet people persist in
poisoning themselves. Dr. Charles Richet of Paris.

The curse of intoxication. Drunkenness takes away the man, and leaves
only the brute; it dethrones reason from its seat, stupefies conscience;
ruins health, wastes property, covers the wretch with rags; reduces wife
and children to want and beggary, and gives such power to appetite that
physically as well as normally, it is next to impossible to cure it. Mr.
W. Jay.

Alcohol lessens man's power of physical endurance, delays recovery from
fatigue, increases the ill-affect of great heat or cold, blunts the
senses, retards nerve response, diminishes self-control, blurs the
judgement. Sir Alfred Pearce Could, K.C.V.O., M.S., F.R.C.S.

This spirit (of Islam) may be expected to manifest itself in many
practical ways and one of these manifestations might be liberation from
alcohol which was in spited by religious conviction and which was,
therefore, able to accomplish what could never be enforced by external
sanction of an alien law. Professor A. Toynbes.

Kings, Parliaments, Academies, Ministers, all those who claim to lead
the masses, though well aware that alcohol degrades the people, do
nothing to prevent this degradation. This is not merely stupid but
shameful. Dr. Charles Richet of Paris.

It (Islam) has set an example of sobriety to the world and has shielded
its followers from the drink plague which destroys the strength of the
nations. Bishop Carpenter.

The combined harm of the three great scourges - war, famine and
pestilence - is not as terrible as that of wine drinking. Gladstone.

The success of Islam in persuading its adherents to abstain from the use
of wine is a notable achievement. David M. Kay.

Alcohol has none of the vitamins or minerals necessary for good health.
Evening Standard (Special Correspondent).

Alcohol poisons the vital cells of the body, acts directly upon the
nervous system and the brain, impairing one's higher faculties,
judgement, conception and control long before the least symptoms of
drunkenness appear. Sir William Wileox, M.D.

Booze is the Matter of Crime
----------------------------

The following poignant pronouncement of Judge, William M. G. Emill of
Chicago points out clearly the impressions which the drink habit -makes
on those charged with the task of dealing with crimes records. Says he,
Booze is the matter of crime. It gives life and sustenance to slums,
dives, brothels, gambling dens, and pay-off joints.

It nerves to his deed the homicide, the stick-up man, the burglar, the
thief and the thug. It fires the brain of the prostitute and the
panderer. It feeds and inflames the passions of the week-mined and the
degenerate. "I have tried an army of 50,000 human derelicts, most of
whom were booze-soaked. With faces red and bloated, with eyes dull and
languid, with bodies week and wasted, with clothing, foul and ragged,
this vast army is for ever marching with unsteady step to the graves of
the drunkard and the pauper or to the prison and workhouse.

"I have looked into the tear-stained face, of a still larger army of
fathers and mothers and sisters, wives and husbands, as they have
pleaded for the miserable wrecks that booze has made. I have seen with
this army ten thousand pale faced, hollow-cheeked, ragged, hungry and
starving children cursed by booze.

I have observed that every bandit crew that goes forth to murder starts
from a saloon; that every panderer has his rendezvous in a grog, shop;
that every den of thieves makes its victim drunk before it robs them;
that every house of prostitution has its bar or is in partnership with
booze; that every gambling den either is in a Saloon or sustains a close
relationship with one; that the pick-pocket 'trust' is housed in a
Saloon; that the spay-off' joint for the crook and the crooked policeman
is in a saloon, that the professional bondsman and character witnesses
for thieves and hold-up men are saloon-keepers or bar-tenders.

Judges, legislators, mayors, governors and even Presidents sit dumb or
quail in the presence of this monster, which enters millions of homes
and leaves them desolate. "I have witnessed daily its ravages after it
had spent its wild fury upon the helpless bodies of women and children,
or after it had reaped for a night, in the public dance, its harvest of
virtue, now dead for ever. I have observed that the last man to be
employed and the first to be discharged is a victim of booze. Booze
never built a park, a playground, a school or a church, but is the enemy
of them all. War may be hell, but where it slays its thousands, booze
destroys its tens of thousands".

Three thousand twenty two saloons in Chicago maintain bed-rooms for the
use of their patrons. Six hundred and thirty three Saloons operate
restaurants, cafes and Cabarets; 718 have dance rooms and 63 'palm'
gardens. Private entrances are provided by 2594 Saloons. Federal Judge
Lawdis remarks in this connection. "Here are thirty-two saloons
confessedly managed by Mr. Buxt's company and they have been steadfastly
breaking the law for at least ten years".

Vices to which Alcohol Gives Birth
----------------------------------

Vices to which Alcohol gives birth. "When the alcohol vice has become a
habit it is difficult to cure is men; it is all but impossible in
women", remarks Sir Andrew Clark, physician to Queen Victoria. This
habit in women, ruinous to their own character and health in every sense
of the evil, is astounding in effect on the offspring's in a far greater
degree than when the offending parent is the father.

The Brewer's Journal editorially comments that "Newspaper advertising
for beer should be designed to attract and appeal to women as well as
men, for if beer is to be used in the home, women must be won over to
it", And, according to the same journal it is, "comparatively easy to
convince the women". The regular campaigns launched by liquor interests
to promote the alcohol habit among the fair sex, is paying high
dividends.

On a count being arranged, 160 girls were found to have gone into a
single saloon in three hours. Mrs. Jane Deeter Rippon, Chief Probation
Officer of the Domestic Relations Court and Mrs. Albert H. Smith,
Secretary of the Association of City Police Matrons, Philadelphia, have
stated that ever-increasing numbers of young girls of respectable
families are succumbing to the alcohol evil.

According to their responsible declarations, "These girls are not
ordinary prostitutes, but shop-girls and other young girls from 16 to 22
years of age. Scores of such girls are nightly drunk in the Cafes of the
city".

A number of commissions on vice, the Chicago Vice Commission, the
Philadelphia Commission among them have conclusively established that
there is a close connection between the traffic in liquors and
commercialised vice. According to the Wisconsin Legislative Committee,
appointed to investigate the conditions of the vicious service. "The
Committee finds that the chief direct cause of the down-fall of women
and girls is the close connection between alcoholic drink and
commercialised vice."

The Chicago Commission "found the most conspicuous and important element
next to the house of prostitution itself was the saloon and the most
important financial interest - the liquor interest," in the Commission's
investigation of the Social Evil. It goes on to say that "As a
contributory influence to immorality, there is no interest so
dangerous." The Chicago Commission investigated the conditions
prevailing in 445 saloons. Of these "No less than 236 were nothing but
houses of prostitution. There were in them counted 928 prostitutes".

"Children, girls whose innocence yet followed hard upon their shame,
tiny boys and even babies, messengers far under-age and half-frightened
countrymen were found in practically every saloon while drunken women,
short skirted and blear-eyed, with sin and disease written strong upon
their faces, lolled beside them and drank imitation drinks for which
exorbitant prices had been charged. Indecent exposures of the person and
almost unbelievable community freedom were prevalent in Saloons of
apparent exterior respectability".

The report under review is explicit that ""wayward girls are brought to
their ruin almost exclusively through alcoholic drinks. Does the tired
working girl seek recreation in the dance sooner or later she must yield
to the temptation to drink, and then - her future is settled for all
time. Does the girl beset with poverty seek the easiest way? She goes to
the nearest saloon, where she is met with smiles and flattery and put to
work to add to the bar's receipts."

The Chicago Commission found in numerous instances that the saloons were
situated in close proximity to schools. They were daily filled with
innocent children. In one saloon the investigator found eighteen
prostitutes drinking at one time. Five of these women invited the
visitor to participate in immoral deeds."

The Royal Commission of England appointed to study the relation of
alcohol to the prevalence of sex immorality has some very pertinent and
outstanding facts to disclose. Among them:

(i) Alcoholic liquor, by weakening self control, is the most important
factor in aggravating Social vice conditions; that the drinker is
peculiarly liable to yield to the temptations which other-wise might be
resisted. One physician reports that out of thousands of cases, he had
found 80 per cent had been under the influence of liquor when they
acquired their diseases through sexual licence.

(ii) Alcohol makes the treatment of such patients very much difficult.

(iii) Alcohol complicates the picture of the diseases that are acquired
through sex immorality. Alcohol and Medical Research. There was a time
when the Western Medical opinion favoured the use of alcohol in certain
diseases.

It was considered stimulant and was supposed to possess some food value,
close investigations have, however, conclusively proved that alcohol is
a depressant and not a stimulant at all. Its apparent stimulating effect
is due to its paralysing properties on the nerve centres.

When alcohol is taken into the stomach, that organ with its inherent
revulsion for the various products at, once expels it into the blood
stream; which carries it into the brain centres and stupefies them. Now,
it is these brain centres that control the movements of the muscles.

With stupefaction overtaking the controlling mechanisms, the muscles
activity is released of all restraint and goes wild, giving an
impression of heightened power. The process may be compared to the
disabling of the governor of a steam engine, which then conveys the
impression of an accelerated speed. As a matter of fact, neither the
narcotized human organism nor the control-free steam engine can have
acquired any increase in working capacity, which can come only by the
supply of suitable fuel material. Alcohol does not add any power to the
organism "it only smashes the governor", as is aptly expressed by a
research scholar of the U.S.A.

As for its food value, the late Sir Spencer Wells M.D., F.R.C.S.,
endorsed the current findings of medical research on the point in the
following words: "It is only lately that we have begun to regard alcohol
in its true light as a drug and not as a food."

To this Dr Harvey H. Wiley adds, "It is without question a substance
which does not nourish the body building tissue or repair waste. Dr W.A.
Evans, medical editor of the Chicago Tribune and former health officer
of Chicago, says, "No health authority anywhere advocates the use of
alcohol as a medicine, food or beverage. Every drink is a mixed drink.
There are no other kinds, When a man takes a drink, however simple it
may be, he mixes in some degeneration of his nerve cells, some chance of
delirium tremens and a few other ingredients. Let him understand, that
he also pours into the glass about one finger of wet brain."

The new York City Board of Health in a pamphlet warned the people
against the evils of drink thus: Alcohol is a depressant and not a
stimulant, it drugs the brain and stops the capacity of the nervous
system to obey the will.

Don't muddle your brain by drinking bear, John Stuart Mill put it very
tersely when he said, "Who would not be a human dissatisfied, rather
than a pig satisfied? Think before you drink for after a bear or
highball you cannot think so well."

The great German philosopher Goethe repeatedly asserted that so-called
stimulation by liquor could produce only a forced, inferior creation of
ideas. Happiness and contentment are said to spring from the benumbing
influence of alcohol upon the higher brain functions. Such happiness is
false, such contentment bought at the expense of individual mental
liberty.

The Chicago Board of Health in a bulletin thus condemns the evil: The
fellow with alcohol in his system is not a good witness as to its
effects on himself, for his mind as well as his body is bribed by the
drug, and is as full of prejudice as his breath is full of fumes. In
another bulletin the following warning is given to the drunkard: The
heavy drinker who contracts pneumonia should not lose an hour in
settling his affairs, as he will, in all probability be unconscious with
delirium within twenty-four to forty-eight hours from the time his
disease is first diagnosed.

Dr. Robert A. bare, professor of therapeutics of the Jefferson Medical
College of Philadelphia, in his classic "Practical Therapeutics" has
laid down the following verdict of medical scholarship: "Alcohol never
acts as a stimulant to the brain, the spinal cord or the nerves. The
depression of the inhibitory nervous apparatus. The activity is,
therefore, that caused by lack of control and is not a real increase of
energy. The effect of moderate doses differs from the effect of large
ones in degree and not in kind.

Alcohol is a Poison
-------------------

Alcohol is a poison and its evils effects are so great that every
courageous man should help to eliminate them.

One is baffled, in the face of complete unanimity among all sections of
the human Society about the evils which alcohol gives birth to as to how
this so called rational being both as an individual and in social groups
submits himself to be swayed into self-destruction by this poison. No
sane thinking mind can be found to say a friendly word in favour of
alcoholic liquors.

Below are given the opinions of some of the most eminent medical
authorities of the west in regard to the characteristic damage that
humanity is exposed to by this inveterate enemy of all good senses. The
testimony of such famous doctors should convince even the incurable
drunkard to pause in his head-long pursuit of self-immolation on the
altar of Bacchus.

Drunkenness and its consequent degeneracy, explain 35 per cent of
epilepsy - Dr. Mathew Woods.

Twenty-eight percent of the men admitted to this hospital during the
past year were alcoholised. This does not include alcohol-caused
insanity - Dr. H. C. Eyman, of the Massilon, Ohio, Asylum.

A son-stroke, is often nothing more nor less than a bear-stroke - Dr. W.
A. Evans, Medical Editor, Chicago Tribune.

I am not aware of any medical connection in which alcohol is necessary,
nor of any in which it could not, with advantage, be replaced by some
less dangerous drug - Sir Arthur Chance M. D.

Twenty five of the 100 deaths which occur every day in Chicago are
caused directly or indirectly by alcohol - John D. Robinson, Health
Commissioner.

Alcohol is not a medicine, it aggravates diseases and hastens death, it
is productive of physical and mental degeneracy, and should be no longer
prescribed by intelligent physicians. It is the best possible persuader
of disease and damaging even in small doses - Dr. De W. H. G. Wilcox.

Alcohol replaces more actively vital materials by fat and fibrous
tissue; it substitutes suppurations by new growths it helps time to
produce the effect of age ; and in a word is the genius of
degeneration - Dr. Dickinson of England.

Alcohol is a poison. It is claimed by some that alcohol is a food. If
so, it is a poisoned food - Frederick Peterson, M. D., Professor of
Psychiatry, Columbia University.

Extract from "Life and Health"  
 March 1969  
 Page No. 21

Alcohol is Dangerous
--------------------

"Alcohol acts as a poison to the human system. The body tries to get rid
of it as rapidly as possible. It serves no good purpose in the body." -
Francis A. Soper, Listen, May, 1968."

You are right in indicting alcohol for its insidious wrongs to humanity.
It is an old and shy offender and very much the "mocker", in medical
practice that it has been pronounced in the Holy Writ. It exhausts the
latent energy of the organism. Upon investigation I found 38 per cent of
our male tubercular patients were excessive users of alcohol, 56 per
cent were moderate users.

From my study of the cases, I am led to believe that in a vast majority
of these cases drink has been a large factor in producing the disease,
by exposure, lowering the vitality etc - O. C. Willhite, M. D.,
Superintendent of Cook County Hospital for Consumptives.

In tuberculosis there is a state of overstimulation of the circulatory
system due to the toxins. The use of alcoholics simply makes the
condition worse - H. J. Blankmeyer, M. D., Sanatorium Gabvels, New York.

That in view of the close connection between alcoholism and
tuberculosis, this congress strongly emphasizes the importance of
combining the fight against tuberculosis with the struggle against
alcoholism. Resolution adopted by the International Congress on
Tuberculosis, held in Paris, October 1905. Alcohol is the most potent
factor in the production of crime, and I have never known of
alcohol -Dr. J.T. Tilmore, Superintendent of the Ontario Reformatory.

Whisky and other forms of alcohol have caused more deaths after
snake-bite than the venom of the Snake - Dr. L. K. Hirshborg of John
Hopkins University.

Children of Drinking Fathers
----------------------------

The children of drinking fathers are very much more liable to
tuberculosis. The results of my investigations are as follows; 149
occasional drinkers 8.7 per cent tuberculosis children; 169 habitual
drinkers-10.7 per cent tuberculosis children; 67 moderate drinkers -
16.4 per cent tuberculosis children; 60 confirmed drunkards - 21.7 per
cent tuberculosis children. Professor A. Von. Burge, Basil.

Whether we look to America, the West Indies, Egypt, India, Arabia or
Persia, there is the same testimony that the health and discipline of
soldiers are much better when they are not allowed or cannot get
alcoholic liquors. Dr. James Ridge, Medical Officer of Health, Enfield
England.

Spirits and poisons are synonymous terms.- Sir Astley Cooper, M.D.

Alcohol is the pathological fraud of frauds. Dr. Norman Kerr, England.

Alcohol is, under no conditions and in no amount beneficial to the
healthy body. Professor Fick, Physiologist, Germany.

For every real drunkard there are fifty others suffering from the
effects of alcohol. George Harley, M. D. England.

I dread the task of operating on a drinker Sir William Paget, M. D.

"Lobular pneumonia, Cardiac failure"-so runs the usual certificate, and
the cause of the cardiac failure in ninety nine cases out of a hundred
is alcohol.-Dr. A. A. Hill. On the use of alcohol, British Medical
Journal.

Alcohol causes the guards to sleep at their posts until man's enemy,
disease, has gained its foot-hold.-S. G. Stewart, M. D. Kansas Medical
College.

One fights shy of having to operate upon patients who are alcoholic,
because of the degeneration of their tissues - they do not heal well in
spite of the scepticism of the present day. W. McAdam Hceles, M.S.

Trying to cure consumption with whisky is like trying to put out a fire
with kerosene - John E. White, M. D., Medical Director, Nordrach Ranch,
Sanatorium.


