Meaning and nature of Human Rights
==================================

Human beings are rational beings. They by virtue of their being human
possess certain basic and inalienable rights, which are commonly known
as Human Rights. According to the New International Webster’s
Comprehensive  Dictionary of the English Language, literally the word
“right” means anything done in accordance with or conformable to truth
or fact, correct, true, accurate, not mistaken, conformable to a
standard of propriety, fit , suitable and the word “human” means
pertaining to charactersing man or mankind[^1] . However, Human rights
being a generic term embrace civil rights, civil liberties, social,
economic and cultural rights. It is therefore difficult to give a
precise definition of the term Human Rights. As such, it can be said
that the rights that all people have by virtue of human existence are
human rights. Since these rights belonged to them because of their very
existence, they become operative with their birth. Human Rights being
the birth right are therefore, inherent in all the individuals,
Irrespective of their caste, creed, religion, sex, nationality. These
rights are essential for all the individuals as they are consonant with
their freedom and dignity and are conductive to physical, moral, social
and spiritual welfare, they are also necessary as they provide suitable
conditions for the material and moral uplift of the people. Because of
their immense significance to human beings; Human Rights are also
sometimes referred to fundamental rights, basic rights inherent rights,
natural rights and birth rights[^2] .

As for as the nature of Human Rights is concerned, two main approaches
were adopted to explain the nature of Human Rights from time to time.
The approaches are philosophical approach and pragmatic approach.


