Conclusion
==========

Withstanding this fact, the modern concept of human rights is
comprehensive in its nature and content.  In fact, the catalogue of
rights is expanding every day. It must be noted that no catalogue
elaborating specific human rights will ever be exhaustive or final,
being man made laws. Its content goes hand in hand with the state of
moral consciousness, or development of civilization at any given time in
history. By and large, the concept of human rights is very much the
product of history and of human civilization. Being as such, it is
always subject to evolution and change and that the human rights concept
is not static but subject to innovation and change. The historical
happenings and evolutionary developments made radical changes on the
idea of human rights.

Author of this article can be met at

Itsmanzoor07@gmail.com

Notes
-----

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] H.O.Agarwal, Human Rights, Universal Book Traders, New Delhi,2002,
p.2

12  H.O.Agarwal, Human Rights,  p.2

[^3] J. Maritain, The Rights of man and natural law, Macmillan, 1951,
p.[^65]:

[^4] D.D. Raphael. “Human Rights Old and New”, In D.D. Raphael, ed.
Political theory and the     Rights of  Man, Macmillan,1967, p.[^55]:

[^5] “Human Rights old and new”, In D.D. Raphael, ed. Political theory
and the Rights of Man, Macmillan, p.[^57]:

[^6] Eddy Asirvatham, “Political theory”, quoted in Dr.U.Chandra, Human
rights, law agency, Allahabad, 1999, p [^16]:

[^7] Dr.U.Chandra, Human rights, law agency, Allahabad, 1999, cited from
Thomas Hobes,      p [^16]:

[^8] Dr.U.Chandra, Human rights,  p [^16]:

[^9] D.G.Ritichie, Natural Rights (Philsophical  Series), Allen and
Unwin, London, p( 66-82).

[^10] For Instance, right to freedom of speech is not absolute but
rather regulated in accordance with the requirements of social
expediency. Dr.U.Chandra,  Human rights, p [^17]:

[^11] R. Devorkin, Taking Rights seriously, Mass publications Cambridge
1977 ,pp 79-[^92]:

[^12] R. Devorkin, Taking Rights seriously , p [^18]:

[^13] .Thomas Buergenthal, ‘Codification and Implementation of
international Human Rights’, Human Dignity- The Internationalization of
Human Rights, Ed. By Alice H.Hankim, Oceana Publication 1979, p [^16]:

[^14] Dr. Gokulesh Sharma, Human Rights and Legal Remides, Deep and Deep
Publications , New Delhi, p 70 ,published………

[^15] DR. V.K. Anand. Human Rights, Allahabad law Agency. Mathhra  Road
U.P, pp 1-2 .year………

[^16] According to the Roman jurist Ulpian natural law was that which
nature and the state assure to all human beings. This meant that
foreigners are requested to be dealt in the same way as one deals with
one’s compatriots. It also implied conducting of wars in a civilized
fashion. The Republic ( C. 400BC) proposed the idea of Universal truths
that all must be recognized people were to work for the common good.
Aristotle (384-322 B.C) wrote in Politics that Justice, virtues and
rights change in accordance with different kinds of constitutions and
circumstances.  Cicero (106-43 BC), a Roman statesman laid down the
foundations of natural law and human rights in his work. The laws (52
B.C), Cicero believed that there should be Universal Human rights laws
that would transient customary and civil laws. Sophocles (495-406 BC)
was one of the first to promote the idea of freedom of expression
against the state. Stoces employed the ethical concept of natural law to
refer to a higher order of law that corresponds to nature and which was
to serve as a standard for the laws of civil society and government.
Later, Christianity, especially, St. Thomas Aquininas (1225-1274) rooted
this ‘natural law’ in a divine law which was revealed to man in part
discoverable by man through his God-given right reason. The city state
of Greece gave equal freedom of speech, equality before law, right to
vote, right to be elected to public officer, right to trade and the
right to access to justice to their citizen similar rights were secured
to the Roman’s by the Jus Civilie of the Roman law. Thus the origins of
the concept of Human rights are usually agreed to be found in the
Greco-Roman natural law doctrines of Stoicisin ( the school of
philosophy founded  by Zeno- and Citium) which held that a Universal
force pervades all creation and that human conduct should therefore be
judged according to the law of nature.  S.J. Henle, A Catholic view of
Human Rights, A Thomistic reflection in Alan S. Rosenbaum, ‘The
Philosophy of Human Rights’, International perspectives’ (1980). See
also H.O. Agarwal ‘ Human Rights’, Universal book traders Delhi 2002, p
7-8

[^17] Vijay Kumar, Human Rights Dimensions and Issues, Vol I, Anmol
Publications .Pvt. Ltd. New Delhi ,p 42 .  year…………………………..

[^18] Nayyar Shamsi, Human Rights and Islam, Reference press, New
Delhi-2003, pp 20-[^21]:

[^19] Nayyar Shamsi, Human Rights and Islam,  p [^25]:

[^20] Nayyar Shamsi, Human Rights and Islam, Reference press, New
Delhi-2003 ,p [^24]:

[^21] Nayyar Shamsi, Human Rights and Islam, p [^28]:

32 H.O. Agarwal, Human Rights,  p [^6]:

[^23]   Dr.V.K. Anand, Human Rights, Allah abad law agency, p [^2]:

[^24] Yaju (36-38), quoted in Dr.V.K. Anand, Human Rights, p [^2]:

[^25] Dr.Gokulesh Sharma, Human Rights and Legal Remedies, Deep and Deep
Publication, New Delhi, p [^70]:

[^26] Human Rights and Legal Remedies ,p [^71]:

[^27] A.A. Mawdudi. Human Rights in Islam, Markazi Maktaba Islamic
Delhi, 1982, p [^56]:

[^28] Teaching  Human Rights , United Nations, New york,  1989, p [^5]:

[^29] Karel Vasak, “Human Rights a legal Reality”. The International
Dimensions of Human Rights, vol I,English Ed.by Phillip Alston, UNESCO
.pp, 4-[^10]:

[^30] In this play , Sophocles describes describes that Antigone’s
brother, while he was rebelling against the kind, was killed and his
burial was prohibited by the kind Creon. In defiance of the order
Antigone buried her brother. When she was arrested for violating the
order. She pleaded that she had acted in accordance with the immutable,
“un written laws of heaven” which even the kind could not override.
Sophocles Antigon, The Unwritten, Unchanging laws of the gods, see also
Dr. U. Chandra, “Human Rights”, p 1-[^2]:

[^31] P.N. Bhagwati, Human rights, International law association Allabad
Centre 1980, p [^7]:

[^32] Galus Eezejoffor,  Protection of Human Rights under the law,
Butter worth London -1964 ,p  [^3]:

[^33] Khwaja. A. Muntaqim, Protection of Human Rights ( National and
International Perspectives), Law Publishers, India-2004,  p [^5]:

[^34] Protection of Human Rights  ( National and International
Perspectives), p [^5]:

[^35] For instance, the Declaration of Independence of the thirteen
United States of America in [^1776]: (The Virginia Declaration, 1776):
the constitution of the United States of 1778 with amendments in 1789,
1865, 1869 and 1919 specified a number of rights of man. The Virginia
Declaration of rights affirmed that all men are by nature equally free
and impendent and have certain inherent rights. The French Declaration
of the Rights of man and of the citizens of 1789 led other European
countries to include the provisions in their laws for the protection of
human rights. H. O. Agarwal. Human Rights, Universal Book Traders New
Delhi 2002 , p 9.

[^36]   H. O. Agarwal. Human Rights,  p [^9]:

[^37]   H. O. Agarwal. Human Rights,  p [^9]:

[^38] H.O. Agarwal, Human Rights, p [^11]:

[^39] For instance, see Declaration of ST. James Palace (1941); Atlantic
Charter (1941); United Nation Declarations (1942); Moscow Declaration
(1943); Tehran Declaration (1943); Dumbarton Oak’s conference (1944);
Sun Francisco Conference (1945); etc.

[^40]   H.O. Agarwal, Human rights, p [^11]:

[^41] General Assembly resolution 217,(III), December [^10]:1948, C.F.
H.O.Agarwal , Human  Rights, p 30.

[^42] The following eight states abstained; Byelorussian,
Czechoslovakia, Poland, Saudi Arabia, Ukrainian, USSR, Union of South
Africa and Yugoslavia, while the representative  of the soviet bloc
abstained because of disagreement over the narrow treatment of economic
and social rights, the South Africa delegate abstained because as he
argued, these matters were solely within domestic jurisdiction of his
nations. H.O. Agarwal. Human Rights, p [^30]:

[^43]  Universal Delectation of Human Rights 1948 (Resolution 217 A
III).

[^44] H.O. Agarwal,  Human Rights. C.F. Report of the Commission on
Human Rights, Second Session, See E/[^600]:

[^45] General Assembly Resolution 2200 A (XXI) December 16, [^1966]:

[^46] H.O. Agarwal, Human Rights, pp 41-[^42]:

[^47] H.O. Agrawal, Human Rights, p 43 C.f  Dr. U. Chandara Human Rights
Allahabad  Law agency publication , June 1999 , pp184-[^185]:

[^48] Dr.U. Chandra, Human Rights, p [^432]:

[^49] Thomas Buergenthat, Internal Human Rights, 1995, p [^49]:

[^50] DR. U. Chandra, Human Rights, p [^305]: In addition to these
documents, international humanitarian law also consists of some earlier
declarations and conventions for instance, The Declaration of Paris
1856. The Declaration of Petersburg of 1868, the Hague conventions of
1899 and 1907. The Geneva Gas and Bacteriological warfare protocol of
1925.
