CONCEPT OF HUMAN RIGHTS:
========================

The concept of Human Rights dated back to the very dawn of Human
Civilization, and quite often appears clearly, enshrined in all the
great religions of the world. Whether it is one’s duty towards a
neighbour. The concept of Universal brotherhood and fraternity of
mankind coupled with a sense of compassion towards one’s fellowmen, have
their origins in several religious beliefs both before and after
Christ[^14] . Therefore, the Human Rights in no means are a concept of
Modern times, though it appears so, the roots of Human Rights are found
very deep in the eternity. In the ancient and ancient most cultures
which have been rooted out by passage of times and rule of human
atrocities or barbarianism of certain tribes[^15] . The world’s all
major religions have a humanist  perspective that supports Human Rights,
despite the difference in the contents .Human  rights are also rooted in
ancient thought and in the philosophical concepts of ‘natural law’ and
‘natural rights’. A few Greek and Roman Philosophers recognized the idea
of natural rights. Plato (427-348 B.C) was one of the earliest writers
to advocate a Universal standard of ethical conduct[^16] . In recorded
history and ancient scriptures, there have been references, on the basic
human rights, though they were not referred to by that name. Modern
Historians credit to by that concept of Magna Carta A.D 1215. However,
All Human rights derive from dignity and worth inherent in the human
person and that the human person is the central subject of Human rights
and fundamental freedoms, in simple terms, whatever adds, to the
dignified and free existence of a human being should be regarded as
human rights evolution and crystallization of the concept took a long
term. Initially there was confusion between the Natural rights
propounded by political philosophers in the bygone ages and the concept
of Human Rights.  The later is an all-encompassing one[^17] . In order
to understand the term ‘Human Rights’, conceptually may be fitness of
things to take stock of the different concepts given in both west and in
the rest of the world.


