Western view of Human Rights:
=============================

Human rights in the West do not enjoy a permanent position. They have no
eternal source criteria of a cosmic order. The entire sources are either
imaginary or like the Habeas Corpus, Magna Carta, the Bill of rights,
the French Charter of Human Rights and the ten amendments to the
American constitution, are documents of a regional nature and are the
product of the peculiar political and social conditions existing in
Britain, France and America. There the concept of the fundamental rights
has developed along with human consciousness. And these rights have been
born one by one out of the agreements during the protracted struggle
between the people and the kind or other rulers, for the division of
powers, the decision of the parliament, charter declarations and the
theories put up by the political thinkers. As this struggle advanced,
the sphere of rights became wider. That is to say, what are being termed
as ‘fundamental rights’ today were not there till yesterday, and if it
all they were, they were no more that more yearnings which had no
sanction at their back. Every one of these rights became a right in the
true sense of the word only when the law of land and the constitution
recognizing it conferred validity on it[^18] . However, in the Western
countries by and large, the real purpose of these rights is to offer
protection to the individual against the state. So in the West these
rights are given higher position than the common laws framed by the
state. By incorporating them in the constitution the legislative powers
of the state are limited, and the judiciary is entrusted with
enforcement of the fundamental rights[^19] .


