Socialist view of Human Right:
==============================

According to Karl Marx and Lenin, the real fountain head of the
fundamental rights is the dialectal process of history. These rights
have not been conferred on man by nature but are the product of this
process, playing their role in the various stages of history; they must
finally come to an end in the Communists classes’ society. To begin
with, these rights helped the bourgeois class in overthrowing the feudal
society and establishing the Capitalist Society. Later on, the
proletariat’s used them as a weapon in their class struggle against the
capitalist. Now under the Socialist order these rights are protecting
the interests of the toiling people and finally for the sake of freedom
and equality, there will cancel themselves out under Communism.
According to this philosophy these rights are neither natural nor the
essential part of man’s person, nor are the impressionable. They have no
special significance or importance. They are part of the general law of
the land[^20] . Therefore in view of above view, to Socialists, man is
sum total of a stomach and matter, and economic struggle in its only
goal of life. When this position of man in society has been determined
what other rights are there to be conferred on him save food and
shelter, and countries guarantee only these material rights and do not
recognize any other right based a moral value, it is the logical outcome
of their outlook on life. Unless and until they change their view point
in relation to man, they can not be expected to extend and expand the
sphere of fundamental rights[^21] .


