RELGIOUS VIEW:
==============

The World’s all major religions have a humanist perspective that
supports human rights despite the difference in the contents[^22] . The
conception may be felt to originate in the ideas of mercy, kindness, and
pity on human beings in various scriptures, Vedas, the holy book of one
of the ancient religion, Hinduism also preaching in the Yajur Veda and
throws a prism of light on friendly dealing and behaviour with all
creatures of the world what to say of only human beings[^23] .

“Oh Lord! Let my eye view be firm in order that all creatures may look
at me by friendly sight. In the same way I also may see all creatures
with friendly sight and all of us creatures may see other in friendly
view[^24] ”.

The same concept can be derived from the contents of ‘The Bible’, where
from Paul formulated his doctrine of equality in the following words.

“There is no such thing as Jew and Greek, Slave and freedom, male and
female, for you are all one person in Christ Jesus".[^25]

The Buddhist doctrine of non-violence in deed and thought is a
humanitarian doctrine pare-excellence, dating back to the 3rd Country
B.c. Furthermore, other religious beliefs both new and old such Judaism,
Zarastarium, Jainism, Sikhism have preached and uphold similar doctrines
human rights[^26] . Islam, the divine religion in its origin, lays Iron
foundation and found a pride of place in theocracy of all ages. The
Islamic practices strengthen the concept of human rights being granted
by Allah’s Himself. The world has not been able to produce more just and
equitable laws than those given 1400 years ago[^27] .

In sum up, it can be said that a rightly, so on that no religion,
Ideology, Ism advocated the in human treatment meted out to the members
of the society. Therefore the basic source of human rights in all times
and in all ages is the region itself and reaffirmed its faith in
different civilization from time immoral.


