Origin and Development
======================

The history of Human Rights, in fact, to the times immemorial, however
gained impacts only in recent times. It has formally and universally
became recognized only after the formation of 1945, which has, as its
central concern, reaffirmed its faith in fundamental Human Rights, in
the dignity and worth of human rights at all levels under any
circumstances. The term Human Rights virtually denotes all those rights
which are inherent in our nature and without which we can not live as
human beings[^28] . Human rights which are essentially individual in
character, for they are meant to be enjoyed by individuals constitute a
social phenomenon by virtue of those for whom they are intended[^29] .
The history of origin and development of Human Rights is very
fascinating. The origin of human is traced by some Scholars back to the
times of ancient Greeks. The fact that human rights were recognized as
natural rights of man is illustrated by a Greek play Antigone[^30] .
Though, the roots for the protection of the rights of man may be traced
as for back as in the Babylonian laws. Assyrian laws, Hittite laws and
in the all major religions of the world[^31] . In Philosophy, the
development of the notion of the natural rights of man was contributed
by the stoic philosophers. They first developed natural law theory and
by virtue of it they explained the nature of human rights. i.e. rights
which every human beings posses by virtue of being human[^32] .

Generally it is said that the struggle for human rights started in the
Western world sometimes in the beginning of 13th century, which is the
great English Charter known as Magna Carta was issued but the fact is
that this struggle had started even 200 years prior to the issue of this
charter determining the rights of the parliament in 1037 AD. After,
that, in 1188 Kind Alfonso had accepted in Principle of Habeas Corpus.
The Second important document was the draft of Right, 1689. Other
important documents included the English Bill of Rights, 1689, American
declaration of indepdence, 1776, French declaration of the Rights of man
and of the Citizens, 1789 etc[^33] . Though the established fact is that
concept of “Human Rights” was existed, before the “Magna Carta” (Bill of
Rights), it self came into existence. However, Magna Carta enjoys the
status of a milestone in the history of human rights. Henry I, Stephen
and Henry II continued to promise that they will accept this charter but
they did not keep their promise. But King John, who was also known as
John, the Tyrant because of his hard temperament, signed this charter.
It is said that he did bow under the pressure of Barons. This charter
was also issued in 1216, 1217 and 1325 after being amended and
modified[^34] . The expression ‘fundamental rights of man ‘were stated
in the declaration and constitutional instruments of many states[^35] .
Thus, the term human rights came somewhat late in the vocabulary of
mankind. It is a twentieth century name for what has been traditionally
known as Natural rights or the rights of Man. It was first used by
Thomas Paine in the English translation of the French Declaration of the
rights of Man and citizen. The term natural law was replaced because the
concept of natural law had become a matter of great controversy and the
phrase ‘the rights of man’ was found unsuitable as it was not
universally understood to include the rights of women[^36] .

The idea that human rights could be protected by International law in
addition to municipal law developed slowly mainly because state
sovereignty … the doctrine of state sovereignty continued to prevail in
the ninetieth and early twentieth century where in human rights question
were regarded as a matters entirely within each state’s own domestic
jurisdiction and wholly inappropriate for regulation by international
law. International human rights were considered as an attack upon the
concept of state sovereignty. No doubt, there were exceptions to the
above rule which included the adoption of the slavery conventions of
1926 and the establishment in 1919 of the International labour
organization and its subsequent activities. The covenant of the League
of Nations adopted at the end of First World War was silent on the issue
of human rights. It pledged for the protection of minority rights and
respect for the human rights of the subject peoples under the mandate
system whereby newly decolonized nations were to be assisted towards
political development. However, the protection of human rights was
dependent upon the provisions of the natural laws[^37] .

The turning point for the traditional approach in International law came
in 1940’s in midst of the extreme human rights abuses in war-torn Europe
during the World War II shocking crimes were committed against the
humanity and there was a total suppression of fundamental human rights.
Nazi leaders of Germany have established a regime of complete
lawlessness and tyranny. They had barbously negated human values and
dignity within their territories under their occupation. It was at that
time realized that the restoration of the freedoms and rights to the
people is one of the essential conditions for the establishment of
international peace and security. Violation of human rights was
considered as a source of International conflict and protection of human
rights was regarded as necessary for international peace. This
conviction was reflected in the proclamation issued by President
Franklin D, Roosevelt on January 6, 1941 which came to be known as ‘Four
Freedoms’. These he listed as freedom of speech, freedom of religion,
freedom from want and freedom from fear. In the message he declared;
“freedom means the supremacy of human rights every where. Our support
goes to those who struggle to gain these rights or keep them”. It was
rightly recognized goal which can be found through the above
freedoms[^38] . The same efforts for the creation of an international
organization, in order to establish peace, were being made even when the
World War II was in progress. A number of conference and meetings were
held before the United Nations, an international organization was
established in 1945. Many declaration adopted by the conference laid
down the importance of human rights[^39] . Later, at San Francisco
conference it was expressed by several delegates that eh United Nation’s
should established an International Bill of Rights. Although that could
not be done it was realized by the members that it should be the
obligation of the International community to co-operate in eradicating
the scourge of war, and they were therefore determined that the
promotion and respect for human rights which at present constitute so
important and so conspicuous be an integrated part of the United
Nation’s charter. The result was that the charter contains provisions
for the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in the preamble and in Articles[^40] . After the United
Nation’s charter came into force, the most important task before the
United Nation’s was the implementation of the principles of the respect
for human rights and fundamental freedom’s for all without distinction
as to race, sex, language or religion. As laid down under Article 55 of
the United Nation’s charter. It was therefore, decided to prepare on
International Bill of Rights to achieve the end. The General Assembly
adopted its on December 10, 1948 through a resolution known as
‘Universal Declaration of Human Rights’[^41] . The resolution was
adopted without dissent by forty votes with eight states abstaining[^42]
. The Declaration consisted of Thirty Articles besides a preamble, they
are as follows.


