Publisher's Preface
===================

We live in a time when people have come to feel an urgent need to
examine the spiritual dimension of their lives. The materialistic
tendencies which have dominated so much of the modern age are beginning
to lose their attraction. People are beginning to realize that their
deepest needs cannot be satisfied by consumer products.

The turn within, however, is not without dangers of its own; sometimes
the seeker becomes blinded by the brilliance of relatively superficial
religious experiences, other may become victims of extreme forms of
asceticism, and perhaps the greatest danger is pride. Guidance is needed
for the spiritual journey. With the publication of this book, we hope to
provide the seeker with a few basic ideas to guide him or her in the
spiritual quest.

This work provides the reader with guidance drawn from the Glorious
Qur'an and ahadith about the value of knowledge of the self, and the
ways in which this knowledge can help one to achieve one's highest
potential.

This book was written in English as a text for foreign students in the
Islamic Republic of Iran. While it retains the style of a text of
fourteen lessons, it is engaging and lively rather than pedantic. It
takes the reader step by step from considerations of the value of
self-knowledge to an understanding of the ultimate goal for humanity.

The author has completed advanced degrees in the Islamic seminaries of
Qom and in the University of Tehran, where he earned an M.A. in Western
philosophy. He has also been teaching Islamic sciences in Qom, Mashhad
and Tehran for more than a decade.

*International Publishing Co.*


