How to Reach Our Goal
=====================

Having understood our ultimate goal it is necessary for us in our
journey to discuss the way to that goal. This topic needs an independent
book. But here we shall try to review briefly the most important points
assured that our readers who take their lives seriously will follow this
journey through further studying and reflection.

Before anything we should pay attention to two points:

We should observe our goal constantly during our lives, day and night;
otherwise we cannot utilise our power for our aim and the ordinary
affairs will capture our attention and gradually it may make us doubtful
about the necessity of following that aim. It is all too common for
human beings who are not successful in their pre-decided program to try
to get rid of their difficulties through a denial of that program.

We should pray and ask Allah seriously to help and save us. We cannot
continue this spiritual journey without His special help. Yes, with His
help there will be no obstacle and nothing can stop us. So in the
relationship with Allah we should not feel self-sufficient, because we
are completely and absolutely dependent on Him. However in the
relationship with others we should trust ourselves and rely on our
powers without allowing despair to capture our hearts. The Prophet (S)
who was the bravest man and stood against all enemies and was able to
change the world said:

“O My God! Do not ever leave me by myself even for an instant. “

Let's listen to Imam Sajjad (a.s.) when he asks Allah for help:

“Glory be to Thee! How narrow are the paths for him whom Thou has not
guided! How plain the truth for him whom Thou hast guided on his way! My
God, so make us travel on the roads that arrive at Thee and set us into
motion on the paths nearest to reaching You!”

“Make near for us the far, and make easy for us the hard and difficult!
Join us to Thy servants, those who hurry to You swiftly, knock
constantly at Your door, and worship You by night and day, while they
remain apprehensive in awe of You! You have purified their drinking
places, taken them to the objects of their desire, granted their
requests, accomplished their wishes through Your bounty, filled their
minds with Your love, and quenched the & thirst with Your pure drink”

The right path towards our happiness is worship, servitude. Allah says:

***“Did I not charge you, O children of Adam, that you should not serve
the shaytan? Surely he is your open enemy, and that you should serve Me;
this is the right path.” (36:60,61)***

The prophet Jesus (a.s.) also told the children of Israel:

***“Surely Allah is my Lord and your Lord, therefore serve Him, this is
the right path.” (3:51)***

Worship does not necessarily mean special kinds of worshipping. Every
action or even thought which is done for Allah's pleasure is considered
as a worship. The worship in this broad sense is able to occupy all our
life. Our works or jobs, our speaking or listening, our eating or
drinking and even our sleeping can be for His pleasure and can be
helpful in our spiritual movement.

We studied during our discussion about the goal of the creation that
human beings are created to worship Him and that it is to their own
benefits. We knew that there is a hierarchy of goals and we understood
the place of worship, as one goal within the hierarchy.

If we want to worship Him and get close to Him, it is not enough to
practice some prayers or fasting and the like. It changes all aspects of
our being. First of all, we should know Allah and His religion.
Secondly, we should obey those laws (act according those laws). Thirdly,
we should make our characters and spiritual qualities as He pleases.
Thus, there are three realms of improvement: creeds, deeds and virtues.

What should we do in respect to our creeds? According to Islam every
person is asked to investigate religion. One should think, reflect,
study and discuss religion. Some religious beliefs are necessary for all
people, such as the main principles and some are not necessary for all
people. So it is not necessary nor expected, that every person must know
al the details about, say, the resurrection through personal
investigation.

To make an inquiry into religious beliefs one should first of all depend
on one's reason. After realising the truth of the religion or the
Prophet (S) one can use the guidance of the Glorious Qur'an and
traditions of the Prophet for further studies. Moreover the Prophet (S)
has wanted all Muslims to refer to his household for understanding the
real interpretation of the Glorious Qur'an and his pure tradition. The
Prophet said:

“I leave two precious things among you that by grasping them you will
never go astray after me: the Divine book and my Household. And they
will never separate from each other until they come to me near the
fountain (kawthar). Be careful how you behave with them after me.”

This tradition is one of the traditions which expresses the authority of
the Household of the Prophet in presenting pure Islam. Here is a list of
books recording this tradition, but we should note that these are just
some samples of Sunni scholars' works and there are many other books by
Shi’s and Sunni scholars which include this tradition: Sahih Muslim, the
Book of fadail (merits) of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, Vol. 7, p.122, Sahih
al-Tirmidhi, Vol.5, p.328, Khasais a by Imam Nesa'i, p.21; Musnad by
Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal Vol.3, p.17; Kanz al-'Ummal, Vol. 1, p.154;
Al-Tabaqat al-Kubra by Ibn Sa'd, Vol.2, p.194; Jami' at-Usul by Ibn
Athir Vol. 1, p.187; AI-Jami' al-Saghir by Al-Suyuti, Vol.1, p.353; Usd
al-Ghabah by Ibn Athir Vol.2, p.12; Tarikh al-Dimashq by Ibn 'As5kir,
Vol.5, p.436.; Al- Tafsir by Thn Kathrr, Vol.4, p.113.

We should take care of our beliefs: basic ones and derivative ones. if a
person is not expert or skilled in discovering Islamic thoughts and
concepts through the Glorious Qur'an or the traditions he must not
interpret them according to his desires or weak understanding and he
must not rely on those people who are not of sufficient knowledge and
expertise. To use their books or sayings is like taking medicine
according to the prescriptions of false physicians. Thus, understanding
the details of the beliefs is like understanding practical laws.

According to Islam our happiness is not only based on our faith or
beliefs. Deeds as well as virtues bear on our happiness. Islamic
practical laws are to guide us in the realm of actions especially when
our intellect or conscience is uncertain. Every person can learn
jurisprudence and the related sciences and become a mujtahid. Then he
can rely on his own understanding of the laws. But it is a difficult
process and needs much cleverness, long work and practice. Those who are
not prepared for this job have two other possibilities.

They can exercise precaution. For example, when they are in doubt about
whether something is obligatory or recommended they must do it, or when
they do not know whether something is forbidden or allowed they must not
do it. To behave in this way is very difficult and even impossible for
those who are not learned in jurisprudence. The second possibility is to
imitate or follow a person who is proved to be a mujtahid or the most
learned and at the same time just, trustworthy, insightful and the like.
This kind of reference, i.e., the reference of a non-learned to a
trustworthy and learned person is advised by reason and approved by
Islam. This is what we do in our daily life, e.g., we take the
prescription of our physician or we ask some architect to make a plan
for our house and so on.

There are also social duties for us especially in the present situation
of the Islamic world. if we want to have respect in this universe and
rewards in the other it is not enough' to perform our personal duties.
Another role of that insightful, learned and just mujtahid is to declare
the duties of the Muslims. Our intellect tells us that through obedience
to this authority we can guarantee our material and spiritual happiness.
Let's quote what Allamah Muhammad Rida al-Muddaffar has written in his
precious book Aq'id al-mamryah:

“We believe that a fully qualified mujatahid is a representative of the
Imam, in the case of the latter's absence. Thus, he is an authority over
Muslims and performs the functions of the Imam as regards judgement and
administration among the people...

Therefore the qualified mujtahid is not only one who issues fatwas, but
he also has general authority over Muslims who must consult him if they
require judgemen4 this being obtainable only from him. It is
correspondingly wrong for anyone to give judgement except him or one who
is appointed by him, as no-one can pass sentence without his permission.
“

After understanding our duties through taqlid (imitation) we should try
our best to perform them. The first step is to perform the obligatory
ones. if a person disobeys the obligatory duties he stops his movement
towards Allah and even goes downwards. The second step is to perform the
recommended affairs (mustafiabbdt).

Besides the performance of obligations we should take care of our
spiritual qualities. This topic is studied in ethics, akhliq. To speak
briefly, first of all we should recognise our bad qualities. Then we
should try to get rid of them. In this way we can clean our spirits from
all badness and make our hearts capable of receiving divine
illuminations. Besides general ways there are some special ways to treat
moral weaknesses particular to each of them. This process should be
accompanied with acquiring good attributes and virtue.

These are outlines of the Islamic program for human beings to reach
their happiness. We hope that the reader will allow these points by him
or herself. It's nice to finish our discussion with two traditions of
the Prophet (S):

“Most of my people enter Paradise through piety and good behaviour. They
improve cities and lengthen lives.”

“I have been sent to complete noble characters.”

The Importance of Knowledge in Decision-making

In our previous discussions we came to the conclusion that human beings
are not the same; some are good and highly respected because of their
own decisions and deeds and some are bad and worse that animals, again
because of their own decisions and deeds. The last topic, “Free-will”,
was selected in order to reject all the excuses expressed by
unsuccessful people who want to shift the responsibility completely to
others or to the society or the environment or the like.

In the present discussion we want to understand those factors which bear
on our decision-making or will. We may divide them into three
categories:

a) knowledge.

b) desires and inclinations.

c) power and ability.

If something is unknown to me and I do not have any information at all
about it, I can never decide to do it. Let's consider a simple example.
Suppose you want to buy a certain book. What kinds of knowledge do you
need?

I) You should know your need. What kind of book do you need?

II) You should know your desire and favourite style of writing.

You should know and consider your background in that aspect or realm.
How much do you know about that subject? To what extent you can proceed
with the subject? If you are a student of high school, you may not make
use of book which are written for experts on math or physics.

You should know where to find and buy books.

You should know the content, the style, the writer and the price of the
book which you want to select and buy.

If you have complete knowledge but you do not have any desire to read or
have books , you will not decide to buy. Thus, the importance of the
second factor is clear. Also the importance of power is clear. if you
feel that you cannot do something you will not decide to do it. All
actions require some kinds of power. Now let us turn to our own case.

On the way to perfection human beings are equipped with desire. All have
some degree of self-love, so they desire and make efforts for their
well-being, for a better future. Yet, they often make mistakes in
deciding what is really better for them. Human beings also have power to
follow the path to perfection. Yet, they are different in the amount of
power they have spiritually, mentally and physically. For example, some
can understand facts or decide what to do much better than others. Some
can resist sin much easier than other people. Some are very respected
and honourable and are not attracted to temporary material interests
easily. Some are very healthy in their bodies so they engage in more
voluntary fasting to obtain greater spiritual rewards.

All these differences are natural. Indeed, they are necessary demands of
this material universe . But we should know that according to Islam,
rewards or punishments and their amount are and will be decided in
consideration of man's power and abilities. if someone has really no
power to understand or to act according to Islamic rules, he is excused
and Allah is most generous towards him. This group are very small in
number. Most of people are wise enough and also sufficiently able to
understand and follow the right path toward their perfection, although
they actually possess different amounts of power and ability. Allah, the
Wise, takes these differences into His consideration. He expects more of
those who are given more talents or abilities than others. Generally one
of the principles in His judgement is:

It means the most precious deed is the most difficult one. If a person
needs more time to learn how to pray or to memorise verses of the
Glorious Qur'an, his rewards will be greater and Allah will help him
more.

Thus, human beings generally have no difficulty in power and desire or
inclination which are needed in every decision and.. action. But what do
you think of the third factor, knowledge? Most difficulties arise from a
lack of knowledge, from ignorance. Now let's see which kinds of
knowledge we need in our journey towards His pleasure.

Here is a list of facts which we should know:

We should know ourselves. How are we created? Why? What are our needs?
What are our real desires or motives? What are our faculties and
abilities? Are there any tasks or duties for us?

What is our present situation? Under what conditions do we live? How is
our life in this universe? Is it the only life that we have? Is there
any eternal life for us? What good or bad qualities do we have?

What is the best position for us? What values and goods can we acquire?
What is a perfect man like?

What are the results of our deeds? What is the effect of this single
decision or even intention on our fate? Generally, how can we transit
from the present situation to the favoured and ideal one?

We can summarise these necessary kinds of knowledge as: knowing our
origin, knowing our present, knowing our nature, and knowing their
interactions.

There is a famous tradition from Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) which is closely
related to this discussion. Imam ‘Ali said:

Thus, every person needs to know his origin, his present, and his
future. Having acquired this knowledge one can behave and manage his
life properly. Otherwise he cannot plan for his life because he has not
acquired the necessary knowledge for deciding his goals and his way of
life. For example, if I did not believe in the Hereafter and eternal
life, my goal might be something to be obtained in this world. Or if I
did not believe in the relationship between my actions and my happiness
on the Day of Judgement, I would not care about my actions. If I
believed that I was created through chance and not by Allah, the Wise, I
would lose my hope in His help and mercy and would lose my confidence.

Therefore we will speak of the following subjects successively:

a) Our origin

b) Our present

c) Our future

d) The Ultimate goal

e) How to reach our goal.

Our Origin

One of the most fundamental things for a human being on the way to
perfection to know is that he is created by Allah for a certain purpose.
There are different approaches to this matter. In Islam every person is
first of all invited to study this problem and make a certain judgement
about it. Nothing less than certainty of belief in Allah is acceptable.
There are different ways to prove the existence of Allah and a variety
of reasons. But according to Islam it is not a difficult process to
understand that Allah, the One, is Existent. Every one; at every level
of knowledge and understanding, can settle this problem easily. Usually
when a person is a disbeliever it is because of his will, although there
might be rare cases of people who have studied this problem seriously
and who were really longing for the truth, but they could not find it.
Usually, atheism is just an assumption. Observe the following verse:

***“Is there doubt About Allah, the maker of the heavens and the earth?”
(14:10)***

In Islam every value is due to the relationship with Allah. Our
happiness is based on our voluntary devotion to Him. It is like the
lives of plants and animals which depend on the light of sun. The sun
does not need them, but they cannot survive without the sun.

Thus, we should change the common approach to Divine law or commands.
They are not some boring duties assigned to us by Allah in exchange for
His favours or His services to us. We are not to perform His commands in
response to His blessings. We should know that His commands are only for
our benefit. His religion, His prophets and His laws are the most
precious blessings that we have ever received. Even thankfulness to Him
(shukr) is for our benefit.

***“And when your Lord makes it known: If you are grateful, I would
certainty give to you more.” (147)***

If we are thankful, we increase our capacity to receive more blessings.
With more thankfulness, again more blessings will be brought. It is an
endless process. If we are not thankful, it is not harmful to Allah, but
decreases our capacity for receiving His blessings, so we loose some
blessings and if we continue, we will loose more.

We should always recall that He is our Lord, that our real happiness and
freedom can be achieved only with our obedience to Him. There are only
two ways: to be servants of Allah or to be servants of others such as
oppressors or unjust governments or idols. To satisfy Allah is easy,
because He is the One and He only wants our happiness. He never makes
mistakes and never wants impossible things. But disobedience to Allah
leads us to try to obey many gods, although it is not possible. If one
wants money and fame and good position and comfort and the like, no
matter how much of them he acquires, he will never be satisfied.

***“Allah sets forth an example: There is a slave in whom are (several)
partners differing with one another, and there is another slave wholly
owned by one man. Are the two alike in condition?” (39:29)***

If we think deeply we will understand that those different and
conflicting gods are really our own different extreme desires. So there
are two ways : to be servants of Allah or to be servants of our devious
soul.

***“Have you seen him who takes his low desires for his god? will you
then be a protector of him?” (25:43)***

***“Have you then considered him who takes his low desire for his god,
and Allah has made him err having knowledge.” (45.23)***

Finally, consider the true story which happened during the time of Imam
Musa al-Kazim (a.s.). Once Imam (a.s.) was walking in a lane. When he
was passing by the door of one house, Imam knew that there was some
celebration there in which dancing and forbidden music and wine were
used. Then a slave-maid opened the door and came out to put the garbage
outside. Imam asked her: “Is the owner of this house a slave or a free
person?” She answered: “Free”. Imam said: “Surely he is free, because if
he were a slave, he would fear his life and would not make such a
session.

When the slave-maid returned, the owner asked her why she was late. She
answered that a man with such and such appearance was passing and
questioned me and I replied to him in this way. The owner was shocked
and began to think deeply about this sentence: “if he were a slave, he
would fear his lord.” Suddenly he stood up and without putting on his
shoes he went out of the house and looked for that man. When he reached
Imam (a.s.) he repented. This man was Bushr ibn Harith, given the title
of 'hafi', meaning shoeless. He became a real believer.

Our Present

Having discussed our origin, it is necessary to study our present
situation and our future. Now let us turn to the former and the latter
will be our topic in the next discussion. In order to certify our goal
and practical program to reach that goal, we should know our qualities,
capacities, abilities, opportunities and so on.

These are articles of our knowledge about our present. We have studied
some of them in the previous chapters such as: good attributes of human
beings, the vices attributed to human beings and free-will. Here we just
mention some other aspects of our present situation.


