Complete dependence
===================

In our being (existence) and our life, we are completely dependent on
Allah, our Creator. This existence and life is given to us by Him; We
are not self-existent. We cannot survive without His will. We are also
dependent on material conditions. We cannot exist without water, air,
food, light, a certain temperature, and so on.

We cannot have a comfortable life without the help of other members of
the society. No one can produce for himself whatever he needs of
clothes, shelter (house), furniture, etc. With the progress and
development of human societies these needs increase. Thus, we are
dependent on our Creator and his blessings in the material universe and
in the social universe.

In our knowledge and understanding, we are not needless. With his
God-given intellect every human being is able to understand many facts
such as the truth of the religion and the.; existence of Allah and to
acquire some easy and simple:) information about the nature and the
environment around him. I With his God-given conscience, every human
being understands) the general rules of morality, e.g., justice is good
and oppression is bad. This theoretical and practical knowledge is
common between men in primitive societies and men in advanced ones.

But what; makes us different from those ancient (earliest) people is
what we have received from the prophets, especially the Noble Prophet of
Islam, the seal of the prophets, whose message is the last and the;;
most perfect message of our life and what we have received from the past
generations. These two sources, religion and inherited knowledge, are
very important. They serve as the point of departure for every field in
the sciences, arts, literature, technology and positive laws (contracts)
which have become very complicated, developed and advanced. For example,
today when a chemist starts to work on a project, he uses the results of
previous discoveries and inquiries. Many of those achievements have
become trivial. Perhaps university students today know more than
chemists in the 18th or even 19th century. Or in Islamic sciences, today
we use many works on different subjects made by great scholars in the
past centuries. Without them we would have to start from the beginning.
But we are still on the way. What we know is much less than what we do
not know.

Thus, we are completely needful and dependent in our existence, our life
and our knowledge. We should not be proud of ourselves. We should not
think we are needless or that our knowledge and understanding are
perfect.


