Mortality of this universe
==========================

This natural universe (dunya) is not eternal. It has started at a
certain time and will reach to its end at a certain time. This earth,
the sun, the moon and all stars and planets will be destroyed before the
resurrection. This fact is expressed by many verses of the Glorious
Qur'an such as the following:

***“When the sun is covered, and when the stars darken, and when the
mountains are made to pass away, and when the camels are left untended,
and when the wild animals are made to go forth, and when the seas are
set on fire, and when souls are united, “(81:1-7)***

Therefore, everything in this universe has a certain end. Our bodies are
mortal. Our physical lives, our powers, our youth, fame and beauty are
mortal (perishable). Allah is eternal and the spiritual (abstract)
universe is also endless. Our spirits belong to the spiritual universe
and not to the corporeal universe.

***“And they ask you about the spirit Say: The spirit is from the
commands of my Lord, and you are not given ought of knowledge but a
little.” (17:85)***

And if we notice that our spirits make our personality and reality, we
easily come to the conclusion that death is not our end. Death is like a
gate to another universe. Not only our spirits but also our characters
and acts will be preserved. (In the next chapter we will discuss the
embodiment of our actions.)

Thus, we cannot obtain eternity and infinite life or endless pleasure in
this world. if we want them, we should know they are due to the
relationship with Allah. Because Allah is eternal, everything is related
to Him (in a narrow sense), is of His signs, and shows Him and so, must
be like Him.

***“Everyone on it must pass away And there will endure for ever the
face (wajh) of your Lord, the Lord Of glory and honour.” (5526,27)***

“And call not with Allah any other god; there is no god but He; every
thing is perishable but His face (wajh); He is the judgement, and to Him
you shall be brought back” (2&88)

In Arabic “wqjh” is that part of any thing through which you can
confront that thing. For example if you confront the foot or hand of a
person, you are not confronting and meeting him, but when you confront
his face and have a kind of face to face sight, you confront and meet
him. This is why in Arabic our face is called “wajh”. In the case of
Allah, we know that He has no body, so it is not necessary to look in a
special direction to meet Him. In the Glorious Qur'an this fact is
expressed in the following verse:

***“And for Allah is the East and the West, therefore, whither you turn,
thither is Allah face Surely Allah is Ample-giving, Knowing.” (2-115)***

As we can consider and use everything to know Him, to reach Him, so
every thing can be called “wajh Allah”. Those things which are
considered in this way will never be destroyed as we saw in the verses:
(55:26,27) and (28:88). So every action or even intention which you have
for His pleasure will be preserved. if you give some money to a poor
person, this money will be destroyed but that aspect of this money or in
other words that aspect of this action which is “wajh Allah” will be
preserved forever.


