The Status of Human Beings in the Glorious Qur'an
=================================================

We can look at human beings from two different angles. The first view
would be to explore human beings as a whole in general terms; or else we
can deal with the matter by looking at them as individuals. The Glorious
Qur'an presents both aspects. Sometimes the Glorious Qur'an speaks of
human beings in general terms. At times, it treats the matter on an
individual basis, for example with the presentation of the Pharaoh as a
bad person. It also sometimes speaks of good people like the wife of
Pharaoh, the prophets and so on. So, both aspects are thoroughly dealt
with in the Glorious Qur'an.

Now we want to speak about humans generally, not some individuals, but
as a whole. Can we understand from the Glorious Qur'an that humans as a
whole are good or bad? What is the answer? As a whole can we say
something?

According to the Glorious Qur'an a human being can be the best and the
most perfect creature. As far as our knowledge permits, we recognise,
comprehend and identify these beings according to given norms. If we
compare man to any form of matter or living things such as plants and
animals and so on, we will immediately draw an important conclusion that
human beings are better, more intelligent and perfect. If man can
cultivate a field and make use of the produce for his own and others'
benefit, capture animals, make use of them and extract natural resources
for upgrading his life and that of the society, naturally, we definitely
come to this result that man is a higher being. For instance, an
elephant is much bigger than a human, but man trains it and controls it
to do some work for him.

Thanks to his talents, physical abilities, mental powers, and the
indomitable spirit that Almighty Allah has bestowed upon man, his life
has adjusted according to the needs of his time and place. For example,
the way of life today is completely different from that of the ancient
ages. Again, when we compare the ancient way of life with that of life
in the stone age, you will see that man has always been after
improvement. The change of the mode of life can be studied in context
with that particular age of man. However, this is not the case with the
animals. All the animals have followed the same pattern of survival for
centuries. The environment may have modelled their pattern of survival
but they have never been the masters of the environment. Many animal
species have become extinct due to environmental changes. Human beings
have shown their capability to survive by modifying their environment to
fit their needs. Consequently, we can say that man is more perfect than
animals. Would it be wrong to conclude that man is the best creature?

We can say yes, and we can argue for it in some ways, but we should be
careful! When we give an affirmation of our status, it does not mean
that every human being is better than every other creature!

Are human beings better than the angels? We do not want to speak about
one person. Yes, the Prophet of Islam (S) and Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) are
better than any angels. That is clear. But can we make a generalisation
that a new-born child is better than an angel? It is difficult to say
because the actual perfection that a child has is not sufficient to
answer this question, but we can argue for the idea in other ways.

According to a verse from the Glorious Qur'an we can deduce that man is
very important and precious.

“Then we made the life-germ a clot, then we made the clot a lump off
lesh, then we made (in) the lump of flesh bones, then we clothed the
bones with flesh, then we caused it to grow into another creation, so
blessed be Allah, the best of the creators.” (23:14)

This verse explains different stages of creation that a human being goes
through. After the body achieves its perfection, Allah, the Most
Glorious, gives him another creation. What it means here is that Allah,
the Creator, bestows souls into the body. This is the final phase of
creation. On the first day the embryo has no spirit, then after some
months, Allah the Glorious breathes life into the foetus. So we can
realise why Allah the Almighty has emphasised the stage of creation of
the spirit by saying 'another creation' which means that the spirit is
not an ordinary thing of the material world. The spirit belongs to
another heavenly universe.

When people were asking the Prophet (S) about the spirit and its nature,
the following verse was revealed. The answer was that the spirit is from
the command of Allah(1) or that it belongs to the abstract world
(according to different interpretation, but the result does not change).

***“And they ask you about the spirit. Say: The spirit is from the
command of my Lord, and you are not given ought of knowledge but a
little.” (17:85)***

Notice that in the last part of the verse (23:14) Allah, the Almighty,
says: “Blessed be Allah who is the best of the creators”. According to
this verse of Scripture, we can now conclude that man is the best
creature. Because it is the best Creator who can create the best
creature. To understand this point more perfectly , we should take note
of the following verse:

***“And surely we have honoured the children of Adam, and carried them
on the land and at the sea, and provided them with good things, and we
have made them to excel by an appropriate excellence over many of those
we created.” (17:70)***

Since Almighty Allah has honoured man with the highest position on the
earth and has bestowed upon him the highest respect, the Creator
provided man with the means to excel many but not all of His other
creatures. What this sentence really implies is that there may be some
creatures superior to man, otherwise Allah would have pronounced thus:
We have made them to excel over all of our creatures. Now the question
arises whether man can be considered the best creature.

Man can rise to the rank of supremacy if he makes use of his God-given
possibilities. Man progresses on the ladders to supremacy according to
his possibilities. These God-given possibilities are the natural or
Divine gifts (talents) innate in every being. These talents are of two
kinds: actualities and capacities (potentialities) for further
perfection. Our corporeal body, being the first dimension, is, to some
extent actualised at the time of our birth. But it is not the case with
our soul which is the other dimension.

Every individual is capable of reaching the highest level of perfection;
they can be vicegerents of Allah; they can be the real servants of
Allah. These capacities or potentialities, (although dormant at the time
of birth) excel in quality compared to every other creature. Natural
gifts do not make us better than other creatures at birth.

However, when we opt for the right path to develop our God-given talents
and begin to fully make use of the potentialities bestowed upon us, we
start climbing the ladders to supremacy. The more constructively we make
use of those potentialities, the better we become compared to other
creatures. We can ascend to the ranks that no angel has reached. And if
man takes a wrong path and begins making use of the God-given talents in
a wrong direction, man can descend to the murkiest level where no animal
has fallen!

We can conclude that at the time of birth, because of our innocence and
purity we may excel many creatures, but there are some creatures like
angels who are better than us at that particular stage. Yes, human
beings are equipped with the best talents and are made in a manner that
can reach the highest levels possible for a creature. So Allah's power
and wisdom is best manifested in human beings. That is the reason that
Allah says:

“Blessed be Allah, the best of the creators.”

Now let's return to the Glorious Qur'an to see the values of human
beings. We will give a list of attributes beginning with the good
attributes of humans and then the bad attributes. There are many verses
and it is not possible to mention them all.

The Vices Attributed to Human Beings

We can describe man in two different ways. We can view man in general
terms as masses or speak about some individuals. When we say an
individual is good or bad, it does not imply that all are bad or good.
It does not mean that the same qualities can be attributed to all human
beings. If an individual happens to possess an undesirable quality, that
stain can be cleansed through strengthening his faith. Here we want to
mention some undesirable attributes of human beings mentioned in the
Glorious Qur'an


