The Importance of Self-Knowledge
================================

When discussing a topic such as this, it is perhaps best to begin with
its definition and an assessment of its importance. Let us then begin by
defining some terms. In Arabic self-knowledge is called Ma’rifatul-Nafs.
What is Ma’rifatul-Nafs or self-knowledge? It is knowledge about us, but
what kind of knowledge?

It is not the kind that has to do with knowing one's name, or father's
name, or the place and date of one's birth. Self-knowledge deals with
another aspect of our being. It is not related to our physical senses,
rather it deals with the spiritual dimension of our lives.

When we speak of the different dimensions of the spirit, and of our
being, we should not forget that the human being is fundamentally
different from other beings. Although we are anchored to the animal
world in many ways, here we wish to focus on that which separates us
from animals and is not found in them.

To understand better why this topic is of such importance, perhaps it
helps to quote a few verses of the Glorious Qur'an and Hadiths on the
subject. There are many verses in the Glorious Qur'an which elaborate.
One of these verses is found in Surah al-Hashr, where the Almighty Allah
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَكُونُوا كَالَّذِينَ نَسُوا اللَّهَ فَأَنْسَاهُمْ أَنْفُسَهُمْ
ۚ أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْفَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And be not like those who forgot Allah, so He made them forget their
own souls; these it is that are the transgressors.”*** ***(59:19)***

Here the Lord is saying that forgetting Him causes us to forget
ourselves in turn, and ultimately leads us to transgression. There is a
tradition that makes a similar point to that of this verse, but looks at
the matter from another angle. This tradition is a very famous one, and
it is difficult to find a book on ethics, which has not quoted it: “He
who truly knows himself has known his Lord “

This tradition implies that self-knowledge implies knowledge about the
Lord as well. Awareness of oneself leads to awareness of the Lord. And
likewise, one who is oblivious of the Lord is oblivious of him. If one
is determined to learn about one's Lord, then the best way to accomplish
the task is to learn about oneself

Another verse dealing with the topic is found in Surah al Ma'idah, where
Allah says***:***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا عَلَيْكُمْ أَنْفُسَكُمْ ۖ لَا
يَضُرُّكُمْ مَنْ ضَلَّ إِذَا اهْتَدَيْتُمْ ۚ إِلَى اللَّهِ
مَرْجِعُكُمْ جَمِيعًا فَيُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Take care of yourselves; he who errs cannot hurt
you when you are on the right path.”*** ***(5:105)***

In this verse Allah is telling us to take care of ourselves, to pay
attention to ourselves, that we must be careful about the well-being of
our spirits, that we must be aware of the diseases of our souls, and how
to cure them. He also tells us that we should pay attention to our
duties, made obligatory on us as Muslims.

Then He tells us that if we understand the way, that if we are faithful
and committed believers, those who are misled will not harm us. From
this we understand that our first duty is to take care of ourselves
spiritually.

Sometimes a question may arise here about the relationship between the
believer and society. Does the above verse mean that we should focus on
ourselves and not pay any attention to the society at large? To answer
this question let us see what Allamah Tabataba'i says on this topic in
his landmark work, Al-Mizan.

This great interpreter and scholar of the Glorious Qur'an explains that
what is meant here is that we should take care of ourselves, and be
familiar with our social and private duties, so that we can also be
socially responsible. For instance, in Islam we are commanded to advise
people to do good and forbid them from evil deeds. One who does not
perform this duty is not considered a devout Muslim, the reason being
that he is not helping the society to better itself.

So, in Islam taking care of oneself spiritually is closely interwoven
with being concerned with the welfare of the society as well.
Conversely, it is important to remember that the society can greatly
influence a person, weakening or strengthening one's faith.

Another question that may come up is “Are we responsible for guiding
non-Muslims as well?” The answer is an unequivocal yes, although the
most important thing before doing that is to conduct oneself in such a
pious, righteous manner that others are able to see the immense
practical benefits of being a faithful Muslim.

In inviting non-Muslims to Islam, we are continuing the job entrusted to
the noble Prophet (S) in his lifetime. It is also a duty demanded by our
love for our fellow human beings. If we have found the way and the
light, we should invite others to immerse themselves in the light and
its blessings as well.

After performing our personal and social duties, those who are still
disbelieving and those who still insist on erring, will not be harmful
to us. Perhaps they will bother you, and at most they may kill you, but
they will not be able to take your faith away from you. On the contrary,
these pressures strengthen your faith.

Returning to our main theme, the third verse on the importance of
self-knowledge is found in:

***“We will soon show them our signs in the universe and in their own
souls, until it becomes quite clear to them that ft is the Truth.”***
***(41:53)***

Allah says that very soon we will show them our signs, but what are
these signs and where will they be found? Allah tells us that these
signs are found in two places: meaning in the external world and in
their own souls. This ayah tells us that by considering these signs
which are within our own selves and which are in the universe, it will
become completely clear that Allah truly exists. According to some
interpretations this fact will not only be true, but will be the truth
itself. It is important to understand the distinction between these two
expressions; it is the same when we say that Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) is not
only just but that he is just meaning that justice was embodied in Imam
‘Ali (a.s.).

Let us continue exploring the reasons the topic is so vital to our
conduct in life. Once again we shall rely on the Glorious Qur'an for
guidance. In everyday life when we purchase a new appliance or a gadget,
we immediately turn to its manual for guidance in correctly operating
it, believing that its manufacturer is the best source of guidance. So
it seems quite logical for a Muslim to turn to the Glorious Qur'an for
instructions on correct conduct in life, convinced that the Maker and
Creator of human beings is also the best source of guidance in learning
about the immensely complex nature of human beings.

Another verse pertaining to our topic is found in surah al-Dhariyat:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفِي الْأَرْضِ آيَاتٌ لِلْمُوقِنِينَ  وَفِي أَنْفُسِكُمْ ۚ أَفَلَا
تُبْصِرُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And there are signs on the earth for those who are certain. And in
your own souls (too); wi11 you not then see?”(51: 20, 21)***

We learned that Allah has two kinds of signs, the ones in the external,
physical world, and those within ourselves. Verse 20 deals with those
signs that have to do with the physical realm. In it the Almighty God
tells us that there are signs on the earth for those who believe.

Immediately a question arises: why should those who already believe need
the reassurances of such signs, and why should those who are not
believers in God remain oblivious of them, yet more in need of them?

The answer given by great scholars of Islam is that those who do not
believe in a creator as the Lord and Sovereign of the universe, also
tend not to look or pay attention to that which is before them remaining
for the most part oblivious of signs which are readily discernible to
believers.

In the following verse, 21 of Surah al-Dhariyat, the Lord says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفِي أَنْفُسِكُمْ ۚ أَفَلَا تُبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And in your own souls (too); will you not then see?”(51:21)***

This verse calls to our attention to the need to look for these signs
within ourselves. We are clearly and unambiguously told that there are
signs in the external world as well, and these are sources of guidance
for us.

From these verses it becomes clear to us that Muslims are urged not to
focus on their souls to the exclusion of the physical, material world;
and conversely, not to think that material affairs are all that matter.

In India for instance, there are people who try to strengthen the power
of their souls in order to enable themselves to perform certain deeds
not ordinarily possible. But in so doing, they loose touch with the
everyday life of the planet. That is not what faithful Muslims are
commanded to do. Muslims are told the two go hand in hand and are
complimentary to each other.

When a scientist is working on a project in the laboratory, or a person
is performing the most menial of tasks to earn an honourable living, he
or she is carrying out one of God's commandments. It is again, one of
the most distinct characteristics of Islam that two worlds are never
separated.

In today's world, in Western societies in particular, we see countless
examples of people who are totally alienated from themselves, seeking
all in the material life.

In more extreme cases, the alienation from the self has progressed to
such a degree that being alone becomes painful and undesirable. Why?

Because when such a person is alone, in a way he has lost contact with
the eternal world, which is all he has. So being alone with his soul and
spirit, he has to face a world which has no meaning to him, and matters
not to him. In trying to escape the inevitable loneliness, many resort
to mind-altering drugs, such as alcohol and narcotics.

A person with a healthy spirit can be alone yet not lonely. One who has
forsaken a part of himself, his spirit, his consciousness, when alone,
seeks to destroy it, rather than facing that which is excruciatingly
painful; thus resorting to drugs becomes an easy escape route.

This is one reason why some societies use solitary confinement as a
method of punishment for hardened criminals who already are serving life
sentences and have nothing to lose by further acts of violence.

But when a faithful Muslim is alone by himself, he is not lonely. As a
matter of fact being alone is prized by faithful Muslims. There is a
Hadith from Imam Sajjad (a.s.) in which the Imam is quoted as saying:
“If all between the East and West were to die, I would not feel lonely
as long as the Qur'an was with me.

Once again we shall turn to the Hadiths to further explore this topic.
This invaluable heritage has been left to us by the scholars who
instinctively knew the eternal value of observing the speech and deeds
of the Noble Prophet and Imams, and recording for posterity this living
example of the perfect Muslim and human being.

Earlier we discussed a famous Tradition, which has reached us in two
similar versions: There is however, no difference in meaning: “However
knows himself (his soul or spirit) knows [or has known] his Lord “(1)

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) is also quoted on the subject, stressing the importance
of knowledge: “Knowledge of oneself (self- knowledge) is the most
beneficial knowledge of all “(2)

This again tells us that knowing oneself leads to knowing one's Lord and
all that it entails. The second Hadith on the topic from ‘Ali (a.s.)
reads: “I wonder at the person who urgently searches for that which he
has lost, but he has lost his soul and is not searching for it “

The third Hadith from Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) on Self-knowledge is: 'I wonder
how a person who ignores himself can know his Lord. '

The fourth Hadith from Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) is: “Whenever the knowledge of a
man increases, his attention to his soul also increases and he tries his
best to train, and purify' it”

Here is yet another Tradition on the subject from Imam ‘Ali (a.s.): “The
ultimate knowledge of a man is to know himself”


