Fiqh, Islamic jurisprudence; Akhlaq, Ethics
===========================================

The obligatory rules of Fiqh are concerned with the minimally necessary
conditions of human perfection. For humans aspiring to new heights,
higher levels of perfection, Divine guidance is provided in the second
set of rules, Akhlaq which governs both the world and the soul and
provides us with all the Prescriptions we need to reach the highest
levels of perfection. Thus, the two sets of rules governing Muslims'
lives, are each meant for a different purpose. For instance, while idle
chatter is not prohibited it is considered a waste of precious time and
not helpful to the spiritual development of the person, and thus
prohibited.

Another example which helps to illuminate the difference better is the
night prayers, which is highly recommended to all Muslims; and while not
mandatory in fiqh, it is compulsory in akhlaq. The reason being that
those aspiring to new heights, and striving for perfection, are expected
to prepare and develop spiritually by performing certain tasks, such as
rising in the majestic dark of the night to offer prayers to the Lord of
the universe.

So Fiqh mainly comprises basic and necessary laws whose obedience IS
required from all Muslims, and is considered the first step towards
development To commit oneself to the laws of Fiqh is not a difficult
undertaking, as Islam itself is not a difficult religion.

However, there always are individuals who observe the mandatory laws of
fiqh, yet upon getting a glimpse of the Light, want nothing more than to
fly to the Flame. For these enraptured souls, Islam has provided akhlaq.
They then make mandatory upon themselves deeds which are highly
recommended, or mustahab . In addition to performing these recommended
tasks, they obey other laws of Akhlaq, and make. unlawful upon
themselves that which is not forbidden in Fiqh, yet somehow might be an
obstacle on the way to the Light, to perfection.

Therefore there might be thoughts or spiritual qualities which are not
directly forbidden in Fiqh, but prohibited in Akhlaq. One destructive
thought or quality which is not forbidden in itself in Fiqh is jealousy,
which is not a punishable offence in Islamic jurisprudence, nor are we
taken to task for such thoughts in the Hereafter. Yet actions issuing
from jealousy might be forbidden.

The Noble Prophet said: 'if you are pessimistic then do not let that
keep you from continuing, and if you are suspicious about someone, do
not judge on that basis, and if you are envious of someone, do not
persecute him “

Jealousy has been called the prison of the soul, and such an impediment
to one's spiritual development that there is no place for it in akhlaq.
We also can find examples of thoughts being the subject of the both sets
of rules governing the life of Muslims. One of these, considered one of
the greatest sins which mostly manifests itself in one's thoughts, is
despair of God's help. There are many Hadiths regarding this subject and
it is so grievous a sin that it is considered a form of or disbelief in
God.

There are several reasons for this; and just from a psychological point
of view, such a person, so lost in sin and so despondent of ever being
forgiven by the Lord, has no practical incentive either to save himself,
or to save the society from his future misdeeds. This feeling of
despair, we are taught in Islam, is worse than the sins themselves.

Even in mandatory, practical laws, fiqh, Muslims are explicitly
forbidden from ever losing hope in God's forgiveness. We are told that
such despondent thoughts are one of the most effective weapons of Satan,
who will rejoice at the spectre of a lost soul, despondent of his Lord's
mercy and forgiveness. Such people are told to truly and sincerely
repent, amend for past deeds to the extent possible, and have faith that
the Almighty God will forgive them.

Another great sin, which also has to do mostly with one's thought, is to
think oneself free of the possibility that God will not exact punishment
for one's misdeeds. To consider oneself the master schemer somehow able
to get away with sin. In the Glorious Qur'an we find:

***“They planned and Allah planned, and He is the best of Planners. “***
(3:54)

So we are told not to think ourselves beyond God's justice, and not to
scheme and deceive, for it is all in vain. One of the words used in this
verse is (makr) which when used for man, means deception; but when used
in connection with Almighty God connotes planning in an innocent, yet
capable manner. An example of this is found in the account of the
Quart’s attempt on the Noble Prophet's life. They thought their plan
carefully through, and in order to spread the blame and avoid the
consequences, sent one man from each tribe to carry out the
assassination. They were certain that this scheme would prevent the kin
and followers of Muhammad (S) from declaring war on all tribes should
the culprits be found. But by God's Grace, the Archangel Gabriel
revealed their plans to the Prophet and ‘Ali (a.s.) decided to occupy
his bed, and the Prophet left town that night.

To conclude our discussion of this topic, the third major benefit Of
self-knowledge taught in Islam is to know that the spiritual aspect of
our being is the most important one, and our spirits are influenced not
only by our deeds but also by our ideas. So we must be on guard with
respect to our thoughts, and use our knowledge of ourselves to avoid the
many pitfalls of the soul. The fourth benefit of self-knowledge is to
understand that we were not created by chance. if we deeply contemplate
our own selves, our being, we come to the inevitable conclusion that it
is God who created all, and we could not have come into existence by
ourselves or simply as a result of our parents' union, had it not been
part of His Plan. Naturally man is always in search of a reason for his
existence, his being, but through contemplating creation and the goals
of creation, one realises that we are each unique, with a mission in
life. We were not created by chance and in vain.

Armed with this knowledge, one is well equipped to strive and to realise
the purpose of one's creation, to incessantly seek to return to Him
through deeds which are dear to him, Godly acts which are the
cornerstone of religion and give life meaning. The fifth benefit is the
tremendous help one receives in truly appreciating the element of
consciousness, which is critical to the process of spiritual development
and purification. Through self-knowledge, we are able to cultivate and
develop our self-awareness, our consciousness; otherwise external
factors may come to influence us in ways we cannot control.

One of the characteristics of man is that with respect to changing
matters and constant ones, he is not always aware of the latter. This is
so that our attention is not fixed and held on constants and we are
therefore able to take measure of new things. Allah has made us in this
way to enable us to attend to new matters; otherwise our attention would
be fixed on only one thing. (Of course, it is possible for us to
strengthen our spirit to pay close attention to more than one thing at
the same time.) For example when we first put on a watch we are aware of
it, but after ,while we lose consciousness of it until we want to know
the time; or we feel the weight of our clothes at first and then we
neglect it. We feel hungry or not hungry through the changes of the size
of our stomach.

We should utilise this psychological point in our spiritual lives. There
are times when major catastrophes can befall one's soul, without the
person being aware of it. There are instances of people who are totally
lost in life and not even aware of the fact. This can progress to the
extent of total disbelief in God, without the person being aware of the
change in himself, in his consciousness. This is because humans are
created in such a way that they are much more aware of sudden changes
than subtle ones. One could undergo drastic changes in beliefs and yet
these changes not be readily obvious to the person. A good example is
lying. Most humans, specially in the early stages of childhood, cannot
tell a lie, especially if it is the very first time they have engaged in
such behaviour, without feeling uneasy, uncomfortable, and later,
remorseful. As one repeats this behaviour though, the soul becomes
inured to the effects, and one can lie, cheat, and deceive with little
effort or discomfort. Even worse, one may not at all be conscious of the
change one has gone through. Self-knowledge lets one see these changes
coming, giving the person the opportunity to correct such character
defects, and once again tread the path of God.

With most people however, only cataclysmic events in their personal
lives can cause them to become aware of these character defects. With
those armed with it will not come to that. By paying attention to one's
consciousness and caring for it, one can gain awareness of the subtle
changes that occur in the inner life and take corrective steps when
needed.

The Almighty God tells us in the Glorious Qur'an:

***“Then it was the fate (end) of those who did evil, to reject Divine
signs, and become accustomed to mocking them. “*** (30:10)

So it is with human beings, given consciousness and free will, we can
destroy ourselves or we (:an attain happiness and peace if we are aware
of ourselves, our actions, and most importantly aware of the Almighty
God at all times.

The sixth benefit of self-knowledge is that it serves as a gateway to
the non-material or spiritual world. Once we pass through the gates we
find many things which from a strictly materialistic point of view do
not make sense. An example of this is the conscience, which can not be
justified or explained by merely materialistic laws. I-low wonderful it
is that all human beings from time immemorial, regardless of
up-bringing, culture, and religion hear the same call from within.
People seem to instinctively realise what is right and what constitutes
a wrong. Every person considers oppression and injustice as bad, and
justice as good and desirable. Even oppressors themselves wish to be
treated justly. It is said that even thieves, when dividing the loot,
pick the one among them they deem trustworthy to do the job.

Through self-knowledge we come to understand that all things except
human beings have an inherent nature which cannot be changed. For
instance, a stone is forever stone, no matter how many changes it goes
though when different things are made of it. With human beings it is the
exact opposite. Although we all inhabit more or less the same kind of a
physical body, we have different natures. We are told that on the Day of
Judgement, when the veil is finally lifted from before our eyes, we will
see ourselves and others as they really are. Their true natures will
appear. In the Glorious Qur'an we read:

***“On the day when hidden things will be made manifest. “ (86:9)***

And there is another verse:

***“The day on which the trumpet shall be sounded so you shall come
forth in hosts”*** (78:18)

According to Hadith, hosts means groups of people and other beings,
grouped according to their true natures. Some might appear as dogs or
monkeys. Some human beings could have fallen lower than a bug, while
others could have ascended higher than angels. We learned that in Islam,
human beings are not valued the same. One can, through despicable deeds
rank below the lowliest of species and conversely, rise higher than
angels, in the eyes of God.

According to other worldviews, all human beings are considered as one
and the same. Zionists and their victims, or Serbs and their victims are
considered as humans with the same rights and both have to be respected.
But in Islam, there are two distinct levels of humanity, therefore two
distinct levels of laws, relationships, etc.

First, there are basic laws applied to all human beings, arising from
their basic rights, their birth right for having been created human. The
second level of laws are exclusively applied to real human beings, who
through countless Godly deeds have risen to a level inaccessible to
others who have not conducted themselves in a a similar fashion. The
underlying reason for this is that the relationship between the Creator
and man is a very special one, with the Lord granting certain rights
exclusively to those who tread His path.

One aspect of this relationship, aside from the laws, is the insight
that the Almighty God grants the faithful, enabling them to understand
people's true natures and characters in this life. There are also some
awesome privileges granted to the righteous which have not even been
granted to angels. Again, the reason seems to be that man, given free
will, when exceedingly righteous and pious, is also accorded certain
privileges denied to angels. For instance, when the Noble Prophet
ascended to the Heavens in the majestic night of Miraj (Ascension), he
was at times accompanied by the Archangel Gabriel; but there were places
and dimensions of the universe which were denied the archangel, for, in
his words, quoted by the Noble Prophet: “If I had gone even a fingertip
further I would have been burnt. “

In the Glorious Qur'an we read that when the Noble Prophet (S) ascended
to the Heavens he got as close as any created being could ever hope to
the Lord of the universe:

***“Then he drew near, then he hewed, so he was the measure of two bows
or closer still. And He revealed to His servant what He revealed. “***
(53: 8-10)

Here we should not forget that in the Glorious Qur'an at times the Lord
speaks to us in allegory, especially when matters are well over our
heads. So the distance mentioned here should also be taken in the same
vein, meaning that the Noble Prophet was only two stages beyond seeing
the Lord of the universe in all His Majesty.

These and matters like them are learned through It is, as mentioned
earlier, the gateway to the non-material, metaphysical world. Thus, we
reviewed some Islamic teachings regarding the widely divergent values of
different human beings to their Creator and to each other. We also saw
how self-knowledge helps open the Sates of the spiritual world,
presenting a breathtaking vista to those who step inside.

As for those who choose a different life, sinking deep, and drowning in
the vortex of sin, the Glorious Qur'an says***:***

***''And certainly we have created for Hell many of the Jinn(I) and the
men; they have hearts with which they do not understand, they have eyes
with which they do not see, and they have ears with which they do not
hear; they are as cattle, nay, they are in worse error, they are the
heedless ones. “*** (7:179)

These, who remain totally oblivious of their Lord and the spiritual
aspects of themselves, are called “dead,” by the Glorious Qur'an Since
we are taught that of the two aspects of our live, the physical,
material life and the spiritual life, the latter is much, much superior,
and is centred on faith and deed. To be truly alive and aware in this
world, we are taught in the Glorious Qur'an to believe in the Almighty
God, His words, and His last Prophet: ***“O' believers! Accept the words
of Allah and the Prophet when he calls you to that which gives you life.
“*** (8:24)

Some people only have the physical life, and therefore can comprehend
only material, physical things; others have both the physical and
spiritual lives, thus can understand both. Given the immensely
constructive role religion as a framework for conduct in this life can
play in people's lives, and the overall world view which it presents to
the faithful to guide their lives, it is astounding that today a great
number of people forsake their faiths. To some this is because they feel
they will lose their “freedom” to do as they wish, that religion somehow
takes away their freedom, and one would be a slave, so to speak. Well,
we are all slaves, in a way. Some of God, some of money, power, desires,
etc. The way then to be truly free is to obey God and His Commandments,
and release oneself from other “gods”. It is not an easy task satisfying
many gods, but to please one, especially when the belief itself
strengthens the person, and releases one from limitations, is not a
difficult undertaking.

The person who chooses God, is no longer a slave of others, but has
reached a level of lordship. We see in Hadiths that: “The servantship is
a substance whose essence is the lordship. “

The Prophet of Islam was a slave of the Almighty God by choice. We also
express this sentiment several times a day during our ritual prayers: “I
bear witness that Muhammad is His servant and Messenger. “

Yet this seemingly bonded man changed the history of the world. He
successfully fought powers which opposed God, yet was honoured to
prostrate himself before Allah. Anything but freedom is one's reward
when one selects a life without religion, without a relationship with
the Creator.

***“Have you seen him who takes his low desires for a god? Will you then
be a protector over him? Or do you think that most of them do hear or
understand? They are nothing, but cattle, nay, they are straying further
of the Path. “*** (25:43-44)

***“Allah sets forth an example: There is a slave in whom are (several)
partners differing with one another, and there is another slave wholly
owned by one man. Are the two alike in condition? (All) praise is due to
Allah. Nay most of them do not know. “*** (39:29)

There are three couplets attributed to Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) with which we
will end our discussion. It only seems fitting, since the Imam's words
eloquently show the importance of self-knowledge: “The cure is with you,
but you do not see, And the illness is from you, bur you are unaware.
You are the clear book whose letters make manifest the hidden. Do you
think you are some small mass while within you there dwells a great
world?”


