Our Future
==========

We mean by this title our situation after death. We can define death as
the separation of the spirit from the body. Sleeping is to some extent
like death. There is however a difference. During sleep the spirit is
still connected with the body, but to a lesser degree than waking. But
during the death the spirit is disconnected from the body and belongs to
another body which has the qualities of a material body like shape and
size without the mass. Philosophers compare it with the bodies of
dreams. They call them 'barzakh' or 'mithalt'. This continues until the
resurrection. Then our spirits will belong to another body which is like
the body in its present situation. In this way we believe in the
physical-spiritual resurrection.

This topic is very controversial. Even those people who believe in the
physical-spiritual resurrection have reached no consensus about the
nature of the bodies in that universe. But what we have said can be
easily understood from the Glorious Qur'an and Islamic traditions on
which great Islamic scholars agree, and this suffices us in our
discussion. As we know, the most important part of our being which makes
our personality is. the spirit. All rewards and punishments are in one
way or another related to the spirit. The body is just a means for the
spirit. Note the following two verses of the Glorious Qur'an.

***“Allah takes the souls at the time of their death, and those that die
not during their sleep; then He withholds those on whom He has passed
the decree of death and sends the others back till an appointed term.
“***(39:42)

These verses show that death is not an end of our being, that during
death our spirits will be completely received by Allah or according to
the other verse we will be completely received by (1) and that sleeping
is to some extent like death. These verses answer many questions about
the resurrection, but they are not closely related to our discussion.


