Heaven and hell
===============

There are many facts about heaven and hell. We try to explain only those
facts which help us in our project. Heaven and hell have been created
now. If we had purified ourselves, we would be able to see them. Imam
‘Ali says about the pious: “To them paradise is as though they have seen
it and are enjoying its favours. To them hell is also as if they have
seen it and are suffering punishment in it.

The Glorious Qur'an also speaks about hell: ***“Nay! If you had known
with a certain knowledge you should most certainly have seen hell”***
(102:5,6)

In this way we can say that our future is now present. Whoever is good,
is now in heaven and criminals or sinners are now in hell. I hope the
reader remembers that the companion of the Noble Prophet (S) who reached
certainty said that he could declare among those who were with the
Prophet who were people of hell and who were people of heaven. The
Prophet (S) has also said that during the ascension, 'miraj' he saw
workers (angels) planting trees. Sometimes they were working and
sometimes they stopped working. Then he was told that when a person
recites certain invocations of God a tree is planted for him and when he
stops no tree is planted for him. This tradition like many other
traditions shows that punishments and rewards are synchronous with the
actions.

Three kinds of relationships can be conceived between acts and rewards
or punishments:

Conventional relationship: Ordinary rewards or punishments are decided
(defined) by some law-refiners. So they vary in different societies. For
example, penalties for breaking traffic laws are from this kind.

Causal relationship: Sometimes rewards or punishments are effects of the
acts. For example, when a person drinks wine, one of his punishments is
loss of his health; or if a student studies well one of his rewards is
to learn his lessons. The loss of health and knowledge are effects
brought into being by those acts.

Unity: Sometimes rewards or punishments are nothing other than the
actions. They are just the realities of those actions made manifest in
another universe.

According to the Glorious Qur'an in the Hereafter the realities of the
acts will be seen. This is what we mean by the embodiment of deeds
(tajassum al-a 'mat): “On that day men shall come forth in sundry bodies
that they may be shown their works. So he who has done an atom's weight
of good shall see it And he who has done an atom's weight of evil shall
see it', (99:&8) “(As for) those who swallow the property of the orphans
unjustly, surely they only swallow flre~into their bellies and they
shall enter burning fire.” (4:10)

According to these and some other verses we will see our acts
themselves. if we had that sight today we would be able to see their
realities today. Whoever is swallowing the property of the orphans
unjustly is really swallowing fire now. Whoever is back-biting is really
eating the flesh of his dead brother or sister now. So we should take
care of our acts, otherwise we will enter hell just now (not only in the
future). if we think constantly about the ugliness of the sins and their
realities we will not commit any sin.


