Child's Wishes
==============

I am hoping that my father will not interfere in my affairs…. I want
him to give some kind of freedom to me.

I hope he will discuss with me on some important issues…not command me
to do something with the sense of command…rather in a fatherly and
kindly manner.

I hope he will remember his youth, while he is interrogating me or
putting an eye on me.

I hope he will respect me in front of my friends and mates, as I used
to respect him in front of his friends and relatives.

I hope he will understand that I have my condition and power, as he has
his own condition and power, so that he will forgive me of the
unintentional mistake I made.

I hope he will understand that I was created for a particular time, not
his time; he should not make me his copy in everything.

I hope he will be just between me and my other brothers.

I hope he will take care of me, but without interfering in my personal
affairs, he should be decisive to me without cruelty… he should be my
adviser not my dictator… and that he should not regard my effort as
nothing.


**Father's Wishes**

I hope that my son will be better than me, and not only be my
continuation.

I hope my son will achieve what I was not able to achieve in my life,
and that his ambition and aspiration should be better than mine.

I hope he will use my experiences, and not fall into the mistakes I
did, and that he will accept my advices.

I hope he will regard me as a sincere friend, so that he will reveal
some of his secrets and problems to me… I hope I will be sincere and
frank to him and likewise he.

I hope he will understand that my anger at him - when he makes
mistakes - is love, not retaliation or dictatorship.

I hope he will understand that my children are all equal in my sight
and that I love them all, but it might be possible that I hate some
habits in some of them and love some habits in others.

I hope I will gain the confidence of my sons and daughters, so as to
open for me their hearts and tell me their problems… and that they will
follow my guidelines because it is for their own good and interest.

These are hopes and ambitions of both the parent and the child, which
explain the sincere hopes of understanding, reconciliation and building
a strong relationship between the children, who love their parents and
respect them, and the parents, who love their children and want good for
them. But, it is compulsory for both sides to study the hopes and likes
of the other side, in order to reach a good family relation, even
though, not all these hopes represent all the children's hope….and,
likewise, also not all the likes of the parent. It represents the key
hopes, which if preserved by both sides, the relationship will be good
and acceptable by both the children and parents.

The question here is that: Why is it that all these valuable comments
remain only hopes? Why didn't the parent try to fill the empty gap? And
why are the children not helping their parents in building the bridge? …
or why won't both sides open the door of dialogue in order to realize
the hopes of the other side? Stopping the factors that prevent the
achievement of these hopes, which if given much consideration by both
sides, their goals will be achieved. Indeed, it is something
practicable, it is not a miracle or something impossible.

Therefore, there is the need for both sides to understand the reality
and the nature of the other sides feelings, his likes and dislikes. This
is what we will discuss now:


**Among the Mistakes of the Parents**

It might be possible that some will put all the blame on the parents
alone, because of the fact that they have much experience in life and
that they were expected to be forgiven and possess a wider heart and
mind.

Based on these, we will not forgive children, upholding blames on them,
when they go against the advice of their parents, especially if they
know that they are not suppose to do what they did.

However, because the responsibilities of parents are great, we will
look into the mistakes of parents, which if it is treated well, the gap
between children and parents will be filled.

Some parents treat their children very harshly, the way they were
treated by their parents as if they inherited this harshness. Here we
are not going to discuss this matter and study the effect of our
relationships for the future of the family's relationship. Rather, we
want to tell these parents, who are fond of dealing with such negative
relationships that: Remember the effect and your hatred of the harsh
treatment your parents used on you? How can a father, who lived in such
a harsh condition and treatment, feel good to see his son in such a
situation?

Is it good for a father to always shout and beat his children for a
minor mistake, and to be talking in a wild and horrible voice in the
house as if he is a small executioner?

It is narrated that one day the governor of a province visited one of
the caliphs and found him playing with his child. The child was climbing
up the back of his father, the caliph. The governor was surprised at
what he saw, to the extent that he couldn't hide his surprise, so, he
asked the caliph: "Why are you doing so, Oh my lord?!"

Then, the caliph asked him, knowing that the governor was not treating
his children in like manner, "How are you treating your children, my
dear?" The governor answered: "If I enter my house, the one standing
will sit down and the one talking will keep quiet." Then, the caliph
said: "You are not illegible to be a governor, because by these actions,
you are hurting your subjects."

Indeed, if one of the parents recorded his behavior and wild condition
when he is upset, on a video cassette and watch it when he cools down,
he will feel ashamed at seeing himself in such a situation. He will
refute the image in front of him, because he lost control of himself at
that time. Thus, we must not do something, which we will be ashamed of,
or it will make us seek an apology.

Is it that all ways are closed to us - that - we can't find a suitable
method of controlling our children without using force or abusive
language? Wise people say: "The last medicine is force." Why is it that
our first medicine is force?! Why can't we use the steps before it, may
be it will bring the required result? Why are we using force first? Did
we exhaust all the other simple methods? It might be possible that
looking at (the children) with the sense of showing disability with
their action might prevent them from committing mistakes in the future.
And maybe talking to them with a soft voice might make them refrain from
exceeding limits in the future.

Why are we dragging our children to be angry with us always due to our
bad relationship with them? Why are we training them to be harsh with
others without their will? This may have an effect in their relationship
with their children in the future. Have we ever perceived the outcome of
all these?

However, the hegemony of parents can take a different shape, that their
word is final without any consideration to the family's opinion. This
can be best seen through imposing the mood and desire of a father on his
family; for example, he may impose the kind of food he likes on the rest
of the family even if they didn't like it.

It is narrated in one hadith that: "He is cursed who feeds his family
with his appetite without paying due respect to the appetite of the
family". The first is egoist and the second self-sacrificing, because
whoever eats with the appetite of his family, is planting love and
respect of him in their hearts and minds. Even if he doesn't see it
presently, however, he will leave his effects on them and in the future
they will be egoistic.

There are some parents who became angry, beat and abuse their children
when they disturb their sleep or rest, even though they don't care about
the resting period of their children, as if they are slaves, who don't
have any rights in their home.

Among the biggest mistakes of the parents that has a negative effect on
the children, is duality in their sayings and actions, because a child
is looking at their parent as a pacesetter in their life. When they
realize that their parents are not practicing what they are saying or
what they ought to have done, the consequences of this will be bad, it
may result in the disobeying of their command in the future. Otherwise,
how can a father who is smoking order his children not to smoke? Even if
he is smoking secretly, they may detect it one day, and his respect, in
their sight, may fall.

Another mistake of the parent is enlarging the mistakes of the
children, considering something small to be big, as if the mistakes are
not forgivable or there is no way of correcting them, to the extent that
some parents, because of their impatience, say: The children have
changed…they no more respect us…now, they are not as they were
yesterday. There is a way they can be changed, even though there is
every possibility that most of the so called problems can be solved
through love, wisdom and understanding. Imam Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.)
said: "If a young fellow reprove you, leave him maybe he will be
embarrassed with what he did."

Another mistake of the parent is that some of them deal with their
children as if they are small kids by imposing their wills on them. This
may cause unhappiness and discomfort in the young boy or girl who
expects to be respected, being that he is coming out of the children's
world into the world of the adults.

Up till today there are some parents who are fond of cautioning their
children, even when they grow up, for example, to be careful of cars on
the road when they want to go out to their work places or other places.
Such advices are good for children but they are not good for the grown
up who know how to take care of themselves.

Another mistake is to enforce on our children a certain work or
profession that we like, but that they don't like. This is because a
young boy or girl is an independent personality, which has his/her own
opinion. He/she likes a particular work, and dislikes another kind of
work. Thus, if you enforce a certain path of work or life, for instance
to be a businessman like you or doctor or lawyer or an engineer, it
means you want a copy of yourself, while he/she wants to be an original
copy of himself/herself. No doubt parent has a right to discuss with
him/her his/her choice, but he doesn't have the right to force a certain
thing on them.

This mistake comes from interference into children's activities, which
naturally causes a grave mistake, that is, in the personal affairs of
the children. Later on we will differentiate between interference and
advice, as well as, between interference and support.

Naturally, direct parent interference into their grown up children's
affairs harms the relationship between both parties. And, likewise,
spying on their activities damages the bridge of children's truth and
confidence in their parents, which results in hiding their activities to
the parent even on some matters that don't deserve it.

Therefore, as we hate to be under someone's scrutiny and spying,
likewise, our children don't like this, because the prohibition of
spying in this phrase [ولا تجسَّسوا ) ) Do not spy) is a general term,
later on we will differentiate between "spying" and "monitoring".

At times, some parents interfere even into the issues of marriage of
their children by forcing a partner (a wife or a husband) on their son
or daughter, whom they didn't like; this adds water to clay. Sometimes
the children will be forced to do a certain action not commonly
accepted; crisis may continue to occur between them, which ends of in
divorce.

Abu Ya'afur said; "One day I told Abu Abdullah (Ja'far al-Sadiq) (a.s.)
that I wanted to marry one woman, but, my parents wanted me to marry
another one, then he said: "Marry the one you like and leave the one
which your parents like". This is because the one who wants to marry is
the son or daughter, not the father or mother, and whom don't have any
part in this except the right of advice and guidance.

Among the mistakes committed by the parents are the material and
emotional differentiation they make between their children or between
the sons and the daughters, which cause spiritual harm between those
favored and those that are dumped. Some parents show love and affection
to some and deprive some from it, or they didn't show equality between
them.

One day the Holy Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) saw a man who has two
children, kissing one of them and leaving the other, then he (s.a.w.)
said to him: "Why shouldn't you do equality between them."

If kissing one of the children portrays differentiation between the
children, then what of the other favors given to one of them and
depriving the other from it? The issue is more complicated in terms of
girls, because they are more nervous and emotional. The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) said: "Make equality between your children in terms of favor.
If I prefer one over the other, surely, I will prefer the girls.

" Indeed, this is not from the chapter of differentiation; rather it is
in the chapter of spiritual feeling and Islamic feeling and respect for
women. Here, we ought to point out that these mistakes - and many
others - may end up in crisis and have other negative impact.


