Points of Differences Between the Two Generations
=================================================

In order to reach a common understanding and a sound atmosphere of
respect, love and cooperation, we -as parents and children- must
understand the main point of difference and disagreement between the two
genera-tions, for each generation to understand the culture of the
other. But not to contradict or to deprive it or to play with it, rather
it is to understand the point of natural differences of every stage of
life.

Some researchers have mentioned various differences, among them are:


- Youth always moves toward new things, whereas elders oppose new
things holding the older ones dear. - Youth have the revolutionary
spirit full of courage and force, whereas the elders have the spirit of
imitation, that is, they are hardliners.
- Most of the time, youths are imaginary and theoretical, and elders -
naturally- believe in the practical.
- Youths -most of the time - are emotional, but elders -generally-
believe in seriousness and trial.
- Youths are hasty while elders are slow.
- Youths deeply think of their future, while elders always think about
their past.
- Youths -many a times- have little experience, while elders'
experiences -naturally- are many.
- Youths always try to make the condition march with them, but the
elders march to the condition.

All these differences are not final, however, and it is not only for a
certain generation and not another. You may find a slow young fellow and
a fast elderly one, as you may find an old man who is ambitious and a
young man who is not, thus, the issue is related to how a person was
brought up and the kind of education he acquired. It is a difference
that can be seen generally or individually.

One of the most important things in understanding these natural
differences is that it helps in reducing the power of accusation towards
each other.

As it is the duty of the elders to respect the love of the youth toward
new things, likewise the youth, also, must respect the love of the
elders toward old things. Because this is natural, being that there is
no generality in favoring new things over the old ones, or favoring the
old one over the new, both have a positive, as well as, negative side.
It is the intellect of both the youth and the older ones that determine
things.

Understanding these differences requires the understanding of the
psychological condition of both generations. Youth are fast because
their blood circulates fast in the body; they want to reach their
destination fast. Maybe they may think of following the steps; and this
order is not always negative and not always positive. Some stages need
fast and hasty conditions, especially if there is will and spirit of
reality and capability, as the case may be in some learning stages.

But jumping the gum without thinking of the end result sometimes brings
about accident and danger.

However, an old father may live quietly and with patience, and this
situation may not be due to his physical or health condition, rather it
may be because of the experiences he has had. It might be due to his
understanding that it is possible to perceive some ambition, but it must
be based on giving the most important issue its due respect first,
followed by the others.

There is no harm in the haste of the youth except in skipping steps of
the proverbial ladder, as the slow movement of the older ones is not
harmful, especially if it is asceticism against the ambitious part of
the world life. Therefore, both generations must reach a conclusion that
there is good and evil in all stages of life, and, also, generations are
growing. Life requires both the generation of youth and the generation
of the elders, because nature has made it a law as 'hot' and 'cold' stay
in one place in an electrical current so that we have light.

A researcher in the field of education conducted a discussion on the
comparison between the roots of a tree and its branches, referring to
the parents and grandparents as roots and the children and grandchildren
as branches. In the beginning of the discussion he shows the adhesive of
the roots with their values and the dependency of the branches.

Among the criticisms meted out to the roots, by the branches is that
they are living under the ground and inside darkness, whereas they (the
branches) are living in light and fresh air. The wise answer of the
roots to the branches is that their food comes from them (the roots), as
the roots also remain alive due to the sunlight and fresh air they get
from the branches. They are the increasing and decreasing sap; the tree
can never live without them.

So this is how the tree of life is. It can never stay and remain alive
unless with parents and grandparents on one side, and the children and
grandchildren on the other. If this cooperation between the two
generations continues, the youth will be able to overcome most of their
problems related to their stage, and, likewise, the parents will have
use of the fresh blood in the youth's vein to move forward.

**Parents and Educational Affairs of Children**

Due to their utmost concern about the future of their children, the
parents always ask and encourage them to give more effort towards their
lessons. This is a good approach and it shows a real concern to the
interest of the student (a boy or a girl).

But, what happens in most houses is insistence -at a right or wrong
time - on reading and revising, most especially at the time of
examinations and tests. Sometimes, parents forget that the student has
his own spiritual condition that may not encourage him to read. And
maybe the environmental condition is not suitable for him due to noises
of children or due to visitors, or because of the smallness of the
house, or other conditions of disturbance in the house.

In such a situation, the problems can be solved through the
following:

- Some family cannot change their house to a better one due to their
financial condition, but they can change their daily programs, or
restrict them during the time of examinations.

- Remembering negative results due to negligence and laziness will
force the youth to take a glance at his self, and remembering positive
results, due to revision and planning for the future, will encourage him
to work harder.

- A problem of the student may be due to the scheduling he did for his
studies, Here, it is possible to guide him with the experiences of the
parents or others in the field of studies. For example, guiding him to
write and summarize his lessons, or writing for him some explanations,
presented in class by the teacher, in his book. Perhaps he could ask his
fellow classmate, whose grades are higher than his, to explain some
topics to him, or allow someone to ask him questions in order to check
his understanding of the topic, etc.

Here, the issue arises again of giving too much concern to hobbies and
their opposition to the lessons. The position of most parents, towards
the hobbies of their children, is negative. This is because they are
regarding hobbies, whatever their value might be, as a waste of time.
They are thinking that the time given to them must be given to lessons
and revisions.

However, the fact is that we must find a solution to the rivalry
between lessons and hobbies, in order to stop any negative results that
occur by delaying what we are not to delay and presenting what we are
not suppose to present. In addition, we must find a correct method of
dealing with those who were left behind in their lessons due to their
hobbies. This can be done by emphasizing that the next holiday will be
enough time for him to exercise his hobbies freely and that everything
is done in order to help him to achieve, or by explaining to him that
hobbies can be left behind till another time, but lessons can never be
delayed till another time.

This method can make a student to rethink his position, but the
opposite is the case when the parents hide the tools of his hobbies or
destroy them, which will cause him to have a greater attachment to those
things, because "man is desirous of what is prohibited to him". Thus,
one of the reasons for a student's reluctance in his lessons is the
constraint meted out to him, causing him a spiritual unnerving.

**Family's Council:**

We will discuss the solution to the problems arising between the
parents and their children, because it is clear to us that there are
many ways of mutual understanding between the two parties; we have
mentioned some of them in the previous pages. Here, we will bring a plan
for mutual understanding and cooperation, leaving each family to test it
based on the nature of its members.

What if we arrange for a "Family Council" in the house?

There is not much problem in this, like the problems that occur in the
national assembliesâ€¦it is enough just to have a consensus that a weekly
or monthly meeting between all the members of the family be conducted.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said: "A boy is a leader for seven years, a
slave for seven years and a minister (adviser) for seven years". Our
main concern in this narration is the last part of it, that is: "a
minister for seven years", that is there is a situation in the life of a
youth that he may become an adviser to his parents.

He will be advising them and presenting his own opinion on a particular
issue. He has the right to bring forth his opinion -whether it is right
or wrong - and they must respect his opinion in both instances, to
praise him when he is right and correct him when he is wrong. But some
words like "Obey before arguing' or "Obey, don't complain", is
dictatorship, which will make the youth oppose.

There is no doubt that the most important source of harmony and mutual
understanding is respecting opinions from every member of the family.
The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) has said: "The heart is attracted to who does
good to it, and hates who does evil to it", and he also said: "If you
all gather together on good things, surely you will be loved."

Indeed, there is nothing more effective than educating children and
giving them the right to forward their opinion and respecting their
personality. This is what the Prophet's word "minister" means, which
encourages the social activities that will boost the morals of the youth
and raise them from the stage of a small boy to the stage of a full
grown individual, capable of having a positive approach.

It is possible to arrange for a suitable method for every family. The
family council should be an open council for discussing family affairs.
Those who run the affairs of such council can be chosen by selection or
election, so as to follow the issues presented during any one of the
meetings. We cannot talk much on the method, but the main aim of any
method selected must be to push the family forward and to achieve a
mutual understanding and cooperation between members of the family. In
the meeting, the opinions of the parents and children must be brought to
the table for discussion in order to select the most important ones
without any partiality or favoring of one side.

One of the most important issues here is that the purity of self and
heart of the children which might help in a great way in family affairs,
that might even be hiding in the hearts of the elders.

But what can be achieved in such a council, are as follows:

1- The family will change from a small gathering of individuals to a
state where different people will be bringing their own opinions and
experiences.

2- Achieving a considerable extent of the feeling of collective and
cooperative responsi-bility, and every one's slogan should be "the
administering of the house and its happiness our responsibility,
altogether."

3- The process of distributing work and responsibilities among the
members will be easier and accepted by all who feel the responsibility
on their shoulders.

4- The discussion, debate and respect for others opinion is a process
of preparing a better future for the family and the generations to come,
who will copy the method and solve their problems, and may use it also
to train their children.

5- One of the main jobs of the council is to fight separation,
backbiting and unnecessary accusation, rather there must be
understanding and cooperation between the members.

Even though some will think that the plan is an easy one, it is a plan
that requires sufficient time in order to achieve the goal. It also
requires a suitable condition. The father (or head of the family), as
the head of the meeting, must have the following features:

1- He must have the capability of favoring the more important issues
above the less important ones.

2- He must be acquainted with the present development and conditions,
because he is dealing with a new generation created for a time not his
own. And he must have the capability of convincing others on issues
related to them.

3- He must be well versed in the law and the limits that differentiate
between lawful and unlawful matters.

4- He must be open and ready to accept all opinions, even those that
can be regarded as unfair and unreasonable, and he must debate with
other members of the family in a good way and manner. He must give
advice to those who needs it, and he must know how to separate disputes
between others.

5- He must have a good relationship with all and he must not be
dictatorial as the head of the meeting. He must give the right to talk
to everyone in the meeting, and give the right to reply or defend of
one's own opinion or against an accusation directed to him. And,
likewise, he should exercise calm and respect. All these are some of the
sources of success for the family.

Another issue that ought to be given much consideration is the secrecy
of the meeting; the secrecy of the meeting must not be taken out to
others. It is unlawful to bring out the issues that are termed internal
issues of the family, especially if the issues concern one of the known
members of the family which the hearing of this by others may harm his
feelings.

In short, the most important things that can be achieved are developing
the family and obtaining a mutual understanding between its members,
solving their problems and paving the way for a good and sound future.

**Testimonies:**

In conclusion, we will bring two real testimonies: The first one is of
a father who deal with his children in a wise manner, and the other of a
son narrating the method used by his father in dealing with him and his
other brothers and sisters. This is to show that what we have discussed
is not something theoretical. We hope both the parents and the children
will be able to benefit from the experiences of others.

**Testimony of a Father:**

"I tried to be honest with themâ€¦I tried not to enforce myself on
everyone of my childrenâ€¦whenever I witnessed a mistake from one of them
I didn't call his attention to it in a harsh manner or by beating,
rather with a soft voice that could not harm them.

I wanted them to live their livesâ€¦I helped them in choosing their way
of lifeâ€¦I used to leave them free in their work, without interfering in
their work; in order to utilize from their mistakes, I tried to talk
with them in a positive not negative sense.

I tried, most of the time to educate them in an open way based on their
ability; not above their capabilityâ€¦I lived with them and I am still
living with them like a friendâ€¦I obtained their confidence by this
relation, I am living, in my house, with love and affection for my small
and big children who discuss with me without any hesitation; I tried to
remove any block between me and them.

I am thinking that a father must know the secrets of his children, but
not to go and relate them to othersâ€¦he should open a way for them to be
his friends."

**Testimony of a Son:**

"My father is my friend, guide and pacesetter in this worldâ€¦he acts in
a way where the friendship will continue. Whenever I have a problem in
my studies or work, he will tell me: "We should be friendsâ€¦open your
heart to me so we can solve the problem together, to think about the
solution," he never tries to impose himself on meâ€¦he avoids telling me:
"I want this from you, or you must do this, he always paves a way for
freedom to all of us to choose whatever we deem good, but it must be
under the limits of the lawful and unlawfulâ€¦.if we did something
unlawful, he acts decisively â€¦he monitors us from a distance in order
not to create bad conditions in our morals; he doesn't force himself on
us even while talkingâ€¦

There is no duality between inside and outsideâ€¦whatever he says outside
he practices it insideâ€¦
He doesn't direct my future more than the choice and capability that he
has given meâ€¦
He teaches us to be more ambitious and to attend that which he has
attended; he teaches us hope to be perfect and reach where he didn't
reach."

Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.


