A Look At the Verse (it Is Not (fit) For the Prophet)
=====================================================

After showing the defects of the tradition and the false

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

1 Al-Issaba, vol.4 p.203, Siyer A'lam an-Nubala' vol.2 p.64, 423, 425,
436.

series of narrators, it would be better to discuss the facts that would
refute the tradition. 1. The tradition mentioned by al-Bukhari showed
that these two Quranic verses were revealed when Abu Talib was dying but
when we referred to the two verses, we found that the first one of them
had been revealed in Medina. (1)

The all knew well that the sure of Bara'a (at-Tawba) was revealed in
Medina after Islam had become so strong and prevailing. The story of
informing of the sura of Bara'a was famous for the all. It was the last
thing that was revealed of the Quran. (2) There was a long period
between the revelation of these two verses. It was about ten years. 2.
It was clear that the first verse, which was a part of sura of Bara'a,
was revealed in Medina after the conquest of Mecca. So there was nearly
eight years between the death of Abu Talib and the revelation of this
verse.

The meaning of the tradition showed the continuity of the praying of
the Prophet (s) that Allah might forgive his uncle and that the Prophet
(s) didn't stop praying Allah to forgive his uncle along this period
according to the Prophet's saying (as they pretended in the tradition).
"I will pray Allah to forgive you as long as I am not

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Abu Talib died in Mecca three years before the hijra (migration) to
Medina.
2 Al-Bukhari's Sahih, vol.3 p.77, al-Kashshaf, vol.1 p.570 (vol.2
p.246), Ta'leeq Sharih al-Kashshaf, vol.2 p.188, al-Baydhawi's Tafseer,
vol.2 p.274, Majma'ul Bayan, vol.10 p.5, ibn Katheer's Tafseer, vol.2
p.331, al-Itqan, vol.1 p.27. It was mentioned in vol.1 p.26 that nothing
was revealed of the Quran after this except its end. He (the author of
al-Itqan) was surprised at the saying of ibnul Farass: "The sura was
revealed in Medina except two verses ..." He said: "How wonder! How was
that and it was said that this was the last thing to be revealed of the
Quran." Al-Ghadeer, vol.8 p.10

forbidden from it." Praying for forgiving Abu Talib (according to their
tradition) continued by the Prophet (s) and didn't stop except by the
revelation of this verse: (It is not (fit) for the Prophet and those who
believe that they should ask forgiveness for the polytheists, even
though they should be near relatives, after it has become clear to them
that they are inmates of the flaming fire).

How was it possible for the Prophet (s) to pray Allah to forgive his
uncle along the period since the death of his uncle until the revelation
of this verse -as they confessed- whereas many verses were revealed to
the Prophet (s) during this period forbidding the Prophet (s) and the
believers from being loving and kind to the polytheists and from praying
Allah to forgive them or from obeying the enemies of Allah before the
revelation of this verse in a long time?

We mentioned some verses in a previous chapter but we mention some of
them here too: a. (You shall not find a people who believe in Allah and
the latter day befriending those who act in opposition to Allah and His
Messenger, even though they were their (own) fathers, or their sons, or
their brothers ...) 58:22. This verse, which was a part of the sura of
al-Mujadila, was revealed in Medina years before the revelation of
Bara'a. Seven suras were revealed before the sura of Bara'a. (1) Also it
was said that it was revealed to the Prophet (s) during the day of the
battle of Badr (2) in the second year of hijra.

Also it was said that it was revealed during the battle of Uhud (3) in
the third year of hijra.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Al-Ghadeer, vol.8 p.10, al-Itqan vol.1 p.17.
2 Ibid as mentioned by Abu Hatim, al-Hakim, Abu Na'eem, al-Bayhaqi, ibn
Katheer in his Tafseer vol.4 p.329, ash-Shawkani in his Tafseer vol.5
p.189.
3 Al-Ghadeer, vol.8 p.10.

Some said that this sura or some verses of it were revealed in Mecca.
(1) According to the all sayings, the revelation of the sura of
al-Mujadila was, no doubt, many years before the sura of Bara'a. b. (O
you who believe! do not take the unbelievers for friends rather than the
believers; do you desire that you should give to Allah a manifest proof
against yourselves?) 4:144. An-Nahhass said that this verse was revealed
in Mecca. Also it was said that it was revealed at the hijra. (2) Some
said that it was revealed in Medina depending upon the saying of
Aa'isha: "The sura of an-Nissa' was revealed when I was with the Prophet
(s) (his wife)." (3)

So its revelation was in the first years of hijra. (4) Any how the sura
of an-Nisa' was revealed before the sura of Bara'a. There were
twenty-one suras between them. (5) c. (Those who take the unbelievers
for guardians rather than believers. Do they seek honor from them? Then
surely all honor is for Allah) 4:139. This verse was a part of sura of
an-Nisa', which was revealed before the sura of Bara'a.

d. (Let not the believers take the unbelievers for friends rather than
believers; and whoever does this, he shall have nothing of (the
guardianship of) Allah, but you should guard yourselves against them,
guarding carefully) 3:28. This verse was one of the first verses in the
beginning of the sura of Aal Imran. The beginning of the sura, until the
eightieth verse or some more, was revealed on the day

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Many of the interpreters referred to that.
2 Al-Itqan vol.1 p.12.
3 Ibid, al-Bukhari's Sahih, vol.3 p.141, al-Ghadeer, vol.8 p.11.
4 Al-Ghadeer, vol.8 p.11.
5 Ibid, al-Itqan, vol.1 p.26.

when the delegation of Najran (1) came to the Prophet (s) in the first
years of hijra. (2) It was mentioned that this verse was revealed about
Obada bin as-Samit on the day (battle) of al-Ahzab in the fifth year of
hijra. (3) Any how the sura of Aal Imran was revealed before the sura of
Bara'a and there were twenty-four suras between them. (4) e. (It is
alike to them whether you beg forgiveness for them or do not beg
forgiveness for them; Allah will never forgive them) 63:6. The sura of
al-Munafiqoon, which this verse was a part of, was revealed in the year
when the Prophet (s) and his army fought against the people of
al-Mustalaq. It was the sixth year of hijra and it was definitely before
the sura of Bara'a. (5)

There were many other verses forbidding from supporting the
polytheists, from praying Allah to forgive them and from being loving
and kind to them. The Prophet (s) kept on praying Allah to forgive his
uncle and this was the utmost support and being loving and kind to him.
Even the false tradition showed that the Prophet (s) kept on that and he
didn't stop except when this forbidding verse was revealed as the
tradition pretended. Could we -the Muslims- ascribe to the Prophet (s) a
doing that his God, Who had sent him to guide the people, had forbidden
him from? Was it possible for the Prophet (s) to beg forgiveness for his
uncle if he was a polytheists whereas there were

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 As-Seera al-Hishamiyya, vol.2 p.225, Asbab an-Nuzool p.43, ibn
Katheer's Tafseer, vol.1 p.343.
2 Al-Ghadeer, vol.8 p.11.
3 Ibid
4 Ibid with reference to al-Itqan, vol.1 p.17.
5 Ibid.

many verses forbidding him from that? Did the Prophet (s) not pay any
attention to those verses or he refused to obey Allah until this verse
of the sura of Bara'a was revealed to him? This sura itself had many
other forbidding verses but why didn't the Prophet (s) obey Allah except
when this special verse was revealed to him? O Allah! Forgive us! We
didn't know how to justify the continuous praying of the Prophet (s) for
forgiving his uncle while Allah every time revealed to him a verse
ordering him to cut every relation with the polytheists!

What raving it was! Was that possible to be ascribed to the Prophet of
guidance and mercifulness? It was not but defaming the sanctity of the
Prophet (s), violating his high position and causing harm to him. O
Allah! We seek Your protection from causing any harm to Your messenger
in order not to be liable to Your wrath and punishment as You threatened
whoever would harm a hair of him according to the verses and the
traditions! 3. We found many traditions and sayings that contradicted
these traditions, which talked about why this verse was revealed. We
quoted here some of them:

a. Imam Ali (s) said: "I heard someone praying Allah to forgive his
parents whereas they were polytheists. I said to him: "Do you beg
forgiveness for your parents whereas they were polytheists?" He said:
"Didn't Abraham pray Allah to forgive his father?" I mentioned that to
the Prophet (s) and then the following verses were revealed: (It is not
(fit) for the Prophet and those who believe that they should ask
forgiveness for the polytheists, even though they should be near
relatives, after it has become clear to them that they are inmates of
the flaming fire.

And Ibrahim asking forgiveness for his sire was only owing to a promise
which he had made to him; but when it became clear to him that he was an
enemy of Allah, he declared himself to be clear of him; most surely
Ibrahim was very tender-hearted forbearing) (1) 9:113-114. This showed
that forbidding begging forgiveness for the polytheists was famous among
the Muslims; otherwise Imam Ali (s) wouldn't object to that man, who
prayed Allah to forgive his polytheist parents. Imam Ali wouldn't deny
that if he was not certain that there was a divine order. The objection
of Imam Ali against this man didn't agree with begging forgiveness by
the Prophet (s) for his uncle if he was polytheist as it was pretended!
And if it was so, the man would answer Imam Ali with another answer and
would justify his doing by saying that the Prophet (s) prayed Allah to
forgive his polytheist uncle, for example!

But the man justified his doing by saying that Abraham prayed Allah to
forgive his father and then the verse was revealed to explain why
Abraham had begged forgiveness for his father. When Prophet Abraham (s)
prayed Allah to forgive his father (2) while he was still alive, he
hoped that his father might be guided and be faithful but when Prophet
Muhammad (s) prayed Allah to forgive his uncle after his death that
because his uncle was faithful. It wouldn't be justified that the
Prophet (s) hoped that his uncle might be guided and be faithful because
his uncle was no longer

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Refer to al-Ghadeer, vol.8 p.12 to see the true tradition mentioned
by at-Tabari, ibn Abu Shayba, Ahmad, at-Tarmithi, an-Nassa'iy, Abu
Ya'la, ibn Jareer, ibnul Munthir, ibn Abu Hatim, Abush Sheikh, al-Hakim,
ibn Mardwayh and al-Bayhaqi. Refer to Sheikhul Abtah p.67, al-Itqan
vol.1 p.34, A'yan ash-Shia, vol.39 p.158, Asbab an-Nuzool p.127, ibn
Katheer's Tafseer vol.2 p.393 and al-Kashshaf vol.2 p.247.
2 He was the uncle of Prophet Abraham and not his father but he brought
him up and in Arabic the uncle was called as father metonymically.

alive. Zayni Dahlan said about this tradition of Imam Ali (s): "The
tradition was true because we found a true tradition narrated by ibn
Abbas confirming this tradition. Ibn Abbas said: "The Muslims used to
pray Allah to forgive their parents until this verse was revealed. When
this verse was revealed, they stopped begging forgiveness for their dead
parents but they weren't forbidden from begging forgiveness for their
live parents until they died.

Then Allah revealed: (And Ibrahim asking forgiveness for his sire was
only owing to a promise which he had made to him). It meant that he
asked for forgiveness for his father as long as he was alive but when he
died, Abraham (s) stopped begging forgiveness for him." This was true
evidence and doing according to it would be more correct. It showed that
the verse concerned those, who prayed Allah to forgive their polytheist
parents and not concerned Abu Talib." (1)

b. The Muslims asked the Prophet (s): "Do we pray Allah to forgive our
parents, who died in the pre-Islamic time?" Then Allah revealed this
verse and showed that neither a prophet nor a believer should pray for
an unbeliever or beg forgiveness for him/her. (2) c. The believers said:
"Don't we pray Allah to forgive our parents whereas Abraham has prayed
Allah to forgive his unbelieving father?" Then Allah revealed this
verse: (And Ibrahim asking forgiveness for his sire was only owing to a
promise which he had made to him). (3) d. When the Prophet (s) came back
from the battle of

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Al-Ghadeer, vol.8 p.13 from Assna al-Matalib p.17, Sheikhul Abtah
p.67.
2 A'yan ash-Shia, vol.39 p.158, Majma'ul Bayan, vol.10 p.150.
3 A'yan ash-Shia, ibn Katheer's Tafseer vol.2 p.394, al-Kashshaf vol.
p.570 (vol.2 p.246).

Tabook, he did the minor hajj and then visited his mother's tomb. He
asked Allah to permit him to beg forgiveness for her and prayed Him to
permit him to intercede for her in the Day of Resurrection but Allah
didn't permit him and then the verse was revealed. (1) e. When the
Prophet (s) came to Mecca, he visited his mother's tomb. He remained
beside his mother's tomb until the sun became hot hoping that Allah
might permit him to beg forgiveness for her then Allah revealed these
two verses. (2) f. The Prophet (s) visited his mother's tomb. He cried
and made the others around him cry. He said: "I asked my God's
permission to beg forgiveness for her but He didn't permit me but I
asked His permission to visit her tomb and He permitted me. Visit the
tombs because they remind of the afterlife!" (3)

This tradition was narrated by Abu Hurayra too. It permitted visiting
the tombs and crying for the dead whereas those, who trusted in Abu
Hurayra's traditions blindly, criticized severely these two points and
whoever believed in them. g. The Prophet (s) passed by his mother's tomb
in the year of al-Hudaybiyya. (4) He asked his God's permission to visit
the tomb. Allah permitted him. He visited the tomb, repaired it and
stayed beside it for some time. Then he asked his God's permission to
beg forgiveness for his mother but Allah didn't permit him. He left the
tomb crying and feeling sorrowful. The Muslims cried with him

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Al-Ghadeer, vol.8 p.13 from at-Tabari, al-Hakim, ibn Abul Hatim and
al-Bayhaqi from ibn Mas'ood, Burayda, at-Tabari, ibn Mardwayh and
at-Tabari from Akrima from ibn Abbas.
2 Al-Ghadeer, vol.8 p.13 from at-Tabari in his Tafseer vol.1 p.31.
3 Muslim's Sahih vol.3 p.65, al-Ghadeer, vol.8 p.13.
4 Al-Hudaybiyya was a place near Mecca in which the Prophet (s) had
concluded a covenant of peace with the polytheists.

and became sorrowful because of his sorrowfulness. (1) h. Ibn Mas'ood
said: "One day the Prophet (s) visited the graves. He sat beside a tomb.
He talked to the tomb for a long time and then he cried. I cried for his
crying. He said: "The tomb that I sat beside was my mother's tomb. I
asked my God's permission to pray for her but He didn't permit me and
then He revealed: (It is not (fit) for the Prophet and those who believe
that they should ask forgiveness for the polytheists, even though they
should be near relatives ...). (2)

i. Burayda said: "Once I was with the Prophet (s) when he stopped in
Asfan where he saw his mother's tomb. He made wudhu (3) and offered
prayer then he cried and said: I asked my God's permission to pray for
my mother but I was forbidden from doing that then Allah revealed: (It
is not (fit) for the Prophet and those who believe ... etc.) (4) j.
Az-Zamakhshari mentioned that this verse was revealed about Abu Talib
and then he said: "... and it was said: when the Prophet (s) conquered
Mecca, he asked that which of his parents was later in dying. It was
said to him: Your mother Aamina. So he visited her tomb in al-Abwa' then
he stood up sighing and said: I asked my God's permission to visit my
mother's tomb and He permitted me but when I asked permission to beg
forgiveness for her I was forbidden then this verse was

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 The margins of As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.193.
2 Asbab an-Nuzool p.127 from al-Hakim and al-Bayhaqi and others, Ibn
Katheer's Tafseer vol.2 p.393, As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.72,
al-Itqan vol.1 p.34.
3 An act of ablution that is required before the performance of certain
actions such as prayer.

4 Asbab an-Nuzool p.127 from Ahmad and ibn Mardwayh. He said too:
"At-Tabari and ibn Mardwayh mentioned a tradition narrated by ibn Abbas
that when the Prophet (s) came back from the battle of Tabook, he
traveled to Mecca to perform the minor hajj and he went to Asfan: "Ibn
Katheer mentioned something like that in his Tafseer vol.2 p.393-394 and
commented: "This is a strange tradition and a surprising context."

revealed: (It is not (fit) for the Prophet and those who believe ...
etc). This is more correct because the death of Abu Talib was before the
hijra and these verses were the last verses of the Quran that were
revealed in Medina." (1) k. Al-Qastalani said: "It was proved that the
Prophet (s) had visited his mother's tomb when he had performed the
minor hajj. He asked his God's permission to beg forgiveness for her but
Allah revealed to him this verse. This was mentioned by al-Hakim and ibn
Abu Hatim from ibn Mass'ood and by at-Tabarani from ibn Abbas. This
showed that the verse was revealed a long time after the death of Abu
Talib and the revelation of a verse wouldn't be repeated." (2)

The thought of al-Qastalani here contradicted the thought of as-Sayooti
in al-Itqan, who tried to reconcile between the fabricated traditions,
some of which defamed Abu Talib and some defamed the Prophet's mother,
so he justified that by saying that the revelation of a certain verse
might be repeated in spite of that the revelation of a certain verse
couldn't be repeated (that the same verse couldn't be revealed twice).
l. Some of the Prophet's companions said: "O messenger of Allah! Some of
our fathers used to be good to their neighbors, helped their relatives,
freed the captives and carried out their promises. Don't we pray Allah
to forgive them?" The Prophet (s) said: "By Allah, I will beg
forgiveness for his father. So Allah revealed: (It is not (fit) for the
Prophet and those who believe ... etc). Then Allah justified the praying
of Abraham for his father by saying: (And Ibrahim asking forgiveness for
his sire was only owing to a promise which he had made to him; but when
it became clear to him that he was

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Al-Kashshaf vol.1 p.570 (vol.2 p.246). Something like this was
mentioned by al-Baydhawi in his Tafseer vol.2 p.298.
2 Al-Ghadeer, vol.8 p.14 from Irshad as-Sari vol.7 p.270, As-Seera
an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.126.

an enemy of Allah, he declared himself to be clear of him). (1) m. The
Prophet (s) wanted to beg forgiveness for his father but Allah forbade
him from that by saying: (It is not (fit) for the Prophet and those who
believe ... etc). The Prophet (s) said that Abraham had begged
forgiveness for his father then Allah revealed: (And Ibrahim asking
forgiveness for his sire ... etc). (2)

n. The Prophet (s) entered Mecca in the year of al-Fat~h (the conquest)
victoriously. While he was in some place of Mecca, he saw a tomb. He sat
beside it and asked Allah's permission to beg forgiveness for the one in
the tomb but he was not permitted. He left the tomb sorrowfully. He
cried and the people began to cry. There were no crying people more than
them in that day. (3) Taha Husayn commented after this tradition by
saying: "The narrators were confused about this tomb. They thought that
it was the Prophet's mother's tomb whereas her tomb was in al-Abwa'. It
might be the tomb of the Prophet's grandfather, the sheikh." (4) He
meant Abdul Muttalib. I didn't know what the value of the world "might"
was while we were talking about an important historical event having its
great value whether in the scales of deeds or men!

We knew Taha Husayn well. He always doubted about every thing. He might
deny the light of the sun easily by saying: The sun may be not shining!
But to change his doubt so suddenly to a degree that

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Al-Ghadeer, vol.8 p.14 from at-Tabari's Tafseer vol.1 p.131, Ibn
Katheer's Tafseer vol.2 p.394.
2 Al-Ghadeer, vol.8 p.14 from ad-Durr al-Manthoor vol.3 p.283.
3 Ala Hamish as-Seera vol.1 p.193, ibn Katheer's Tafseer vol.2 p.393
but this mentioned that the tomb was of the Prophet's mother.
4 Ala Hamish as-Seera vol.1 p.193


**The Inheritance Of Abu Talib**


astray only to the detriment of it. Quran 10:108) and many other verses
we didn't want to quote. 3. It would be better to mention some
traditions showing the reason of the revelation of the verse as it was
thought by some persons: a. The Prophet (s) was stabbed with a bayonet
in his cheek during the battle of Uhud. He fell down to the ground and
then stood up. One of his teeth was broken and blood began to flow on
his face. He said: "O Allah! Guide my people for they don't know the
truth!" Then Guide my people for they don't know the truth!" Then Allah
revealed this verse: (Surely you cannot guide whom you love, but Allah
guides whom He pleases). (1)

b. It was said that some people showed their faithfulness in the
Prophet (s) and in Islam but when the Prophet (s) immigrated to Medina,
they stayed in Mecca and showed unbelieving and reverting to their old
beliefs. When the Prophet (s) and his companions of the Muslims knew
about that, they disagreed about it; some of them thought that they were
still faithful and their showing unbelief was as taqiya because they
were obliged to do that as Allah had said: (Let not the believers Take
for friends or helpers Unbelievers rather than believers; if any do
that, in nothing will there be help from Allah; except by way of
precaution, that ye may Guard yourselves from them. Quran 3:28) and
others thought that they were unbelievers because they had to immigrate
with the Prophet (s) if they liked to save their faithfulness, therefore
this group and that group came to the Prophet (s) where some of them
liked that the Prophet (s) might considered them as believers for the
kinship between these and those, who stayed in Mecca.

But the Prophet (s) put off the answer until the Archangel Gabriel
revealed to him: (Surely you cannot guide whom you love, but Allah
guides whom He pleases).

It was said that the meaning of the verse was as: "You
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Al-Hujja p.29, A'yan ash-Shia, vol.39 p.159.

don't determine, name or witness for whomsoever you like as faithful
but it is Allah, who does that if that person deserves to be called as
faithful." (1) c. It was said that this verse concerned al-Harith bin
Othman bin Nawfal bin Abd Manaf, whom the Prophet (s) wished and liked
to be a Muslim. (2) Some of the interpreters said that the verse: (And
they say: If we follow the guidance with you, we shall be carried off
from our country), which came after that verse, concerned al-Harith.
(3)

And it was said that all the Muslims agreed upon that the second verse
(And they say: If we follow the guidance with you ...) concerned
al-Harith. (4) d. The messenger of Caesar brought a book to the Prophet
(s). The Prophet (s) put the book in his lap then asked the man: "Where
are you from?" The man said: "I am from Tanookh." The Prophet (s) said
to him: "Do you like to believe in the religion of your father Abraham?"
The man said: "I am just a messenger of some people and I am on their
religion until I come back to them." The Prophet (s) laughed, looked at
his companions and said: (Surely you cannot guide whom you love, but
Allah guides whom He pleases). (5)

These were four sayings about the reason of the revelation of the
verse. As we said before that a verse couldn't be revealed to the
Prophet (s) twice, so how was it distorted to concern Abu Talib? It was
that false tradition, which was fabricated by those, who neither
refrained from lying nor respect the sanctity of a Muslim!

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Al-Hujja p.30, A'yan ash-Shia, vol.39 p.259.
2 Sheikhul Abtah p.69.
3 Al-Kashshaf vol.2 p.167 (vol.3 p.333), Majm'ul Bayan, vol.20 p.309,
Asbab an-Nuzool p.169, Ibn Katheer's Tafseer vol.3 p.395, al-Baydhawi's
Tafseer vol.4 p.9.
4 Sheikhul Abtah p.69.
5 Ibn Katheer's Tafseer vol.3 p.395.

4. If we gave up and confessed that the verse was revealed about Abu
Talib, then it would be as a weapon in the hand of those, who defended
Abu Talib's faithfulness, more than those, who accused him of being
unfaithful because those who said that the verse (Surely you cannot
guide whom you love, but Allah guides whom He pleases) concerned Abu
Talib, they confirmed that the Prophet (s) loved him for the verse
meant: O Muhammad! You don't guide whom you love but Allah guide him!

Definitely when the Prophet (s) loved someone, it would be sufficient
evidence proving the faithfulness of that one because the Prophet (s)
was forbidden from loving other than the faithful ones. On the other
side the verse would be evidence showing the high faithfulness of Abu
Talib because his faithfulness then would be out of the guidance of
Allah and not out of the invitation of the Prophet (s) only. In fact
this showed that there was a divine care towards Abu Talib. 5. After all
this, we didn't find an improvised saying weaker than the saying of
az-Zajjaj when pretending that: "The Muslims agreed upon that this verse
had been revealed to concern Abu Talib." (1)

When was this consensus of the Muslims? Yes! It was in the world of
imagination and illusion! Was there any evidence confirming this false
pretense? Didn't he fear the bad end of this disgraceful accusation or
the responsibility of such a reckless decision? The least thing in his
saying was excluding Ahlul Bayt and their followers, the Shia, who
refuted this false pretense, from among the Muslims and excluding
another group of the Prophet's companions, who acknowledged the truth
and confessed the faithfulness of Abu Talib, because if he didn't
exclude these people from the

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Al-Kashshaf vol.3 p.332. (275)

Muslims, his pretense about the consensus would by invalidated by a
saying of any one of Ahlul Bayt or the companions. The strange thing in
this concern and how much wonders and strange things there were in this
subject -was that his evidence about this illusory consensus was a false
tradition mentioned without any series of narrators so that we could
find whether the narrators were liars, fabricators or something else.
But it was undoubtedly that the tradition was derived from those false
traditions that were just refuted and he might add to them something of
his imagination to make the little lie grow.

The contradiction was apparent in the tradition and the marks of
fabrication were clear between the words ascribed to Abu Talib: "O my
nephew! I know that you are truthful but I hate to be said that Abu
Talib slackened when about to die" until he said: "... but I will die on
the religion of the sheikhs Abdul Muttalib, Hashem and Abd Manaf." (1)
We didn't want to repeat the argument about this fabricated tradition
but we liked to refer to the saying of al-Qurtubi, who found the word
"consensus" so big and he wanted to lessen something of its sharpness so
he commented: "It is more correct to say: The most of the interpreters
agreed upon that the verse was revealed concerning Abu Talib." (2)

But he wasn't saved from what az-Zajjaj had fallen into because the two
pretenses had no evidence nor they depended upon reason or reality. The
same was the saying of ibn Katheer when saying about this verse: "It was
proved in the two Sahihs (3) that the verse was revealed about the
Prophet's uncle Abu

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Al-Kashshaf vol.3 p.332-333.
2 Al-Ghadeer, vol.8 p.22 from al-Qurtubi's Tafseer vol.13 p.299.
3 Sahih of al-Bukhari and Sahih of Muslim.

Talib, who protected the Prophet (s), defended him, assisted him and
loved him greatly; natural love and not (legal!) ..." (1) Then he cited
those fabricated traditions, which were already refuted, and then he
sent his decision indifferently without thinking of any responsibility
or anything else. Would such commercial news be proved by false
traditions fabricated by some of the liars? And it was funny to quote
the saying of at-Tarmithi about one of these traditions: "... it was
accepted but odd. We didn't know it except from the tradition of Yazeed
bin Kayssan." (2)

He acknowledged that it was odd and that it was only narrated by
Yazeed, who was unreliable and no one depended upon his traditions as we
knew before when we discussed the series of the narrators of the
tradition in a previous chapter, so what made at-Tarmithi say that it
was accepted? Also we didn't want to argue with ibn Katheer about the
love, which he liked to call a natural love and not a (legal) love,
because this book was full of evidences proving that the great love Abu
Talib had towards Muhammad was towards Muhammad the Prophet not Muhammad
the nephew! Such raving was called interpretation one time, history
another time and tradition a third time. Like that was the saying: "Abu
Sa'eed bin Rafi' said: "I asked ibn Omar: Was this verse (Surely you
cannot guide whom you love, but Allah guides whom He pleases) concerning
Abu Jahl and Abu Talib?" He said: "Yes, it was." (3)

We didn't find any series of narrators for this saying

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Ibn Katheer's Tafseer vol.3 p.349. He meant that Abu Talib loved
Muhammad as his nephew not as the prophet.
2 Ibn Katheer's Tafseer vol.3 p.349.
3 Asbab an-Nuzool.

besides that it was just an opinion ascribed to ibn Omar. But how did
reason accept such opinion -even if the faithfulness of Abu Talib was
not proved- where it put Abu Jahl and Abu Talib in one position? How
would the two; Abu Talib in his love, protection and his devotedness in
defending the Prophet (s) and Abu Jahl in his opposite situation, be
equal for the Prophet (s) and in the same position where the Prophet (s)
loved for both of them to be guided and to be Muslims? Who knows!
Perhaps they thought that the Prophet (s) loved Abu Jahl more but Allah
didn't want that! The values became under the feet, the qualities were
lost and beauty and ugliness were equal ... defending the Prophet (s)
and fighting him were the same! How bad it was!

This impudent attack was not against Abu Talib; it was against the
Prophet (s) himself where he was considered as unjust and unfair in
dealing with two contradicted situation in the same way, in which he
wronged justice and violated rightness! O Allah, forgive us!
Interpreting the verse according to the personal opinions didn't stop at
a certain end. We found that every one interpreted it as he liked and
according to his fancy and passion.

We found that someone divided the verse between Abu Talib and al-Abbas
when saying that the beginning of the verse concerned Abu Talib whereas
its end concerned al-Abbas. (1) Between the death of Abu Talib and the
believing of al-Abbas in Islam there was a long period besides that
al-Abbas became a Muslim years after the revelation of this verse.
We referred previously to our respected father's saying

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Al-Ghadeer, vol.8 p.22 from al-Qurtoobi's Tafseer vol.13 p.299 and
ad-Durr al-Manthoor vol.5 p.133.

that all the accusations ascribed to Abu Talib were because he was the
father of Ali, otherwise he wouldn't be accused of anything if he was
the father of anyone else than Ali; therefore defaming of Abu Talib was
just a means to defame his son Ali! We found some of the distortion
fabricated about the verse confirming this thought.

Mo'awiya asked Samra to distort a Quranic verse against Ali and another
verse in the interest of ibn Muljam (Ali's killer) as we mentioned in
the first chapter (At the Threshold). Besides that he wanted a verse to
be distorted against Abu Talib. Someone said: "The verse (Surely you
cannot guide whom you love, but Allah guides whom He pleases) concerned
Abu Talib because the Prophet (s) liked Abu Talib to be a Muslim and so
this verse was revealed. Meanwhile he disliked Wahshi (the killer of
Hamza, the Prophet's uncle) to be a Muslim then this verse was revealed
(Say: O my servants! who have acted extravagantly against their own
souls, do not despair of the mercy of Allah. Quran 29:53) so Wahshi
became a Muslim but Abu Talib didn't!" (1)

In order to certify this silly saying they ascribed it to ibn Abbas to
show us the extent of confusion they reached. It was the just one of
those opinions put to serve the obscene aims and the fabricator would
never mind whomever or whatever it defamed or what values it destroyed!
The Prophet (s), according to this thought, contradicted Allah. He liked
what Allah disliked and disliked what Allah liked! Allah glory be to
Him, didn't want Abu Talib to be a Muslim! Perhaps there was an old
enmity between them or perhaps the reason of that enmity was because
that

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Majma'ul Bayan, vol.20 p.207-208.

Abu Talib had brought up the Prophet (s), protected him, defended him
and defended his mission and his followers of the believers! But the
Prophet (s) liked Abu Talib to be a Muslim as a kind of loyalty to him
and so the two wills contradicted but then the stronger will, the will
of Allah, won and Allah achieved his opponency against Abu Talib by
preventing him from being a Muslim!

As for Wahshi, also the two wills; of Allah and that of His messenger,
contradicted and at the end Wahshi became a Muslim! The Prophet (s)
hated Wahshi, who had killed his uncle Hamza, and the hatred grew in his
heart that he didn't want him to be a Muslim but Allah, the Merciful,
the Kind forgive the crime of Wahshi against Hamza, the hero of Islam,
and didn't pay any attention to His messenger's emotions. The result of
the fight between the two wills made Wahshi a believer because it was
the will of Allah!!!

Wouldn't it be better for them to add to the great faithfulness and
high virtues of Wahshi his decision to the wine, which he didn't leave a
minute until it mixed with his blood and that he couldn't wake up from
its effects until the last moment of his life, which was full of sins
and crimes! (1)

What raving and silly speech those dotards uttered without knowing what
they raved! How did this verse concern Wahshi whereas it was general and
it concerned all the Muslims? It was revealed in Mecca whereas Wahshi
pretended to be a Muslim many years after the revelation of this verse.
(2) Worse than Wahshi were those, who never cared for any responsibility
and who followed the mirage and jumbled in the darkness!

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Al-Istee'ab vol.3 p.61.
2 Majma'ul Bayan, vol.23 p.163.


Among the fabrications against Abu Talib was the pretense that Ali and
Ja'far hadn't taken anything from the inheritance of their father
because they were Muslims while their father was unbeliever. (1)

We didn't find the narrators of this lie in order to remove the cover
from above this scandal and this disgrace! Surely this lie was
fabricated by someone, who was ignorant of the conditions of inheritance
among the Muslims. Definitely that fabricator didn't know more than the
tradition of "There is no succession between the followers of two
different religions." We believe in this tradition but it means that the
unbeliever is not to inherit from the Muslim. This prophetic tradition
wouldn't prevent a Muslim from inheriting from an unbeliever because
Islam exalted the Muslim as it was confirmed by many prophetic
traditions such as: "Islam is exalted and nothing is to be more exalted
than it."

Hence Islam didn't permit an unbeliever man to marry a Muslim woman
because she was loftier than him whereas some of the ulema permitted a
Muslim man to marry a (kitabi) (2) unbeliever woman in a continuous
marriage. The shia agreed upon the permission of marrying a kitabi
unbeliever woman in temporary marriage as I knew. (3)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Al-Seera al-Halabiyya, vol.1 p.74, Al-Hujja p.32, Sheikhul Abtah
p.78.
2 Kitabi is a follower of judaism or Christianity.
3 When referring to the sources concerning this subject, three opinions
appeared:

a. Continuous and temporary marriage were permissible.
b. Both were not permissible at all.
c. Continuous marriage was not permissible but temporary marriage was
permissible. Refer to Nasseem and Zawba'a p.228-230.

If we submitted to this fabrication and supposed that it was true,
although it wasn't, it wouldn't be as evidence showing that Abu Talib
was unbeliever because Ali and Ja'far, who were Muslims, had the right
to inherit their father even if he was unbeliever as the fabricators
pretended. The Islamic law didn't forbid that but the one, who
fabricated this lie, was unaware of Islam and its laws.

**The Tradition of ad-Dhihdhah (1)**

We would like to quote the different ways of the tradition as
fabricated by the fabricators and then to discuss it. 1. Obeidillah bin
Omar al-Qawareeri, Muhammad bin Abu Bakr al-Maqdimi and Muhammad bin
Abdul Melik al-Amawi said: Abu Owana told us from Abdul Melik bin Omayr
from Abdullah bin al-Harith bin Nawfal that al-Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib
had said: "O messenger of Allah! Did you benefit Abu Talib with
something? He protected and defended you. The Prophet (s) said: Yes! He
is in a shallow place of Hell but without me, he will be in the lowest
bottom of Hell." (2)

2. Ibn Abu Omar from Sufyan from Abdul Melik bin Omayr that Abdullah
bin al-Harith said: "I heard al-Abbas saying: "I said: O messenger of
Allah! Abu Talib used to protect and support you. Did that benefit him?
He said: Yes! I found him in a flood of Fire and I took him out to a
shallow place (in Hell)." (3)

3. Muhammad bin Hatim from Yahya bin Sa'eed from

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Dhikdhah means shallowness.
2 Muslim's Sahih vol.1 p.34-135.
3 Ibid.

Sufyan ... etc like the first one. (1) 4. Abu Bakr bin Abu Shayba from
Wakee' from Sufyan ... like the first one. (2) 5. Qutayba bin Sa'eed
from Layth from ibn al-Had from Abdullah bin Khabbab that Abu Sa'eed
al-Khidri said: "Once Abu Talib was mentioned near the Prophet (s). The
Prophet (s) said: My intercession may benefit him in the Day of
Resurrection. He may be put in a shallow place of Fire reaching his
heels and making his brain boil." (3)

6. Abu Bakr bin Abu Shayba from Affan from Hammad bin Salama from
Thabit from Othman an-Nahdi that ibn Abbas said: "The Prophet (s) said:
The least tortured one among the people of Hell is Abu Talib where he
wears two shoes, from which his brain boils." (4)

7. Musaddad from Yahya from Sufyan from Abdul Melik from Abdullah bin
al-Harith said: "Al-Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib (may Allah be pleased with
him) told us that he had said to the Prophet (s): "With what did you
benefit your uncle? He protected and defended you." The Prophet (s)
said: "He is in a shallow place of Fire and without me; he would be in
the lowest bottom of Hell." (5)

8. Abdullah bin Yousuf from al-Layth ... etc. like the fifth tradition.
(6)

9. Ibraheem bin Hamza from Abu Hazim and ad-Darawardi from Yazeed ...
like the fifth tradition. (7)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

1 Muslim's Sahih vol.1 p.134-135.
2 Ibid
3 Ibid
4 Ibid
5 Al-Bukhari's Sahih vol.2 p.201.
6 Ibid
7 Ibid


