The Final Word About the Faithfulness of Abu Talib
==================================================

The faithfulness of Abu Talib was so clear and certain that it didn't
need any evidence to be proved except that if you wanted to certify for
the blind that the sun was shining in the sky and sending its rays and
that the day was bright!

All Abu Talib's sayings, his continuous jihad he had done for the sake
of Islam and all the witnesses of the Prophet (s), his pure progeny and
the companions confirmed his faith, his belief in monotheism and in the
mission of the Prophet (s). Since all the evidences had confirmed Abu
Talib's faith in Islam, so all of the Shia agreed upon that with no any
bit of doubt or suspect. Whoever said other than that is not a Shia
especially when the infallible imams had confirmed that with their
irrefutable witnesses. So Shiism and believing that Abu Talib was
unbeliever would never meet together; for whoever said that Abu Talib
was unbeliever would deny the sayings of the infallible imams of the
Shia when confirming the faithfulness of Abu Talib.

Would he, who objected his imams, be a Shia?

Therefore the faithfulness of Abu Talib was one of the necessities of
Shiism. All the Shia said that and also many of the Zaydis. (1) Some of
the great personalities of the Mu'tazilites said that too. (2) Among
them was Sheikh Abul Qassim al-Balkhi and Abu Ja'far al-Iskafi. (3) Many
of the saints and ulema said that it was proved for them that Abu Talib
was a Muslims (4) and that he would be safe from punishment; among them
was al-Qurtubi, as-Sabki, ash-Sha'arani and many others. They said:
"This is what we believe in before Allah." (4) Imam Ahmed bin al-Husayn
al-Moossily al-Hanafi, who was known as ibn Wahshi, said: "Hating Abu
Talib is unbelief." (6) So was said by al-Ajhoori, who was one of

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

1 Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol.3 p.310, Sheikhul Abtah, p.55, A'yan
ash-Shia, vol.39 p.135.
2 Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol.3 p.310, Sheikhul Abtah, p.55, A'yan
ash-Shia, vol.39 p.135.
3 Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol.3 p.310, A'yan ash-Shia, vol.39 p.135.
4 As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.87, al-Ghadeer, vol.7 p.382, A'yan
ash-Shia, vol.39 p.135.
5 Al-Ghadeer, vol.7 p.383.
6 Ibid.

the Malikite imams, in his fatwas. (1) At-Talmassani said when
mentioning Abu Talib: "He should not be mentioned except with protecting
the Prophet (s) because he protected and supported the Prophet (s) in
saying and doing. Criticizing Abu Talib would harm the Prophet (s) and
he, who harmed the Prophet (s), would be unbeliever and the unbeliever
should be killed." (2)

Abu Tahir said: "He, who hates Abu Talib, is unbeliever." (3) Dahlan
said: "Believing in the sayings of these imams that Abu Talib was a
faithful is safe for one before his God especially that the evidences
proves that as it has been mentioned by al-Barazanji." (4)

As-Sayooti had written a book about this subject with this title:
(Bughyat at-Talib li Eeman Abu Talib). The aim of the seeker for the
faithfulness of Abu Talib). (5) The title of the book was enough to show
the thought of the author about the subject. Zayni Dahlan had written a
book named (Assna al-Matalib), which we referred to in a previous
chapter, about the same subject. We don't want to quote all the names of
the authors and their books written about the subject because they are
so much many. As for that, who thought that Abu Talib was unbeliever, he
deviated from the right way. He fabricated those accusations and lies
and received his immediate fees in this life but he would receive his
other fees in Hell and then he would know the lowest bottom of Hell

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

1 Al-Ghadeer, vol.7 p.382.
2 Ibid
3 Ibid
4 Ibid
5 Ibid
would be for whom! And then came those, who saw the fabrication but
didn't try to draw its cover for they knew well what they would uncover.
We were so astonished to see those people denying the faithfulness of
Abu Talib in spite of that there were much many clear evidences
confirming it whereas at the same time we found such a tradition:
Ash-Shareed said: "One day I rode behind the Prophet (s). He asked Me:
"Do you have something of the poetry of Umayya bin Abus Salt?" I said:
Yes.

He said: Come on!

I recited him a verse.

He said: Come on!

I recited another verse.

He said: Come on!

I kept on reciting until I recited one hundred verses. He said: "He was
about to become a Muslim!" or he said: "He was about to be a Muslim with
his poetry." (1) Zayd bin Amr set out looking for the religion of
Abraham (s). He took his way towards Sham and then from Sham to Mecca
but he died on his way to Mecca. It was related about Aa'isha her
saying: "The Prophet (s) said: I entered into Paradise and found that
there were two large trees for Zayd bin Amr." (2)

It was mentioned that Sa'eed bin Zayd bin Amr bin Nufayl and his cousin
Omar bin al-Khattab said to the Prophet (s): "Do you beg forgiveness for
Zayd bin Amr?" The Prophet (s) said: "Yes! He would be resurrected as
a

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Muslim's Sahih vol. p.48-49.
2 As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.96.

nation by himself." (1) It was mentioned too that the Prophet (s) had
said: "May Allah have mercy upon Qass bin Sa'ida. He would be
resurrected in the Day or Resurrection as one nation or as a nation by
himself." (2) So what was this contradiction?

Why was the Prophet (s) so generous to the non-relatives, who had never
done him any favor, and was so miser towards his uncle, who had done him
great favors since his childhood until he became a prophet? Hadn't his
Lord revealed to him: (Is the reward of goodness aught but goodness?)
55:60. Then why would the Prophet (s) reward his uncle with else than
goodness? After all we found that accusing Abu Talib of being unbeliever
would harm the Prophet (s) and this would be a great sin that could
never be forgiven.

Allah the Almighty said: (... and (as far) those who molest the
Messenger of Allah, they shall have a painful punishment) 9:61. (... and
it does not behave you that you should give trouble to the Messenger of
Allah) 33:53. (Surely (as far) those who speak evil things of Allah and
His Messenger, Allah has cursed them in this world and the hereafter,
and He had prepared for them a chastisement bringing disgrace) 33:57.

Hence we found that at-Talmassani had said that the one, who accused
Abu Talib of being unbeliever, should be killed because it would harm
the Prophet (s) and whoever harmed the Prophet (s) should be killed. The
Muslims agreed upon killing the one, who

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Ala Hamish as-Seera vol. p.136, As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.73,
76, 95.
2 Biharul Anwar, vol.6 p.57, As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.73, 76,
Murooj ath-Thahab vol.1 p.69-70.

harmed the Prophet (s), according to the Quranic verses, which
confirmed that whoever harmed the Prophet (s) would be in Hell for ever.
No harm was be caused to the Prophet (s) more than defaming his uncle
and supporter and accusing him of being unbeliever whereas he was a
sincere believer and a nonesuch supporter. They mentioned that one day
Subay'a bint Abu Lahab had come to the Prophet (s) complaining that
people often said to her: "You are the daughter of the firewood of Hell
(for she was the daughter of Abu Lahab)."

The Prophet (s) stood up angrily and said: "Why do some people harm me
with my relatives? He, who harms me, will harm Allah." (1) What kind of
kinship with Abu Lahab, who had cut every relation and perished every
connection by harming the Prophet (s) so severely, it was! They also
mentioned that the Prophet (s) had said: "Don't curse the dead lest you
harm the live." (2)

They determined that: "Harming the Prophet (s) is unbelief. Whoever
does that shall be killed if he doesn't repent." (3) The Malikites
thought that whoever harmed the Prophet (s) should be killed even if he
repented. (4)

If it was so according to their thought, then wouldn't defaming Abu
Talib and accusing him wrongly harm the Prophet (s)? It would be enough
sin to make its committer deserve to be killed as punishment in this
world and to be in Hell for ever as punishment in the afterlife.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.77.
2 Ibid
3 Ibid
4 Ibid

Therefore as-Sayooti aid that their purpose behind defaming Abu Talib
was to defame Ali himself but their arrow missed and hit the Prophet's
parents; Abdullah and Aamina, and grandfather Abdul Muttalib. Any how
the Prophet (s) and Ali (s) were as one soul and Abu Talib was to the
Prophet (s) as was Abdullah to him and Fatima (Ali's mother) was to the
Prophet (s) as Aamina was.

As-Sayooti said: "I didn't pretend that the matter of the parents was
agreed upon by the consensus but there was disagreement (1) about it
like the other matters, which were disagreed upon, but I chose the
sayings of those, who thought that the Prophet's parents were pure, and
this was the most suitable.

Be cautious of mentioning them (the Prophet's parents) with anything
bad because this may harm the Prophet (s) (2) because the traditional
custom determined that defaming one's parents would harm the son
undoubtedly." (3) If it would defame the Prophet (s) when one of his
forefathers was a polytheist, then definitely it would defame him to be
brought up in a house of a polytheist, (4) who looked after him,
assisted him, defended him and

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 We don't think that there was any kind of disagreement upon this
matter. It had been proved by the Quran and the sayings of many scholars
that the Prophet's parents and grandparents were faithful until they
reached the first faithful Adam (s).

2 There was no any doubt that this would harm the Prophet (s) not
because of the justification of as-Sayooti but because it would wrong
those faithful ones, who were the source of faithfulness and
monotheism.

3 As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.76.

4 No doubt that a child will be affected by the manners of the house,
in which he is brought up, and that he/ she is ready to initiate the
one, who brings him/her up, and definitely that one will be considered
as his/her example.

defended his religion and defended the followers of his religion. Then
the Prophet (s) with all his glory and success would be indebted to that
polytheist man! What a great value and a high position that polytheist
would have! Hadn't the Prophet (s) said: "O Allah! Don't make a
dissolute or an unbeliever have a chance of getting my kindness!"?

If the polytheist father would defame the faithful son, so the
polytheism of Abu Talib would defame his son Ali! Definitely Abu Talib
was accused of being polytheist just to defame Ali in order to perish
his virtues and high qualities, which no one at all had save Ali. No one
of the companions' fathers was faithful nor were they themselves free
from polytheism at some time of their lives whereas Ali was pure, since
his birth in the Kaaba, whether in his lineage or his beliefs.

Hence we found how they fabricated different traditions pretending that
some of the companions' fathers were Muslims. They fabricated such
traditions besides the tradition talking about the polytheism of Abu
Talib just to lighten the scales of Ali (s) and to make the scales of
others outweigh!

Even if those traditions were true, the two scales of the balance would
never be equal in any case that their fathers were polytheists and then
became Muslims -if sincerely- while Abu Talib was monotheist where
polytheism could never find any outlet to his heart at all. The same was
fabricated against the antecedence of Ali's faithfulness in the
Prophet's mission. They fabricated as possible as they could until they
reached a point that they couldn't deny the truth but they tried to
clothe it. Ignorantly they tried by saying: "The first of boys, who
believed in Muhammad, was Ali, the first of men was Abu Bakr and the
first of women was Khadeeja."

If it was said that somebody became a Muslim, that was because that
somebody was unbeliever and then became a Muslim but this was not true
concerning Ali, who had never been unbeliever for a moment of his life
nor had he bowed before an idol! He always raised his head upwards
looking at the greatness of the great Creator. He had been faithful
since the first day. He had never been unbeliever and then turned to be
faithful. He had never prostrated himself before anything save Allah.

Therefore discussing the subject of antecedence in being faithful
wouldn't be fit about Ali (s). Then if the unbelief of Abu Talib would
defame his son Ali, it would, at the same time, defame the Prophet (s)
as long as Muhammad and Ali were as one soul. The participated in having
the same qualities of the house of deep-rooted faithfulness. Muhammad
and Ali had to be in one degree of virtues and qualities except for the
prophecy, which distinguished Muhammad from Ali, in order to be united
as one self.

Therefore Abu Talib must be like Abdullah and Fatima must be like
Aamina either in faithfulness or unfaithfulness so that the parents were
to be united as the sons were united; so Muhammad and Ali were but
one!

If the Prophet (s) would be harmed when it was said to Sabee'a, whose
father and mother were cursed by the holy Quran, that she was the
daughter of the firewood of Hell, then how would he be when his uncle
was accused of what he was free from? Wouldn't that harm him so much
because it was unjust accusation and violation of the truth against his
nearest relative; Abu Talib, who was the kindest one to him and who
supported him until the last moment of his life? Wasn't that required
the Prophet (s) to be loyal towards the favors of his kind uncle and to
suffer when something harmed his uncle; the faithful, the supporter and
the nearest relative to him?

It also did harm the equivalent of his soul; Ali, whom whatever harmed,
would harm the Prophet (s) and whatever harmed the Prophet (s) would
harm Allah as the true prophetic tradition said. And if the intercession
benefited all those great numbers of people, most of whom deserved to be
in Hell, wouldn't it benefit his uncle even if he was not faithful as
they pretended?

And as long as the Prophet (s) was the kindest one to his relatives as
Onayss had sworn of that and so had every one, who knew the merciful
Muhammad, then would his intercession benefit all those great numbers of
sinful people but it would fail to include his loving uncle, who was to
him like his father and who was the father of Ali; his own self, his
beloved brothers, his son-in-law and his guardian?

But Abu Talib, as we said and so did every fair one, saw the rightness
and followed it and so he would enter into Paradise deservingly as a
reward for his deeds with no need for intercession, which would benefit
those whose doings didn't save them from the torment of Hell. He, who
did his duties rightfully, would deserve to be in Paradise according to
the justice of Allah the Beneficent, with no need for any
intercession.

If Abu Talib wouldn't enter into Paradise, then for whom would it be?

In fact for whom would it be if Abu Talib wasn't the first to be in it
rewardingly?

If Abu Talib entered into Hell, as they raved, then who would be safe
from it -even the Prophets? Then Hell wouldn't be feared, the values
would be perished, punishment would be random, justice would be lost and
judgement would be unfair! Allah forbid!

O Allah! Forgive us and don't destroy us for what the fools have done!
(And those who speak evil things of the believing men and the believing
women without their having earned (it), they are guilty indeed of a
false accusation and a manifest sin) 33:58.


