Personality
===========

In that great highbred house and under the care of that merciful
father, from whose high instructions and great school Abu Talib had
graduated. He entered from the wide gate of life armed with the high
principles of the great house and the glorious past of his fathers.
Since heredity had important effect in forming the personality of man,
as the psychologists said, so Abu Talib had made infinite use of this
heredity.

Abu Talib was a clear image of a bright past. He had qualities of his
father Abdul Muttalib, his grandfather Hashem and his great grandfathers
that made of him that bright wonderful image. No one would deny that Abu
Talib, as Allah willed, was the adopter of the Prophet of Islam, who was
the perfect image of man and the ideal copy of humanity.

No one would deny that the Prophet had grown, been brought up and spent
his youth, which was the greater and the more effective, critical,
sensitive and affective stage of man's life, under the care of Abu
Talib.

Hence many qualities gathered into the personality of Abu Talib;
greatness, exaltedness and self-making. He was the adopter of the orphan
Muhammad, the protector and supporter of Prophet Muhammad and the
believer in Muhammad's mission. He was Sheikhul Bat~ha' and Baydhatul
Balad. (1) It had been decided by the Heaven that Abu Talib would
undertake this task and he carried out the task in the best way. He
supported the mission of the Heaven as possible as he could.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Two surnames of Abu Talib. Sheikhul Bat~ha' means: sheikh of (the
valley) or of Mecca. Baydhatul Balad means: the master of the country.

No one would deny that Abu Talib had participated his father in the
leadership when he was alive to be the first personality after his
father Abdul Muttalib. He also participated in taking care of the
Prophet (s) (1) and finally, after the death of his father, he was alone
with the two tasks; the leadership (of Quraysh) and the taking care of
the orphan Muhammad. So he became the only leader and the only guardian
without any partner. A splendid past and a bright present formed a
virtuous life that produced ripe fruits and spread fragrance that
perfumed the space for the friend and the enemy as the sun when sending
its rays to the caves and to the tops of mountains. But the colded nose
wouldn't smell the redolent fragrance and the sore-eye wouldn't see the
rays of the sun!

Leadership and sovereignty wouldn't be gained without plenty of money
but although Abu Talib was not so rich, he was the respected leader, the
first master and the obeyed chief and this might be the characteristic
of Abu Talib alone and no one else other than him. (2)

Even though he was empty-handed but he had a great rich spirit. He was
so great with his qualities and virtues and no one would ever replaced
him. He inherited his father's qualities. He forgave without being asked
for and gave open-handedly without considering it as doing favor. He
often gave people in burdened himself with debts lest he would leave a
favor his father used to do before.

He began to water the pilgrims as his father had been
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 As-Seera al-Halabiyya, vol.1 p.137
2 Refer to Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol.1 p.9, vol.3 p.461, As-Seera
an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.99, as-Seera al-Halabiyya, vol.1 p.53, the Thesis
of aj-Jahidh, p.109, Mo'jamul Quboor, vol.1 p.198, A'yan ash-Shia,
vol.39 p.124 and Imam Ali; The Voice of Justice, vol.1 p.55.

doing before after he had dug the well of Zamzam. He often added dates
and raising to the water in order to make it taste sweet. Once a
difficult year came. Abu Talib became needy. He found himself unable to
keep on his tradition. At the same time he wouldn't give up his father's
noble deeds. He borrowed from his brother al-Abbas ten thousand dirhams
to be paid back in the next year.

The next year came and he couldn't pay his debt back to his brother. He
found himself in a bad situation that he might not be able to serve the
pilgrims. He decided to borrow fourteen thousand dirhams from his
brother again. But al-Abbas in this time wouldn't lend him the money
except on a condition that if he couldn't pay the debt in the next year,
he would have to give up watering the pilgrims and to let al-Abbas
undertake it ... and it was so. (1)

The loss of watering the pilgrims didn't affect his high position nor
harmed his leadership that he was the fount of goodness in Mecca and he,
whose prayers were always responded to, was the point of connection
between the Heaven and the earth. He had so much high qualities that
made him a leader surrounded by honor and glory and made him as a
fortress that no defame might reach him nor he might be shaken before a
wind.

His qualities imposed upon us to believe that he had followed the
belief of Prophet Abraham (s). (2) The pre-Islamic age with all its
filths, evils and sins wouldn't affect him or make him deviate from the
right way he had followed.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol.3 p.461, as-Seera al-Halabiyya, vol. p.17,
As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.99, al-Kamil by ibnul Atheer, vol.2 p.14,
al-Majaliss by Tha'lab, vol.1 p.37.
2 Refer to Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol.1 p.37.

Neither the environment he lived in could adapt him nor was he affected
by its evils. He still had had his exalted thinking, his high insight,
his virtuous soul and all his inherited good qualities. All these made
him so strong that he wouldn't be drifted by the sins of the milieu he
lived in. Nevertheless he was so firm enough to educate that low society
with high lessons of morals and principles.

It was so necessary for such a man to be existed in a period between
two prophets or after the cease of the divine revelation lest Allah
wouldn't be answerable before his people. (1)

The existence of Abu Talib after Abdul Muttalib was an inevitable
necessity. Such deportment had to be a sign for a divine mission, which
would shine to drive the dark cloud prevailing over the existence away.
But it might be surprising for those, who used to live under the
darkness and that it might be too difficult for them to open their eyes
before a bright lamp.

There must be a lamp sending a ray as a good omen of shining light
later on and there must be a star to guide those, who walked under the
darkness of the night lest they fell into an abyss of deviation ... so
there must be one like Abu Talib to be as evidence of Allah before His
people. And really he was. He was the educator of Muhammad (s) and one
of the signs leading to the near appearing of the prophecy.

No one would deny that the personality of Abu Talib had all the
qualities of the well-quallified leader, the virtuous aspects and the
high excellences, which made him distinguished from all around him and
surrounded him with a halo of respect and admiration.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Refer to al-Abbas p.18-19, Biharul Anwar, vol.6 p.302, 475,
Ikmaluddeen p.102, Mo'jamul Quboor, vol.1 p.190, 200 and al-Ghadeer,
vol.7 p.390, 395.

He was the fount of goodness and the respective fortress, to which
wronged and weak people resorted. He was the generous, from whose hand
the destitute ladled. He was the one, whom people entreated when the
Heaven held its rain. He was so humane towards his relatives. He hurried
to relieve the distressed. He was merciful, pious, generous, determined,
eloquent, heartsome, certain, handsome, respected, honored and
glorified. (1)

He knew much about divine laws. He was of comprehensive knowledge and
science. He forbade himself from drinking wine, committing sins (2) and
all of the dirt of polytheism and evils of the low milieu around him.
His soul was high in a wide exalted horizon flying in a pure space.

He was the first one, who enacted the law of (qassama) (3) when Amr bin
Alqama was killed. Later on the prophetic Sunna confirmed it. (4) There
was a spiritual phenomenon in Abu Talib's life happened during the war
of al-Fijar between Hawazin and Kinana. (5) Whenever Abu Talib attended
with Muhammad the victory became on the side of Hawazin but whenever he
was absent Hawazin would lose much. So Hawazin asked Abu Talib not to be
absent in order to

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Thus he was described by the historians. Refer to Ithbatul Wassiyya,
p.107-108.
2 As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.79, as-Seera al-Halabiyya, vol.1
p.134, Abu Talib p.23, Hashem and Umayya p.157, MO'jamul Quboor, vol.1
p.198.
3 Qassama means swearing. The relatives of the killed person gathered
to swear that a certain person was the killer if there was no clear
evidence.
4 Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol.3 p.461, Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.2 p.196.
5 Two Arab tribes.

obtain victory and he did. (1)

Ibn Assakir mentioned in his book that Jalhama bin Arfata had said: (2)
"Once I came to Mecca where it was a year of rainlessness. Some said:
Let's go to al-Lat and al-Ozza. (3) Another said: Let's go to Manat. (4)
A prudent handsome old man said: Why do you turn away whereas the
remainder of Abraham and the progeny of Ishmael is among you? They said:
As if you mean Abu Talib! He said: Yes, I do.

They all, and I was with them, went to Abu Talib. We knocked at the
door. A pretty-faced man wearing loincloth came out. They rushed to him
and said: O Abu Talib, the valley became rainless and people became
miserable. WOuld you please pray to Allah for rain?

Abu Talib went out with a little boy; it was Muhammad, who was as a sun
appearing among dark clouds. Abu Talib took the boy and stuck his back
to the Kaaba. The boy pointed to the Heaven with his finger suppliantly.
There was no a bit of cloud in the sky. The clouds began to come from
here and there. The valley was filled with water and the ground became
green and fresh." (5)

With these high qualities, virtues and excellences Abu Talib had had
his high position and made the hearts

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol.3 p.462, As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.98,
as-Seera al-Halabiyya, vol.1 p.152.
2 As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.80, as-Seera al-Halabiyya, vol.1
p.138.
3 The most famous idols of Quraysh.
4 Another famous idol
5 This event was mentioned in al-Ghadeer, vol.7 p.346 with reference to
Sharh al-Bukhari by al-Qastalani, vol.2 p.227, al-Mawahib al-Laduniyya,
vol.1 p.1 p.48, al-Khassa'issul Kubra, vol.1 p.86, 124 and Tulbat
at-Talib p.42. Refer to Al-Hujja p.91, Biharul Anwar, vol.6 p.388, Abu
Talib p.49, Imam Ali, the Voice of Justice p.34, vol.1 p.55 and A'yan
ash-Shia, vol.39 p.126.

submit to him lovingly, surround him with respect and glorification and
let the leadership to be for him alone ... and who would be better than
him for that? He was like his father; a carpet was put to him around the
Kaaba and he sat on it alone. Muhammad came and sat with his uncle on
the carpet. Abu Talib said: "My nephew feels blessedness or great
glory." (1)
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.80, as-Seera al-Halbiyya, vol.1 p.138,
Biharul Anwar, vol.6 p.129, A'yan ash-Shia, vol.2 p.11.


**Signs**

The poetry of Abu Talib had evidence showing that he had known about
the prophecy of Muhammad (s) before he was sent as prophet according to
what the monk Buhayra had told him and according to many other signs.
The knowing of Abu Talib about the prophecy of Muhammad (s) was
mentioned by many historians besides that it was understood through his
poetry.


Imam Abudl Wahid as-Safaqissi As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.88.

Abu Talib said: "My father read all of the books. He had said: From
among my progeny there will be a prophet. I wish I live until that
moment to believe in him. Whoever of my progeny attains him is to
believe in him." (1) Abu Talib was not in need of this saying to show
new evidence about the prophecy because his belief was deep-rooted and
his faith was firm. He had many evidences even that one of them was
enough to prove his intent. These clear evidences confirmed the faith of
Abu Talib, who had never been hesitant at any moment.

He had known definitely and without any bit of doubt that his nephew
would be that expected prophet, about whom he and his father had read in
the divine books and the divine missions had talked about since the
first days

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Sheikhul Abtah p.22, al-Ghadeer, vol.7 p.348, al-Abbas p.18,21.

of their revelation.

Besides that certain knowledge Abu Talib saw clear signs and bright
evidences that no one would but to submit to. He saw some of those signs
while his father Abdul Muttalib was still alive. Abdul Muttalib often
saw some of those signs and informed Abu Talib of them. But today as he
was the first guardian of his orphan nephew, he would see many many of
those signs, which no day passed or no cloud traveled away unless he
would see a sign of the prophecy through its folds.

He saw in his nephew things, aspects and qualities that would never be
of an ordinary man, who would live and die as if nothing had happened
... certainly not! He saw in his nephew the most perfect image of the
creation of Allah since the creation of Adam until the Day of
Resurrection. He saw that his nephew was the ideal copy of the
exaltedness of man with the highest values.

Among those many signs -rather than the spiritual and moral signs-
there were many touchable signs that even the materialists, who didn't
see but by their eyes and didn't touch but by their hands, would easily
feel them so how about the prudent, the discerning and the faithful
persons! We don't want to wedge the signs and evidences available in the
different books in this book for it needs a long time but we just want
to show the reader some of them as examples.

**The Spring**

The historians mentioned that among the signs that preceded the
prophecy of the Prophet (s) was that one day Muhammad was with his uncle
Abu Talib in Thul Majaz. (1) Abu Talib felt thirsty and there was no
water

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 It was a place that was taken as a market in the pre-Islamic time at
a distance from Arafa.

with them at all. He told his nephew about his thirst. Muhammad (s)
kicked a rock with his leg and water began to flow. Abu Talib drank and
then Muhammad (s) kicked the rock again and it returned to its previous
state. (1)

**With the Diviner**

A man of Lihb (2) was a diviner. Whenever he came to Mecca, the men of
Quraysh came to him with their boys to predict about them. One of those
men was Abu Talib, who had come with his nephew Muhammad (s). The
diviner looked at Muhammad (s) and then he became busy with another
thing. When he finished he said: "The boy! Bring me the boy!" When Abu
Talib saw that the diviner paid much attention to the boy, he became
afraid and felt there was something. He thought that he had to hide his
nephew so that the diviner's piercing eyes wouldn't glance at him. The
diviner shouted: "O you! Bring me the boy, whom I just saw. By Allah, he
will be of great importance!" (3)

This word of the diviner was not new for Abu Talib because he knew well
that his nephew would be of great importance.

**You are blessed**

Abu Talib saw a clear thing showing a bright sign since Muhammad (s)
had joined his family after the death of Abdul Muttalib. Abu Talib's
family was numerous and he was not wealthy. This wouldn't let his family
be
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Refer to As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.89, as-Seera al-Halabiyya,
vol.1 p.139, Tathkiratul Khawass p.9, al-Abbas 20 and Biharul Anwar,
vol.6 p.129.
2 A name of a family or a tribe.
3 As-Seera al-Hishamiyya, vol.1 p.190, As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol.1
p.190, as-Seera al-Halabiyya, vol.1 p.139, Abu Talib p.32.

satiated when having their meals. But whenever Muhammad (s) was among
them at the meal, the all would be satiated and some food would remain
yet. So Abu Talib often said to his family when it was the time of the
meals and he didn't see his nephew among them: "Don't eat until my son
comes!" Anyone of his family would drink the entire cup of milk but Abu
Talib took the cup to let Muhammad (s) drink first and then the all
would drink from the very cup. Then Abu Talib said to his nephew: "You
are blessed."

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.180, as-Seera al-Halabiyya, vol.1
p.137-138, Biharul Anwar, vol.6 p.124, 129. Omar Abu an-Nasr mentioned
this in his book Fatima Bint Muhammad p.18 and in his book Muhammad, the
Arab Prophet p.47. It was mentioned in the book Abbas p.20. Abu Talib
saw the same thing in the day when the Quranic verse of al-Inthar (the
warning) was revealed. He saw that the Prophet (s) had made forty
persons drink from one cup of milk as it was narrated by Imam Ali (s).
All of the historians mentioned this event so there is no need to
mention the reference books.


