His Birth and Upbringing
========================

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was a pure branch from the tree of prophethood, and
a shiny bough from the tree of Imamate. By him and his fathers Allah has
consolidated Islam and exalted monotheism. Before talking about the
aspects of his great personality, we will discuss his pure origin,
birth, and upbringing.

The Origin and The Birth
------------------------

His Father
----------

The father of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was Imam Muhammad al-Jawad bin[^1]
‘Ali bin Musa bin Ja’far bin Muhammad bin ‘Ali bin al-Husayn bin ‘Ali
bin Abu Talib (peace be upon them). It is the most exalted lineage in
Islam. Humankind, throughout all its ages, has never had a lineage more
honorable and more exalted than this lineage that has lit the world with
the essence of Islam and faith.

To this great, honorable family Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was born. His
father, Imam al-Jawad (a.s.), was the wonder of the world through his
talents and intellectual abilities. After the death of his father, Imam
ar-Ridha (a.s.), he assumed the general religious authority and
leadership of the nation while he was only seven years and some months
old.

The Abbasid government seized this opportunity and charged Yahya bin
Aktham, who was one of the great ulama’ at that time, to test Imam
al-Jawad (a.s.) and deny his status, so that the fact that the Imam was
the most knowledgeable one of his age, which was and is one of the basic
elements in the Shiite doctrine, would be proven wrong.

Yahya asked Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) before a large crowd of scholars,
viziers and officials of the Abbasid government about a jurisprudential
question and Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) ramified the question into many
branches. Yahya was astonished and he felt a failure and acknowledged
the exceptional scientific abilities of Imam al-Jawad (a.s.). The news
of this event and of others circulated in the meetings of Baghdad and
everywhere.

His Mother
----------

Before we talk about the mother of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) we would like to
say, as we have said many times before, that Islam has adopted the unity
of society and struggled against all the means that might lead to
disagreement or break that unity. The Imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
always acted in light of this fact. They did not differentiate between
the White and the Black.

They got married to bondmaids in order to do away with all kinds of
racial segregation. Imam ‘Ali bin al-Husayn Zaynul Aabidin (as-Sajjad)
(a.s.) married a bondmaid who gave birth to Zayd the eternal martyr, and
Imam Muhammad al-Jawad (a.s.) got married to a bondmaid who gave birth
to Imam ‘Ali al-Hadi (a.s.).

Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) bought this bondmaid and he himself educated her.
She lived in the house of Imamate with the Alawi women and the daughters
of the messenger of Allah (SwT), who were the example of honor,
chastity, and purity. She was affected by their conducts and devoted
herself to the worship of Allah. She spent her nights worshipping and
reciting the Book of Allah.[^2]

It sufficed her that she had given birth to a master from the masters of
Muslims and an Imam from the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) whom Allah has sent for
the safety and deliverance of the people.

Historians disagreed on her name. Here are some of the names as
mentioned by historians:

1. Sumana al-Maghribiyya[^3] and known as Lady Ummul Fadhl[^4]  
 2. Mariya al-Qubtiyya[^5]  
 3. Yadash[^6]  
 4. Haweet[^7]

There are other sayings but the details of this particular point is not
so important to the subject.

Great Newborn Baby
------------------

‘Ali al-Hadi (a.s.) was born in Siriya[^8] in Yathrib (Medina)[^9] and
by this birth the world was delighted. No one had ever been born in that
age more pious, more devoted, or more knowledgeable than him. He
inherited all qualities of good, honor, and nobility.

Ceremonies of the Birth
-----------------------

Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) performed the special rituals for his blessed
newborn son. He performed Azan in his right ear and Iqama in the left,
circumcised him on the seventh day after the birth, cut the hair of his
head, gave silver, as much as the weight of the hair, to the poor, and
slaughtered a ram as aqiqa[^10], as it was the norm for the Imams of the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) to do with their children when they were born.

Birth Date
----------

Most of historians agreed that Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was born in 212
AH[^11], and it was also said that he was born in 214 AH[^12], but they
disagreed on the month and day of his birth. Here are some of their
sayings:

1. He was born on the twenty-seventh of Thul Hijja.[^13]  
 2. He was born on the thirteenth of Rajab.[^14]  
 3. He was born on Monday, the third of Rajab.  
 4. Some sources mentioned that he was born in Rajab but without
mentioning the day. It has been mentioned in some du’as (supplications)
that, “O Allah, I ask you by the ones born in Rajab, Muhammad bin ‘Ali
the second and ‘Ali bin Muhammad al-Muntajab”.

Some historians did not mention the month and the day of his birth but
said he was born in Medina.[^15]

His Name
--------

His father Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) named him ‘Ali like the blessed name of
his two great grandfathers Amir’ul- Mu’minin Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) and Imam
‘Ali bin al-Husayn Zaynul Aabidin (a.s.). He resembled his grandfather
Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) in eloquence and rhetoric, and his grandfather Imam
Zaynul Aabidin in piety, worship, and asceticism.

His Surname
-----------

Giving a surname to a child was a way of honoring the child which helped
his personality grow well towards perfection. The infallible Imams
(a.s.) paid attention to this important fact and therefore, they
surnamed their children in their early childhood. The Arabs were proud
of their surnames.

Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) surnamed his son, Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), as Abul
Hasan, which was the same as the surnames of his two grandfathers Imam
Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) and Imam ar-Ridha (a.s.). Narrators differentiated
between these three Imams in this surname by saying Abul Hasan the First
(Imam Musa al-Kadhim), Abul Hasan the Second (Imam ar-Ridha), and Abul
Hasan the Third (Imam ‘Ali al-Hadi).

His Epithets
------------

His epithets expressed the high qualities he possessed. His epithets are
as follows:

1. **An-Nasih** (loyal); he was called so because he was the sincerest
advisor to the nation.

2. **Al-Mutawakkil** (reliant on Allah); he disliked this epithet and
ordered his companions not to call him with it. I think he hated this
epithet because it was the epithet of the Abbasid caliph Ja’far
al-Mutawakkil who held a bitter grudge and enmity, and was spiteful,
towards the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

3. **At-Taqiy** (pious, devout); he was called so because he feared
Allah and turned to Him. Al-Mutawakkil, the tyrant Abbasid caliph, tried
his best to attract Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) to the fields of amusement and
debauchery but he failed.

4. **Al-Murtadha** (being pleased with Allah); it was his most famous
epithet.

5. **Al-Faqeeh** (jurisprudent); he was the most informed person of his
age in jurisprudence, and was the authority that jurisprudents and
scholars turned to.

6. **Al-Aalim** (knowledgeable); he was the most knowledgeable one among
the people of his time, not only in the Islamic laws, but all branches
of knowledge and sciences.

7. **Al-Ameen** (trustee on religion and life)

8. **At-Tayyib** (generous, kind-hearted, good-natured)

9. **Al-Askari** (military); he was called so because he resided in
Surra Men Ra’a (Samarra’) which was called al-Askar.[^16]

10. **Al-Muwadhih** (explainer of the verdicts of the Holy Book and the
Sunnah)

11. **Ar-Rasheed** (wise, prudent); he was called so because he was the
wisest and most prudent of his time.

12. **Ash-Shaheed** (the martyr) because he was martyred at the hands of
the enemies of Allah.

13. **Al-Wafiy** (loyal); he was the most loyal of his people, and
loyalty was a key element of his personality.

14. **Al-Khalis** (pure from every defect and bad)

His Lineaments
--------------

He was brown[^17] like his father Imam al-Jawad and grandfather Imam
ar-Ridha (peace be upon them). Narrators described that he was
black-eyed, with thick hands, wide chest, hooked nose, pretty face, and
good body odor. He was stout in body like his grandfather Imam Abu
Ja’far al-Baqir (a.s.), neither short nor tall, with wide shoulders, big
organs[^18]…straight stature.[^19]

His Charm
---------

Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) resorted to Allah the Almighty to protect his son
Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) from the troubles and adversities of time and from
every evil. Every day he charmed him with this du’a that showed his
devotedness to Allah:

“In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful, there is no power
save in Allah, the Exalted, the Great. O Allah, the Lord of angels and
Gabriel, prophets and messengers, the Omnipotent over the inhabitants of
the heavens and the earth, and the Creator and Possessor of everything,
protect me from the harm of our enemies, and whoever wants to do us
wrong from the jinn and human beings.

O Allah, blind their eyes and hearts and make between us and them a
screen, guard, and defender. You are our Lord and there is no power and
might save in Allah. On Him we have relied and to Him we have turned and
He is the Mighty, the Wise. O our Lord, save us from every evil, and
from the evil of every living creature you have control on, and from the
evil of every thing that calms down on the day and the night, and from
every harmful thing, and from the evil of every evildoer.

O Lord of the worlds and the Lord of messengers, send blessings on
Muhammad and all his progeny and favor Muhammad and his progeny with the
best of everything, and there is no power save in Allah, the High, the
Great. In the name of Allah, and in Allah I believe, and from Allah I
seek protection, and to Allah I resort, and with Allah I seek refuge.

And by the glory and might of Allah I seek protection from the devils of
the humans and the jinn, and from their footing, knighting, and running,
and from their cunning and evil, and from the evil of what they do under
night and under day, from far and from near, and from the evil of the
present and the absent, and of the witness and the visitor, alive or
dead…and from the evil of people far away, and people close by, and from
the evil of my self in its obsession, and from the evil of the devils,
and the sense, touch, and dubiousness, and from the envy of the jinn and
the humans.

And by the name, which the throne of Bilqees[^20] shook for, I protect
my religion and self, and all those under my care from the evil of every
figure or imagination, whiteness or blackness, statue or appearance,
ally or not ally of whatever dwells in the air, cloud, darkness, light,
shadow, hot, cold, seas, plains, badlands, ruins, building, hills,
marshes, moors, churches, graveyards (of Christians), deserts and
cemeteries.

From the emanations of those who appear in the night and disappear on
day, evening and morning, afternoon and sunset. and from the suspicious
and accusers, and the talebearers in the night, the devils, the
Pharaohs, Satan, and from their soldiers, wives, tribes, and clans, and
from their backbiting, slandering, speech, maligning, magic, beating,
playing, deceit, and from the evil of every wicked one of magicians, the
jinn, their wind, and all that they generate.

And from the evil of every wicked coming or going, accidental or
intentional, calm or moving, and the beating of a vein, and headache and
fever…and from the evil of every living creature you have power on, you
are on the Right Path. O Allah, have blessing on Muhammad and the
progeny of Muhammad and much peace…’

Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) prayed upon his great newborn son with this du’a so
that he would live with confidence that the power which ran and managed
this universe was none but Allah the Almighty, the Creator of everything
and the Maker of life, and anyone other than Him had no power. Imam
al-Jawad (a.s.) planted in his son the absolute faith in the powers of
Allah, and taught him that resorting must be only to Allah Who saved
from all misfortunes and distresses.

His Upbringing
--------------

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) grew up in a family different from all families in
its noble conducts, high morals, and lofty virtues. Their young revered
the old and the old respected the young. Historians mentioned wonderful
anecdotes of the high conduct of the members of this great family. They
relate that Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) never spoke before his brother Imam
al-Hasan (a.s.) as a kind of reverence.

They said that Imam Zaynul Aabidin (a.s.) did not eat with his mother or
nursemaid for fear that he might eat something that his mother or
nursemaid had looked at to pick and then he might be undutiful to her.
These morals were like the morals of the prophets that were, and are not
found, in any other than this great family.

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) grew up under the wing of his father Imam al-Jawad
(a.s.) who was the most wonderful example of virtues and high morals.
Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) shed light from his soul on his son and planted his
virtues into him. He always praised his son and showed his admiration of
his talents and intellectual abilities.

Historians said that when Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) wanted to go to Iraq, he
seated Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), who was six years then, in his lap and said
to him, ‘What do you like as present from the masterpieces of Iraq?’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) smiled and said, ‘A sword like a flame.’  
 Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) turned to his son Musa and said to him, ‘And you!
What do you like?’  
 Musa said, ‘Some mats.’  
 Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) did not hide his admiration and he said to his son
al-Hadi (a.s.), ‘Abul Hasan (al-Hadi) is like me…!’ He was delighted
because this showed courage and valor that were from his and his
fathers’ qualities.

His Early Genius
----------------

The intelligence, intellectual abilities, and talents which Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) had in his childhood astonished the minds and amazed the
intellect. He had a strong memory, excessive intelligence, and sharp
wit. Historians have mentioned many examples of his intelligence.

They mentioned that al-Mu’tasim, the Abbasid caliph, after having
assassinated Imam Muhammad al-Jawad (a.s.), charged Umar bin al-Faraj to
go to Yathrib (Medina) in order to choose a teacher for Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) who was six years and some months old then. He asked him to
choose a teacher that must be one of the enemies of the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) so that he (the teacher) would feed him hatred towards the Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.).

When Umar arrived in Yathrib, he met the wali there and informed him of
his task. The wali and some others directed him to al-Junaydi who had
intense ill will towards the Alawids. Umar sent for al-Junaydi who
accepted the task. A monthly salary was assigned to al-Junaydi and he
was charged to prevent the Shi’a from visiting or contacting Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.). Al-Junaydi began teaching Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) but he was
astonished at his sharp wit and acute intelligence. One day, Muhammad
bin Ja’far met al-Junaydi and asked him,

‘What about this boy (Imam al-Hadi) whom you teach?’  
 Al-Junaydi said to him angrily, ‘Do you say “this boy” and not “this
sheikh”? I ask you by Allah; do you know anyone in Medina more aware in
knowledge and literature than me?’  
 Muhammad bin Ja’far said, ‘No!’

Al-Junaydi said, ‘I mention some matters of literature and think that I
have elaborated upon them, but he (Imam al-Hadi) opens sections of
literature where I myself learn from him. People think that I teach him,
but, by Allah, I learn from him…’  
 After some time Muhammad bin Ja’far met al-Junaydi again and asked him,
‘What about the boy?’

Al-Junaydi said to him, ‘Let you not say so! By Allah, he is the best of
the inhabitants of the earth and the best of the creatures of Allah.
Many a time, when he wants to enter his room, I say to him, ‘You do not
enter the room until you recite a surah.’ He says, ‘Which surah you want
me to recite?’

I ask him to recite long surahs and he recites them in a way that I have
heard no recitation better than his. He recites the surahs with a voice
nicer than the pipes of Prophet David (a.s.). He has memorized the
Qur'an from its beginning until its end and he knows its revelation and
interpretation…’ Al-Junaydi added, ‘This young boy grew up in Medina
between black walls. How did he obtain this immense knowledge? Glory be
to Allah!’

Al-Junaydi gave up his enmity towards the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and believed
in them and in their Imamate.’[^21]

Of course, there is no explanation of this phenomenon except that which
the Shi’a believe, that Allah has endowed the infallible Imams of the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), whether young or old, with knowledge, wisdom, and
virtue in a manner that He has not endowed anyone else of His people.

His Solemnity and Dignity
-------------------------

He inherited solemnity and dignity from his fathers. The mien of
prophets and brightness of guardians appeared on him, and no one of his
enemies or followers met him unless he revered and respected him highly.

Muhammad bin al-Hasan al-Ashtar al-Alawi said, ‘One day, I was with my
father at the door of al-Mutawkkil (the Abbasid caliph) among a crowd of
people. While we were waiting there, Abul Hasan (al-Hadi) came and all
the people dismounted revering and honoring him until he entered the
palace. Someone denied this reverence towards Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and
said, ‘Why do we dismount to this boy? By Allah, he is neither the
noblest nor the eldest of us. By Allah, we do not dismount to him when
he comes out.’

Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari replied to him, ‘By Allah, you shall dismount to
him with meanness and lowness.’

When Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) came out, people began crying out with takbir
and tahlil[^22] and all of them stood up glorifying him. Abu Hashim
turned to people and said, ‘Did you not claim that you would not
dismount to him?’

They said, ‘By Allah, we could not control ourselves until we
dismounted.’[^23]

Hearts revered and honored him, and this reverence did not come out of
his authority or rulership, but it resulted from his devotedness to
Allah, asceticism in the worldly life, and utmost piety. He left the
meanness of disobedience of Allah and came to the honor of obedience.
From the evidences of the great reverence that people held for him, was
the fact that whenever he came to al-Mutawakkil in his palace, everyone
in the palace hastened to serve him. They competed to raise the
curtains, open the doors, etc., and they did not ask him to do anything
by himself.[^24]

The Alawids’ Reverence Towards him
----------------------------------

All the Alawids agreed on revering and honoring Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and
acknowledging his leadership and virtue. Among them was the uncle of his
father, Zayd, the son of Imam Musa al-Kadhim, (a.s.) who was a
respectable old man. One day, Zayd asked Umar bin al-Faraj, who was the
doorkeeper of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), to ask permission for him to enter.

He was permitted to come in to have the honor of meeting Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.). Zayd came in to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), who was at the front of the
meeting area. He sat before Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) in a manner of honoring,
glorifying, and believing in his Imamate. The next day, Zayd came to the
meeting of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) who was not present yet. Zayd sat at the
front of the meeting area. When Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) came, Zayd jumped up
and seated Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) in his place, although Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) was too young then and Zayd was very old.[^25]

Relation of the People of the Book to him
-----------------------------------------

The reverence towards Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was not limited to Muslims
only. Even the People of the Book besides Muslims believed in his high
position near Allah. When they faced a misfortune, they carried gifts to
Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and took him as means to relieve their misfortunes.

Hibatullah bin Abu Mansur al-Musily said that Yusuf bin Ya’qub the
Christian was acquainted with his father. Once, he came to his father as
guest and his father asked him why he had come to Baghdad. He said, ‘I
was sent for to meet al-Mutawakkil and I did not know what for, but I
brought with myself one hundred dinars that I gave to ‘Ali bin Muhammad
bin ar-Ridha (Imam al-Hadi).’ Hibatullah added, ‘My father congratulated
him, and then he left Baghdad towards Surra Man Ra’a.[^26]

He stayed there for some days and then came back delightedly. My father
asked him about his travel and he replied, ‘I arrived in Surra Man Ra’a,
which I had not visited before. I wanted to take the one hundred dinars
to the son of ar-Ridha (Imam al-Hadi) before going to meet
al-Mutawakkil. I asked about him and it was said to me that
al-Mutawakkil had prevented him from going out and that he kept to his
house. I feared to visit him and refrained from asking about him. It
came to my mind that I would ride on my stumper and go to the town so
that I might find out more about him without asking conspicuously.

Walking in the streets and markets, I reached a house when it struck me
that it might be the house of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.). I asked my servant to
see whose house it was. The servant asked and it was said to him that it
was the house of the son of ar-Ridha. My servant knocked the door and a
black servant came out towards me and said, ‘Are you Yusuf bin Ya’qub?’
‘Yes!’ I replied.

He said, ‘Dismount!’ I dismounted from my sumpter and he took me into a
vestibule. He went in and then came out asking me, ‘Where are the one
hundred dinars?’ I gave them to him and he took them to the Imam. After
a while, he came and permitted me to come in. I came in. Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) was alone. He looked at me kindly and compassionately and said,
‘Is it not yet enough for you? (He meant, has he not seen enough to be
guided).’  
 I said, ‘O my master, a sufficient proof has appeared to me!’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘How far! You will not be Muslim, but your son
will, and he will be from our Shi’a. O Yusuf, there are some people
claiming that our guardianship does not benefit ones like you. Go to
what you have come to! You shall see what you like.’

Yusuf was astonished at the miracle he saw from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.). He
went to al-Mutawakkil and got all that he wanted.

Hibatullah said, ‘Yusuf died and I met his son who was a good Muslim
following the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). He told me that his father was still
Christian when he died, and that he (the son) became a Muslim after the
death of his father. He often said, ‘I am the good tiding of my
master’.[^27]

The people of the Book believed in Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and found in his
life a continuity to the lives of prophets and saints.

What authors say about him
--------------------------

All those, who wrote about the life of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), saw honor,
dignity, knowledge, piety, and charisma in his great personality and
showed their admiration and high regard for him. Here are some sayings
of historians and scholars about him:

### 1. Abul Falah al-Hanbali

Abdul Hayy Abul Falah al-Hanbali says, ‘Abul Hasan bin ‘Ali al-Jawad bin
ar-Ridha bin Musa al-Kadhim bin Ja’far as-Sadiq al-Alawi al-Husayni, who
is known as al-Hadi, was a jurisprudent, worshipping Imam. He was one of
the Imams whom the Shiite exaggerators believe to be infallible like
prophets…’[^28]

### 2. Al-Yafi’iy

Al-Yafi’iy says, ‘Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was worshipful, jurisprudent,
Imam…’[^29]

### 3. Abul Fida’

He says, ‘‘Ali at-Taqiy (pious) is one of the twelve Imams of the Shi’a.
He is ‘Ali az-Zakiy bin Muhammad al-Jawad…’[^30]

### 4. Ibn as-Sabbagh al-Maliki

He says, “Someone of scholars said, ‘The virtue of Abul Hasan has
established its domes on the galaxy, and stretched its ropes on the
stars. No excellence is counted, unless with him is its conclusion, and
no nobility is mentioned, unless with him are its details and totality,
and no high quality is regarded, unless his proofs appear on it.

He deserved all that due to the essence of liberal qualities that he
alone had, and glory that governed his lofty nature which was purified
from any blemish, and so his nature and morals were pleHasant, his
conduct was fair, and his qualities were virtuous. His gravity,
calmness, certainty, chastity, honesty, and wit were like the Prophet’s
and ‘Ali’s. He had a pure soul and high determination such that no one
among men resembled him (in this respect), and he lived a coarse life of
asceticism such that no human participated with him in it or looked
forward to it.’[^31]32

**5. Ibn Shahrashub**

He says, ‘He (Imam al-Hadi) was the best and most truthful of people. He
was the cleverest from near and the most perfect from far. When he kept
silent, dignity was observed on him, and when he spoke, splendor was
observed on him. He was from the house of prophethood and Imamate, and
the abode of guardianship and caliphate. A branch from the lofty tree of
prophethood was he, and a fruit from the tree of the mission was
he…’[^32]

### 6. Al-Qutb ar-Rawandi

He says, ‘As for ‘Ali bin Muhammad al-Hadi, all qualities of Imamate
have gathered in him. His virtue, knowledge, and good merits have been
perfected. All his morals were extraordinary like the morals of his
fathers. He spent the night worshipping, facing the Qibla, wearing a
wool garment and sitting on a mat. If we mention his high qualities, the
book shall be prolonged with them.’[^33]

### 7. Ath-Thahabi

He says, ‘‘Ali bin Muhammad bin ‘Ali bin Musa bin Ja’far bin Muhammad
bin Zaynol Aabidin bin as-Sayyid ash-Sharif al-Alawi al-Husayni was
jurisprudent and one of the twelve Imams. The Twelver Shi’a call him
al-Manari.’[^34]

### 8. Ibn Hajar

He says, ‘‘Ali al-Hadi was the heir of his father’s knowledge and
generosity.’[^35]

### 9. Ibn Anbasah

He says, ‘‘Ali al-Hadi is surnamed as al-Askari because he lived in
Surra Man Ra’a which was called al-Askar. His mother was Umm Walad
(bondmaid) who was absolutely virtuous and noble…’[^36]

### 10. Muhammad bin Talha

Muhammad bin Talha ash-Shafi’iy says, ‘As for the qualities of ‘Ali
al-Hadi, ears never received praise more pleHasant than them (the
qualities) such that they surrounded him, as precious pearls in their
shells. What is witnessed in Abul Hasan ‘Ali al-Hadi was that his soul
was described with invaluable descriptions, and that it was in the
position of prophethood in its honor of ranks and honor of
roots…’[^37]38

### 11. Aagha Buzurg at-Tahrani

This great researcher says, ‘Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was the best of his
brothers. He inherited the knowledge and generosity of his fathers. The
Imamate transferred, and was limited to him from among his brothers
because he had fulfilled all the conditions of Imamate. The conditions
of Imamate are knowledge, justice, qualifications, soundness of senses
and organs that does not affect one’s determination and action, being
Arab from Quraysh, besides being from the Hashemites…’[^38]

### 12. Khayruddeen az-Zarkali

He says, ‘‘Ali al-Hadi bin Muhammad al-Jawad bin ‘Ali ar-Radhiy bin Musa
bin Ja’far al-Husayni at-Talibi was the tenth of the twelve Imams for
the Shi’a and one of the pious virtuous ones…’[^39]

These were some words said by scholars and ulama’ showing their
admiration towards Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and some of his high qualities
for he was the highest religious authority in the Islamic world.

[^1]: Bin means “son of” and bint means “daughter of”.

[^2]: Refer to Uyoon al-Mu’jizat

[^3]: Tathkiratul Khawas, p.39.

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.13 p.126, ad-Durr an-Nadheem.

[^5]: Bahr al-Ansab, p.35.

[^6]: Mir’at az-Zaman, vol.9 p.553 (manuscript).

[^7]: Tareekh al-A’imma, p.16.

[^8]: A village established by Imam Musa al-Kadhim (s) about three miles
from Medina.

[^9]: Al-Ittihaf bihubil Ashraf, p.67, Jawharatul Kalam fee Madh
as-Sadah al-A’lam, p.151.

[^10]: Aqiqa is the name of the sacrifice on the seven day after the
birth of a child.

[^11]: Usul al-Kafi, vol.1 p.497, al-Irshad, p.368, A’yan ash-Shi’a,
vol.4 p.252.

[^12]: Al-Ittihaf bihubil Ashraf, p.67, Jawharat al-Kalam, p.151, Mir’at
al-Janan, vol.2 p.159, Tareekh al-Khamees, vol.2 p.321.

[^13]: A’yan ash-Shi’a, vol.4 p.252.

[^14]: Tareekh al-Khamees, vol.2 p.321, Mir’at al-Janan, vol.2 p.159.

[^15]: Al-Ittihaf Bihubil Ashraf, p.67.

[^16]: It is mentioned in Umdat at-Talib, p.188 and Ilal ash-Sharayi’,
p.241, that the quarter where Imam al-Hadi (s) lived was called Askar
and therefore he was called al-Askari.

[^17]: Noor al-Absar, p.164, Bihar al-Anwar, vol.13 p.127, Jawharat
al-Kalam, p.151.

[^18]: Ma’athir al-Kubara’ Fee Tareekh Samarra’, vol.3 p.20.

[^19]: Jawharat al-Kalam, p.151.

[^20]: She was a sovereign on Yemen.

[^21]: Ma’athir al-Kubara’ fee Tareekh Samarra’, vol.3 p.95-96.

[^22]: Takbir is the saying “Allahu Akbar-Allah is great” and tahlil is
the saying “la illaha illallah-there is no god but Allah”.

[^23]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 13, p.131, A’yan ash-Shi’a, vol.4 p.274-275.

[^24]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.13 p.129.

[^25]: Ma’athir al-Kubara’, vol.3 p.94.

[^26]: Samarra’, the capital of al-Mutawakkil the Abbasid caliph.

[^27]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.13 p.133.

[^28]: Shadharat ath-Thahab, vol.2 p.128-129.

[^29]: Mir’at al-Janan, vol.2 p.160.

[^30]: Tareekh Abul Fida’, vol.2 p.47.

[^31]: Al-Fusul al-Muhimmah, p.268.

[^32]: Al-Manaqib, vol.4 p.401.

[^33]: Al-Kharayij.

[^34]: Tareekh al-Islam, vol.5.

[^35]: As-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah.

[^36]: Umdat at-Talib fee Ansab Aal Abi Talib, p.188.

[^37]: Matalib as-Sa’ool.

[^38]: Shajarat as-Sibtayn, (manuscript).

[^39]: Al-A’lam, vol.5 p.140.


