Imam al-Hadi in Samarra’
========================

Imam ‘Ali al-Hadi (a.s.) lived most of his life in Surra Man Ra’a
(Samarra’). The Abbasid government imposed on him house arrest. He was
like a prisoner. The policemen and investigators of the Abbasids
surrounded his house watching all his movements and everyone associating
with him or carrying money to him.

He suffered the severest political pressure during the reign of
al-Mutawakkil, the Abbasid tyrant, who saved no effort in oppressing the
Alawids. During his dark rule, the Alawids faced different kinds of
misfortunes and disasters. We shall talk about that in details through
the book.

Anyhow, we talk in brief about the Imam (a.s.) when he was in Yathrib
(Medina) and the reasons that forced him to leave it to Surra Man Ra’a
and what happened to him with al-Mutawakkil.

In Yathrib
----------

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) lived in Yathrib, his birthplace and the country of
his fathers. He spent his time in spreading knowledge and morals and in
educating people the Islamic principles. He took the Prophet’s Mosque as
school for that. Ulama’, jurisprudents, and narrators surrounded him
taking from the springs of his knowledge that he acquired from his
fathers who had illuminated the life of man with the light of knowledge
and faith.

As he was a fertile source for the intellectual, scientific life in
Yathrib, he was the only source that provided students with money and
material means besides providing the poor and needy with what they
needed. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) did not only help or pay charity to the
people of Yathrib, but his kindness included all sides of their lives.
He comforted them in sorrow and in joy. He visited the sick,
participated in funerals, showed kindness to the young and old, and
cared for widows and orphans. He spared no good and favor unless he did
to them. In return, they were very loyal to him. They surrounded him
with their hearts and feelings and made him dwell in the deep of their
souls.

Betraying the Imam
------------------

Some irreligious persons, who envied people of noble birth, bore grudge
against Imam Abul Hasan (a.s.). The virtues and high position Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) had among people displeased those persons. From the
bitterest enemies of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was Abdullah bin Muhammad who
had been appointed by al-Mutawakkil as the wali over Yathrib. This man
often intended to harm and trouble Imam al-Hadi (a.s.). He informed
al-Mutawakkil against the Imam.

He told the caliph that the gathering of the public around Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) caused the state dangers, and that great monies came to him from
the different countries of the Islamic nation that weapons might be
bought with those monies to stand against the Abbasid state, and there
was a possibility of a revolt to overthrow the Abbasid government.

He asked al-Mutawakkil to arrest Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) lest he would be
powerful enough that the government would not be able to resist him.
Al-Mutawakkil was upset and worried and he informed his viziers of the
matter.

Frustrating the plot
--------------------

When Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) knew about the plot of this villain, he feared
that al-Mutawakkil might face him with severe procedures for he knew
that al-Mutawakkil was one of the bitterest enemies to the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.).

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) wrote a letter to al-Mutawakkil complaining at the
grudge and the bad treatment of his wali against him (Imam al-Hadi) and
informed him of the falseness of his talebearing. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.)
assured al-Mutawakkil that he did not intend any harm against him and
did never think of revolting against his rule.

Al-Mutawakkil was certain of the truthfulness of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and
his innocence of all that which was imputed to him.

The letter of al-Mutawakkil to Imam al-Hadi
-------------------------------------------

Al-Mutawakkil sent a letter to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) replying to his
letter and he deposed his official the villain wali of Yathrib. He
invited the Imam to come to Surra Man Ra’a to be under house arrest so
that he would be under his watch. Here is the text of the letter:

“Amir’ul- Mu’minin (al-Mutawakkil) knows your position, regards your
kinship, considers what you and your family need to manage your affairs,
fix your glory and their glory, and assure safety for you and for them.
He just wants, out of that, the contentment of Allah and to carry out
his duty towards you and towards them.

Therefore, Amir’ul- Mu’minin thought to depose Abdullah bin Muhammad
from his post in the city of the messenger of Allah (SwT) for what you
have mentioned that he ignored your right, slighted your high position,
and ascribed to you that which Amir’ul- Mu’minin is certain you are
innocent of and he believes your good will. Amir’ul- Mu’minin appointed
Muhammad bin al-Fadhl and ordered him to respect and glorify you, and to
follow your orders and opinions, to be close to Allah and to Amir’ul-
Mu’minin through that. Amir’ul- Mu’minin longs to you, and likes to meet
and look at you. Would you please hurry to visit and reside with him as
you like?

You are free to bring from your family, followers, and servants whom you
like. You travel when you want, come when you want, and move however you
want. And if you like that Yahya bin Harthama the mawla of Amir’ul-
Mu’minin and the soldiers with him to accompany you in your travel, and
it is up to you.

We have ordered him to obey you. Ask Allah to choose what is best for
you until you will come to Amir’ul- Mu’minin. None of his (Amir’ul-
Mu’minin al-Mutawakkil’s) brothers, his children, family, and close
companions is more preferred to you near him, or of closer position to
him than you, and he is not kinder, more loyal, or more faithful towards
any of them than towards you. The peace, mercy, and blessings of Allah
be on you.’[^1]

The worry of the people of Medina
---------------------------------

Al-Mutawakkil ordered Yahya bin Harthama to travel to Yathrib to bring
Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) to Surra Man Ra’a and to investigate the accusation
claiming that Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) had intended to resist the rule and
revolt against the government. Al-Mutawakkil gave the letter, which he
had written to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), to Yahya.

Yahya traveled to Yathrib. When the people of Yathrib knew about his
task, they worried and feared too much for Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) from the
violence of the tyrant against him. They loved Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) so
much, for he kept to the mosque of the Prophet (S) feeding their ulama’
with his knowledge, giving charities to their poor, and he had no any
tendency towards the worldly life.[^2] Yahya began calming down people’s
worry and fear and swore to them that he had not been ordered to do the
Imam any wrong. They believed him and calmed down.

Searching the Imam’s house
--------------------------

Yahya and his men searched the house of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) thoroughly
but did not find anything save copies of the Holy Qur'an and books of
du’a. it appeared that what was imputed to the Imam (that his house was
full of weapons and money) was false.[^3]

Sending the Imam to Surra Man Ra’a
----------------------------------

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was forced to leave Yathrib to Samarra’. His family
accompanied him in the travel. Yahya, who admired the guidance and piety
of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), himself served the Imam during the travel. The
caravan covered the desert until it arrived in Baghdad.

Al-Ya’qubi said that when Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) arrived in al-Yasiriyya,
Isaaq bin Ibrahim received him and saw how people were eager to meet and
sit with the Imam. So he was taken to Baghdad in the night.[^4]

Yahya went to visit the governor of Baghdad Isaaq bin Ibrahim
adh-Dhahiri and informed him of the matter. Isaaq said to him, ‘This man
(Imam al-Hadi) is the son of the messenger of Allah (SwT) and you know
that al-Mutawakkil is deviant. If you inform al-Mutawakkil of a word
against the Imam, he will kill him, and then the Prophet (S) will be
your opponent on the Day of Resurrection.’

Yahya said, ‘By Allah, I did not know from him (Imam al-Hadi) what I
deny, and did not see from him except good.’

They left Baghdad towards Samarra’. When they arrived in Samarra’, Yahya
visited Waseef at-Turki who was from the prominent statesmen. He
informed him of the arrival of the Imam. Waseef warned him from saying
to al-Mutawakkil anything that might harm the Imam. He said to him, ‘O
Yahya, by Allah, if one hair falls from him (Imam al-Hadi), no one will
be responsible for it except you.’

Yahya was astonished at the agreement of Isaaq and Waseef on
recommending him of keeping the Imam safe.[^5]

In Khan as-Sa’alik
------------------

Al-Mutawakkil ordered his men to put Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) up in Khan
as-Sa’alik[^6] to dishonor and degrade him before the public. Salih bin
Sa’eed visited him in the khan and became uneasy for seeing him in that
place. He said to the Imam, ‘May I die for you! They wanted to put out
your light and to degrade you, so they put you up in this worst khan
(caravansary); Khan as-Sa’alik.’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) looked at him with kindness and sympathy. He thanked
him for his feelings, comforted his pain and uneasiness, and showed him
from the miracles that Allah had provided His prophets and guardians
with,[^7] and so Salih calmed down and became satisfied.

The meeting between the Imam and al-Mutawakkil
----------------------------------------------

Yahya told al-Mutawakkil about the good conducts, asceticism, and piety
of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.). He told him that he searched his house but did
not find in it save copies of the Qur'an and books of du’a and that he
was innocent of all that which was imputed to him. These words removed
the rage and anger of al-Mutawakkil against the Imam.

Al-Mutawakkil ordered his men to allow Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) to come in to
him. When Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) came in, al-Mutawakkil welcomed him with
much respect and gave him good presents.[^8]

He obliged him to remain in Surra Man Ra’a to be under watch. When
al-Mutawakkil house-arrested Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), the Imam bought a
house from Dalil bin Ya’qub an-Nasrani and lived with his family in it.
He lived in this house until he died and was buried in it.[^9]

Al-Mutawakkil refers to the Imam’s fatwas
-----------------------------------------

Al-Mutawakkil found it inevitable to refer to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) in the
questions he faced. He preferred his fatwas to the fatwas of all the
jurisprudents of his age. Here are some of the questions that
al-Mutawakkil referred to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) for their answers:

1. Al-Mutawakkil had a Christian clerk who was preferable by him.
Because he loved him too much he surnamed him as Abu Noah. Some other
clerks denied that and said that it was not permissible to surname an
unbeliever. Al-Mutawakkil asked the jurisprudents to give him a fatwa on
that but they did not agree on one fatwa. Some of them said it was
permissible and others said it was not. He sent the question to Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) who wrote to him with this answer,

***Perdition overtake both hands of Abu Lahab, and he will
perish***.[^10]

This answer was the most wonderful answer in the field of fatwas. Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) quoted this Qur’anic verse that declared the
permissibility of surnaming the unbelievers. Al-Mutawakkil followed this
fatwa of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.).[^11]

2. Once, al-Mutawakkil became ill and he vowed that if Allah healed him,
he would pay many dinars as charity. When he restored to health, he
gathered the jurisprudents and asked them about the amount of the money
he should pay as charity to fulfill his vow, but they disagreed on that.

Then, he asked Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) about that. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said
that al-Mutawakkil had to pay eighty-three dinars. The jurisprudents
were astonished at that and asked al-Mutawakkil, ‘Where from did he get
this answer?’ Al-Mutawakkil wrote to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) asking him
about the source of his answer, and Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) replied, ‘Allah
the Almighty says,

***Allah has given you victory in many battlefields***.[^12]

All our ancestors narrated that the battlefields were
eighty-three.’[^13] He said in the end of the answer, ‘Whatever more
good Amir’ul- Mu’minin does shall be more useful and rewardable to him
in this life and in the afterlife.’[^14]

3. One day, a Christian man, who had committed adultery with a Muslim
woman, was brought before al-Mutawakkil. When al-Mutawakkil wanted to
execute the legal penalty on the Christian, he turned Muslim. Yahya bin
Aktham said, ‘His faith (in Islam) cancelled his polytheism and sin.’
Another jurisprudent said, ‘He is subjected to three punishments (by the
whip).’ Other jurisprudents said different things. Al-Mutawakkil asked
his men to take a fatwa from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) about this matter.

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) replied, ‘He should be whipped until he dies.’ Yahya
and the other jurisprudents denied this fatwa of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and
said that he took this fatwa neither from the Book nor from the Sunna.
Al-Mutawakkil wrote to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) saying, ‘The jurisprudents of
Muslims denied this fatwa and said that neither the Book nor the Sunna
had said so. Would you please show us why you have imposed on him the
whipping until he would die?’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) replied by quoting this Qur’anic verse,

***But when they saw Our punishment, they said: We believe in Allah
alone and we deny what we used to associate with Him. But their belief
was not going to profit them when they had seen Our punishment***.[^15]’

Al-Mutawakkil took the fatwa of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and ordered the man
to be whipped until he died.’[^16]

Al-Mutawakkil and poets
-----------------------

Once, al-Mutawakkil asked ‘Ali bin al-Jahm (the poet) about the best of
poets and he mentioned to him some poets of the pre-Islamic and the
Islamic ages, but al-Mutawakkil paid no attention and turned to Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) asking him about the best of poets. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.)
said, ‘Al-Humani where he says:

“A group from Quraysh vied in glory with us.  
 When we disputed,  
 the call of cells judged to us against them with what we liked.  
 You find us silent while the witness of our preference to them  
 is of orotund voice in every mosque.  
 Ahmad, the messenger of Allah is our grandfather,  
 And we are his sons like shining stars.”  
 Al-Mutawakkil turned to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and asked him, ‘O Abul
Hasan, what is the call of cells?’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘It is: “I witness that there is no god but
Allah, and witness that Muhammad is the messenger of Allah”.[^17] Is
Muhammad *my* grandfather or yours?’  
 Al-Mutawakkil became angry and he said with a trembling tone, ‘He is
your grandfather and we do not deny that.’[^18]  
 Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) left and left sorrow eroding the heart of the
tyrant who found no way to answer the Imam.

Al-Mutawakkil invites ibn as-Sikkit to try the Imam
---------------------------------------------------

Al-Mutawakkil asked the prominent scholar Ya’qub bin Isaaq known as ibn
as-Sikkit to ask Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) about a complicated, ambiguous
question that he (the Imam) might not find an answer and then
al-Mutawakkil would have an excuse to defame and degrade him. Ibn
as-Sikkit prepared a question to try Imam al-Hadi (a.s.).

A scientific conference was held in the Abbasid Palace where prominent
ulama’, jurisprudents, and theologians attended. At the head of the
conference was al-Mutawakkil. Ibn as-Sikkit advanced and asked Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.), “Why Allah sent Moses with the rod and white hand, sent
Jesus with the healing of the blind and leprous and giving life to the
dead, and sent Muhammad with the Qur'an and sword?’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) showed the percept behind all that by saying, ‘Allah
sent Moses with the rod and white hand in a time where the predominant
thing among people was magic. Therefore, Moses came to them with that
and defeated their magic, dazed them, and proved authority over them.
And Allah sent Jesus Christ with the healing of the blind and leprous
and the giving of life to the dead by the will of Allah in a time where
the predominant thing among people was medicine.

Therefore, Jesus Christ came to them with that and defeated and dazed
them. And Allah sent Muhammad with the Qur'an and sword in a time where
the predominant things among people were sword and poetry. Therefore,
Muhammad came to them with the Qur'an and sword and dazed their poetry,
defeated their sword, and proved authority over them.’

Allah the Almighty has assisted his prophets with clear signs and dazing
miracles that human beings were unable to make like them. Those signs
and miracles fitted the ages when the prophets were deputed. Allah had
given His messenger Moses the rod that changed into a huge adder eating
the ropes and rods which the magicians of the Pharaoh changed to snakes.

The magicians of that age, who had reached the top of magic, could not
invalidate the miracle of Moses or do even a little like it. Allah had
also given him the white hand that was like the sun in its light and
brightness. The magicians were unable to do something like this miracle
which was the evidence on the truthfulness of Moses.

Allah had given His messenger Jesus the son of Mary the miracle of
healing the blind and leprous and giving life to the dead in the time
where medicine had reached the top of progress and development;
nevertheless, people could not do anything like this miracle which dazed
minds. Allah had given Jesus this miracle to be a sign on his
truthfulness.

Allah had deputed Muhammad to be the last of His prophets and assisted
him by the Qur'an which falsehood would not come to it from before it
nor from behind it and which was the supreme miracle in its eloquence,
rhetoric, excellent style, and wonderful expression in the time when the
Arabs had reached the top of eloquence and rhetoric; but nevertheless,
they were unable to keep pace with it or compose something like it or
like a little of it. Therefore, the Qur'an was the sign that proved the
prophethood of Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and upon his progeny.

Allah the Almighty had assisted the Prophet (S) with the defeating sword
that was the sword of Amir’ul- Mu’minin ‘Ali (a.s.) which harvested the
heads of polytheists and unbelievers. The brave of Arabs were coward
before this sword and they said that fleeing from battle is shame except
from the sword of ‘Ali. The sword of ‘Ali (a.s.) was like a thunderbolt
that annihilated the masses of polytheists, separated the parties of
unbelievers, gave the victory to Islam, and made Muslims mighty.

After this answer of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), ibn as-Sikkit said to him,
‘What is the argument then?’  
 Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘Reason! By it one, who fabricates lies
against Allah, is known and denied.’

Reason is the judge that distinguishes the truthful from liars, and its
judgment is the final decision.  
 When ibn as-Sikkit failed to go on with the Imam, he said, ‘What does
ibn as-Sikkit have in arguing with him (with the Imam)? He (ibn
as-Sikkit) is but a man of grammar, poetry, and linguistics!’

The questions of Yahya bin Aktham
---------------------------------

Yahya bin Aktham offered some questions, which he had prepared and
written down before, to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) in order to try him. Here
are the questions with their answers not literally mentioned:

1. Allah says in His Book:

***One who had the knowledge of the Book said: I will bring it to you in
the twinkling of an eye***.[^19]

The asker was Prophet Solomon and the asked one was Asif. Was Solomon,
who was a prophet, in need of the knowledge of Asif?

**The answer:** Prophet Solomon (a.s.) was not unable to know what Asif
knew, but he wanted to make his nation of the jinn and mankind know that
the authority after him would be Asif. It was from the knowledge of
Solomon (a.s.) that he had taught to Asif lest his nation would disagree
on his Imamate and guardianship after him, and to confirm the proof
before people.

2. Allah says:

***And he raised his parents upon the throne and they fell down in
prostration before him***.[^20]

How did Ya’qub (Prophet Jacob) and his sons prostrate themselves before
Yusuf (Prophet Joseph) while they were prophets?

**The answer:** the prostration of Ya’qub before his son Yusuf was not
for Yusuf, but all that from Ya’qub and his sons was obedience to Allah
the Almighty and as greeting to Yusuf, as the prostration of the angels
before Adam was not for Adam. Ya’qub and his sons, and Yusuf with them,
prostrated themselves to thank Allah the Almighty for their reuniting.
Do you not see that he said when thanking Allah at that time,

***My Lord! Thou hast given me of the kingdom…***[^21]

3. Allah says:

***But if you are in doubt as to what We have revealed to you, ask those
who read the Book***.[^22]

If the addressee was the Prophet (S), then he was in doubt, but if the
addressee was other than the Prophet (S), then to whom the Book had been
revealed?

**The answer:** the addressee was the Prophet (S) and he was not in
doubt about what Allah had revealed but the ignorant said: why did Allah
not deputed a prophet from the angels? Why did He not differentiate
between him (the Prophet) and the rest of people in eating, drinking,
and walking in markets? So Allah revealed to his Prophet,

***And We have not sent before you any messengers but they most surely
ate food and went about in the markets***.[^23]

He said to the Prophet (S): ask, in the presence of the ignorant, those
who recite the Book: has Allah sent a prophet before you that he did not
eat food and walk in the markets? O Muhammad, they are examples for you.
Allah said, ***(if you are in doubt…)*** though there was no doubt but
just for showing the truth as He said,

***But whoever disputes with you in this matter after what has come to
you of knowledge, then say: Come let us call our sons and your sons and
our women and your women and ourselves and yourselves, then let us be
earnest in prayer, and pray for the curse of Allah on the liars***.[^24]

If he said: “Come so that we make the curse of Allah on you”, they would
not respond. Allah knew that His Prophet would carry out His mission and
knew that he was truthful and not a liar but He wanted to confirm the
situation when saying

***if you are in doubt….***

4. Allah says:

***And if all the trees in the earth were pens, and the sea, with seven
more seas to help it, (were ink), the words of Allah could not be
exhausted***.[^25]

What are these seas and where are they?

**The answer:** Yes, it is so. If all the trees of the world were pens
and the seas were ink supplied with other seven seas until the earth
would explode into springs as it exploded in the flood, the words of
Allah would not come to an end. The seas are: Ayn al-Kibrit, Ayn
al-Yemen, Ayn Barhut, Ayn Tabariya, geyser of Masidan called Lisan, an
African geser called Saylan, and Ayn Bahuran. And we (the Ahlul Bayt)
are the words that our virtues cannot be perceived or counted.

5. Allah says:

***And therein is all that souls desire and eyes find sweet***.[^26]

The soul of Adam desired to eat from the wheat and he ate. Then, why was
he punished?

**The answer:** in the Paradise there are all kinds of foods, drinks,
and entertainments that souls desire and eyes delight in and Allah has
permitted all that for Adam. But the tree that Allah has forbidden Adam
and his wife from eating from its fruit was the tree of envy. Allah
asked them both not to look at those whom Allah has preferred to them
and at His creatures with the eye of envy, but Adam forgot and could not
help himself before that tree.

6. How is the witness of one woman permitted whereas Allah says:

A***nd call to witness two just men among you*** [^27]

**The answer:** the woman whose witness is permitted though alone is a
midwife but with satisfaction; otherwise no less than two women who
stand instead of one man. If the woman was alone, her witness is
accepted with her taking an oath.

7. ‘Ali (a.s.) judged that a hermaphrodite was to be looked at its organ
of urination to see if its urination was like that of man, then a
hermaphrodite was to be considered as a man and if the urination was
like that of woman then the hermaphrodite was to be considered as a
woman.

Who can look at the hermaphrodite? For if the looker was a man, the
hermaphrodite might be a woman, and if the looker was a woman, the
hermaphrodite might be a man which would be not permissible. And what
about the inheritance of a hermaphrodite?

**The answer:** The case of a hermaphrodite is as ‘Ali said. A
hermaphrodite inherits due to its organ of urination. Some fair and just
men hold mirrors in their hands and a hermaphrodite stands naked behind
them. The men look in the mirrors and judge whether the hermaphrodite is
a man or a woman.

8. The owner of a herd of sheep saw the shepherd copulate with a ewe.
When the shepherd saw the owner, he released the ewe to go in the middle
of the herd. How can that ewe be known to be slaughtered? Is it
permissible to eat its meat or not?

**The answer:** if the owner, who saw the shepherd commit that sin, knew
that ewe, he should slaughter and burn it, and if not, he should divide
the sheep into two divisions and cast lots between the two divisions. If
the lots fell on one division, the other division should be excluded,
and so on until two sheep would remain. The lots would be cast between
the two sheep and the one, which the lots fell on, should be slaughtered
(and burned) and the rest of sheep would be preserved.[^28]

10. Why, in the Fajr (dawn) Prayer, the suras are recited loudly though
it is from the prayers of day whereas it is the prayers of night that
are recited loudly?

**The answer:** as for the Fajr Prayer, it is recited loudly because the
Prophet (S) offered it in the darkness of (the end of) night, and so it
is recited in the night.

11. (Imam) ‘Ali said to ibn Jarmuz, ‘Tell the killer of the son of
Safiyyah that he shall be in the Fire.’[^29] Why did he (Imam ‘Ali) not
kill him (ibn Jarmuz) though he was the Imam?

**The answer:** ‘Ali said that after the saying of the messenger of
Allah. Amir’ul- Mu’minin did not kill him in Basra (on the day of the
Camel) because he knew that he would be killed in the battle of
an-Nahrawan.

12. Tell me why ‘Ali killed the people of (the battle of) Siffin and
ordered his men to kill them whether they were attacking or fleeing and
he finished off the wounded, but on the day of al-Jamal (the camel) he
did not kill a fleer or a wounded one and did not order his men to do
that. Rather, he said, ‘Whoever keeps to his house will be safe.’ Why
did he do that? If the first decision was right, so the second would be
wrong.

**The answer:** The Imam (leader) of the people of the Camel was killed
and they had no leader to refer to. They went back to their homes
without fighting, deceiving, or spying. They were satisfied (after the
defeat) not to be fought. But the people of Siffin belonged to a
prepared company with a leader supplying them with spears, armors, and
swords, caring for them, giving them good gifts, preparing great monies
for them, visiting their sick, curing their wounded, giving sumpters to
their footers, helping their needy, and returning them to the fight.

The matter with the people of Basra (who fought in the battle of
al-Jamal) was to stop fighting them when they laid down their arms, but
the matter with the people of Siffin was to follow after their fleers
and finish off their wounded. Without Amir’ul- Mu’minin and his
judgments towards the people of Siffin and the people of al-Jamal, the
judgment towards the disobedient of monotheists would not be known.
Whoever denied that would be subjected to the sword.

13. If a man confesses, against himself, that he has committed sodomy,
shall he be punished or pardoned?

**The answer:** if a man confesses against himself by himself with no
evidence discovered by others against him, the Imam, who has been
appointed by Allah, has the right to punish in behalf of Allah, and he
also has the right to pardon in behalf of Allah. Have you not heard the
saying of Allah,

***This is Our free gift, therefore give freely or withhold, without
reckoning***.[^30]

Allah began with the giving first and then the withholding.

We answered all what you asked us about. Know that!’

Yahya was astonished at the answers of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) to these
ambiguous questions and he turned to al-Mutawakkil and advised him
saying, ‘We do not like you to ask this man about anything after my
questions to him…In showing his knowledge there will be strengthening to
ar-Rafidha (the Shi’a).’[^31]

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was one of the great men of knowledge in Islam. He
was the heir of the knowledge and sciences of his fathers who were the
leaders of the intellectual life in Islam.  
 Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) replied to the ambiguous questions of ibn as-Sikkit
immediately and as soon as he looked at them. This showed the great
scientific ability which was one of the eminent aspects of the great
personality of the Imam (a.s.).

His visiting to the tomb of Amir’ul- Mu’minin
---------------------------------------------

In the first year when Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) came to Surra Man Ra’a, he
visited the tomb of his grandfather Amir’ul- Mu’minin ‘Ali (a.s.). His
visit fell on the day of Eid al-Ghadir. Two ziyaras to his grandfather
Amir’ul- Mu’minin were transmitted from him. Here are they:

1. “Peace be on you, the guardian of Allah. I witness that you are the
first who were wronged and your right was extorted, but you were patient
and you expected until certainty came to you. I witness that you met
Allah and you were a martyr.

May Allah torture your killers with all kinds of torment and repeat
punishment for them. I came to you acknowledging your right, knowing
your position, and opposing your enemies and opposing whoever wronged
you. I shall meet my Lord on that insha’Allah… O guardian of Allah, I
have many faults; please intercede for me with your Lord, O my master
for you have a high position near Allah, great rank, and intercession.
Allah has said,

***They do not intercede except for him whom He approves***.[^32]” [^33]

2. There is another ziyara that was narrated from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) to
his grandfather Amir’ul- Mu’minin ‘Ali (a.s.). It is one of the most
wonderful ziyaras of the infallible Imams (a.s.) in its high meanings
and in mentioning some events that took place in the First Islamic Age.
Here we mention a little part of this ziyara:

“I witness that there is no god but Allah the Only with no partner, as
He has witnessed for Himself, and the angels, and people of
understanding from His creation have witnessed. There is no god but He,
the Mighty, the Wise. And I witness that Muhammad is His slave and
pleased messenger whom He sent with guidance and the religion of truth,
that He might cause it to prevail over all religions, though the
polytheists may be averse.

O Allah, make the best and most perfect of Your blessings, the most
growing and prevailing of Your favors, and the purest of Your
compliments be on our master Muhammad Your slave, messenger, confidant,
guardian, pleased, best friend, the choice of Your creation, Your pure,
trustee, the witness to You, the guide to You, the revealer of Your
mission, the loyal to You, the struggler in Your way, the defender of
Your religion, the declarer of Your proofs, the guided to Your
obedience, the guider to Your pleasedness, the container of Your
revelation, the keeper of Your covenant, the achiever of Your charge,
the assisted with the illuminating light, the directed by the pleased
errand, the infallible against every error and slip, the exalted above
every error, the sent with the best of religions and beliefs…

O Allah, bless Your guardian, the guard of Your religion, the executor
of justice after Your Prophet, ‘Ali bin Abu Talib the commander of the
believers, the Imam of the pious, the master of guardians…the successor
of Your Prophet over the whole people, his guardian in life and
religion, the great truthful, the distinguisher between the halal and
the haram, the supporter of Islam, the destroyer of idles, the assistant
and defender of religion, the protector and satisfier of the Prophet…

O Allah, show us the right path so that we follow it, and the way of
guidance so that we walk in it, and change our faults into right, and
make not our hearts to deviate after You have guided us aright, and
grant us from You mercy O You Who are called out of Your generosity
al-Wahhab (the Giver), and grant us good in this world and good in the
hereafter, and save us from the chastisement of the Fire if we deserve
it, O You the Most Merciful of the Merciful!’[^34]

Invoking the shrine of Imam Husayn
----------------------------------

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) became ill and he saw that the best cure for him was
to invoke the tomb of the master of the youth of Paradise and one of the
two grandsons of mercy (the Prophet); Imam Husayn (a.s.) whom no one
resorted to his tomb unless Allah relieved him from the pains and
misfortunes of this world.

Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari narrated the resorting of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) in
many narrations. Here we mention them:

1. Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari said, ‘Muhammad bin Abu Hamza and I visited
Abul Hasan (al-Hadi) when he was ill. He said to us, ‘Send some men to
al-Ha’ir (Kerbala; where Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) was buried) at my
expense!’ When we left him, Muhammad bin Hamza said to me, ‘Does he send
us to al-Ha’ir while he himself has the same position of the one (Imam
Husayn) who is in a-Ha’ir?!’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) had the same position his grandfather Imam Husayn
(a.s.) had. He was an infallible Imam like him that Allah had kept away
the uncleanness from him and purified him a thorough purifying. Abu
Hashim was affected by the saying of Muhammad bin Hamza and so he went
to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and told him that. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said to
him, ‘It is not so. Allah has some places that He likes to be worshipped
in, and al-Ha’ir of al-Husayn is one of those places.’[^35]

2. Abu Hashim Said, “I visited Abul Hasan ‘Ali bin Muhammad when he was
ill. He said to me, ‘O Abu Hashim, send a man from our mawali to
al-Ha’ir to pray Allah for me!’

When Abu Hashim left, he met ‘Ali bin Bilal in the street. He told him
about the Imam and asked him to travel to Kerbala to pray for the Imam.
‘Ali was astonished and he said, ‘I hear and obey! But I say: he is
better than al-Ha’ir.[^36] He has the same position of that one (Imam
al-Husayn) in al-Ha’ir, and his praying for himself is better than my
praying for him.’

Abu Hashim went and told Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) what ‘Ali bin Bilal said.
Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘The messenger of Allah (SwT) was better than
the House (the Kaaba) and the (black) Rock, but he circumambulated the
House and kissed the Rock. Allah the Almighty has places that He likes
to be worshipped in, and He responds to whoever prays Him there.
Al-Ha’ir is one of those places…’[^37]

In another tradition Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘Allah the Almighty has
assigned from His earth some places called al-Marhumat (mercified). He
likes to be invoked in them and He responds.’[^38]

3. Abu Hashim said, ‘Abul Hasan (a.s.), when he was ill, sent for me and
for Muhammad bin Hamza, who preceded me to him. He told me that Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) still said, ‘Send (someone) to al-Ha’ir!’ I said to
Muhammad, ‘Did you not say to him that I would go to al-Ha’ir?’ I said
to the Imam, ‘May I die for you, I go to al-Ha’ir.’ He said, ‘Think of
that!’ Then he said, ‘Muhammad has no secret from Zayd bin ‘Ali (he does
not believe in the doctrine of Zayd) and I do not want him to hear
that.’

I mentioned that to ‘Ali bin Bilal and he said, ‘What shall he do with
al-Ha’ir whereas he himself is al-Ha’ir?’ I went to al-Askar (Samarra’)
and visited him (Imam al-Hadi). When I wanted to leave, he asked me to
sit down. When I saw him feel at ease with me, I remembered the saying
of ‘Ali bin Bilal and mentioned it to him.

He said to me, ‘You might say to him that the messenger of Allah (SwT)
circumambulated the House and kissed the Rock, and the sanctity of the
Prophet (S) and the believers is greater than the sanctity of the House.
Allah ordered him (the Prophet) to stop at Arafa which is but a place
that Allah likes to be mentioned in. So I like to be prayed for me where
Allah likes to be called on. And al-Ha’ir is one of those places.’[^39]

Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) is dear and beloved to Allah. He defended the
religion of Allah by his life and blood and offered his children,
family, and companions as pure sacrifices for the sake of Allah. He
faced misfortunes and disasters that no reformer in the earth had ever
faced.

Allah had endowed Imam Husayn (a.s.) with charismata that He had not
endowed anyone of His guardians with except his grandfather (the
Prophet) and father (Imam ‘Ali). In this world Allah has given him
dignity and honor that no man has ever been given. Allah has made his
holy shrine as a resort for the yearning, and a shelter for the
distressed, and honored the shrine by responding to the prayer under its
dome, and in the afterworld he shall be an obeyed intercessor and Allah
will endowed him with dignity and honor that no eye has ever seen and no
ear has ever heard like it.

Breaking into the Imam’s house
------------------------------

Some villains went to al-Mutawakkil and informed him against Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) claiming that he had books, arms, and monies and that he
might revolt against the government of al-Mutawakkil, who became worried
and terrified when hearing that. Al-Mutawakkil ordered some of his Turk
policemen to attack the house of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) in the night and
arrest him. They attacked Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) unexpectedly and found him
in a simple house wearing a garment of wool and there was nothing
between him and the ground save a carpet of sand and pebbles while
facing the qibla and reciting this saying of Allah,

***Nay! do those who have wrought evil deeds think that We will make
them like those who believe and do good that their life and their death
shall be equal? Bad it is that they judge***.[^40]

They took him to al-Mutawakkil while he was in that state [^41] that
represented the asceticism of prophets and spirituality of apostles.
Al-Mutawakkil was drunk at the table of wine. When he saw Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.), he offered him a glass of wine, but Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) shouted
at him, ‘By Allah, it has never mixed with my blood and flesh at all.’  
 Al-Mutawakkil asked the Imam, ‘Recite me some poetry!’  
 Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘I seldom recite poetry.’  
 Al-Mutawakkil insisted on him saying, ‘You must recite me some poetry!’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) found himself obliged to recite some poetry, and so
he recited the following verses that changed the ecstasy of
al-Mutawakkil into sorrow and weeping,  
 “They were on the tops of mountains,  
 Guarded by strong, brave men, but those tops sufficed them not.  
 After glory, they were taken down from their positions,  
 and put into holes. How bad abode they dwelt in!  
 A crier called them after been buried:  
 Where are the thrones, crowns, and treasures?  
 Where are the faces that were at ease and luxury,  
 that curtains and screens were put before them?  
 The grave showed those faces where worms were fighting on them.  
 How long they ate and drank!  
 But after that long eating, they were eaten!”

Al-Mutawakkil was shaken and intoxication flew from his head. He began
terribly crying. The attendants in the meeting feared for Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) that al-Mutawakkil might assault him and they thought that
al-Mutawakkil would revenge on him.

Al-Mutawakkil ordered his men to take the glasses of wine away from the
meeting. He turned to the pure Imam (a.s.) and said to him reverently,
‘O Abul Hasan, are you in debt?’  
 Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘Yes, four thousand dinars.’

Al-Mutawakkil ordered four thousand dinars to be given to Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) and returned him back to his house with respect and honor. This
event showed the jihad of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and his fixed situation
towards that tyrant. He did not care for his rule and power. He preached
him and warned him from the punishment of Allah and said to him (through
poetry) that he would die and neither his armies nor his authority would
save him from death, and that his delicate body would be food for worms
in the grave. Certainly al-Mutawakkil had never heard such preaches
before. Instead, he filled his ears with the voices of songsters and
songstresses. And finally death came to him while he was between
musicians and cups of wine, and the mention of Allah did not come to his
mind throughout his life.

Al-Bathawi informs against the Imam
-----------------------------------

Historians said that one day al-Mutawakkil was afflicted with abscesses
and he was about to die from that. Al-Fath bin Khaqan counseled him to
send a messenger to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) to tell him about his case that
he might have some remedy. Al-Mutawakkil sent a messenger to Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.), who prescribed a remedy for him. After using the remedy
al-Mutawakkil was restored to health. When his mother was informed that
he recovered, she sent Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) a pouch of ten thousand
dinars and she sealed it with her seal. Muhammad bin al-Qassim
al-Bathawi went to al-Mutawakkil and told him that money and arms were
carried to the Imam.

Al-Mutawakkil was terrified and ordered Sa’eed the custodian to break
into the house of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) in the night and fetch all weapons
and monies he might find there. Sa’eed went to the house of Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.). He put a ladder and went up to the roof. It got too dark and
Sa’eed did not know how to get to the yard of the house. While he was
confused, he heard Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) saying to him, ‘O Sa’eed, stay as
you are until we bring you a candle!’

He was given a candle and then he came down to the yard. He found Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) wearing a wool-garment and a wool cap, and saw a
prayer-carpet on a mat. He searched the house but found nothing except
that pouch and ten thousand dinars. He lifted the prayer-carpet of the
Imam and found a sword. He took all that to al-Mutawakkil. When
al-Mutawakkil saw the seal of his mother on the pouch, he sent for her
and asked her about matter. She said to him that she had vowed to give a
gift to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) when al-Mutawakkil would recover from his
illness, and said that when al-Mutawakkil recovered, she carried out her
vow.

Al-Mutawakkil felt shy and added another pouch of money to that pouch of
his mother and ordered Sa’eed to take them to the Imam. He took them to
the Imam and apologized to him. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) replied to him by
reciting this Qur’anic verse,

***Those who do wrong will come to know by what a (great) reverse they
will be overturned***.[^42]

The blockade against the Imam
-----------------------------

Al-Mutawakkil imposed a serious economical blockade on Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) and imposed severe penalties on whoever sent legal dues or gifts
to him. During the reign of al-Mutawakkil Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was in
serious hardship and difficulties. The believers refrained from giving
him the legal dues as they refrained from visiting and having the honor
of serving him for fear of the oppressive government.

Imprisoning the Imam
--------------------

The tyrant ordered to arrest Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and put him in prison.
After some days in prison, Saqr bin Abu Dulaf came to visit him. The
chamberlain, who knew him and knew that he was a Shi’a, received and
asked him, ‘What do you want and what for you have come?’  
 He said, ‘I have come for good.’  
 The chamberlain said, ‘You might have come to ask about your master!’  
 He said, ‘My master is Amir’ul- Mu’minin (he meant al-Mutawakkil).’  
 The chamberlain smiled and said, ‘Be silent! Your master is the truth
(he meant Imam al-Hadi). Do not fear me! I am on your belief.’  
 Saqr said, ‘Praise be to Allah!’  
 The chamberlain said, ‘Do you want to see him?’  
 Saqr said, ‘Yes, I do.’

The chamberlain said, ‘Sit down here until the mailman comes out.’  
 When the mailman went out, the chamberlain said to his attendant, ‘Take
Saqr to the room where the Alawid is imprisoned and leave them alone!’
When Saqr went into the cell, he saw Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) sit on a mat
and before him there was a dug grave. Al-Mutawakkil had ordered this
grave to be dug in order to frighten the Imam. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said
to Saqr kindly and friendly, ‘O Saqr, what made you come?’

Saqr said, ‘I came to know your news.’ Saqr began crying feeling pity
and fear for the Imam. The Imam said to him, ‘O Saqr, do not worry. They
cannot harm us.’  
 Saqr calmed down and thanked Allah for that. Then he asked the Imam
about some religious questions and the Imam answered his questions. Then
he said farewell to the Imam and left.[^43] It was no long after that
when the Imam was set free.

**A vain attempt to assassinate the Imam**

Al-Mutawakkil was unable to bear Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) any more. It
bothered him that people talked about the virtues, vast knowledge,
piety, and asceticism of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and that the Shi’a believed
in his Imamate and believed that he was worthier of the caliphate than
him (al-Mutawakkil). Therefore, he tried to assassinate the Imam and get
rid of him but however he failed to achieve his aim.

Al-Fadhl bin Ahmad al-Katib (the clerk) narrated that his father, who
was the clerk of al-Mu’tazz, said, ‘We were with al-Mu’tazz when one day
we went to al-Mutawakkil who was sitting on his throne but very angry
looking askance at his vizier al-Fath bin Khaqan and shouting, ‘This is
whom you said about what you said!’

Al-Fath tried to calm him down. He said to him, ‘O Amir’ul-
Mu’minin,[^44] it was fabricated against him.’  
 Al-Mutawakkil paid him no attention and said, ‘By Allah, I will kill
this…who fabricates and defame my rule.’ He brought four men from the
Khazar, who understood nothing, gave them arms and ordered them to kill
Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) when he would come to him. He said angrily, ‘By
Allah, I will burn his body in fire after killing him.’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) came surrounded by the guards of the palace who
glorified him by saying loudly “la ilaha illallah; there is no god but
Allah” and “Allahu akbar; Allah is great”. They said, ‘This is the son
of ar-Ridha.’

When al-Mutawakkil caught sight of him, he was affected by his solemnity
and Allah cast terror into his heart. He jumped from his throne,
received the Imam warmly, kissed him on the forehead, and said to him
reverently, ‘O my master, son of the messenger of Allah, the best of
whom Allah has created, my cousin, my lord Abul Hasan…’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) advised and warned him of the punishment of Allah.  
 Al-Mutawakkil asked him, ‘My master, why did you come at such a
time?’  
 Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘Your messenger came to me saying;
al-Mutawakkil sends for you.’  
 Al-Mutawakkil said, ‘The son of…lied. My master, go back to where you
have come from!’ Al-Mutawakkil turned towards his viziers and sons and
said, ‘Fath, Abdullah, Mu’tazz, escort your master!’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) left surrounded by a halo of reverence and
glorification and the Khazars refrained from killing him when they saw
his solemnity, the honoring of the guards, and the glorification of
al-Mutawakkil towards him.[^45] And thus the attempt of al-Mutawakkil
failed.

Al-Mutawakkil despises the Imam
-------------------------------

Envy filled the heart of al-Mutawakkil who followed all ways to degrade
Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and belittle his position that was exalted among the
public. He wanted to belittle the Imam by making him go on foot before
him so that people might disregard him, but his vizier counseled him to
give up because that would make the public blame and criticize him.

Al-Mutawakkil paid no attention to his vizier who counseled him again
that he could order the officials and notables including the Imam to go
on foot so that no one would think that the Imam alone was intended.
Al-Mutawakkil responded to his vizier and ordered people to go on foot
before him and they did. It was a very hot summer day. Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) oozed sweat. Zuraqa the chamberlain of al-Mutawakkil saw the Imam
in that state. He came to him, seated him in a vestibule there, took out
a handkerchief and began wiping the sweat of the Imam. He said to the
Imam trying to comfort his pains,

‘Your cousin (al-Mutawakkil) did not intend you particularly.’  
 Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) looked at him and said, ‘Stop that!’ And then he
recited this Qur’anic verse,

***Enjoy yourselves in your abode for three days, that is a promise not
to be belied***.[^46]

Zuraqa said, ‘I had a teacher who was a Shi’a. I often joked with him.
When I went home, I sent for him. When he came to me, I told him about
what I heard from the Imam (a.s.). He changed color and said to me, ‘Be
careful and store all what you have! Al-Mutawakkil shall die or be
killed after three days.’ He understood that from the Qur’anic verse
that Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) recited.

I was affected by his speech and asked him to leave. Then I thought with
myself and said that it would not harm me to take precautions. If
something like that happened, I would have taken my precaution, and if
not, I would lose nothing. I went to the house of al-Mutawakkil and took
all my money. I deposited them with one of my acquaintances. After three
days al-Mutawakkil died. This sign was the cause of my guidance and
believing in Imamate.’[^47]

The Imam’s prayer against al-Mutawakkil
---------------------------------------

Imam Abul Hasan al-Hadi (a.s.) resorted to Allah and prayed Him with
this holy du’a (known as the du’a of the wronged against the unjust)
which was one of the treasures of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.);

“O Allah, I and so-and-so (he meant al-Mutawakkil) are two slaves from
your slaves. Our forelocks (heads) are in your hand. You know our
residence and depository, and know our resort and abode, and our inwards
and outwards, and know our intentions, and encompass our consciences.
Your knowing of what we show is as your knowing of what we conceal, and
your knowing of what we hide is as your knowing of what we announce.

Nothing of our concerns is hidden from you, and no state of ours is kept
secret before you. We have no shelter protecting us from you, and no
refuge keeping us away from you. No escaper from us can escape from you,
and no oppressor can protect himself by his power from you, nor his
soldiers can defend him against you.

No defeater can defeat You by his might, and no mighty one can stand
against You by his abundance. You overcome him wherever he goes, and
subject him to wherever he resorts. The wronged come to your door, and
the oppressed from us rely on you and turn to you.

They ask you for help when helpers fail them, and cry for Your support
when supporters turn backs to them. They resort to You when shelters
disappoint them, and knock Your door when doors are closed before them,
and get to You when inadvertent kings hide from them. You are aware of
them before they complain to You, and know what benefits them before
they ask You for it. Praise be to You, the Hearing, the Seeing, the
Kind, the mighty.

O Allah, it has been in Your eternal knowledge, clear judgment, running
fate, irrefutable decision, and inevitable will in all Your creations;
the happy one of them and the wretched, the good one and the bad, that
if You have given to so-and-so (he meant al-Mutawakkil) a power over me
and he wronged me by it, oppressed me, overcame me by the power You have
given to him, and became haughty towards me by the position You have
made to him, and Your gifts to him seduced him, Your patience with him
made him be tyrannical, and so he did me a distress that I could not
bear, and intended me with evil that I failed to tolerate.

I could not defend myself against him for my weakness, and could not
take my right from him for my humbleness. So I left him to You and
relied on You concerning him. I threatened him with Your punishment,
warned him of Your domination, and frightened him of Your revenge, but
he thought that Your patience with him was out of weakness, and Your
giving him time was out inability.

Nothing prevented him and so he went far in his oppression, and
exaggerated in his enmity, and exceeded in his tyranny daring before You
my Lord, and exposing himself to Your wrath which You do not repel from
the unjust, and ignoring Your punishment which You do not withhold from
the oppressive.

O my Lord, here I am disabled before him, subjected under his rule,
subjugated by his reins, defeated, oppressed, distressed, afraid,
terrified, suppressed. I lost my patience, and remained helpless. Doors
were closed before me except Yours, and directions were blocked before
me except Yours. My affairs were confused to resist his hardships to me.
My thoughts failed to remove his oppression. Whoever of Your people I
asked for help disappointed me, and whoever of Your creation I relied on
betrayed me.

I counseled with my advice and it told me to resort to You, and inquired
my guide and it did not guide me save to You, so I turned to You my Lord
humbly, servilely, submissively, knowing that there was no deliverance
except near You, and no rescue except by You. Carry out Your promise of
supporting me and responding to my supplication for You have said and
Your saying is the truth that is not annulled or changed,

***(and he who retaliates with the like of that with which he has been
afflicted and he has been oppressed, Allah will most certainly aid
him)***,[^48] and, glory be to You and sanctified are Your names, You
said, ***(call upon Me, I will answer you)***,[^49]

and so I do as You have ordered me not as a favor from me on You; how is
that while it is You Who have guided me to that? My Lord, bless Muhammad
and the progeny of Muhammad and respond to me as You have promised me, O
You Who do not fail the promise.

My Lord, I do know that You have a day on which you avenge on the unjust
for the wronged, and I am certain that You have a time at which You take
from the oppressor to the oppressed because none of resisters can resist
You, and none of opponents can run off Your hold, and You fear none that
may escape You, but my fear and intolerance fail me before Your
patience, and the expectance of Your insight.

Your power over me, my Lord, is over all powers, and Your authority
defeats all authorities. The return of everyone is to You even if You
give him time, and the coming back of every oppressor is to You even if
You respite him.

Your patience with so-and-so (he meant al-Mutawakkil) and Your respiting
him harmed me, and despair was about to overcome me except for the trust
I had in You and the certainty in Your promise. If it is in Your fate
and eternal power that he will repent of oppressing me or refrain from
harming me or change from what he has committed against me…

O Allah, bless Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad and put that in his
heart at this very moment before removing Your blessings that You have
endowed me with…and if it is in Your knowledge other than this that he
will keep on oppressing me, then I ask You O the Helper of the wronged
and oppressed to respond to my call.

Bless Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad and snatch him
(al-Mutawakkil) from his shelter with the snatch of the Mighty, the
Powerful, and surprise him in his inadvertence with the surprise of the
Overcoming King! Deprive him of his ease and authority! Scatter his
gathers and assistants from around him!

Tear his kingdom thoroughly, and separate his supporters with every
separation! Divest him of Your blessing which he does not thank, and
take the dress of Your glory off him which he does not reward with
goodness! Crush him O You the Crusher of tyrants, and perish him O You
Who had perished the ancient nations!

Trounce him O You the Trouncer of the unjust nations, and disappoint him
O You the Disappointer of the transgressive parties! Overwhelm his old,
destroy his kingdom, omit his trace, remove his mention, put out his
fire, darken his day, cover his sun, destroy his life, increase his
distress, degrade him, suppress him, hasten his death.

Do not let a rank to him unless You disgrace it, and no pillar unless
You tear it down, and no unity unless You separate it, and no highness
unless You demean it!…and show us his supporters, soldiers, beloveds,
and relatives scattered everywhere, and separated after their unity, and
masked after their power over the nation! Relieve the fearful and eager
hearts with the disappearance of his rule and delight the confused
nation and the lost people!

Remove by his disappearance the annulled laws, ignored verdicts,
forgotten heritage, distorted traditions, deserted schools, averted
mihrabs, and destroyed mosques!…Afflict him with a night that has no
like, and an hour that there is no remedy from, and a disaster that
there is relief from!…Expose his honor, and disturb his ease! Show him
Your great assault, utmost revenge, Your power that is over all powers,
and Your sovereignty that is mightier than his sovereignty!

Defeat him for me by Your strong power, abort his cunning by Your
cunning, rout his will by Your will, sicken his body, orphan his
children, decrease his life, disappoint his hope, remove his kingdom,
increase his misfortunes, make him busy with his body, do not relieve
him from his sorrow, take him into deviation, make his end into vain,
make his blessing disappear, and his good luck to lowness, and his
sovereignty to declination, and his end to the miserable end!

Make him die with his rage when You want to make him die, and let him
live with his sorrow if You want to let him live! Keep me safe from his
evil, slandering, backbiting, domination, and enmity! Look at him with a
glance that destroys him, for You are stronger in might and stronger in
inflicting punishment! And praise be to Allah the Lord of the worlds.”

This du’a is from the treasures of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) which they
resorted to whenever an oppressor poured his spite on them, and Allah
responded to them and brought down His wrath on their enemies.

This du’a shows the extent of the distresses and disasters Imam al-Hadi
(a.s) suffered during the reign of al-Mutawakkil the Abbasid tyrant who
saved no effort in oppressing the Alawids and their followers.

**The death of al-Mutawakkil**

Allah responded to the prayer of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and revenged on his
enemy severely. After this prayer al-Mutawakkil lived no more than three
days.  
 A plot was arranged to assassinate al-Mutawakkil and to do away with
him. The terms of the plot were made perfect and kept very secret and
finally it succeeded and the plotters lost no one of them. The plotters
were al-Muntasir, Waseef at-Turki (the Turk), and Bugha at-Turki.

**Al-Muntasir**

Al-Muntasir (son of al-Mutawakkil) had spite and malice towards his
father and the reason, as we think, belonged to two points;

**The first,** al-Mutawakkil despised his son al-Muntasir and
exaggerated in that until he swelled his nose. Al-Muntasir was full of
spite against his father. A day before his death, al-Mutawakkil brought
al-Muntasir to his meeting and abused him one time and made him drink
over his capacity another. He said to his vizier al-Fath bin Khaqan, ‘I
shall be free from Allah and from my kinship to the messenger of Allah
if you do not slap him (al-Muntasir).’

Al-Fath got up and slapped al-Muntasir twice. Al-Mutawakkil said to the
attendants of his meeting, ‘Witness on me you all that I have deposed
al-Muntasir (from the position of heir apparent).’ He said to
al-Muntasir, ‘I have named you al-Muntasir and people named you
al-Muntadhir for your foolishness, and now you are al-Musta’jil
(reckless).’  
 Al-Muntasir said to his father, ‘If you ordered to behead me, it would
be better for me than what you did to me.’ Then he left while being full
of spite against his father and thinking of revenge. After that he
carried out the plot of assassination.

**The second,** al-Mutawakkil was full of spite and hatred towards Imam
‘Ali (a.s.) whereas al-Muntasir was contrary to him. He had a great love
to Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) and his progeny of the Alawids and this was the
reason, as historians said, behind the killing of his father.  
 These three persons were the most important members in this plot. They
held secret meetings and discussed the best ways to carry out their
plan. They agreed on the following points:

1. To carry out the plot under the darkness of night

2. Closing the gates of the palace except the gate that led to the
Tigris for fear of that supplies might come to al-Mutawakkil from the
guards of the palace or from a unit of the army

3. Killing the prime minister al-Fath bin Khaqan

4. Rumoring among the public that al-Fath led a failed military coup and
killed the caliph al-Mutawakkil but al-Muntasir suppressed the coup and
killed al-Fath as revenge for the killing of his father. These were some
steps of the plan that the leaders of the coup (the plotters) agreed on.

Executing the Plot
------------------

The Turks, holding unsheathed swords and headed by Baghir at-Turki,
attacked al-Mutawakkil on the night of Wednesday the fourth of
Shawwal[^50] in 247AH.[^51] Al-Mutawakkil was drunk. Al-Fath bin Khaqan
became astonished and cried out, ‘Woo unto you! He is Amir’ul-
Mu’minin!’ They paid him no attention.

He threw himself on al-Mutawakkil to be the scapegoat but he saved
neither his master nor himself. The Turks tore them both to pieces that
the flesh of each of them could not be distinguished from the others.
They were buried together. Thus the days of al-Mutawakkil, who was the
bitterest enemy to the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), came to an end.

The Turks left the palace and went to al-Muntasir who was waiting for
them. They saluted him with the title of the caliphate. Al-Muntasir
rumored among people that al-Fath bin Khaqan killed his father and he
revenged and killed him. Then he took allegiance for himself from the
Abbasid family and all units of the army.

The Alawids and their followers the Shi’a received the news of
al-Mutawakkil’s death with delight and joy, because the tyrant, who
turned their lives to unbearable distresses, perished. He was killed
between the cups of wine and musicals.

His body did not suffer illnesses or pains except a little when the
swords harvested his life. Anyhow, that terrible nightmare disappeared
from the life of the Alawids and their followers. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.)
was delighted because Allah responded to his prayer and perished the
bitterest of his enemies and opponents.

The rule of al-Muntasir
-----------------------

Al-Muntasir assumed the rule after the coup against the government of
his father. All classes of people felt delight and joy because the
oppression and tyranny of al-Mutawakkil disappeared.

With The Alawids
----------------

Al-Muntasir followed a rightly, fair policy towards the Alawids and the
Shi’a. From the good achievements he did to the Alawids were that he
returned Fadak[^52] to the Alawids, cancelled the interdict on the
entails of the Alawids and gave them back to them, deposed the wali of
Yathrib Salih bin ‘Ali, who treated the Alawids badly, and appointed
‘Ali bin al-Hasan instead of him and ordered him to treat the Alawids
kindly and do them good.[^53]

Poets praised al-Muntasir in their poems too much for the many favors he
did to the Alawids. He repaired what his father and grandfathers spoiled
towards the Alawids who were their kin. He comforted and treated them
very kindly after they suffered distresses, hardships, and deprivation
from the previous governments.

The Permission of Visiting the Tomb of Imam ‘Ali
------------------------------------------------

Al-Mutawakkil had officially forbidden the visit to the tomb of Amir’ul-
Mu’minin ‘Ali (a.s.), but when al-Muntasir became the caliph, he
permitted people to visit the tomb.

Annulling the Interdict of Visiting the Tomb of Imam Husayn
-----------------------------------------------------------

Al-Muntasir permitted Muslims to visit the tomb of Imam al-Husayn (a.s.)
after al-Mutawakkil had forbidden that and decreed severe penalties
against whoever visited that holy tomb.

These favors of al-Muntasir were and will be mentioned throughout
history with high praise and gratefulness. He proved his nobility,
honesty, and high personality and proved that he did not slip in the
abyss which his father al-Mutawakkil had slipped in and brought himself
disgrace in this life and eternal punishment in the afterlife.

His Death
---------

This noble man, who refreshed the hearts of the Alawids, did not live
long. Death came over him in the beginning of his rule. Most of
historians said he did not die a natural death but he was poisoned. The
Turks assassinated him fearing that he might kill them and do away with
their influence and domination over the Islamic nation.

The Turks bribed his physician ibn Tayfur by giving him thirty thousand
dinars to assassinate him. Al-Muntasir was ill and the physician advised
to bleed him. He bled him with a poisoned blade and he died soon.[^54]
He died on Saturday, the fourth of Rabee’ ath-Thani,[^55] 248 AH and was
buried in al-Jawsaq.[^56] By his death people lost much. It was he who
destroyed his father’s throne which was based on oppression and tyranny.

Anyhow, the books of history at hand did not mention any meeting or
event that took place between Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and al-Muntasir. The
certain thing is that Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was delighted for
al-Muntasir’s procedures towards the Alawids that returned to them
safety and settlement which they missed during the reign of
al-Mutawakkil.

The reign of al-Musta’een
-------------------------

After the death of al-Muntasir al-Musta’een assumed the rule on Sunday,
the fifth of Rabee’ ath-Thani in the year 248 AH. He was as a tool run
by the Turks. He had no political influence over the body of his
government. One of the poets said on that,

“A caliph in a cage between Waseef and Bugha,  
 he repeated what they both said to him as a parrot does.”[^57]

The caliph was like a parrot in a cage repeating unconsciously and
unwittingly what his viziers said to him. The rule was run by Waseef,
Bugha, and other Turks. Neither al-Musta’een nor his family had
influence or authority.

His Wasting and Lavishness
--------------------------

Al-Musta’een wasted and spent money lavishly. He spent all what the
previous caliphs had spared in their treasuries of monies, jewels,
furniture, weapons, war equipments, and other things. Bugha at-Turki
denied that and said to him, ‘O Amir’ul- Mu’minin, these treasuries are
the capital of Muslims. The caliphs before you have gathered for a day
when Islam and Muslims may face an unexpected misfortune or disaster.’
But the caliph paid no attention and went on wasting the monies of the
state.

An example on his wasting was that he had a gallery in which he had put
precious jewelries, and splendid tools and utensils besides gold
sculptures of animals, beasts, birds and humans. These sculptures were
inlaid with most precious stones. He ordered to made vessels of gold to
be filled with musk and ambergris. Villages of gold were made for him in
which he put statues of cows, buffaloes, sheep, dogs, plants, and
fruits. And all that were made of gold.

This is an example on the absurdities of the Abbasid governments which
overcame the wealth of Muslims and spent it on their lusts and wishes.

The Deposition of Al-Musta’een
------------------------------

The Turks snubbed al-Musta’een and feared him. One day, he set out
towards Baghdad. The Turks sent for him asking him to return to
Samarra’. He refused and went on to Baghdad. They deposed him and took
al-Mu’tazz out of prison and paid him homage as the caliph. They
prepared a great army to occupy Baghdad. The two armies met and both
sides suffered great losses but the war continued. At last, they agreed
on that al-Musta’een should announce the deposition of himself and give
the caliphate to al-Mu’tazz on some conditions that they agreed on.

Al-Musta’een gave the caliphate to al-Mu’tazz who did not observe the
conditions required from him and he put al-Musta’een in the prison of
Wasit. He remained for nine months in that prison. The Turks felt fear
of al-Musta’een although he was in prison. They took him out of prison
and brought him to Samarra’. Al-Mu’tazz asked his chamberlain Sa’eed to
kill him and he did.[^58]  
 The author of al-Fakhri said he was weak in mind, reason, and
administration, and that many seditions happened during his reign and
his state was full of troubles and confusion.[^59] We shall talk about
the rule of al-Mu’tazz in a coming chapter because Imam al-Hadi (a.s.)
was martyred in that period.

[^1]: Al-Irshad, p.375-376

[^2]: Mir’at az-Zaman, vol.9 p.553

[^3]: Muruj ath-Thahab, vol.4 p.113

[^4]: Tareekh al-Ya’qubi, vol.3 p.209

[^5]: Mir’at az-Zaman, vol.9 p.553, Tathkirat al-Khawas, p.359, Muruj
ath-Thahab, vol.4 p.114

[^6]: It was a caravansary of paupers

[^7]: Al-Irshad, p.376

[^8]: Mir’at az-Zaman, vol.9 p.553

[^9]: Tareekh Baghdad, vol.12 p.57

[^10]: Qur'an, 111:1

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.4

[^12]: Qur'an, 9:25

[^13]: Tareekh al-Islam by ath-Thahabi chap. The men of the twenty-sixth
class, Tathkirat al-Khawas, p.360.

[^14]: Al-Muntadham, vol.12 p.26-27

[^15]: Qur'an, 49:84-85

[^16]: Sharh Shafiyat Abu Firas, vol.2 p.167.

[^17]: The call of cells is the azan in the mosques

[^18]: Al-Manaqib

[^19]: Qur'an, 27:40

[^20]: Qur'an, 12:100

[^21]: Qur'an, 12:101

[^22]: Qur'an, 10:94

[^23]: Qur'an, 25:20

[^24]: Qur'an, 3:61

[^25]: Qur'an, 31:27

[^26]: Qur'an, 43:71

[^27]: Qur'an, 65:2

[^28]: Tuhaf al-Uqul, al-Manaqib

[^29]: The son of Safiyyah was az-Zubayr bin al-Awwam who was killed by
ibn Jarmuz on the day  of al-Jamal.

[^30]: Qur'an, 38:39

[^31]: Al-Manaqib by ibn Shahrashub, vol.4 p.403-406, Tuhaf al-Uqul,
p.477-481

[^32]: Qur'an, 12:28

[^33]: Kamil az-Ziyarat, Mazar al-Bihar

[^34]: Mazar al-Bihar.

[^35]: Kamil az-Ziyarat, p.273, Mazar al-Bihar, p.141.

[^36]: He meant the holy place where Imam al-Husayn (a.s) was buried

[^37]: Kamil az-Ziyarat, p.274, Mazar al-Bihar p.141

[^38]: Wassa’il ash-Shi’a, vol.3 p.570.

[^39]: Kamil az-Ziyarat, Furu’ (branches of) al-Kafi, vol.4 p.567

[^40]: Qur'an, 45:21

[^41]: Rawdhat al-A’yan, manuscript

[^42]: Qur'an, 26:227

[^43]: Bihar al-Anwar

[^44]: It refers to al-Mutawakkil

[^45]: Al-Kharayij by ar-Rawandi

[^46]: Qur'an, 11:65

[^47]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.12 p.134, al-Kharayij

[^48]: Qur'an, 22:60

[^49]: Qur'an, 40:60

[^50]: The tenth month of the Muslim lunar year

[^51]: Tareekh ibn Kathir, vol.10 p.349, Rawdhat al-A’yan, p.108

[^52]: Fadak was a very vast, fertile village that the Prophet (s) had
donated to his daughter Fatima (s). It was rich of date-palms and other
fruitful trees.

[^53]: Tareekh ibn al-Athir, vol.5 p.311

[^54]: Tareekh al-Khulafa’ by as-Sayooti, p.357

[^55]: It is the fourth month in the Islamic lunar calendar

[^56]: Al-Anba’ fee Tareekh al-Khulafa’

[^57]: Al-Anba’ fee Tareekh al-Khulafa’

[^58]: Tareekh al-Khulafa’, p.358-359

[^59]: Al-Fakhri, p.222


