The Age of the Imam
===================

It may be very useful or necessary to study the age of Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) and shed lights on the political, social, religious, cultural,
and other sides of that age. Studying an age is one of the methodical
researches that is too necessary in the modern studies because it
uncovers important sides of the external influences on man and shows his
intellectual and all psychological tendencies that arise from his age
and environments as psychologists says.

Political life
--------------

The political life in the time of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was very bad.
There was no security in all countries of the Islamic world. Anarchy was
everywhere because the Abbasid government lost its authority and
influence and no longer had its terrible power it had during the reigns
of al-Mansur, ar-Rasid, and al-Ma’mun. The reasons behind that were:

The Prevailing of the Turks on the Rule
---------------------------------------

The Turks controlled the reins of power and prevailed on all the bodies
of the state to a degree that the Abbasid caliph had no authority or
influence. The decisions were in the hands of the Turks. They appointed
and deposed whoever they liked of caliphs, viziers, and officials. One
of poets described the state of al-Musta’een by saying,

“A caliph in a cage between Waseef and Bugha,  
 he repeated what they both said to him as a parrot does.”

The Abbasid caliphs in that period were like parrots. They had nothing
from the caliphate. The Turks did everything whereas the caliph was in
name only with no will or option.

The caliphate declined and lost its solemnity and superiority, and the
caliphs had no significance. It was mentioned that when al-Mu’tazz
assumed the caliphate, some of his companions sent for a diviner and
asked him how long the caliph would sit on the throne and how long he
would live. A humorous man from among the attendants said, ‘I know
that.’ They asked him to tell them and he said, ‘The matter is in the
hands of the Turks. They decide how long he rules and how long he
lives.’ The all burst into laughter.[^1]

Al-Mu’tasim, the Abbasid caliph, appointed Ashnas the Turk as the wali
and gave him the right to appoint walis. It was prayed for Ashnas on the
minbars [^2] whereas praying was limited to the caliphs before.

During his reign, al-Wathiq appointed Ashnas as the wali on Baghdad and
expanded his authority until over Morocco. He gave him the right to run
the affairs of all those countries and to appoint whoever he liked
without referring to the caliph. The caliph entrusted Ashnas with all
the affairs of the state and dressed him with two sashes of jewels.[^3]

Ignorance of the Turks
----------------------

The Turks had no any expertness in the affairs of rule and
administration or in the political and economical affairs. They were
like nomads in all their behaviors.

Al-Jahidh said about them, ‘The Turks are people of tents, inhabitants
of deserts, and owners of cattle. They are the nomads of the non-Arabs.
Crafts, trade, medicine, agriculture, engineering, building, digging
rivers, and yielding did not attract their attention. Their interest was
in invasions, raids, hunting, riding, fighting against heroes, searching
for booties, and subjugating countries.

Their determination towards all that was well known and all meanings and
means were subjected to that. They mastered these matters and were
skilled in them. It is these things that are their crafts, trades,
pleasure, pride, discourse, and night chat.’

The affairs of the state were in the hands of these rudes who knew
nothing about civilization or development. Therefore, the nation faced
dangerous crises, terrible problems, and too many misfortunes and bloody
events.

Corruption of the Rule
----------------------

From the direct results of the domination of the Turks over the rule was
the corruption of the rule and inadvertency. Bribe was widespread among
the officials of the state. The viziers, walis, and clerks embezzled the
monies of land taxes and other taxes and the yields that came to the
state from different countries.

In 229 AH, al-Wathiq, the Abbasid caliph, confiscated from the clerks of
the divans about two million dinars,[^4] and al-Mutawakkil confiscated
ibn az-Zayyat’s money which he had embezzled and the wealth of his clerk
Umar bin al-Faraj ar-Rakhji. It was said that al-Mutawakkil took from
him about one hundred and twenty thousand dinars and from his brother
about one hundred and fifty thousand dinars.[^5] He also took from the
chief of judges Yahya bin Aktham seventy-five thousand dinars.[^6]

Shawqi Dhayf comments on this by saying, ‘This means that the viziers,
clerks, and walis embezzled the wealth of the state and nation. One
thinks that there was no senior official in the state unless he
committed abominable crime. The walis bribed the vizier in order to stay
in their posts. Sometimes bribe was about two hundred thousand dinars
besides gems and other gifts.[^7]

Even the muhtasibs [^8] took bribes and embezzled money through their
watching traders and merchants and the movement of buying and selling in
the markets. It was narrated that Ahmad bin at-Tayyib bin Marwan
ar-Rakhsi, the philosopher, breached the trust when he was the chief of
the muhtasibs in Baghdad. He took, by this way, about one hundred and
fifty dinars besides other gifts and presents.[^9] We do not exaggerate
if we say that most officials of the state were involved in that
embezzlement and bribes.’[^10]

The spread of bribe in this manner was a clear evidence on the
corruption of the senior officials in the Abbasid government and that
most of the officials embezzled the wealth of Muslims unjustly.

The Walis of the Islamic Districts
----------------------------------

The walis over the Islamic countries often bought their jobs and posts
from the viziers. The vizier al-Khaqani sold the post of the wali over
Kufa to nineteen walis in one day and took from each of them bribe.

Most walis went too far in wronging people and extorting their money
unjustly which made most people complain of their injustice and
oppression. At the days of al-Wathiq, his vizier Muhammad bin Abdul
Melik composed a poem and ascribed it to one of the soldiers and gave it
to the caliph.

He mentioned a flow of grievances and distresses that the walis poured
over the nation. In his poem he expressed the misfortunes of the nation
and the endless sufferings people received during the days of those
walis whom al-Wathiq set up on the Islamic districts and entrusted with
all the affairs of Muslims. They were excessive in oppression. They
embezzled the treasury and threw the innocent into dark prisons and
cells of torture.

The Hatred towards the Abbasid Rule
-----------------------------------

Muslims of all trends and tendencies hated the Abbasid rule and wished
it to disappear a moment after another because of the bad, devious
policies of the Abbasid rulers which were different from the laws of the
Islamic Sharia in most cases, where the wicked became masters and the
free were subdued. The corruption of the Abbasid governments brought
Muslims disasters and misfortunes and threw them into great dangers.

The Abbasid rulers and their officials extorted the wealth of the nation
and killed the great and reformers. They killed many people like the
great martyr Zayd the son of Imam ‘Ali bin al-Husayn who were martyred
in the way of justice during the reign of the Umayyads. They killed a
big group of the Alawids like Yahya bin Amr bin al-Husayn and others who
resisted injustice and oppression. Anyhow, Muslims hated the Abbasid
governments and disapproved their oppression and despotism against
people.

Oppressing the Alawids
----------------------

From the worst faces of the clumsy politics the Abbasid followed was the
oppression against the Alawids who were the heralds of the social
justice in Islam. The Alawids were tried very severely and they suffered
distresses that no one had ever suffered in the world of Islam and
especially during the reign of al-Mutawakkil who spared no effort in
oppressing and punishing them. He poured on them a flow of misfortunes
and distresses. Historians said that his vizier Ubaydillah bin Yahya bin
Khaqan encouraged him to oppress them.[^11]

Economical Blockade
-------------------

Al-Mutawakkil imposed an economical blockade on the Alawids and
officially forbade people from helping or doing any good to them.
Whenever he was informed that someone did them good even a bit he
subjected him to severe punishments.[^12] Therefore, people refrained
from helping them with any kind of help or giving them any of the legal
dues for fear of the revenge and punishment of the tyrant.

The economical blockade harmed the Alawids and exhausted them to a
degree that one dress was used by some women of them. One of them wore
it and offered the prayer and then another one and so on. They always
patched it. They sat at their spindle semi naked with unveiled
heads,[^13] whereas the tyrant al-Mutawakkil spent on his red nights
millions of dinars and gifted, without measure, thousands to singers,
drinking companions, and effeminates, but prevented the progeny of the
messenger of Allah (SwT) from receiving their rights and legal dues
until he made them poor and wretched.

One day, al-Fath bin Khaqan the vizier gave al-Mutawakkil a very
beautiful maid as a present. She came to him carrying a gold cup and a
vat of crystal full of wine. He spent his nights with singers, female
dancers, and wine whereas the progeny of the Prophet (S) suffered
poverty, hunger, and all kinds of distresses.

The Abbasid women and the singers and dancers around them strutted in
silk and brocade while the daughters of the messenger of Allah (SwT) had
no clothes to cover themselves with. Those dark days passed and
al-Mutawakkil recorded in his history black pages full of sins and
crimes against the progeny of the Prophet(a.s.).

Gifting Monies to Disparage The Alawids
---------------------------------------

Al-Mutawakkil gifted great monies to mercenary poets who criticized the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) in their poetry. He gave abundant money and gold to
Marwan bin Abu al-Janub and appointed him as wali on Yemen and Bahrain
just for his hatred and criticism in his poems against the Alawids. So
did he with other insipid poets who sold their consciences and distorted
the truth just for some transient pleasures of this world.

Jailing the Alawids
-------------------

From the hard and severe distresses the Alawids suffered during the
reign of al-Mutawakkil was imprisonment. Al-Mutawakkil arrested and
threw many of them into dark prisons for no guilt but just because they
called for the rights of the nation and they adopted its aims and
wishes.

From among the prominent Alawids, who were imprisoned by al-Mutawakkil
at that time, was Muhammad bin Salih the great-grandson of Imam al-Hasan
(a.s.),[^14] and Muhammad bin Muhammad bin Ja’far al-Husayni who was
arrested by Abdullah bin Tahir, who was one of al-Mutawakkil’s
governors, and imprisoned in Naysabour. He remained in prison until he
died.[^15]

Some other Alawids ran away and lived disguisedly in far towns and
villages for fear of the Abbasid government like Ahmad bin Eesa bin Zayd
bin ‘Ali bin al-Husayn, who died in loneliness,[^16] and Abdullah bin
Musa bin al-Hasan who was from the eminent Alawids and well-known
heroes. He hid himself for fear of the Abbasids,[^17] besides many
others as mentioned by Abul Faraj al-Isfahani and other historians.

The Revolt of Martyr Yahya
--------------------------

Yahya bin Umar bin al-Husayn bin Zayd revolted against the Abbasid
government calling for the rights of the oppressed and persecuted people
and inviting to establish the rule of Allah in the earth. He was a brave
knight far away from the recklessness of the youth. He was not accused
of any defect.[^18] People loved him and were loyal to him because he
began his rising by refraining from shedding blood or taking anything
from people’s properties. He treated the all with justice and fairness.

The cause of his revolt was for an isolation and misfortune he and
others suffered from the Turks during the reign of al-Mutawakkil.[^19]
Groups from the people of Kufa followed him and he revolted with them
during the reign of al-Musta’een. The caliph assigned Muhammad bin Tahir
to fight Yahya. He marched towards him with a big army. After violent
fighting Yahya was martyred and a page from the bright pages of jihad in
Islam was folded.

After the martyrdom of Yahya, Muhammad bin Tahir sat in a public meeting
to receive congratulations for killing the progeny of the messenger of
Allah (SwT). Villains and flatterers showed him joys and delight and
congratulated him for the victory of killing the grandson of the
messenger of Allah.

Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari went to Muhammad bin Tahir and said to him, ‘O
emir, you are delighted for killing a man, who if the messenger of Allah
was alive he would be consoled for his death.’  
 Muhammad bin Tahir became silent and terrible silence prevailed over
the meeting.

The captives from Yahya’s companions were taken to Baghdad after
receiving too severe harms and torture. Historians says that they were
drawn barefoot and whoever of them was late would be killed until the
book of al-Musta’een arrived ordering them to be set free and they were
set free.[^20]

People became sad for the death of Yahya and wept for him too much. No
one was elegized more than him. Many well-known poets elegized him and
criticized the Abbasids.

Anyhow, the killing of Yahya was one of the great, shocking events in
that age, for by killing him the sanctity of the Prophet (S) was
violated whereas Allah, in the Holy Qur'an, had made the love for the
Prophet’s progeny as the reward for the Prophet’s efforts in carrying
out the mission of Allah.

Destroying the Tomb of Imam Husayn
----------------------------------

Al-Mutawakkil destroyed the tomb of Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) and this was
one of many other terrible misfortunes Muslims were afflicted with at
that time. Al-Mutawakkil was full of rage whenever he heard or saw
crowds of people visit the shrine of Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) the master of
the youth of Paradise, whereas the graves of his (al-Mutawakkil’s)
fathers and their cousins the Umayyads turned into dunghills in dark,
dreary places which were resorts for beasts. Those graves, with their
misery and gloominess, told the oppression and violence of their
inhabitants against Muslims.

The direct reason that made al-Mutawakkil destroy the holy shrine was
that some songstress sent him her maids before he assumed the rule to
sing for him when he drank, and when he became the caliph, he sent for
her to send him a songstress but she was not there. It was said to him
that she had gone to visit the holy tomb of Imam al-Husayn (a.s.).

She was informed of that while she was in Kerbala. She hurried back to
Baghdad and sent al-Mutawakkil one of her maids. He asked the maid where
they were and she said, ‘My lady went to perform the hajj (pilgrimage)
and took us with her.’ It was the month of Sha’ban. Al-Mutawakkil was
astonished and said to her, ‘Where did you perform the hajj in Sha’ban?’
She said, ‘To the tomb of al-Husayn.’

The tyrant was alarmed and angry when he heard that the pilgrimage was
to the holy tomb of Imam al-Husayn (a.s.). He arrested the lady of the
maid and confiscated all her wealth, and ordered his officials to
destroy the tomb. They refused insistently to destroy the tomb of the
grandson of their Prophet. Then, al-Mutawakkil asked some Jews, headed
by ad-Dayzaj, to destroy the tomb.

They responded to him and destroyed the holy tomb in 237 AH,[^21] and
destroyed all buildings around the tomb. They plowed the land around the
tomb and made water flow over the land [^22] but water turned around the
tomb without reaching to it; therefore, it was called al-Ha’ir. A
pleHasant smell was emitted from the tomb that people had never smelt
like it.[^23]

A nomad from bani Asad got the honor of visiting the holy tomb after it
had been destroyed. He began smelling the earth so that it might guide
him to the holy tomb. When he took a handful of earth, smelt it, and
found it emitting a very pleHasant smell. He cried and addressed Imam
al-Husayn (a.s.) saying, ‘May my father and mother die for you! How fine
you are! How fine your tomb is, and how fine your earth is!’ Then he
recited the following verse,

“They wanted to hide his tomb from his companion,  
 but the fine smell of the tomb’s earth guided to the tomb.”[^24]

Al-Mutawakkil wanted to remove the tomb of Imam Husayn (a.s.), the
master of the youth of Paradise, and to remove any trace leading to it
but all his efforts were in vain. The holy shrine of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
remained high throughout history. It was and is still the holiest place
that all human beings of different trends and beliefs sanctified and
still sanctify. Millions of people visit this holy shrine every year.

Professor Abbas Mahmud al-Aqqad says, ‘It is today a sanctuary that
Muslims, agreeing or disagreeing, circumambulate, and it deserved to be
circumambulated by every man. It is an eternal symbol of that which this
alive human gives among all creatures. The dome of the heaven has never
shaded a place of a martyr at all more honorable than those domes with
the meaning of martyrdom and the memorandum of martyrs…’[^25]

Forbidding Muslims from Visiting Al-Husayn
------------------------------------------

Al-Mutawakkil forbade Muslims officially from visiting the holy shrine
of Imam Husayn (a.s.). He established military checkpoints and
distributed spies everywhere to watch and chase the visitors and punish
them severely with killing, crucifying, cutting the hands, and other
kinds of punishment. In spite of all those severe punishments, Muslims
did not refrain from visiting the grandson of their holy Prophet (S).
They crowded around the holy shrine.

When al-Mutawakkil knew about that, he sent one of his leaders with an
army to prevent people from visiting the shrine. People resisted and
said to the leader, ‘If you kill us all, we will not refrain from
visiting him (Imam Husayn).’ He wrote to al-Mutawakkil about the
situation and al-Mutawakkil ordered him to give up.

In 247AH al-Mutawakkil was informed that people in great masses came to
visit the holy shrine. He sent them a big army and ordered the caller to
call out that al-Mutawakkil would be free from whoever visited
al-Husayn.[^26] He killed, imprisoned, and imposed big taxes on people
but he failed to stop them from visiting the holy shrine of Imam
al-Husayn (a.s.). People offered their lives and wealth generously for
the sake of visiting Imam al-Husayn (a.s.).

Complaint of Muslims
--------------------

Muslims complained of al-Mutawakkil and abused him in their societies
and meetings. They wrote the cursing against him on mosques and walls,
in the streets of Baghdad and other towns. The following verses, which
were composed by a poet who concealed his name for fear of the
government though it was ascribed to ibn as-Sikkit or al-Bastami,[^27]
were memorized by people and spread among all classes of society:

“By Allah, if the Umayyads had killed the son [^28] of the Prophet
unjustly,  
 his cousins [^29] did the same; here is his tomb destroyed!  
 They felt sorry that they did not participate in killing him,  
 So they chased him in the grave.’[^30]

The Abbasids exceeded what the Umayyads did in oppressing and
distressing the Alawids. In fact, in spite of all severity and malice
the Umayyad treated the Alawids with, they were better and nobler much
more than most of the Abbasid kings. Some Umayyad rulers had had virtues
that the founder of the Abbasid state al-Mansur ad-Dawaniqi had not any
as Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said.

Economical life
---------------

The economical life in the age of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was absolutely
confused. There was no scientific, economical system that the state
depended on. The state sank under economical confusion that was governed
by neither the Islamic economical system nor others. The caliph, the
Turks, the viziers, and the officials robbed the economy of the nation
and extorted its wealth, and then accumulated great capitals in their
private treasuries at the time when poverty and wretchedness were
widespread everywhere in the nation.

The majority of people moaned under the pressure of poverty. They could
not have the slightest necessities of living whereas al-Mutawakkil and
other Abbasid caliphs, who were contemporary with Imam al-Hadi (a.s.),
excessively wasted the wealth of Muslims.

The Waste of Al-Mutawakkil
--------------------------

Al-Mutawakkil spent the wealth of Muslims on his lusts and pleasures
over the limit. The treasury was as his own property and he spent from
it as he liked. Al-Mas’oudi says, ‘Expenditures did not reach at any
time what it reached at the time of al-Mutawakkil.’[^31] The wealth was
spent on singers, the maids of the palace who were about four thousands,
clowns, and the poets who disparaged the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and this
class were given great amounts. The wealth of Muslims was spent
excessively in this way while it was supposed to be spent on Muslims to
better their lives and conditions.

When one of his sons was circumcised, al-Mutawakkil held a festival and
spent uncountable money. Al-Imrani reported that event by saying, ‘A
tablecloth was spread at the bank of the Tigris and people of all
classes had food. Then cups of wine were served and people drank.
Al-Mutawakkil ordered woolsacks full of dinars and dirhams mixed
together to be brought. Heaps of money were made before people. A caller
called out that whoever drank a cup of drink could take three handfuls
of that money.

Every one took three handfuls and it was so on until the sunset.
Al-Mutawakkil also ordered dinars and dirhams to be poured in the middle
of the meeting. The money was poured and was so much that it prevented
people from seeing each other. A caller called out that Amir’ul-
Mu’minin (al-Mutawakkil) allowed the attendants to loot from those
monies. People threw themselves on those heaps of money and carried them
off. When night came, candles of ambergris were lit. Some of those
candles were like date-palm trees which were set up at the bank of the
Tigris where one at the other bank could read a book with the light of
those candles.’[^32]

Celebrating the Homage to his Sons
----------------------------------

Al-Mutawakkil spent great monies on the celebration he held on the
occasion of taking homage to his sons Muhammad al-Muntasir, az-Zubayr
al-Mu’tazz, and Ibrahim al-Mu’ayyad on Monday, the first of Muharram in
236AH. He invited all classes of people and spent astonishing amounts in
that celebration. A tablecloth of about four farsakhs[^33] was spread in
the garden which he had established in Samarra’ and built his palace
known as al-Ja’fari in.

The palace was seven farsakhs long and one farsakh wide. It was filled
with people. Statues of ambergris, camphor, and vessels of musk were put
before people. Whoever drank a cup of drink, took some musk, smelt it,
and put it into his pocket or gave it to his servant. The vessels were
refilled continuously. It was so since the sunrise until the sunset.
Al-Mutawakkil sat on a throne of gold studded with jewels and the heirs
apparent were standing before him wearing crowns studded with jewels.
People of different classes were sitting or standing. The sunrays
reflected on gold vessels spread in the meeting, gold belts, and gilded
swords and shields.

These abundant monies, which were spent on such celebrations and
festivals, were the wealth of Muslims that must, according to Islam, be
spent to improve the conditions of Muslims, grow their powers, and
increase their incomes, but unfortunately nothing of that happened under
the shadow of those corrupted regimes.

Bondmaids
---------

The palaces of the Abbasids were crowded of bondmaids who were brought
from different countries of the world. Al-Mutawakkil had about four
thousand bondmaids and he slept with all of them.[^34]

Of course, millions of dinars from the treasury of Muslims were spent on
these bondmaids, and because of these bad behaviors the general economy
of the nation was paralysed.

Palaces
-------

Al-Mutawakkil and other Abbasid caliphs built huge and unequaled palaces
where no one had ever seen like them. One of al-Mutawakkil’s palaces was
built on a ship. Millions of dinars were spent on those palaces.

Ash-Shabasti said that the palaces cost al-Mutawakkil two hundred and
seventy-four million dirhams and five hundred and thirteen million and
twenty-five thousand dinars.[^35] An-Nuwayri said that al-Mutawakkil
spent on building his palaces about one hundred and fifty million dinars
and two hundred and fifty-eight million and five hundred thousand
dirhams.[^36] Here we talk about some palaces of al-Mutawakkil:

### 1. Al-Ja’fari

It was the most important palace of al-Mutawakkil. The building of this
palace cost him about two million dinars.[^37] When the palace was
completed, al-Mutawakkil sent for clowns and jesters, and when they
performed some comic scenes, he gave them two million dirhams.[^38] But
time attacked al-Ja’fari and turned it into ruins that even beasts
rejected it because it told the oppression and cruelty of al-Mutawakkil.

### 2. Al-Burj

It was a very beautiful palace. He spent on the building of this palace
about one million and seven hundred thousand dinars.[^39] Ash-Shabasti
described it by saying, ‘Al-Burj was the most beautiful building of
al-Mutawakkil. He made in it big statutes of gold and silver and a wide
pool with plates of gold and silver.

Beside the pool there was a tree of gold with birds that whistled. It
was adorned with jewels. He called the place Tuba as the name of the
Paradise. A big throne of gold, with two big lions and a drawer having
pictures of beasts and eagles, was made for him there with other things
as the throne of Prophet Solomon (a.s.) had been described. The walls
were covered from inside and outside with mosaic and gilded
marble.’[^40]

### 3. Al-Maleeh

It was a wonderful palace. He spent on it five million dirhams.[^41]

### 4. Ash-Shabandaz

It was one of his wonderful palaces that cost ten million dirhams.[^42]

### 5. Al-Mukhtar

It was a very wonderful palace that cost five million dirhams.[^43] It
had wonderful pictures, one of which was a picture of a church with
monks.[^44] This showed that he was influenced by Christianity.

### 6. Al-Gharw

It was a very beautiful palace that cost one million dirhams.[^45]

### 7. Barkwar

It was the most beautiful and most wonderful of al-Mutawakkil’s palaces.
He spent on it twenty million dirhams.[^46] It was in this palace that
al-Mutawakkil had held his excessive banquet on the occasion of
circumcising his son al-Mu’tazz as we have mentioned before.

### 8. Al-Hayr

It was a beautiful palace that cost four million dirhams.[^47]  
 Al-Mutawakkil and other Abbasid caliphs adorned their palaces with
wonderful pools surrounded by wonderful pictures and statutes. They
adorned some pools with plates of gold and silver and furniture stud
with jewels and gems.[^48]

Those pools were a place of amusement for the Abbasid caliphs and their
mock at people. One day, al-Mutawakkil ordered Ibadah the effeminate to
be thrown into one of those pools in the winter while it was very cold.
Ibadah was about to die and then al-Mutawakkil ordered him to be taken
out of water and to be given new clothes to put on. He approached and
asked him, ‘How are you now?’

Ibadah said, ‘I have just come from the afterlife?’  
 Al-Mutawakkil laughed and asked him, ‘How was my brother al-Wathiq
there?’  
 Ibadah said, ‘I did not visit the Hell.’  
 Al-Mutawakkil laughed and gifted him.[^49]

He shot ibn al-Abrah the foolish poet by the mangonel and when he went
high in the air, al-Mutawakkil said, ‘Clear the way! The mangonel is
coming to you.’ The poet fell into the pool. Nets were thrown over him
and he was caught like fish.[^50]

It was required from al-Mutawakkil to spend his time and efforts to
serve the Islamic nation and work for its development in the economical,
cultural, social, and other fields, but he did nothing of that. Instead,
he spent his time and the wealth of Muslims on vanities, amusements, and
lusts. His palaces were places for singing, drinking, and other vices.

Gifts To The Poets
------------------

Al-Mutawakkil and other Abbasid caliphs gifted great monies to mercenary
poets who formed the most important part of the media at that time. The
poets, who criticized the Alawids in their poems, got too much money
because they fixed the position of the Abbasids and made people think
that they were closer to the Prophet (S) and worthier of his position
than the Alawids.

Once, Ibrahim bin al-Mudbir recited a poem praising al-Mutawakkil who
was pleased with it and gave the poet fifty thousand dirhams and asked
his vizier Ubaydillah bin Yahya to find him a good job.

He gave Abul Shibl al-Barjami thirty thousand dirhams after reciting him
a poem of thirty verses,[^51] and gave as-Sawli one hundred thousand
dirhams, and so did his son.[^52]

When Marwan bin Abul Janub praised him in a poem, he gave him two
hundred thousand dirhams and new clothes. For another poem he gave him
one hundred and twenty thousand dirhams, fifty garments, a mule, a
horse, and a donkey.[^53] The poet praised al-Mutawakkil on another
occasion and got from him one hundred and twenty thousand dirhams and
some clothes,[^54] and fifty thousand dirhams on another occasion.[^55]

As for ‘Ali bin al-Jahm the poet, al-Mutawakkil made him so wealthy
because he dedicated his poetry to praise the caliph particularly. The
excessive gifts of al-Mutawakkil were not limited to poets only, but
they included singers, clowns, and drinking companions. Al-Mas’oudi
says, ‘No one in his (al-Mutawakkil’s) state was expert in serious or
love poetry unless he got a good share of money.’[^56]

The wealth of the nation and its economical abilities were dispelled on
vanities, amusements, and pleasures. Nothing was spent on the public
welfare. Shawqi Dhayf says,

“…In this way millions of dinars and dirhams were spent, without
consideration or control, on the parties of the palace; those parties
which supplied the stories of “A thousand and one nights” with all what
might come to one’s imagination of luxury and lavish spending. That
wealth, which was supposed to be spent on preparing armies to resist the
Turks and the Byzantines, was wasted foolishly while people strove and
worked hard, but suffered poverty and wretchedness. At the same time,
al-Mutawakkil and other than al-Mutawakkil played with the people’s
wealth.

Millions after millions were spent on building high palaces which were
places for singing, dancing, and drinking, and heaps of gold and silver
were scattered here and there. It was narrated that one day
al-Mutawakkil was drunken in his palace called al-Barkwar. He said to
his drinking companions where it was not the season of flowers, ‘What do
you think if we hold a festival of flowers?’

They said to him, ‘These days are not of flowers.’ He sent for
Ubaydillah bin Yahya, who was one of his viziers, and asked him to coin
five million dirhams each of two weights of silver. When the dirhams
were coined, he ordered his vizier to dye some of the dirhams red, some
yellow, some black, and to leave some as they were.

The vizier did as he was ordered. Then al-Mutawakkil ordered his seven
hundred servants and retinue to prepare a new garment and cap different
in color from each other and they did. Al-Mutawakkil waited until a
windy day came and he ordered a large tent of forty doors to be erected.

He came into the tent surrounded by his drinking companions and his
servants wearing their new dresses. He ordered the dirhams to be
scattered a group after another like flowers. They were scattered
successively and the wind carried them for they were light. They flew in
the air like flowers did.[^57]

It was a result of idleness, and excessive luxury. The caliphs enjoyed
life to the extent of foolishness and mania, whereas classes of people
behind them lived in straits and pressing poverty.’[^58]685

The general economical life
---------------------------

The general economical life in the Islamic nation was absolutely bad.
Poverty bit most of people who were in terrible neediness. The general
wealth was accumulated near singers, clowns, the retinue and agents of
rulers especially the Turks who were so wealthy that they did not know
how to spend that wealth. They spent great monies on every kind of
pleasure and lust.

Whenever they became bored with a pleasure they turned to another one.
Thus, their lives passed between singing, amusement, and meetings of
drinking that were held in the great palaces which were built with the
money of the poor, the deprived, and the miserable.

Anyhow, the economical life in most of the Islamic countries was
paralyzed or confused, and that made reformers to rise in armed revolts
against the Abbasid rule.

Land Tax
--------

The collection of the land tax was an important side in the economical
life. The Abbasid governments entrusted this job to a group of severe
and harsh men. They collected taxes that Islam had not legislated. They
collected those taxes with all severe and violent means, and people
suffered too much during those dark periods.

General Misery
--------------

The majority of the Islamic peoples suffered misery, poverty, and
deprivation during the Abbasid ages. Ulama’, men of letters, and
thinkers often and always complained of their difficult lives. Poverty
attacked most people that they hardly found a bite to satisfy their
hunger or a rag to cover their semi-naked bodies against the cold of
winter. Some well-known scholars, poets, and authors lived lives of
misery.

Many times they could not find a bit of bread to eat or to give to their
families and children. Studying and seeking knowledge at that time led
scholars to poverty and deprivation. As an example, al-Jahidh, who was
one of the best and most eminent scholars, authors, and men of letters
and intellect, suffered pressing neediness and misery, whereas singers,
dancers, and clowns lived at absolute ease. Many poets of that age
invited in their poetry towards asceticism and Sufism because of the
poverty and deprivation they underwent.

The religious life
------------------

The religious life in the age of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was confused and
turbid. Many suspicions and illusions were raised against the Islamic
belief by the powers that had spites and enmities against Islam. Muslim
ulama’, and at the head was Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), confronted those
suspicions and spurious arguments and they refuted them.

Heresies and Errors
-------------------

A wicked group of atheists and apostates slipped among the Shi’a and
spread some heresies and errors. Muslims were tried too much by these
polytheists because of the falsehood they spread by which they misled
simple and naïve people. The heads of those heretics were ‘Ali bin
Hasakah al-Qummi, al-Qassim al-Yaqtini, al-Hasan bin Muhammad bin Baba
al-Qummi, and Muhammad bin Nusayr.

The Heresies of Ibn Hasakah
---------------------------

Ibn Hasakah said that Imam Abul Hasan al-Hadi (a.s.) was the God, the
creator, and the manager of the universe. He claimed that he (ibn
Hasakah) was a prophet sent by Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) to guide people. He
annulled the Islamic obligations such as zakat, the hajj, and fasting,
for whoever believed in his belief. Simple people of no understanding
believed him and inclined to his heresies.

One of Imam al-Hadi’s companions wrote a letter to the Imam saying,

“May I die for you my sire! ‘Ali bin Hasakah claims that he is from your
guardians and that you are the First and the Old. He claims that he is
your bab and your prophet, and that you yourself have ordered him to
invite for that. He claims that prayer, zakat, hajj, and fasting are the
knowing of you and the knowing of one who is like ibn Hasakah who is the
bab and the prophet.  
 He says that whoever believes in this is a perfect faithful and
therefore prayer, fasting, hajj, and other obligations are not required
from him. Many people inclined to him. Would you please favor your
followers with an answer to save them from perishment?’[^59]

The Imam Disavows Him
---------------------

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) disavowed ibn Hasakah and invited people to reject
him and reject his followers and kill them. He wrote a letter as a reply
to the previous letter saying,

“Ibn Hasakah tells lies. The curse of Allah be on him! He is not one of
my guardians. May Allah curse him. By Allah, Allah did not send Muhammad
and the prophets before him except with prayer, zakat, fasting, hajj,
and guardianship. Muhammad did not invite except to Allah alone with no
partner. So do we, the guardians from his progeny.

We are slaves of Allah not associating with Him anything. If we obey
Him, He will have mercy on us and if we disobey Him, He will torture us.
We do not have any authority on Allah but Allah has the authority on us
and on all His creatures. I, before Allah, disavow whoever says that and
I resort to Allah from this saying. Desert them! May Allah curse them.
Block them up into narrow passages and if you find any of them, split
his head with stone!’[^60]

The Heresies of Al-Fihri
------------------------

Muhammad bin Nusayr al-Fihri an-Namiri was from the heads of atheists
and the chiefs of unbelievers. He spread among people that Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) was the Creator and God. He permitted the marriage with one’s
mahrams (close relatives that it is unlawful to get married to) like
one’s mother, sister, daughter, and the like. He permitted sodomy and
considered it as one of the good pleasures that Allah had not forbidden
and that it was a means of being humble before Allah.

He believed in transmigration (of souls at or after death into another
body).  
 By these heresies he tried to fight Islam and distort the reality of
the infallible Imams (a.s.).

Interpreting the Obligations
----------------------------

These deviant atheists interpreted the Islamic obligations according to
their own corrupted tendencies. They said that the prayer, which Allah
had ordered to be performed, was not that known kind of worship but it
was a particular man. They also said that the zakat was not the tax that
Allah had imposed, but it was a particular man. They also interpreted
the sins that Allah had prohibited according to their own tendencies.

Ibrahim bin Shaybah wrote a letter to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) saying,

“May I die for you! There is a group of people among us disagreeing on
acknowledging your virtues and position by different sayings that hearts
are disgusted of and chests cannot bear. They narrate traditions on that
that we cannot accept because they say terrible things and we cannot
refute or deny if they are ascribed to your fathers. We are suspicious
about these sayings. They interpret the meaning of the sayings of Allah,

***…surely prayer keeps (one) away from indecency and evil***, [^61]

and

A***nd keep up prayer and pay the zakat*** [^62]

and say that prayer means a man and neither bowing nor prostration. They
also say that zakat is a man and not the paying of money. They interpret
other obligations in the same way and even sins. Would you please favor
your followers with that which has their safety and rescue from the
sayings (beliefs) that take them to perishment? From among those who
claim they are guardians and invite people to follow them are ‘Ali bin
Hasakah and al-Qassim al-Yaqtini. What do you say about them?”

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) replied, ‘This is not from our religion and you have
to reject it.’[^63] Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was tried seriously by those
deviants who disbelieved in Allah and denied his signs.

The Imam warns against them
---------------------------

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) warned his followers and the rest of Muslims from
associating with those excessive atheists. He wrote to ‘Ali bin Muhammad
bin Eesa, ‘May Allah curse al-Qassim al-Yaqtini and ‘Ali bin Hasakah
al-Qummi. Satan has appeared to him and so he inspires falsehood to
deceive others.’[^64]

He also wrote to al-Ubaydi warning him from the heresies of those
excessive atheists and inviting him to disavow them. He said in the
letter, “I disavow, before Allah, al-Fihri and al-Hasan bin Muhammad bin
Baba al-Qummi and you have to disavow them. I warn you and all my
followers from them, and I curse them. The curse of Allah be on them.

They eat the monies of people in the name of us. They are seditious and
harmful. May Allah harm them, throw them into curse, and plunge them
into mischief. Ibn Baba claims that I have sent him (as an apostle) and
that he is a bab. The curse of Allah be on him. Satan has mocked and
seduced him. Allah may curse whoever accepts from him. O Muhammad, if
you can split his head with stone, do! He has harmed me. May Allah harm
him in this life and in the afterlife.”[^65]

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) asked his followers (the Shi’a) to kill the head of
the extremists Faris bin Hatim. He said, ‘Faris claims that he acts in
the name of me. He is seditious calling for heresies. His blood is to be
shed by whoever can kill him. Who will relieve me from him by killing
him and I will assure Paradise for him by the will of Allah?’[^66]

One of the faithful responded to the Imam and killed Faris and relieved
Muslims from him.

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) permitted the killing of the extremists. He wrote to
one of his companions, ‘…if you can overcome any of them, break his head
with a stone!’[^67]

Once, as-Sariy bin Salamah sent a letter to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) asking
him about the extremists and what they called for. The Imam replied to
him, ‘May Allah keep you safe from their extremism. It suffices that the
guardians of Allah have disavowed them. May Allah fix you on what you
are in…in this life and in the afterlife and make you not go astray
after He has guided you.’[^68]

Causes of Extremism
-------------------

The causes that led such people to say that Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was the
god and the creator of the universe were-as we think- as the following:

1. The charismata and miracles that Allah had endowed Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) and his fathers with, which the deviants and those who had spite
towards the Imam advantaged of to fabricate heresies in order to attack
Islam and do away with it.

2. The disengagement from the Islamic values and principles; and so they
permitted all what Islam had prohibited.

3. The greed for people’s wealth; therefore, they took it wrongly and
extorted the legal dues that the Shi’a paid to their Imams (a.s.).

With the Waqifites
------------------

After the death of Imam Musa bin Ja’far al-Kadhim (a.s.), a sect from
the Shi’a called the Waqifites appeared on the stage of the Islamic
life. They denied the death of Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) and claimed
that he was raised to the Heavens as Jesus Christ (a.s.) was. The chiefs
of this sect claimed so because there were great monies of the legal
dues of Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) with them.

They embezzled these monies and did not deliver them to Imam ar-Ridha
(a.s.) after the death of Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.). This sect kept on
resisting the Twelver Shi’a until the Shi’a called them as al-Mamturah
(dirty dogs that were wetted by rain and they became (ritually) impure
and consequently they would impurify whoever they might touch).

One of the Shi’a wrote to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) asking him if it was
permissible for him to curse those al-Mamturah in prayer, and the Imam
replied to him that it was permissible.[^69]

The Creation of The Qur'an
--------------------------

From the terrible problems Muslims were tried with in their religious
life was the problem of “the creation of the Qur'an” which the Abbasid
rulers contrived and spread to do away with their opponents. Many people
were killed because of this heresy and spites and hostilities spread
among Muslims.

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) wrote a letter to Ahmad bin Isma’il bin Yaqtin in
227AH saying to him, “May Allah safeguard us and you from the sedition!
If He does, it shall be a great blessing and if not, it shall be the
perishment. We see that disputing on the Qur'an is a heresy that both
the asker and the answerer participate in; the asker deals with what is
not his and the answerer burdens himself with what it is not his duty.

The creator is but Allah the Almighty and whatsoever else is created,
and the Qur'an is the speech of Allah. Do not make for Him a name from
yourself so that you shall be from the deviants. May Allah make us and
you from among those who fear their Lord in secret and they are fearful
of the hour (of doom).’[^70]

The life of amusement
---------------------

The Abbasid kings, who ruled at the time of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.),
indulged in pleasures, amusement, singing, and all lusts. Their red
nights were full of drinking, singing, and dancing, but with no
seriousness or any remembrance of Allah. Not only had the caliphs
behaved so, but also their viziers, clerks, walis, officials, and in
fact the rest of people. They pounced upon pleasures and amusements and
turned away from the pure life that Islam had determined for them.

Wining
------

Drinking wine was widespread in that age. Al-Mutawakkil the caliph, his
viziers, and his retinue drank wine often and it was something common
for them. They were indifferent to the prohibition and the severe
penalty that Islam had legislated for drinking wine. The bottles of wine
were from the most precious presents for the Abbasids.

Abdullah bin Ahmad bin Hamdun narrated that his father said, ‘We went
with al-Ma’mun and with al-Mu’tasim to fight the Romans. Muhammad bin
Abdul Melik az-Zayyat gifted us with matured Iraqi drinks and wrote with
them some verses of poetry.’

Al-Mutawakkil was the fondest of wine among the Abbasid kings, and all
bodies of his government were like him. He spent most of his life
between the cups of wine, and he was killed while he was drunk.

Debauchery
----------

Debauchery and corruption spread widely during the reigns of the Abbasid
kings. It was an outstanding phenomenon not only near the kings, but
also near the rest of people. The general conduct of people at that time
was colored with debauchery, dissoluteness, and vices. It was the kings
themselves, who pounced upon amusement, desires, and all unlawful
pleasures, that encouraged the rest of people to follow these ways. The
spiritual life had influence neither inside their palaces nor on their
conducts in the outside.

[^1]: Al-Fakhri, p.181

[^2]: An-Nujum az-Zahirah, vol.2 p.229

[^3]: Tareekh al-Ya’qubi, vol.3 p.205

[^4]: Tareekh at-Tabari, vol.9 p.125

[^5]: Muruj ath-Thahab, vol.4 p.19

[^6]: Tareekh at-Tabari, vol.9 p.197

[^7]: Al-Fakhri, p.178

[^8]: A muhtasib was the official who controlled prices, weights, and
measures in the market

[^9]: Muruj ath-Thahab, vol.4 p.170

[^10]: Al-Asr al-Abbasi ath-Thani (the second Abbasid age), p.120-121

[^11]: Maqatil at-Talibiyin, p.597

[^12]: Ibid., p.599

[^13]: Maqatil at-Talibiyin, p.599

[^14]: Maqatil at-Talibiyin, p.600

[^15]: Ibid., p.615

[^16]: Ibid., p.619-627

[^17]: Ibid., p.628

[^18]: Maqatil at-Talibiyin, p. 639

[^19]: Muruj ath-Thahab, vol.4 p.93

[^20]: Maqatil at-Talibiyin, p.p.644

[^21]: Akhbar ad-Duwal, p.359

[^22]: Maqatil at-Talibiyin, p.598

[^23]: Ibid

[^24]: Sharh Shafiyyat Abu Firas, vol.2 p.144

[^25]: Abu ash-Shuhada, by Abbas Mahmud al-Aqqad

[^26]: Sharh Shafiyyat Abu Firas, p.144

[^27]: Fawat al-Wafiyyat, vol.1 p.203

[^28]: Imam Husayn (a.s).

[^29]: The Abbasids who were the cousins of the Prophet (a.s) and of
Imam Husayn (a.s).

[^30]: Akhbar ad-Duwal, p.159, Tareekh al-Khulafa’, p.347

[^31]: Muruj ath-Thahab, vol.4 p.159

[^32]: Al-Anba’ fee Tareekh al-Khulafa

[^33]: Farsang: a unit of distance equal to 6km

[^34]: Siyer A’lam an-Nubala’, vol.8 p.153, Tareekh al-Khulafa’, p.349,
Akhbar ad-Duwal, p.116.

[^35]: Ad-Diyarat, p.102

[^36]: Nihayat al-Arab, vol.1 p.406

[^37]: Mu’jam al-Buldan, vol.2 p.143

[^38]: Tareekh at-Tabari, vol.9 p.212

[^39]: Tareekh al-Ya’qubi, vol.3 p.222, ad-Diyarat, p.103

[^40]: Ad-Diyarat, p.103

[^41]: Mu’jam al-Buldan, vol.3 p.175

[^42]: Ibid., p.319

[^43]: Mu’jam al-Buldan

[^44]: Ibid., vol.5 p.70

[^45]: Ibid., vol.4 p.192

[^46]: Ibid., vol.2 p.328

[^47]: Mu’jam al-Buldan

[^48]: Nihayat al-Arab, vol.1 p.406

[^49]: Al-Iqd al-Fareed, vol.6 p.430

[^50]: Fawat al-Wafiyyat by al-Kutubi, vol.2 p.356

[^51]: Al-Aghani by Abul Faraj al-Isfahani, vol.14 p.193

[^52]: Ibid., vol.10 p.64

[^53]: Al-aghani

[^54]: Tareekh al-Khulafa’, p.349

[^55]: Al-Aghani

[^56]: Tareekh al-Khulafa’, p.349

[^57]: Ad-Diyarat, p.160

[^58]: The Second Abbasid Age, p.68-69

[^59]: Rijal al-Kashshi

[^60]: Rijal al-Kashshi

[^61]: Qur'an, 29:45

[^62]: Qur'an, 2:43 and other verses

[^63]: Rijal al-Kashshi

[^64]: Rijal al-Kashshi

[^65]: Rijal al-Kashshi

[^66]: Ibid

[^67]: Wassa’il ash-Shi’a, vol.18 p.554

[^68]: Ad-Durr an-Nadhim

[^69]: Rijal al-Kashshi

[^70]: At-Tawhid, p.224


