To the Paradise
===============

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) suffered pressing misfortunes and distresses from
the Abbasid tyrants. They spared no effort in oppressing and harming
him. Al-Mutawakkil was the most spiteful towards Imam al-Hadi (a.s.)
from among all the Abbasid caliphs. He oppressed him too much. He moved
the Imam from Yathrib to Samarra’ and imposed on him house arrest, and
surrounded his house with policemen who watched even his breaths.

Al-Mutawakkil prevented ulama’, jurisprudents, and narrators from
meeting him, taking from his knowledge and narrating his fatwas and
opinions. Doing this, al-Mutawakkil committed a terrible crime against
knowledge. He imposed economical blockade against the Imam and prevented
people from taking the legal dues, which came from the different Islamic
countries, to him. He left the Imam in a pressing neediness. He ordered
his men to search the house of the Imam from time to time that they
might find arms or books objecting to the Abbasid rule so that
al-Mutawakkil might find an excuse to kill the Imam but nothing was
found.

Sometimes, he ordered his men to bring him the Imam in whatever state he
was. Once, the Imam was brought while al-Mutawakkil was drunk and before
him there were vessels and cups of wine and he was surrounded by groups
of male and female singers.

But the Imam was sharp with him and began advising him, reminding him of
the afterlife, and scolding him for the corruption he was in. When
al-Mutawakkil saw the Imam insist on keeping away from him, refuse to
associate with him, and devote himself to Allah, he ordered his men to
arrest and put him into prison.

Narrators said that some man heard Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) saying from
inside the prison, ‘I am more exalted near Allah than the she-camel of
(Prophet) Salih.’ Then he recited this Qur’anic verse,

***Enjoy yourselves in your abode for three*** ***days that*** ***is a
promise not to be belied***. [^1]

After three days, the tyrant was killed by his son al-Muntasir. [^2]

After the death of al-Mutawakkil, the distress of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.)
did not end. The Abbasid government kept on watching him and plotting
day and night to do away with him. The Abbasids bore malice towards him
because he was highly regarded and sanctified by all the nation, whereas
the Abbasids got no respect or regard like that.

Besides that there was a big part of the nation believing in the Imamate
of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and believing that he was worthier of the Islamic
caliphate than the Abbasids who indulged in pleasures and lusts and
governed the nation, like the Umayyads, with violence, oppression, and
haughtiness.

The assassination
-----------------

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) became a heavy burden on al-Mu’tamid the Abbasid
caliph after he saw people talk about the virtues, knowledge,
asceticism, and piety of the Imam and prefer him to all other Muslim
ulama’. He became angry, envious, and spiteful against the Imam His ill
will led him to commit the worst crime in Islam.

He inserted fatal poison to the Imam, who, after having the poison, kept
to bed. The poison reacted in all his body and he suffered intolerable
pains. The Shi’a and the notables of the state visited him, and the all
were covered with deep sorrow.

The next Imam
-------------

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) appointed his son Abu Muhammad al-Hasan (al-Askari)
as the Imam after him and set him as the general authority for the Shi’a
after his death. He insinuated to his close companions about the Imamate
of his son Abu Muhammad (a.s.) before. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) entrusted his
son Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) with the procedures of funerals,
prayer, and burial after his death, and recommended him of other
recommendations concerning his affairs.

To Paradise
-----------

The poison reacted inside the body of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.). Violent pains
attacked him and death approached him quickly. When he felt the
inevitable death, he turned towards the qibla and began reciting some
suras of the Qur'an. He breathed his last while the mention of Allah was
still on his lips.

His great, pure soul ascended to its Creator surrounded by the angels.
The earthly world turned dark while the Heavens shone bright to receive
his coming. People lost much good by his death because it was the
leader, guide, and defender of the rights of the weak and the oppressed
that died.

Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) washed the pure body of his
father, enshrouded it, and offered the prayer of the dead on it while
his heart was full of pain, sorrow, and regret.

Processions of escort
---------------------

Samarra’ was shocked by the great disaster. People of all classes
hurried to get the honor of escorting the pure body of the great Imam
who was the remainder of prophethood and Imamate. State offices and
shops were closed.

Viziers, ulama, judges, prominent leaders of the army, and the eminent
members of the Abbasid family walked before the bier feeling the big
disaster, and mentioning the virtues and favors of the Imam, and
expressing the great loss that afflicted the Islamic nation. Splendid
funerals were held that Samarra’ had never seen like before.

In the last abode
-----------------

The pure corpse was carried under a halo of takbir and glorification to
the last abode of the Imam (a.s.) that was his house which he had
assigned to be a graveyard for him and his family. Imam al-Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.) put the pure corpse of his father into the tomb, while
his tears were flowing over his cheeks. He buried his father and buried
with him the values of knowledge, patience, piety, and probity.

After the burial, the masses of people came to Imam al-Hasan al-Askari
(a.s.) and comforted him, while he was standing with his family to thank
the comforters.

The date of his death
---------------------

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) died on Monday, the twenty-fifth of Jumadi
al-Akhirah[^3] in 254AH when he was forty years old.[^4] Other than this
date is also mentioned in some sourcebooks.

[^1]: Qur'an, 11:65

[^2]: A’lam al-Wara, p.363

[^3]: The sixth month in the Islamic calendar

[^4]: Noor al-Absar, p.150, Kashf al-Ghummah, vol.3 p.174


