Proper and Generic Nouns
========================

83. What is a proper noun?

84. What is a generic noun?

85. How many types of generic nouns are there?

86. List the derived generic nouns.

87. What is a noun of place?

88. What is a noun of time?

89. How is a noun of place/time formed from a triliteral verb?

90. How is a noun of place/time formed from a verb with more than three
letters?

91. What is an instrumental noun?

92. How is an instrumental noun formed?

83. A proper noun is a noun that denotes a specific person, animal or
place. For example: **إبراهیم** (Abraham), **بارود** (bārūd, the name of
a horse) and **دمشق** (Damascus).

84. A generic noun is a noun that denotes, in an unspecific way, all
people, animals or things that fall under one species. For example:
**رَجُلٌ** (man), **کَلبٌ** (dog) and **مدینةٌ** (city).

85. There are two types of generic nouns: derived and apolistic.

86. The derived generic nouns are: nouns of place/time and instrumental
nouns.

87. A noun of place is a form that indicates the place that an action
took place. For example: **مَطبَخ** (kitchen).

88. A noun of time is a form that indicates the time that an action took
place. For example: **مَغرِب** (evening).

89. A time/place noun is formed from a triliteral verb in the following
forms:

1. **مَفعَل** for verbs whose second root letter has a *dummah* in the
aorist tense, for example **یَطبُخُ** (he is cooking) becomes **مَطبَخ**
(kitchen), for verbs whose second root letter has a *fathah* in the
aorist tense, for example: یَذبَحُ (he is slaughtering) becomes
**مَذبَح** (slaughterhouse) and for verbs whose third root letter is a
weak letter, for example: **یَرمي** (he is shooting) becomes **مَرمیَ**
(gun range).

2. **مَفعِل** for verbs whose second root letter has a *kasrah* in the
aorist tense, for example: **یَضرِبُ** (he is hitting) becomes
**مَضرِب** (camp site).

90. The time/place nouns are formed from verbs that have more than three
letters by using their passive aorist tense form and substituting the
aorist letter with a *mīm* with a *dummah*. For example: **یُستَشفیَ**
(a cure was sought) becomes **مُستَسفیَ** (hospital).

91. An instrumental noun is a form that indicates the thing that the
action was performed with. For example: **مِبرَد** (file).

92. Instrumental nouns are taken from transitive triliteral verbs. There
are three forms that they have:

1. **مِفعَل**: for example: **مِبرَد** (file)

2. **مِفعَلَة**: for example: **مِکنَسَة** (broom)

3. **مِفعال**: for example: **مِفتاح** (key)


