Infinitives
===========

93. What is an infinitive?

94. How is an infinitive formed from triliteral verbs without increase
letters?

95. How is an infinitive formed from triliteral verbs with increase
letters?

96. How is an infinitive formed from quadriliteral verbs without
increase letters?

97. How is an infinitive formed from quadriliteral verbs with increase
letters?

98. Are there infinitives for verbs that have not been mentioned?

99. How is a *mīmī* infinitive formed from triliteral verbs?

100. How is a *mīmī* infinitive formed from verbs with more than three
letters?

93. An infinitive is a noun that indicates a state or action without
indicating its time. For example **أخذٌ** (removal) or **تَسلیمٌ**
(submission)

94. There are many forms for infinitives taken from triliteral verbs
without increase letters. They can be found in dictionaries. For
example: **نَصرٌ** (help) and **جُلوسٌ** (sitting) and many more.

95. There are rules for the infinitives of triliteral verbs with
increase letters:

• Form II - the infinitive of form II has the following form:
**تَفعیل**, for example: **قَدَّمَ** becomes **تَقدیم**.

• Form III - the infinitive of form III has the following form:
**مُفاعَلَة**, for example: **نازَعَ** becomes **مُنازَعَة**

• Form IV - **إفعال**, for example: **أکرَمَ** becomes **إکرام**

• Form V - **تَفَعُّل**, for example: **تَأخَّرَ** becomes **تأخُّر**

• Form VI - **تَفاعُل**, for example: **تَباعَدَ** becomes **تَباعُد**

• Form VII - **اِنفعال**, for example: **اِنکَسَرَ** becomes
**اِنکَسار**

• Form VIII - **اِفتِعال**, for example: **اِجتَمَعَ** becomes
**اِجتِماع**

• Form IX - **اِفعِلال**, for example: **اِحمرَّ** becomes **اِحمِرار**

• Form X - **اِستِفعال**, for example: **اِستَرحَمَ** becomes
**اِستِرحام**

• Form XII - **اِفعیعال**, for example: **اِحدَودَبَ** becomes
**اِحدیداب**

96. The two forms of the infinitive of quadriliteral verbs without
increase letters are: **فَعلَلَة** and **فِعلال**, for example:
**دَحرَجَ** becomes **دَحرَجَة** or **دِحراج**.

97. There are rules for the infinitives of quadriliteral verbs with
increase letters:

• Form II - **تَفَعلُل**, for example: **تَدَحرَجَ** becomes
**تَدَحرُج**

• Form III - **اِفعِنلال**, for example: **اِحرَنجَمَ** becomes
**اِحرِنجام**

• Form IV - **اِفعِلال**, for example: **اِطمَأنَّ** becomes
**اِطمِئنان**

98. There is an infinitive for triliteral and quadriliteral verbs with
or without increase letters called a *mīmī* infinitive. It is called
this because there is a *mīm* added to the beginning of it.

99. The *mīmī* infinitive is formed from triliteral verbs by putting
them in the following forms:

• **مَفعِل** this form is used if the first root letter is a *wāw*. For
example: **وَعَدَ** (he promised) becomes **مَوعِد** (promise).

• **مَفعَل** this from is used in all other cases. For example:
**أکَلَ** (he ate) becomes **مَأکَل** (food).

100. The *mīmī* infinitive is formed from verbs with more than three
letters by using the passive aorist tense and replacing the aorist
letter with a *mīm* that has a *dummah*. For example: **یُنحَدَرُ** (is
brought down) becomes **مُنحَدَرٌ** (fall).


