The Forms of Exaggeration
=========================

113. What are the forms of exaggeration?

114. How are the forms of exaggeration formed?

115. What do the forms *fa'ūl* and *fa'īl* mean?

116. What rule applies to the *fa'ūl* form and the noun it describes?

117. What rule applies to the *fa'īl* form and the noun it describes?

113. The forms of exaggeration are forms that bring about a change in
the active participle to indicate exaggeration. For example: **رَحِمَ**
(he showed mercy) becomes **راحِمٌ** (the merciful) which becomes
**رَحیمٌ** (the very merciful).

114. The exaggeration form is only formed from triliteral verbs, but
there is no rule one how to form them. The most famous forms are:

• **فَعَّال**: **جَبَّار** (giant)

• **فَعَّالة**: **عَلّامة** (high scholar)

• **مِفعال**: **مِفضال** (excellent)

• **مِفعیل: مِسکین** (destitute)

• **فِعِّیل: صِدِّیق** (very truthful)

• **فَعِل: حَذِر** (very cautious)

• **فعیل: رَحیم** (very merciful)

• **فَعول: کَذوب** (big liar)

115. The forms *fa'ūl* and *fa'īl* are used to indicate an actor or
objective compliment. For example: **رَسول** is the same as **مُرسَل**
and **رَحیم** is the same as **رَاحِم**.

116. The rule that applies to the form *fa'ūl* and the noun it describes
is different depending on its meaning:

• If it has the meaning of an objective compliment it follows the noun
it describes in gender. For example: **هذا رَسول** (this male messenger)
and **هذه رَسولَة** (this female messenger).

• If it has the meaning of an actor it remains masculine even if the
noun it is describing is feminine. For example**:** **جاءَ الأبُ
الحنونُ** (the loving father came) and **جائتَ الأُمُّ الحنونُ** (the
loving mother came). This is only the case if the described word is
mentioned, if it is implied the adjective must follow the described word
in gender. For example: **جاءَ الحنونُ و الحنونَة**ُ (the loving
[father] and the loving [mother] came).

117. The rule that applies to the form *fa'īl* and the noun it describes
is different depending on its meaning:

• If it has the meaning of an actor it follows the noun it describes in
gender. For example: **هذا شَفیقٌ و هذه شَفیقةٌ** (this male
compassionate person and this female compassionate person).

• If it has the meaning of an objective compliment it remains masculine
even if the noun it is describing is feminine. For example: **جاءَ**
**رجلٌ** **جَریحٌ** (an injured man came) and **جائت** **امرأةٌ**
**جَریحٌ** (an injured woman came). This is only the case if the
described word is mentioned, if it is implied the adjective must follow
the described word in gender. For example: **جاءَ** **جَریحٌ** و
**جَریحَةٌ** (the injured [man] and the injured [woman] came).


