The Comparative and Superlative Noun
====================================

118. What are comparative and superlative nouns?

119. What are comparative and superlative nouns formed from?

120. What verbs are not formed into comparative and superlative nouns?

121. Why are comparative and superlative nouns not formed from
triliteral verbs that indicate color, defect or trickery?

122. What do we do if we want to use the comparative or superlative form
from a verb that is not put into the comparative or superlative tense?

118. The comparative and superlative noun is a form which changes an
adjective to indicate a comparison between one thing and another. An
example of an adjective is: **یوسفُ** **کبیرٌ** (Joseph is big.) An
example of a comparative is: **یوسفُ** **أکبرُ** **من** **إبراهیمَ**
(Joseph is bigger than Abraham.)

119. The comparative and superlative are only formed from triliteral
active verbs and always are put in the form **أفعل**. For example:
**کَرُمَ** (which is a active verb) becomes **أکرَم** (more generous)
and **ضُرِبَ** (which is a passive verb) is not put into the comparative
or superlative form.

120. Triliteral active verbs which indicate color, defect or trickery as
well as any verb that has more than three letters are not put into the
comparative or superlative forms.

121. The reason that triliteral active verbs which indicate color,
defect or trickery are not formed into the comparative and superlative
forms is because the form **أفعل** for these verbs is used as an
adjective. For example: **سَوِدَ** (to make black) becomes **أسوَد**
(black) and **عَوِرَ** (to loose an eye) becomes **أعوَر** (one-eyed).

122. If we want to use the comparative or superlative form from a verb
that is not put into the comparative or superlative tense we must use
one of the words **أشد** (more severe), **أکثر** (more) **أوفر** (more
abundant) or **أکبر** (larger) and then add the infinitive of the verb
in the accusative form (because it is a specificative). For example:
**سَوِدَ** becomes **أشَدُّ** **سَواداً** (blacker) or **عَوِرَ**
becomes **أکثرُ** **عَوَراً** (more one-eyed).


