Masculine and Feminine
======================

127. What is a masculine noun?

128. What is a feminine noun?

129. How is a masculine noun differentiated from a feminine noun?

130. What are the signs of a literated feminine noun?

131. Are all nouns ending with the feminine *tā'* feminine?

132. Are all nouns ending with the *alif maqsūrah* (یَ) feminine?

133. Are all nouns ending with an *alif* and *hamzah* femine?

134. How many types of masculine and feminine nouns are there?

135. How is a relative clause noun put into the feminine form?

136. How is an adjective put into the feminine form?

137. Are there exceptions to this rule about adjectives?

138. How is an adjective in the **فعلان** form put into the feminine
form?

139. How is an adjective in the **أفعل** form that indicates a color,
defect or trickery put into the feminine form?

140. How is an adjective in the **أفعل** form indicating the comparative
or superlative form put into the feminine form?

127. A masculine noun is a noun that indicates masculinity. For example:
**رَجُلٌ** (man)

128. A feminine noun is a noun that indicates femininity. For example:
**اِمرأة** (woman)

129. There is no sign for a masculine noun. It is known by its meaning.
But, feminine nouns are either:

• literated, there are signs indicating its femininity. For example,
**اِمرأة**

• unliterated, there are no signs indicating its femininity. For
example, **شمس** (sun)

130. There are three signs for literated feminine nouns:  
 • The feminine *tā'*: **نعمة** (comfort)

• *Alif maqsūrah*: **عَطشیَ** (thirsty woman)

• *Alif* and *hamzah*: **صَحراء** (desertlike)

131. No, some nouns ending with the feminine *tā'* are masculine. For
example: **طلحة** (a male name)

132. No, The nouns that end with an *alif maqsūrah* which is part of its
root (not added) are not feminine. For example: **هُدیَ** (correct
guidance).

133. No, the nouns that end with a *hamzah* preceded by an *alif* which
is part of its root (not added) are not feminine. For example: **بِناء**
(building)

134. There are two types of masculine and feminine nouns:  
 • Literal: a noun that is actually masculine or feminine, for example:
**رجل** (man) and **اِمرأة** (woman).

• Figurative: a noun that is not actually masculine or feminine, for
example: **قَلَم** (pen) and **قَوس** (arch).

135. A noun (non-adjective) is made feminine in two ways:  
 • Grammatically: by adding a feminine *tā'* to the end of the word. For
example: **نَمِر** (panther) becomes **نَمرة** (female panther).

• Non-grammatically: there are no rules for this. For example: **رجلٌ**
becomes **إمرأةٌ**.

136. An adjective is made feminine by adding a feminine *tā'* to the end
of the word. For example: **کاذب** (male liar) becomes **کاذبة** (female
liar).

137. Yes, there are three exceptions to this rule.  
 • The form: **فَعلان**

• The form **أفعل** when the verb indicates color, defects, or trickery.

• The superlative and comparative form.

138. An adjective has the **فعلان** form is made feminine by putting it
into the **فَعلیَ** form. For example: **عَطشان** (thirsty male) becomes
**عَطشیَ** (thirsty female).

139. An adjective has the **أفعل** form and it denotes color, defect, or
trickery is made feminine by putting it into the **فَعلاء** form. For
example: **أحمَر** (red) becomes **حَمراء** (red).

140. A superlative or comparative is made feminine by putting it into
the **فُعلیَ** form. For example: **أکبر** (bigger) becomes **کُبریَ**
(bigger)


