The Status of Verbs
===================

237. Are all verbs declinable?

238. How many states of verbs are there?

239. What are the signs of the different states of verbs?

240. Are there exceptions to this rule?

241. What are the five verbs?

242. What is the sign of the nominative state in the five verbs?

243. What is the sign of the subjunctive state in the five verbs?

244. What is the sign of the jussive state in the five verbs?

245. What is the sign of the jussive state in defective verbs?

237. Aorist verbs are declinable except if the *nūn* of emphasis or the
feminine *nūn* is added to it. In that case the verb would be
indeclinable.

238. There are three states for verbs: nominative, subjunctive, and
jussive.

239. The signs of these states are:

• Nominative: *dummah*

• Subjunctive: *fathah*

• Jussive: *sakūn*

240. Yes, there are exceptions to this rule in:

• The five verbs

• Defective verbs in the jussive case

241. The five verbs are aorist tense verbs that:

• have a dual *alif*, for example: **یَضرِبانِ** (they 'two' are
hitting)

• have a plural *wāw*, for example: **یَضرِبونَ** (they are hitting)

• have a you feminine pronoun, for example: **تَضرِبینَ** (you 'female'
are hitting)

242. The nominative sign in the five verbs is the *nūn* remaining at the
end of the verb. For example: **یَضرِبانِ** (those 'two' are hitting)
which is an aorist tense verb in the nominative state and its sign is
the *nūn* because it is one of the five verbs.

243. The subjunctive sign in the five verbs is the subtraction of the
*nūn*. For example: **لَن** **تَضرِبي** (you 'female' never hit) which
is an aorist tense verb in the subjunctive state because of *lan* and
its sign is the subtraction of the *nūn* because it is one of the five
verbs.

244. The jussive sign in the five verbs is the subtraction of the *nūn*.
For example: **لَم** **تَضرِبوا** (you 'plural' did not hit) which is an
aorist tense verb in the jussive state because of *lam* and its sign is
the subtraction of the *nūn* because it is one of the five verbs.

245. The jussive sign in the defective verbs is the subtraction of the
weak letter. This is if it is not one of the five verbs in which the
*nūn* would be subtracted. For example: **لَم** **یَرمِ** (he did not
throw) which is an aorist tense verb in the jussive state because of
*lam* and its sign is the subtraction of the weak letter because it is a
weak verb of the root letter.


