The Imperative
==============

51. What is an imperative?

52. What is an imperative formed from?

53. Is the last syllable of an imperative declinable or indeclinable?

54. What vowel sign does the glottal stop of an imperative receive?

55. What is a *wasl* glottal stop?

56. What is a *qat‛* glottal stop?

57. What should be done if the speaker wants to use the imperative in
the first or third person?

51. The imperative verb is used to ask something from the listener in
the present or in the future. For example: **کُن** (be) and **اُکتُب**
(write)

52. The imperative is formed from the aorist tense by:

• erasing the aorist letter from the beginning of the word, for example:
**تَتَقَدَّمُ** becomes **تَقَدَّم** (precede)

• then, adding a glottal stop if the verb is a single triliteral verb or
starts with an added glottal stop. The glottal stop is a *qat‛* glottal
stop if the verb has four letters and a *wasl* glottal stop if it has
more or less than four letters. For example: **ضَرَبَ** becomes
**یَضرِبُ** then becomes **اِضرِب** (hit) or **أحسَنَ** becomes
**یُحسِنُ** then becomes **أحسِن**(act well)

53. The last syllable of an imperative is indeclinable, it does not
change. It is indeclinable upon:

• a *sakūn* if the last letter is not a weak letter, for example:
**اُنصُر** (help)

• erasing the weak letter of defective verbs, for example **یَرمي**
becomes **اِرمِ** (throw) or **یُعطِي** becomes **أعطِ**(give)

• erasing the *nūn* if the verb is connected to the dual *alif*, the
plural *wāw* or the *yā'* personal pronoun, for example: **اُنصِرَا**
(you two people help)

54. The imperative glottal stop:

• is given a *dummah* if the second root letter of a three letter verb
has a *dummah* in the aorist tense. For example: **اُنظُر** (look)

• is given a *fathah* if it is a four letter verb. For example:
**أکرَم**(be generous)

• is given a *kasrah* in other than these two cases. For example:
**اِعلَم** (know) and **اِضرِب** (hit) and **اِنطَلِق** (begin) and
**اِستَعلِم** (seek knowledge).

55. A *wasl* glottal stop is pronounced at the beginning of a sentence,
for example: اِجلِس یا رَجُلُ (Sit, oh man.), but is not pronounced in
the middle of a sentence, for example: یا رَجُلُ اجلِس (Oh man, sit.)

56. A *qat‛* glottal stop is pronounced in the beginning of a sentence,
for example: **أقبِل** **یا** **رَجُلُ**(Accept, oh man.), and in the
middle of a sentence, for example: **یا** **رَجُلُ** **أقبِل** (Oh man,
accept.)

57. The imperative used for the first or third person has a special form
which is called the imperative by *lām* where a jussive *lām* is added
to the beginning of the aorist tense verb and takes a *kasrah*, for
example: **لِیَضرِب** **لأُوَدِّب** (He must hit to teach manners),
except if it is after a *fā'* or *wāw*, in this case it is given a
*sakūn*, for example: **فَلتَطِب** **نفسک** (feel comfortable).


