Intransitive and Transitive Verbs
=================================

58. Does every verb need an actor?

59. Does every verb need an objective compliment?

60. When does a triliteral intransitive verb become transitive?

61. How many categories of transitive verbs are there?

62. What verbs are passive verbs derived from?

63. Is a passive verb derived from an intransitive verb?

64. How is a passive verb in the preterite tense formed?

65. How is a passive verb in the aorist tense formed?

58. Every verb needs an actor and the actor is either:

• Apparent, for example: **جَلَسَ** **المعلِّمُونَ** **ثُمَ**
**تَباحَثُوا** (The teachers sat down and then discussed.)

• Hidden, for example: **اِلعَب** (play) where the 'you' is hidden.

59. No, there are two types of verbs:

• Intransitive: A verb that suffices itself with an actor and does not
need an objective compliment. For example: **جاءَ** **الولَدُ** (The boy
came.)

• Transitive: A verb that doe not suffice itself with an actor, rather
it needs an objective compliment as well. For example: **کَسَرَ**
**الخادِمُ** **ٳبریقاً** (The servant broke a pitcher.)

60. Most triliteral intransitive verbs are made transitive if placed
into form II or IV. For example: **دامَ** (to last) becomes **أدامَ**(to
make last) or **کَرُمَ** (to be noble) becomes **کَرَّمَ**(to call
noble).

61. There are two categories of transitive verbs:

• Active: a verb whose actor is known, for example: **بَری**
**التلمیذُ** **قَلَماً** (The student sharpened a pencil.)

• Passive: a verb whose actor is not mentioned and whose objective
compliment is put in the actor's place. For example: **بُرِيَ**
**القَلَمُ** (The pencil was sharpened.)

62. A passive verb is normally formed from a transitive verb and the
objective compliment takes the place of the actor after it is erased
from the sentence. For example: **ضَرَبَ** **زیدٌ** **سلیماً** (Zayd hit
Salīm) becomes **ضُرِبَ** **سلیمٌ** (Salīm was hit.)

63, Yes, a passive verb is formed from an intransitive verb:

• if it can be made transitive by using a preposition. For example:
**قَبَضَ** **الحارسُ** **علی** **اللصِّ** (The guard seized the thief.)
becomes **قُبِضَ** **علی** **اللصِّ** (the thief was seized.)

• if there is a adverbal noun of time or place after the verb. For
example: **صَامَ** **العابِدُ** **اذارَ** (the worshiper fasted [in]
March.) becomes **صیمَ** **اذارُ** (March was fasted.)

• if there is an infinitive after the verb. For example: **احتَفَلَ
الجمعُ احتفالاً عظیما**ً (The group rallied, a great rally.) becomes
**احتُفِلَ احتفالٌ عَظیم**ٌ (A great rally was rallied.)

64. The preterite tense passive verb is made from the preterite tense
active verb by giving a *kasrah* to the second to last letter and a
*dummah* to all other letters that have a vowel sign already. For
example: **أکَلَ**(he ate) becomes **أُکِلَ**(it was eaten) or
**اِستَقَبَلَ** (he faced) becomes **اُستُقبِلَ** (it was faced).

65. The aorist tense passive verb is made from the aorist tense active
verb by giving the first letter a *dummah* and the second to last letter
a *fathah*. For example: **یَعلَمُ** (he knows) becomes **یُعلَمُ** (it
is known) or **یَکتُبُ** (he writes) becomes **یُکتَبُ**(it is being
written


