Introduction
============

2nd Edition

Though man, by divine inspiration or natural instinct finds out the
roots of good and bad and through natural guidance, differentiates
between the desirable and the undesirable, it does not mean that people
can understand all the problems facing them in the field of morality by
themselves without a teacher. That they can easily distinguish virtues
from vices and answer all the questions in this regard.

This is so because the knowledge of morals is so difficult and complex
that despite deep studies by great philosophers throughout the
centuries, some parts of the problem have remained unsolved even today
and they have not become as clear as they should be and scholars are not
able to give a definite reply to some questions pertaining to morals.
Therefore, we should try to grasp their realities and subtleties from
the Holy Quran and words of the infallibles We must understand that in
the school of thought of the Holy Prophets (s.a.w.s.), man is a being
having two dimensions, that is to say, human nature has both a positive
and a negative dimension. Man can travel upward as well as downward.

In his temperament, he has inclination both toward good and bad. Man
possesses both an intelligence and heart. Intelligence guides him to the
good and the graceful and he also has a lustful heart, which drives him
toward the bad and the lowly.

Human heart possesses both a constructive power and a destructive one.
The Holy Quran points to both of them in various verses and says. Nay! I
swear by the Day of Resurrection. Nay! I swear by the self-accusing
soul. Regarding the second it says: Most surely man's self is wont to
command him to do evil, except such as my Lord has had mercy on, Man,
naturally has an inclination toward God due to the positive dimension.
The Quran says in the same background. In the right state - the nature
made by Allah in which He has made men.

He has power to travel toward good and become a lofty being. He has the
capacity to lift himself up to the state of Nafse Mutmainnah (Restful
soul) How beautiful is the Word of Allah: O soul that art at rest!
Return to your Lord, well pleased with Him, well pleasing Him. So enter
among My servants. And enter into My garden.

In the negative dimension, too, the human nature has been recognised as
stingy, greedy, quarrelsome, hasty and thankless. Hence we find these
subjects in the Holy Quran:

And man is niggardly.
Surely man is created of a hasty temperament.
And man is most of all given to contention.
And man is ever hasty.
Most surely man is ungrateful to his Lord.

The negative dimension of man's self is such that he can drag himself
down unto the lowest of the low. The Holy Quran says: Then we render him
the lowest of the low except those who believe and do good.

These verses tell us clearly that man can become lower than all the
lowly creatures. Thus from the viewpoint of Quran and Divine schools of
thought, there is, in the nature of man, a fathomless expanse of
difference. On the one hand it develops so much that it reaches the
Aalaa illiyyeen The Highest places in the Hereafter as, the Holy Quran
says about the noble Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.):

Then he drew near, then he bowed, so he was at the measure of two bows
or closer still.

On the other side, it is possible that he drops down so low that he
reaches the Asfalus Saafileen (lowest of the low.)

Now that we have read some of the Quranic verses describing graceful
morals and their importance as well as the ayats which mention how much
low a man becomes by immorality, we should know that, for training and
guidance of man, it is necessary for us to take maximum benefit from the
teachers of morality who themselves have been the epitomes of moral
virtues and who had kept themselves far away from vices so that, we too,
slowly, become graceful. If we do not do so and if we leave ourselves
free, then surely we may reach the place mentioned by the Holy Quran
regarding such licentious people, They are as cattle, nay, they are in
worse errors.

So, from this aspect, we must know that the importance of morality is
so great that the perfection of human destiny lies in the gracefulness
of his morals.


Gulam Reza Sultani

1st Edition

Before we discuss morality, we must understand that from the viewpoint
of Islam, man has a very high status. The Lord Almighty says about his
creation, So blessed be Allah, the best of the creator.

Also regarding the creation of Adam, He tells the angels, I am going to
place in the earth a Khalif â€¦ Surely I know what you do not know He also
says, And surely We have honoured the children of Adam, and We carry
them in the land and the sea, and We have given them of the good things,
and We have made them to excel by an appropriate excellence over most of
those whom We have created. It is obvious that man by his painstaking
efforts reaches such a status that his eyes, ear and heart become
divine; and then whatever he desires, happens.

In some narrations we read: A man who performs deeds honestly for forty
days, the Lord Almighty fills up his heart with wisdom. So also:
Knowledge is the light with which God fills the heart of whomever He
wills.

Now, in order to be able to gain the status of humanity and to seek
this high station, it is necessary to, first, understand our selves and
then only we would know our Lord, because, One who knows himself, known
his Lord.

We should know that reaching this stage is not possible except under
the shade of submission to the Divine laws and by removing all
despicable vices from ourselves and by adorning ourselves with precious
virtues like knowledge, truthfulness, Piety , moral heroism, humility,
sincerity and Takhliyah and Tahliyah (consuming and expelling).

In this book, we describe some qualities which either raise man to
perfection or drag him down to abyss, from the viewpoint of the Holy
Quran and the Hadith so that, with the blessings of the Holy Quran and
the words of the Holy Prophet and his pure progeny, both the author and
the readers may be blessed with light. Then, after contemplation,
examination and analysis we shall come to a conclusion that man reaches
perfection only in the shade of morals and ethics and understands the
aim of creation.

I hope that this book having 32 lessons of ethics shall prove effective
for cleansing and purifying and will help us and the readers in our
journey toward the Lord and human perfection.


