Ways of Curing This Dangerous Disease
=====================================

This deadly disease can be remedied in two ways:

1 - First man must recognise the disease and always keep in mind its
evil effects.
2 - He should try all must endeavour so that the noble Islamic culture
rules over him and the society so that we remember that Allah is always
watching and protecting us and that He is Omniscient, Allah-seeing and
All-knowing; that He is aware of even our thoughts and imaginations: He
knows the stealthy looks and that which the breasts conceal.

Then it must be realised that every spoken word and every taken step is
being recorded and that it will have to be accounted for in the supreme
court of Allah and that the Day will come when all of us will have to
answer for all of our misplaced deeds and decisions and imaginations
before Allah.

**Some Essential Advice**

A - Husn-e-Zann (having favourable opinion) is correct when the society
is not corrupt or polluted. Ali (a.s.) says: When honesty and goodness
is well spread in the society, it is oppression unjust to have a bad
opinion about a person whose defects are not obvious. Of course when
evil and immorality and corruption overtakes a society, having good
opinion about one can prove deceptive.

B - Husn-e-Zann does not encircle un-Islamic militiamen or un-Islamic
organisations because their designs and their foundations for working
are based on secret and underground and they work for the destruction of
Islam and Muslims.

B - One must keep distance from excessive favourable opinion,
especially in money matters and in affairs that are in dispute among
people because sometimes it can cause allegation and false accusation.
In this connection Imam Sajjad (a.s.) has said: Excessive favourable
opinion attracts allegation.

C - What is meant by conjecture is baseless belief and decision and it
does not include tendency of heart or inclination of mind and hence it
is not a doubt.


**Lesson: 38 : Pardon and Tolerance**

Pardon or forgiveness and connivance or tolerance is one of the
prominent virtues of the faithful. Many verses and narrations are found
on this subject. Some of them are being discussed here. After this we
will mention its good consequences and instances so that we may
understand how lucky are those who have this virtue. Verses:

Those who spend benevolently in ease as well as in adversity, and those
who restrain their anger and pardon men; and Allah loves the doers of
good to others.

The word Ka za ma used in this ayat means closing of the mouth of a
water bag made of leather that is full. The allusion here is to one who
is full of anger and yet restrains from hitting back, and Ghaiz is a
state of mind in which man becomes furious and extra-ordinarily excited
because of unpleasant happenings.

The Holy Quran, talking about the prominent virtue of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) says: Thus it is due to mercy from Allah that you deal with
them gently, and had you been rough, hard hearted, they would certainly
have dispersed from around you; pardon them therefore and ask pardon for
them, and take counsel with them in the affair; so when you have
decided, then place your trust in Allah; surely Allah loves those who
trust. Take to forgiveness and enjoin good and turn aside from the
ignorant.

Explain this verse Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says: In the Holy Quran, no other
verse is more comprehensive than this one in the matter of morality and
so commentators have further commentated on this statement of the Imam
that this verse covers graceful morals being the same as Aql (reason),
Iffat (modesty) and Shahwat (zeal). According to this meaning the virtue
of reason called Hikmat is in the phrase wamur bil urf (enjoin the good)
as it orders good deeds and decent acts. The gracefulness of heart
against the rising of passion is seen in the phrase. And the servants of
the Beneficent God are they who walk on the earth in humbleness, and
when the ignorant address them, they say: Peace. Narrations:

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said: Behold! O people I inform you
about the best morals of man in this world and the Hereafter. Forgiving
the one who oppressed you, rejoining relation with one who broke it off
and doing good to one who did bad for you and to gift one who deprived
you. Also Imam Sadiq as. has said: Three virtues are the best virtues of
this world and of the Hereafter:

1. Pardoning the one who oppressed you
2. Joining with one who separated from you
3. Self-control when confronted with an unwise person .

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said: It is essential for you to
connive and forgive because pardoning increases for you nothing bout
honour and forgive one-another so that Allah may love you.

Again the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said: Allah has never loved a man
with ignorance nor has He ever dishonoured an ignorant person. Imam
Baqir (a.s.) has said: One who restrains oneself from anger while being
able to act angrily is the one whose heart is filled with peace faith by
God on the Day of Judgement.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says: Allah will give large eyed houri in marriage to
one who has three virtues:

1. Who suppresses his anger and fury
2. Stands firm in the path of God and under swords and shows
tolerance
3. Does not wish to take forbidden wealth falling in his hands.

And the character of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and of the Holy Imams
(a.s.) was indeed such. The Prophets general pardon granted on the day
of conquest of Mecca and its like by Amirul Mo-mineen following his
victory in the war of Basra are witness to this. Interested people may
refer history books.

Here one question may arise why pardon and connivance has been praised
so much in the verses and the tradition? The answer: As anger is the
fountainhead of most of the great sins and the state of anger is the
most dangerous state for man when if the fury is not brought under
control wisdom goes away and the angry man becomes almost lunatic. Then
he is liable to make serious and dangerous mistakes which attract evil
consequences accompanied by ransom, atonement and finally Divine torture
or chastisement: Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says: One who suppresses his fury
despite being able to retaliate, Good will fill his heart with His
pleasure on the Day of Judgement.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) also says: Allah fills the heart of a
person with faith and peace who controls himself from acting on his fury
despite being able to retaliate.

This tradition tells us that suppressing of anger has an extraordinary
effect on spiritual perfection and on the strengthening of Faith. Yet it
should be remembered that suppression of anger gives much benefits. But
sometimes only this much does not suffice to root out the enmity from a
heart. For this important result it is necessary that suppression of
anger must be accompanied by pardon and gift. This is what enables a man
to attain high status and hence, doing good to one who has done bad to
one is the desired precious virtue as testified by verse 134 of Surah
Aale Imran Holy Quran and conniving at the evil behaviour of others was
the way of the innocent Imams while dealing with their ill-wishers.

**Some Questions**

Does not pardoning an oppressor strengthen him? Or does not this deed
encourage him to continue his injustice? And, similarly, does not
forgiving a foe generate a sort of negative effect in the oppressed
ones?

The reply to these questions is that there is a difference in the
relation of pardon and connivance with establishment of a right and so
also regarding war with the oppressor. It is one of the Islamic
commands: Neither oppress others nor be oppressed by others. And the
leader of the pious Imam Ali (a.s.) has said: in his will to his sons:
Be an enemy of the oppressor and a helper of the oppressed. So, if Islam
orders pardoning and connivance, it also asks to fight and struggle.
Proofs of both have been produced above from verses and narrations. That
is why it is said that verses of the Holy Quran explain one another: Al
Quraanu yufassiru bazuhu bazan.

Perhaps some unintelligent persons may think that the two orders about
pardoning and fighting are contradictory, But attention to the said
verses and hadiths must make all understand that the occasions for
forgiving and the circumstances for fighting are also different.

The explanation is that pardon and connivance refers to a state when
and where one is able to overcome the enemy who is completely defeated
and there is no fear of his rising up and when it is likely that
pardoning him would give him a chance to improve so that he may review
his behaviour. We see a number of such circumstances in Islamic history.
In this connection there also is a hadith: When you get victory over the
enemy, consider pardoning him as a kind of thanksgiving for the said
victory.

But when there still is a danger of the enemy's getting up or pardon is
likely to encourage him in his enmity or make him happy for his
oppressive attitude, Islam not only does not permit pardoning, rather it
orders a fight till final victory. Such was the way of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) and the sinless Imam (a.s.)

Another occasion for forgiving and conniving is related to personal and
family rights wherein pardon and connivance has been given preference to
vengeance that can destroy the organisation of family and society.

**On whose part pardon and Connivance Is More Beneficent?**

Naturally pardon and connivance is good on the part of all. Yet it is
all the more so in the case of leaders and preachers as they have more
encounters with prejudiced, ignorant, obstinate, unaware and uncivilised
people and they are many a time subjected to abuse and stoning. In such
circumstances the weapon for victory is pardon and convince, and
kindness them and not quarrelling because, in case of the unwise
ignorant, tolerance and courage and connivance is the best way which can
enlighten them and dampen their fury and root out their enmity and
prejudice. How nicely has the Holy Quran, addressed the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) in this matter: Take to forgiveness and enjoin good, and turn
aside from the ignorant.


**Lesson: 39 : Good manners and the Islamic behaviour**

Scholars of morality have divided moral issues into two categories:

1 - Morals in the common meaning as discussed in earlier pages
2 - Morals in the particular meaning that includes good manners and
Islamic behaviour.
It is obvious that one of the ways of advancing the noble Holy aims of
Islam in an Islamic society is correct behaviour. The great Prophet of
Islam (s.a.w.s.), addressing the sons of Abdul Muttalib says: You can
never gather people around you with your wealth, so treat them with a
smile face. In order to understand to the extent Islam given importance
to good behaviour we point out to some of the verses and traditions:

Verses Thus it is due to mercy from Allah that you deal with them
gently, and had you been rough, hard hearted, they would certainly have
dispersed from around you

And when the ignorant address them, they say: Peace.
And most surely you conform yourself to sublime morality.

From this series of verses we learn that the Islamic society too must,
like their leaders, attract people towards them and Islam.

Traditions

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) is recorded to have said: I have been
appointed to carry the greatness of man to perfection. He has also said:
The weightiest of all deeds in the balance of deeds is nice behaviour
and manners. Imam Baqir (a.s.) says: Most perfect from the viewpoint of
Faith are those who are good mannered. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: the
Faithful Mo-min, on the Day of Judgement, does not present to Allah
anything more dear to Allah than good behaviour with people, except the
obligatory duties.

Similarly the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) says: Nearest to on the Day of
Qiyamat, among you will be the one who had the best morals and who had
behaved most nicely with his family members. And Imam Baqir (a.s.) has
said: Meeting your brother with a smiling face and removing his trouble
is a good deed. Therefore, in Islamic programmes, orders have been
issued for good and nice human behaviour and on the other hand, words
have been said regarding good conduct even in wars. Here are some:

Verses

And speak to them kind words.

And you shall speak to men good words Kind speech and forgiveness is
better than charity followed by injury; and Allah is Self-sufficient,
Forbearing. And let those fear who, should they leave behind them weakly
offspring, would fear on their account, so let them be careful of their
duty to Allah, and let them speak right words.

Traditions

Imam Baqir (a.s.) has, while explaining the verse qooloo linnaasi
husnaa says: O our Shias! Be our beauty! And do not deviate to make us
feel ashamed and speak nicely with people and restrain your tongues from
foul language and futile talks. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said in
this connection: Decorate or beautify yourselves with good behaviour
because the residence of nice people in Paradise and beware! Of
bad-natured people as they will burn in Hellfire.

Similarly he has also said: Bad behaviour vitiates human deeds just as
vinegar spoils honey.

Now that you perused some verses and traditions your attention is being
drawn to two other topics too:

A: Good behaviour and a warn human attitude is desired and expected
from ever one but it is all the more so in case of the friends of the
progeny of Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) as the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and
his family members were the ideals in this matter of nice behaviour and
good nature and, hence, we, their followers, should also be a decoration
for them and should never act in a way which may make them disgusted:

B: The well-wishers of our society and the office-hearers of the
Islamic Republic and the heads of families should strive to guide our
society toward Islamic attitude and to behave mildly and soberly with
the ignorant. They must nor get disappointed in the matter of their
improvement even if they talk harshly and sarcastically because virtues
and good morals do have roots in human nature and it is essential for a
gardener to nourish moral plants in a proper manner. Treasures of
virtues are hidden in their hearts and expert people want to take out
these treasures, because, nature has taught them what a perfect man
should possess. Materialism has covered it with a curtain. Therefore a
sympathetic teacher wants to remove that barrier and to make man
remember what he has forgotten. How nice are the words of Amirul
Mo-mineen (a.s.) in this regard: Remind them of the forgotten bounties…
and dig out the pearls of intelligence which are lying hidden in their
nature. The Prophets and men of God, before being teachers of the
newcomers, are the nourishers of those virtues which are hidden in the
heart of humanity and therefore the responsibility of such sympathisers
are very crucial and grave. So they must tolerate harsh and hard things
and behave nicely with the ignorant.

O Lord! Guide us all so that we may have the virtues and morals of Your
Apostles and of our Imams to become their true followers.


**Lesson: 40 : Self-restraint and Piety**

Abstinence, self-restraint (Wara) and piety (Taqwa) are among those
most important virtues about which we see many verses and narrations.

**Definition of Taqwa**

Taqwa is that pure state of the human heart that controls man's deeds
and creates harmony between the internal forces and external acts of
man. It connects man with Allah and lifts up the curtains between the
material world and the super natural.

Defining Taqwa, Raaghib says: Wiqaya is to protect a thing from
anything that wants to harm it and Taqwa means to keep the soul safe
from danger. What is meant by this that, sometimes, as per the law of
using words grammar, sabab (cause) is used in place of Moosa bbab causer
and sometimes the vice versa. Khauf is used for Taqwa and Taqwa for
Khauf. In the terminology of Shariat religion Taqwa means to protect the
heart from whatever drags man toward a sin. It should be understood that
religious and Divine Taqwa means man must save himself from what the
religion or principle of a Muslims way of life, has called sin or
deviation or impiety or unclean and should never indulge in it.

This safeguarding or protection is possible in two ways:

1. Man, with a view to protect himself from sins and impurities and in
order to run away from such things, keeps himself at a safe distance
from the environment of sin, makes efforts to keep himself healthy and
hence away from the atmosphere of illness and from the microbes which
spread diseases.

2. Man installs in his heart such power whereby he get spiritual and
moral protection. For instance, if he falls or happens to be in an
environment that supplies means for sinning and disobedience, that power
protects his soul from that disease, as if he had vaccinated himself.
Here we discuss that second kind of Piety which is also understood from
various verses of the Holy Quran:

Verses

1. And make provision, for surely the provision is the guarding of
oneself, and be careful of your duty to Me, O men of understanding.

2. Yea, whoever fulfils his promise and guards against evil -then
surely Allah loves those who guard against evil.

3. O you who believe! be careful of your duty to Allah with the care
which is due to Him, and do not die unless you are Muslims.

Some of the great commentators, while explaining this ayat have said:
that the demand of Taqwa is the highest and loftiest grade of piety that
includes refraining from all kinds of sin and disobedience and deviation
from truth. Hence, while explaining Haqq-e-tuqaatuhu, Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
says: Piety is that you obey Allah constantly and never disobey and
never indulge in a sin, always remember Him and never forget Him and be
thankful to Him for His bounties and never remain ungrateful to Him.

And this verse does not differ from the above verse Fattaqullah mas ta
tatum Be pious to the extent you can, because, after all, this order,
like all other orders, is related with the ability of man.

O you who believe! Be upright for Allah, bearers of witness with
justice, and let not hatred of a people incite you not to act equitably;
act equitably, that is nearer to piety, and he careful of your duty to
Allah; surely Allah is Aware of what you do.

Narrations

It is reported that Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: Their cryings should not
deceive you, because, really piety is in the hearts. Amirul Mo-mineen
(a.s.) has said: Piety is the top of morals.

It is mentioned in the will of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) for Ali
(a.s.): O Ali! The one who does not have three things has nothing: 1-
Piety that prevents him from sinning, 2-Good behaviour that results in
nice relations with people and 3- Tolerance which removes the ignorance
or the ignorant. We learn from these ayat and similar other narrations
that Taqwa and abstinence are virtues of the soul, not merely refraining
from sin and disobedience, though that too is desirable in its limits.
But piety is beyond it and the virtues mentioned in case of the pious do
not include the first kind.

**Difference between Taqwa and Wara**

The late Allamah Majlisi (r.a.) says: Perhaps what Taqwa means is to
refrain from sinning and the meaning of wara is to leave even the
doubtful. Under this description and below this definition the position
of wara is higher than that of Taqwa and it can be said that taw has
some stages which we shall discuss in the following talks, God
willing.


**Lesson: 41 : Taqwa Continued**

Traditions Yaqoob bin Saif says: I heard from Imam Sadiq (a.s.):
Almighty Allah does not take out a slave from the disrespect of sin to
the honour of taw except by making him needless without wealth, and
beloved without family and acquainted without company. Amr bin Saeed
says: I approached Imam Sadiq (a.s.) and said: I come to you only once
after some years so kindly tell me some words of advice on which I may
act. The Imam said: I admonish you to have fear of Allah and to have
Wara and effort. Know that an effort. Know that an effort without wara
gives no benefit.

It is recorded that Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has said: Make taqwa your habit
and protect your religion with abstinence.

Similarly he has also said: It is essential that you, without speaking,
invite others to Islam through fear of God, and abstinence and endeavour
and truthfulness in talk and trustworthiness and good behaviour with
neighbour and with everybody that is, your attitude, O Shias! Must be
such that your opponents may incline toward your creed and be adoration
for us and do not make us feel ashamed. You should also lengthen your
bowing rukoo of prostrations, because, when one of you makes a long
rukoo and sajdah, satan, from behind, cries out: Alas, this person
obeyed and I rebelled!

Kheesama says: Before proceeding on a journey I went to Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) to say him good bye, when he said: Convey my salaams to our
friends and advise them to fear Allah and announce that we do not make
them needless affluent without God but with the help of good deeds and
our recommendation intercession does not reach without abstinence and
verily, the most sorrowful person on the Day of Judgement is a man who
praises justice but acts against it.

Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) says: O servants of God! I advise you to fear
Allah which Taqwa is both a provision and a baggage, and so also a
shelter. Provision makes man reach his destination and a shelter
protects him from dangers.

O servants of God! Fear of Allah???? away from doing the prohibited and
makes their hearts a place of precaution in such a way that they remain
awake in nights talking with their Lord Creator and they fast during hot
days. Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) said: Thanks for every bounty is a refrain
from what Allah has prohibited.

**Consequences of Taqwa**

Clear-sightedness as a result of Piety O you who believe! If you are
careful of your duty to Allah, He will grant you a distinction A light
which will make it possible for you to distinguish truth from untruth.
…and whoever is careful of his duty to Allah, He will make for him an
outlet, And give him sustenance from whence he thinks not… …and whoever
is careful of his duty to Allah, He will make easy for him his affair.
…and he careful of your duty to Allah, Allah teaches you…

These short yet meaningful sentences describe one of the most important
fate-forming man problems of man and it is that, on the path that man
traverses for attaining success, there always are some by away and
pitfalls. If he does not remain careful about them and does not avoid
them he falls down in such a way that no sign of him is left. So it
becomes easy for man if he recognises what is truth and what is untruth,
good and bad, friend and foe, useful and harmful and of fortune and
misfortune.

The difficulty is that, in many of such cases, man becomes doubtful. He
thinks untruth to be truth, selects foe instead of friend walks is a bye
lane instead of on the right path.

We understand from the Holy Quran that this way of seeing eases our
problems as curtains for lust, greed, passion, selfishness and excessive
love of wealth, wife and children, position and status hinder our
intelligence. This darkness can be removed only by the light of Taqwa.

Secondly, we know that every perfection, wherever it may be, is the
reflection of a light of the Lord. The more man gets near to Allah, the
more powerful reflection he will receive, from that Fountainhead of all
perfection. Accordingly, all knowledge and wisdom sprout from that main
Source of knowledge and wisdom. When man, in the light of Taqwa, gets
nearness to Him by avoiding sin and thus mixes his insignificant drop of
his existence with the unfathomable ocean, he acquires a big booty of
awareness and wisdom. So, in the course of human history, we find men
and women who were pious. In them we see such an extraordinary knowledge
and wisdom that it is impossible to acquire through common avenues of
education. They were able to recognise a number of calamities that were
rooted in the folds of chaotic social conditions. They saw the heinous
faces of enemies through thousands of deceptive veils. As a proof of
this we give here some narrations:

1. A believer sees with the light of God!
2. Beware of the intelligence of a Faithful.
3. Be cautious of the guess and imagination of the faithful because the
Lord Almighty makes their tongues tell only the Truth

It is recorded from the innocent Imams (a.s.): Assist us by means of
Wara. Verily the one of you who meets his Lord when he possess wara gets
ease from God because the Lord Almighty has said: the one who obeys
Allah and His Apostle on the Day of Judgement will be the neighbour of
one on whom Allah will have completed His bounty and they are the
Messengers and the Truthfuls and Martyrs and the Pious and indeed they
are the good friends.


**Lesson: 42 : Taqwa Contd.**

Admonition and Counsel Proves Effective for the Pious Though guidance
and advice is the means of walking straight for all, only god-fearing
people benefit from it. The Holy Quran has hinted at this on many
occasions:

1. Alif Lam Mim. This Book, there is no doubt in it, is a guide to
those who guard against evil.
2. This is a clear statement for men, and a guidance and an admonition
to those who guard against evil.
3. And We reveal of the Quran that which is a healing and a mercy to
the believers, and it adds only to the perdition of the unjust.

Of course, the Holy Quran has been revealed for the guidance of entire
mankind. Yet the reason of calling it a guide for the Godfearing and the
Believers is that they submit to the Truth and follow it and hence
according to it attain a higher degree of guidance for them.

But the unbelieving people are an obstinate group who are neither
seeking the truth nor in case they know about it follow the truth.
Rather they value their lust and passion above everything. Therefore,
they not only remain deprived of the guidance of the Quran but it only
multiplies their wretchedness. It is so because the temperament of their
existence is deformed due to the effect of their denial and oppression
and hypocrisy. Hence, whenever and wherever they come across the light
of Truth they get up to fight with it and this encounter with truth only
increase their dirtiness and strengthens the spirit of rebellion and
insurgence within them.

For example, the Holy Quran can be compared with that helps the seeing
person s walk on the straight path. But the blind do not get any benefit
from it and remain only in the deviation of denial and hypocrisy. It
means the main condition for getting guidance is readiness and
worthiness. The verses of the Holy Quran are like those life-giving
drops of rain that enliven a pure land. But it does not benefit a salty
land. Likewise in order to benefit from Quran it is necessary to first
create readiness to accept it and, as a saying goes, besides the deed of
the doer his ability is also required.

To summarise: For getting the benefit of any gift of life and creation,
it is necessary to have readiness and a favourable background within
man.

**Islam Has Removed All Fanciful Prejudices**

One of the most manifest features of Islam is that it has eliminated
all imaginary privileges and distinctions like those of race and
ancestry and lineage, wealth, position, colour of skin and country. The
Holy Quran says: O you men! surely We have created you of a male and a
female, and made you tribes and families that you may know each other;
surely the most honourable of you with Allah is the one among you most
careful of his duty … It is reported from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.): O
people! Beware that verily your Lord is one, be cautious that your
father is one, remember that there is no superiority or preference of an
Arab over a non-Arab and/or of a non-Arab over an Arab, or of
black-skinned over a red-skinned or of a red-skinned over a
black-skinned but on the basis of Taqwa. Truly the most valued among you
in the sight of Allah is the one who is the most fearful of Him. Have I
conveyed my message to you? The people said: Yes, messenger of Allah!
Then he said: So those who are present here should convey it to those
who are not here.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.), with a view to put this principle into
practice, married his cousin sister daughter of Zubair bin Abdul
Muttalib with Miqdaad bin Aswad who was black skinned, so that pride and
prejudice based on race and lineage and beauty may go away from the
Islamic society. Somebody asked Isa (a.s.): who is superior? He took up
two handfuls of earth and asked: which one is superior? Then said: you
have been created from earth and most precious honourable among you is
the one who is most God-fearing.

In Islam, distinction is based only on spiritual heights or status like
knowledge, Faith and fear of God. The Holy Quran says: …Allah will exalt
those of you who believe, and those who are given knowledge, in high
degrees; and Allah is Aware of what you do. And also says: …Say: Are
those who know and those who do not know alike? Only the men of
understanding are mindful.

About the distinction based on Taqwa it says: Shall We treat those who
believe and do good like the mischief-makers in the earth? Or shall We
make those who guard against evil like the wicked?

So also the Holy Quran says: The holders back from among the believers,
not having any injury, and those who strive hard in Allah's way with
their property and their persons are not equal; Allah has made the
strivers with their property and their persons to excel the holders back
a high degree, and to each class Allah has promised good; and Allah
shall grant to the strivers above the holders back a mighty reward. In
summary it can be said that is Islam, all external distinctions have
been cancelled. Only the specialities in the matter of knowledge, Piety,
and jihad are valuable.

**Signs of Piety**

Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) said: There are some signs of the pious which
make him or her distinct.

1. Truthfulness in talk.
2. Trustworthiness in every affair.
3. Fulfilment of promise.
4. No show of pride.
5. No miserliness.
6. Maintenance of bonds of relationships.
7. Kindness toward the weak.
8. Less mixing with women.
9. Promotion and propagation of good deeds and virtues.
10. Good behaviour and nice attitude.
11. Awareness of issues making people closer to God.
12. And finally said: How lucky is this lot and what a nice place they
are to get!

**Ranks of Piety**

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) is reported to have said that Taqwa has three
degrees: 1 Piety for the sake of God in the matters desired by Him and
it is most special Taqwa, 2 Piety in the matters which are doubtful and
it is Special taqwa and 3 Piety due to fear of the Hell and its
chastisement and it is giving up of or restraining oneself from the
prohibited Haraam and this is Taqwa-e-Aam ordinary taqwa.

The late Naraqi, in his book, has written: Some scholars have divided
Wara in four categories: 1 Piety and abstinence called Udool which means
avoiding everything which makes man disobedient to God, 2 Wara and Taqwa
of the pious and it means refraining even from the doubtful things, 3
the carefulness which prevents man from a thing which is likely to make
one indulge in the prohibited Haraam though that thing, in itself is
neither prohibited nor doubtful and 4 the wara of the Truthfuls and it
is keeping away from everything which is not related to a Divine matter
even if it is lawful or permitted.

We conclude this discussion with some words of the leader of the pious,
Ali (a.s.) and pray to Allah to make us his true followers:

Ali (a.s.), in his letter to Usman bin Haneef Ansari, says: Beware!
Every follower has a leader who should be followed and his light must be
taken benefit of. Know that your leader has left this world only in two
old clothes and who had taken only two pieces of breads for food but you
do not have the ability to do like that. Yet assist me through piety,
effort, cleanliness and walking on the true path. By God, I have not
hoarded gold and silver from your world and have not heaped treasures of
wealth and money and even for this clothing, I have not provided an
alternate pair. I have not owned even a little measure of land. I have
not eaten from this world more then a little and insignificant food. In
my view this worldly life is of no more value than the bitter seed which
grows on the branch of the oak tree…

As said by the Imam, we are certainly not able to live like him. Yet
our like should have the likeness of his life. If the lust and greed and
desire of the worldly beauties and gold and silver have overtaken our
entire existence, we must understand that we have deviated from the path
of that just leader, even though we consider ourselves to be his
followers. We must realise that the aim of those who shed their blood
for this Islamic Revolution was the revival of the Islamic laws and
following of the ways and programmes of the innocent Imams (a.s.). So it
is our duty and responsibility to pursue the aims of those martyrs and
it is possible to attain only when we make it our goal to follow the
ways of Imam Ali (a.s.) and his honourable son Imam Khomeini (r.a.) and
put this ideal in practice. Otherwise it is likely that tomorrow, on the
Day of Resurrection we may stand ashamed with our heads down before
Almighty Allah and His Apostles and friends and the immortal martyrs.


**Lesson: 43 : Piety and the Pious**

Piety is, originally, in the sense of disinclination and hence the
opposite of inclination. Though these two terms zuhd and raghbat have
not been used in the Holy Quran as a topic of moral grace and its
opposite, they are repeatedly found in Nahjul Balaghah and in the words
of the leaders of Islam, of course, the Holy Quran speaks of other terms
instead of zuhd while condemning attachment with the world and it
material manifestations, it does not go against what has been said, so
far as the essence is concerned, in narrations about zuhd. In order to
understand the real meaning of piety it is better to refer to the texts
of the Islamic sources.

Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) said: The entire piety has been covered by two
terms in the Holy Quran. Almighty Allah says: So that you may not be
sorrowful for what has passed and you may not be overjoyed by what is or
is to be for you. Abi Tufail says: I heard from Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.):
Zuhd means curtailing worldly ambitions and thankfulness for every
bounty and to avoid what has been prohibited by Allah.

Also it has been noted from Ali (a.s.): O people! Zuhd means shortening
of desires and gratitude for gifts and abstinence from sins then added
if you are unable to acquire all these virtues, then beware that the
prohibited thing does not overcome your wish and patience and that you
may not forget to thank Allah for His bounties because, Almighty Allah
has, removed all excuses and disposed of all pretexts through His clear
scriptures. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has said: In this world piety does not
mean to discard wealth and to deny what is permissible but it means you
should not think that whatever is your possession wealth and power is
safer than what is in with Allah.

These narrations clearly show that piety in the philosophy of Islam is
never being aloof and separated from the world, but zuhd can be
summarised in two sentences. First, if man loses something, he should
not sit in sorrow,. Rather ignoring that loss, he should make efforts
for a fruitful future. He must not waste away his energy in worrying
about the past.

Secondly, as regards what he owns, he must not become so much attached
to it that it may resemble slavery so that, in that way, you may
safeguard your liberty and freedom. In other words, it can be said that
abstinence in the world is opposed to lust for the world. The first is
desired whereas the second censured.

Many books have been written in the matter of Hubb and zuhd of the
world. For example we give below the contents of the book Tawaazun baine
duniyaa wa aakhirat Balance between This World and the Hereafter:

The first section of this book which is in praise of the world has
these titles.

1. Islam has ordered the earning of necessary requirements of the
world.
2. The world and its gifts are good and desirable.
3. The worldly gifts are from the grace of the Lord.
4. Sometimes the worldly material gifts are rewards of the virtuous.
5. The world has been created for His servants and Allah likes it.
6. The world is a mercy of God.
7. The world is a divine blessing and beneficence.
8. Sometimes deprivation from worldly gifts is by way of punishment.
9. Poverty and destitution is considered undesirable.

**Section Two: Censure of the World**

The second section of this book It has been written with the assistance
of some teachers. Those who are interested can refer to it for details,
contains the verses and the traditions condemning the world:

1. Worldly interests cause chastisement both Here and in the
Hereafter.
2. This world is a fast fading and transitory thing.
3. The world is a deceptive abode.
4. This world and the Hereafter are opposed to one another.
5. This world is a playful activity.
6. This world causes leaving of and turning against the Hereafter.
7. This world is a trifling thing and it is advisable to turn away from
it.
8. Poverty is desirable and admirable and like wise, piety and power to
the extent of sufficiency.
9. Lust and greed for worldly things is undesirable and so also is
accumulation of wealth.
10. This world is valueless compared to the Hereafter and spiritual
perfection.

Section Three: is comprised of the verses and narrations explaining
meaning of the world and piety and it also discusses the relation
between the two:

1. The lust for the world is condemned, not the world itself.
2. An indulgence in world which makes one forgetful of the truth is
undesirable and condemnable.
3. Revelry in the world is undesirable and indecent.
4. Giving preference to this world over the Hereafter is blameworthy.
5. Hoarding of wealth and being parsimonious is undesirable and
abhorrent.
6. Selling away the Hereafter in exchange of this worldly life has been
condemned and, it's vice a versa, praised.
7. Extravagance over indulgence and squandering spending of wealth
futilely and luxury extravagance and pomp are undesirable.
8. Refraining from spending money in what is blameworthy according to
the divine commandments.
9. Reliance on and attachment with the world is censored.
10. The worldly involvement, if it is for the benefit of the Hereafter,
is desirable and appreciable.

From the above narrations it becomes known that pious is one whose
heart is not entangled in the material world and who also keeps away
from the worldly adornments and luxuries.

**Attributes or virtues of a Zahid**

Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) says: They were a group of people from this
world but they did not live for it, that they lived in the world like
those who did not belong to it. They acted on what they perceived and
were ever cautious. They did not sit but with those who loved the
Hereafter life after death. They knew that the worldly people give more
importance to the death of the body but they understood that the death
of the soul of the living was more significant.

**Degrees of Piety**

Ali bin Husain (a.s.) was asked: What is piety? The Imam (a.s.) said:
Piety is of ten kinds. Its highest degrees are the lowest stages of Reza
Gods pleasure. Beware! Verily zuhd has been defined in a verse of the
Holy Quran: Do not remain in sorrow over of what has passed and do not
be overjoyed about what is to come. The late Naraqi (r.a.) writes in
Me'raj us-Saadah: Know that piety is of three categories: 1-Lower, 2-
Medium and 3- High. Verily the first and the lower kind is that man
loves and likes the world but also keeps away from it through efforts
and toiling exercises. The second stage: As a whole appreciates and
values the world but does not give preference to it over the Hereafter
and thus discards love for the world.

Third stage: Does not focus attention on the world as an aim and,
really, does not believe that it is precious. Thereafter he has divided
Zuhd in seven categories:

1. The obligatory piety: to give up what is prohibited by Allah.
2. The safe piety: to keep away from every doubtful thing.

3. Excellent piety: which also is divided into two kinds:

4. Refrains from desiring more than necessary even in the permitted but
benefits from it only to the extent of need.
5. Gives up all that is like by the human heart even if essential that
is he or she limits his worldly needs to the minimum.
6. Zuhde Maarefat (Piety with Insight): Gives up everything except
Allah and disconnects himself or herself even from his or her life.

7. Zuhde Khaaifeen (Piety of the Afraid): This is the best kind of
piety wherein one does not desire anything except nearness to and
pleasure of Allah nor does not desire anything except nearness to and
pleasure of Allah nor does he think about the chastisement in Hell so as
to seek protection there-from. He also does not long for the paradise so
as to pray for the same. Rather all and all of his or her self is for
meeting the Lord Almighty.

But from what can be said after following the above narrations is that
his world in itself is not against the Hereafter. It is the lust for
worldly things which is against piety even if less. What testifies this
is the lives of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and Imam (a.s.). The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: Wearing rough clothes and eating dry food is
not piety. Curtailing of ambitions is piety.

**The Philosophy of Piety**

Whatever explanation is given about piety also makes for us it
philosophy clear It can be said that it is disconnection and freedom
from the clutches of wealth and status material power , because, it
gives liberation to man. This liberation is such that nobody
particularly leaders cannot attain their aims without it, as what mostly
stagnates the leaders of the society in the middle of their path and
renders them unsuccessful in gaining their goal is this very spirit of
world-worship which overcomes them. If they become careless of material
wealth and status and adopt upright devotion they can sweep aside all
hindrances and can advance toward their goal.

Whenever we study the history of the lives of the priest and leaders of
Islam, especially the noble lives of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and Ali
(a.s.) we see that those who were the enemies and opponents of Islam
had, for luring and scuttling the collective thinking of Muslims, put
forward material and worldly offers in order to deviate them from the
right and straight path of Islam. Those before whom such offers were
constantly put were two groups:

1. Those who were not among the pious and God fearing and devout and
intelligent Muslims and hence were liable to slip when confronted by
such conspiracies and tricks.

2. Those who had advanced fully in understanding Islam to such an
extent that even if the sun and the moon and the stars were put in their
palms they would not show any inclination to them and/or if the
government of the entire world less justice and Truth was offered to
them they would not value them more than a pair of shoes. The perfect
example of the second kind was Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) and those who
were trained by him as they too had kicked off such offers and fought
with the offerers very toughly.

Yes, one who really owns piety is never deceived by the adorations of
fast-passing wealth and status because zuhd is always against beauty
worship and power lust and a pious leader always endeavours to make
money serve the poor in a correct manner. Similarly a pious society
never feels inferior or contempt and leads life peacefully and easily.

Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.), in his letter to Usman bin Haneef, governor of
Basrah: Next, O son of Haneef! I have come to know that a rich man in
Basrah invited you for a dinner and you too accepted it happily and went
there. There came to you different colourful food one after another in
attractive plates and vessels. I do not think you should have accepted
that invitation because the reedy and the poor could not go there and
only rich had gathered there O son of Haneef! Ponder seriously on
whatever you eat whether it is permissible Halaal or prohibited Haraam.
Then if you have any doubt about a things permissibility spit it out and
devour only that wherein there is no doubt at all.

O son of Haneef! Be cautious and remember that every follower has a
leader whom he should follow. He must learn wisdom from him. And you O
son of Haneef! Know that your leader Imam has, in his life, sufficed
only with these two worn out clothes and two pieces of bread. And if you
are unable to be like that then, at least, assist your Imam in the path
of piety and modesty and in going straight….

…Do not think that I am unable to obtain the worldly tasty things. By
Allah! If I so desire, I can provide for myself pure honey and the pulp
of wheat and silk clothes for my food and dress. But, woe unto me if I
am overpowered by lust and greed and if I indulge in passion and desire
so as to select tasty eatables. Maybe when I eat tasty and colourful
things when, in Hijaz or Yamama, there is someone who does not have even
a piece of bread and perhaps he has never gone to be with a full
belly?

Is it proper for me to fill my stomach and go to bed when, around me,
there may be hungry and weak people? Should it be as a poet has said: It
should be a sufficient calamity for you if you sleep with a full belly
and around you are empty stomachs in thin bodies!

Should it be enough for me that people call me Amirul Mo-mineen when I
am not like them in their hardships? Yes, it is obvious that, if the
people in a society are pious and honest, there will be no opposition or
it will be the least and, consequently, all will live in peace and
happily away from all kinds of injustice and oppression and encroachment
of the rights of one another. Who is Zahid ?

Zahid or pious is one who has the ability to live luxuriously for
himself but does not do so. One who has such ability and does not live
luxuriously cannot be considered pious.

Also Zahid is one who, when he gets such wealth, spends all of it in
the path of Allah for His sake and in no other way like love of power
and status and praise for himself.

Definition of piety in the words of Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.): The best
piety is to hide your piety. Some great personalities have mentioned
three distinct signs of a Zahid:

1- Does not become joyful due to whatever he gents gets from worldly
things and also does not turn sorrowful when it goes out of his hand. As
the Lord Almighty says in the Holy Quran: So that you may not grieve for
what has escaped you, nor be exultant at what He has given you.
2- His praise and his criticism Bouquets and brickbats are same for
him.
3- His heart must always be full of love of Allah and not of anything
else a as two affections do not join in one heart.

Lastly the love for worldly things must not pierce he soul of man.
Rather man must ride on the world as a ship rides water. So long as the
ship is riding on water it swims safely but drowns if water enters it.
Similarly if the worldly love creeps in the soul it drowns man in
ignorance and waywardness and drives him away from Allah. It is exactly
like that ship which continues the voyage until it remains on the
surface of water and so long as there is no hole in it. But if and when
a hole appears in it and the water gets into it drowns.


**Lesson: 44 : Relation between worship and perfection**

Among all things in this world it is only man who has the best ability
to attain perfection. His life started from non-existence and it
continues toward the endless and his process of perfection does not halt
so long as he moves on the straight path.

During this journey it is only worship, as the highest school of
thought, that trains his thoughts and enlightens him guiding him toward
the endless. It Godworship washes out all dust and dirt from his heart
and soul and removes the curtain of ignorance from his eyes. According
to his ability it inculcates high noble virtues in him and strengthens
the spirit of faith inside him making him realise his responsibilities.
Thus it is not possible for man to be needless of this noble and great
and guiding school of thought. Those who think that a time can come when
man will not need this worship have either some other meaning of
perfection in their mind which is different from ours or they have not
understood the meaning of worship.

In this connection, we summaries below what the great scholar Allamah
Tabatabai (r.a.) has written in his commentary Al Meezaan:- All that is
in this world moves toward perfection. Among this the perfection of man
takes place in the heart midst of the society and hence he is born
social. The society assures man's perfection if it has organised rules
and regulations and if people discipline their affair in the light of
those rules which must command their respect, and if people refrain from
tug of war and if their respective responsibilities and rights are well
defined and, in other words, if the human society becomes pious and
competent so that people may be able to reach their final goal. If the
society becomes corrupt people lag behind in their journey toward
perfection. These rules and regulations will be effective and impressive
if they are obtained from the divine source of the heavenly
revelation.

We should also know that the worship-related rules form a part of the
programme for individual and social perfection of man. Thus it becomes
clear that so long as the human society remains strong the divine duties
too will remain forceful and that ignoring of responsibilities results
in ignoring of rules which results in the spread of corruption in
society.

It is also worth noticing that good deeds and Godworship is the
fountainhead of graceful human virtues. When good deeds are done to a
sufficient extent it makes the spirit stronger and again that increased
ability of the soul increases good deeds and extended Godworship. This
makes it clear that the words of those are meaningless who say that the
aim of duty is to make man perfect and hence when man reaches perfection
the need of duty and responsibility too ends. This I nothing but
deception because as soon as man discards duties the society turns
towards anarchy and corruption. How then in such a society, can a
perfect man live and if he despite having graceful virtues, gives up
worship it becomes contradictory! Just think.

Verses

1- And your Lord has commanded that you shall not serve any but Him…
2- And I have not created the jinn and the men except that they should
serve Me.
3- And you Lord says: Call upon Me, I will answer you; surely those who
are too proud for My service shall soon enter Hell abased.
4- And whoever disdains His service and is proud, He will gather them
all together to Himself.
5- Say: I am only commanded that I should serve Allah and not associate
anything with Him.

Narrations

1- It is recorded from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that Allah Almighty said: O My
righteous slaves! Enjoy the bounty of My worship in this world. You will
get its reward in the Hereafter.
2- Hazrat Sadiq (a.s.) quotes the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.): The best of
men is he who admires worship, then embraces it and then loves it from
the depths of his heart and enacts it through his limbs and reserves
himself for it God-worship. Such a person cares not whether his life is
hard or easy.
3- Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: Worshippers are of three categories 1- Those
who worship Allah due to His fear and this is the worship of slaves, 2-
Those who worship to get reward from Him and this is the service of the
servants and 3- Those who worship Allah because of their heartfelt love
of Him and this is the service of the free and this last is the worship
of the best and it is the most precious worship.

4- It is recorded from Imam Ali (a.s.): My Lord! I did not worship you
for fear of Hell nor for a desire of Paradise. Rather I found you worthy
of worship So I worshipped you. This subject is also there is the
Dua-e-Kumail: So, pardon me O Worthy of Worship and O My Lord and My
Master Suppose I bear your chastisement, but how will I be able to bear
my distance from you?

5- The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said: Worship Allah in such a manner
as you see Him and if you do not see Him, He sees you. Below this
hadith, Imam Khomeini (r.a.) writes: This hadith points to engrossment
of heart and mind in God twice, one in the Lord Almighty's inherent
lustre or Him Holy Names and secondly in His lustrous actions. Once the
worshipper sees himself in the presence of the Lord Almighty and, of
course, at that time, he takes full care of the discipline and
orderliness in this respect about addressing the Lord, quite
naturally.


