Extremely Extraordinary Points About Parents
============================================

A. After commanding: worship is exclusively for the Almighty Allah and
hence none else should be worshipped immediately thereafter through the
refers to parents and says: behave nicely with father and mother. This
shows the importance of this issue.

B. The problem of their old age has been specifically mentioned, as it
is possible that they may not be able even to move without the help of
others and fulfil their needs themselves. In such event, definitely it
is compulsory to give extra attention to them.

C. The divine commandment asserts that you have no right to say even
ugh to your parents. It means you should never show disgust in their
presence.

D. Thereafter the Holy Quran orders: talk respectfully with them.

E. God also orders to remain lowly and meek before them. That lowliness
must express love and affection.

F. Finally Allah says: when you turn your face to Allah in worship or
prayer or supplication do not forget your parents be they alive or dead
and seek Allah's Mercy for them.

And We have enjoined man in respect of his parents - his mother bears
him with fainting upon fainting and his weaning takes two years -saying:
Be grateful to Me and to both your parents; to Me is the eventual
coming. And if they contend with you that you should associate with Me
what you have no knowledge of, do not obey them, and keep company with
them in this world kindly..

**Thought provoking point**

The fact that the mention of being thankful to parents has been made
along with that to the Lord for His bounties shows how great and vast
are the rights of parents.

Traditions

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: One who looks angrily toward his parents makes
God so angry that God does not accept his prayers.. and this is so even
if the two parents might have done in justice to himâ€¦

Imam Baqir (a.s.) has quoted the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) saying:
Refrain from harassing parents because the fragrance of paradise which
can be smelled from a distance of a thousand year journey does not reach
a person who has displeased his parents, who has committed adultery in
old age, and the one who drags his clothes on ground as a sign of ego as
greatness belongs to only one God.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: Had there been anything lighter by uttering ugh
to parents God might have prohibited even its utterance as we have
explained it is the Safest way of expressing disgust and it is the least
indication of disrespect and opposition the ones parents. One of the
ugly things making man aaq displeased by parents is to look harshly or
angrily toward them.

It is recorded from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that he said: To look
with love and affection at parents is an act of Ibaadat.

Question: Do the above mentioned verses and traditions also apply when
what the parents what is against Shariat?

Answer: The reply is in the negative. First of all we should know that
no order has any value against the command of God. Amirul Mo-mineen
(a.s.) has said: No order should be obeyed which makes one disobey
God.

Secondly, verse No: 15 of Surah Luqman says: And if they contend with
you that you should associate with Me what you have no knowledge of, do
not obey them, and keep company with them in this world kindly.

Thirdly, the Holy Quran also commands: O you who believe! do not take
your fathers and your brothers for guardians if they love unbelief more
than belief; and whoever of you takes them for a guardian, these it is
that are the unjust. Say: If your fathers and your sons and your
brethren and your mates and your kinsfolk and property which you have
acquired, and the slackness of trade which you fear and dwellings which
you like, are dearer to you than Allah and His Apostle and striving in
His way, then wait till Allah brings about His command: and Allah does
not guide the transgressing people.

Similarly when there is a tussle between the pleasure of God and other
things, everything should be sacrificed for God. Question: Is the status
of father higher or that of mother?

Answer: traditions show that the status of mother is higher. Mali bin
Khanees says: Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has said: a man asked the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.). It is recorded from Imam Sadiq 9(a.s.)0 that a man
approached the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and said: Behaarul Anwaar. In
these two traditions the command to do good to the mother has been given
thrice and hence it is the proof that the respect for mother is higher.
Question: Is the respect demanded only during the life time of parents
or it is desired even after their demise? Answer: It includes the time
after their death also. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: What prevents you from
behaving nicely to parents during their lifetime or after their death?

It is also recorded from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.): Verily a man
keeps serving his parents continuously during their entire lifetime,
then they die and he does not repay their debts and doesn't and pray for
their forgiveness then in these circumstance he is noted as Aaq disliked
by parents. And sometimes it also happens that the son does not do good
to be parents during their life span but when they expire he pays up
their debt and prays to God for their forgiveness, God considers him as
a pious person .

Conclusively we must mention that we must know that behaving nicely or
adversely with parents has a takweeni (universal effect) which applies
to man during this worlds life. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has said: Behave
nicely with your parents so that your children may also be good to you.
Quranic verses and traditions explicitly to the truth of our stand. Some
of them have also been mentioned in our another book Maad.


**Lesson: 57 : Duties of parents toward children**

Children are the trust from Allah given to parents so that they may be
nicely trained and made well versed in Islamic matters. In this
connection the Holy Quran says: O you who believe! save yourselves and
your families from a fire whose fuel is men and stones. Fathers and
mothers have the obligation of training their children on right lines.
The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said: Honour your offspring and nourish
them with good manners and desirable virtues.

Right training is one of the factors for making the youth wholesome and
intelligent. Those who have been nourished correctly in their childhood
and who have benefited from essential guidance know the art of living
nicely. They are able to derive benefits from their early training
during their middle and old age. They can present themselves in a
desirable and deserving way before their families and in their
societies, living comfortably and happily.

On the contrary, those who were not nourished and trained nicely in
their childhood and who cultivated undesirable habits and manners are
unable to find the correct way of living during their youth and old age.
They cannot live in a fitting way in society due to their immorality.
Mostly they fail in their social life because, unknowingly they put into
practice the bad habits of their childhood thus putting both themselves
and the society to trouble and disrespect.

We must know that a child and youth is ever ready to imbibe every kind
of teaching and training. If their fathers and mothers and guardians so
desire they can turn a child into a model human being and they entrust
it to the society.

Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) has, in his letter to Hasan al-Mujtaba (a.s.)
said: The heart of a growing child I like a land without any grass or
vegetation. It accepts whatever seed is thrown in it and then nourishes
it is itself. Then added: My dear son! Before your heart could get hard
in your youth in the beginning of your youth I had undertaken your
training and disciplining.

Traditions

1. Someone asked the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.): What is the right of this
son of mine upon me? The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) replied: Select a good
name for him, discipline him and give a nice place to him to live.

2. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: Father has three duties concerning
his son: selection of a good name for him, to teach him the Holy Quran
and when he grows up to arrange his marriage.

3. It is reported that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said: The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) saw a man with his two sons of young age. That man
kissed one of them but not the another one. the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
criticised this unfair treatment and said: Why did you not treat your
two children in a same manner?

4. Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) is recorded to have said: Teach your
children our knowledge which Allah has made beneficial for them so that
deviated groups may not misguide them.

5. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: Make your child free for seven years for
playing. Then give him knowledge teach him for the next seven years also
and also keep him with you. If he improves so good otherwise there is
not good in it.

6. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said: Teach horse riding and also
shooting to your children.

7. It is reported from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.): One the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) saw some children and said: Woe unto the children of
the last age at the hands of their own fathers. The companions asked: O
Prophet of God! At the hands of their polytheist fathers? The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) replied: No, but at the hands of their believing
fathers who do not give them essential religious knowledge. If they
children learn they fathers prevent them from so doing as they are
pleased with their little material worldly benefits. I am at a distance
from them and they are at a distance from me.

8. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said: It is for the father and
mother not to curse and disinherit their children but to observe their
rights. Similarly it is the duty of the children not to be cursed and
get disinherited by their parents but to observe their rights that is,
they also will have to answer if they do not do their duty.

At the end we should know that four things are effective in the destiny
of man: Viraasat (heritage), Talqueen (suggestion), Taqleed (following)
and Taaseer-e-Muheet (effect of environment).

It is the duty of the parents to bear in mind the aforesaid four things
concerning their children so that they may not be corrupted under the
influence of undesirable suggestions, wring following and corrupt
atmosphere. It is our duty to clean the environment if it has corrupted.
We should not say that we cannot train our children.

**Warning to parents**

In case, despite full efforts to train them the children do not follow,
they should be left alone and should not be helped in any way. Rather
the father-son relation should be disconnected. Allah says to Prophet
Nuh (a.s.): O Nuh! surely he is not of your family; surely he is the
doer of other than good deeds, therefore ask not of Me that of which you
have no knowledge; surely I admonish you lest you may be of the
ignorant.

It is reported from Imam Moosa Reza (a.s.) that: once he asked his
friends: how do the people explain the verse: Surely he is the doer of
other than god deeds? One from the audience replied: Some believe that
it means the son of Nuh, Kinaan was not his real son. The Imam said: No,
it is not so. He was Nuhs real son. But when he sinned and deviated from
the correct Path of Allah, God negated his son-father relationship. It
is just as if someone among us does not obey Allah we say he is not from
us.

Material worldly relationships connections based on family, friendship
etc. are always, in the Divine Heavenly religions, overshadowed by
spiritual relationship. In these schools heavenly religions, closeness
of blood relations has no meaning compared to the spiritual relation.
Salman Farsi from a distant country Iran was neither from the family
blood of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and was not either from the tribe
of Quraysh nor even he belonged to Mecca. Originally he was not even an
Arab. Yet as per a tradition: Salman is from our family, Salman is
regarded as a member of the Holy Prophets (s.a.w.s.) Holy family. But
the closest blood related son of the Prophet like Nuh (a.s.), as a
result of tearing himself from his fathers line of school religion is
being discarded so thoroughly that he faced the verse: Surely he is not
of your family.

Also the Surah Lahab was revealed concerning the uncle of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.). The Imams (a.s.) have given a similar warning to
their followers. Imam Baqir (a.s.) addressed Jabir: O Jabir! Remember
that you will not be our friend unless when the whole city gathers
around you to tell you that you are a bad man yet you do not feel
unhappy and, similarly, if the whole population of the city tells you
that you are a good man and yet it does not make you happy, rather you
look only at the Book of Allah and adopt the criteria of good and bad
from it and then see to which group you belong.

Also Imam Baqir (a.s.) addressed his friends thus: O Shias of the
family of the Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) ! Remember that there is no
family relation between us and God and that we have no argument before
Allah. Nearness to Allah must be obtained by nothing but by obeying the
Divine commandments. Our friendship will benefit only those who obey
Allah. Our friendship will not benefit the one who disobeys Allah.

These traditions negate the thinking of those who rest contented merely
on name and have no concern for action according to religion. These
narrations prove that in the school of thought of the Holy Imams Faith
is fundamental is and deeds according to it. All things must be weighted
in this balance.


**Lesson: 58 : Family relationship Blood relations**

In the Islamic plan of actions emphatic orders have been given
regarding family relations or kith and kin. We point to a part of the
same here:

1. And when We made a covenant with the children of Israel: You shall
not serve any but Allah and you shall do good to your parents, and to
the near of kin. 2. And those wh

o join that which Allah has bidden to be joined and have awe of their
Lord and fear the evil reckoning.

3. And those who break the covenant of Allah after its confirmation and
cut asunder that which Allah has ordered to be joined and make mischief
in the land; as for those, upon them shall be curse and they shall have
the evil issue of the abode.

Traditions

1- Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) is reported to have said: Join even with
Salaam well-wishing words. Lord Almighty says: and be careful of your
duty to Allah, by whom you demand one of another your rights, and to the
ties of relationship; surely Allah ever watches over you.

2- Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) has also said: Join relations with your
kinsfolk even if they cut off relations with you.

3- Imam Baqir (a.s.) has quoted the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) words:
Angel Jibraeel has informed me that the fragrance of paradise can be
smelled from a distance of a thousand year journey. But it cannot be
smelled by the one whom his parents have cursed and disinherited and the
one who cuts of relations with relatives and one who commits adultery in
old age.

4- Hazrat Reza (a.s.) quotes from his father: Joining of relations with
relatives and behaving nicely with neighbours makes one rich.

5- Ishaaq bin Ammaar says: I heard from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that
Maintaining good relations with kin and behaving nicely with others
makes accounting in the Hereafter easy and prevents the bad results of
sin. so join the relations and behave nicely with your brothers even it
is by saying Salaam in a good way and by responding to a salaam
greeting.

6- Imam Sadiq is reported to have said: Maintaining good relations
makes the accounting on the Day of Judgement easy makes life span longer
and protects one from a bad death and a charity given at night cools
down eases the Divine anger.

In conclusion we should know that man is not an existence which is
isolated and cut off from the rest of the world but his entire being is
made up of a number of attachments and connections and concerns. On the
one hand he is connected with the Creator of the universe. It is such
that if he cuts off that attachment he gets destroyed like an electric
bulb which goes off if the current connecting it with the source of
power is cut. So, just as, from the viewpoint of creation,

he is joined with this great source, it is also necessary for him from
the viewpoint of obedience and religious submission, to maintain and
continue this relation to the best of his ability. From another
direction, he has a connecting relation to the best of his ability. From
another direction, he has a connecting relation with the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) and the Imam as his leader and guide, which, if cut off,
makes man wander in wrong ways.

From yet another direction, he is also related with the entire human
society and especially with those who have more rights on him like his
mother and father and relatives and friends and teachers and tutors.
From yet another side he has relative with his own self as he is duty
bound to preserve and advance himself toward perfection.

Maintaining and preserving all of these relations is, in fact, what is
called in the Holy Quran yasiloo na maa a ma rallaahu bihi an yoosal and
cutting off of any of these relations is in the Divine Text the cutting
of Maa a ma rallaahu an yoosal because the Lord Almighty has commanded
the maintenance of all these connections.

There is, it seems, nothing more now here to explain this intention.


**Lesson: 59 : Behaviour with neighbours and their rights**

Islam has made much recommendation in this matter

1- We find, in the will of Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) for his sons Hasan
and Husain (a.s.) when the accursed Ibne Muljim and attacked the Amir:
For Gods sake, for Gods sake, behave nicely with your neighbours because
it is one of the recommendations of your Prophet (s.a.w.s.). He had made
so much admonition regarding good behaviour with neighbours that we
imagined that very soon they neighbours will be made entitled to
inheritance.

2- Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has said: You have to behave nicely with your
neighbours because Allah has commanded it.

3- Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: Good behaviour with neighbours increases
prosperity.

4- Imam Baqir (a.s.) is reported to have said that he read in the book
of Ali (a.s.) that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) had in his letter to
Muhajirs and Ansaars written: A neighbour is like a man himself who is
neither to be harmed nor sinned and moreover giving respect to the
neighbour is like giving respect to one mother.

5- Abi Rabi quoted the Imam Sadiq (a.s.): Once when his house was full
of visitors he said: Remember that, in fact, one who is not a good
neighbour is not from us.

6- If one grabs wrongly a little measure of his neighbours land, will
be garlanded by Allah with the weight of seven layers of earth until he
meets the Almighty unless he repents and withdraws his misdeed.

7- And also said: The one usurps the right of his neighbour will no be
allowed the fragrance of paradise and his place will be hell which is a
bad abode indeed.

8- And also said: The one usurps the right of his neighbour is not from
us. Jibraeel (a.s.) continuously recommended about the rights of the
neighbour until I imagined that he will also inherit the dead.

9- The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: There are three categories of the
neighbours: the first group has three rights: the right of Islam, the
right of neighbourhood and the right of kindness. The second group has
two rights: The right of Islam and the right of neighbourhood. The third
group has one right: and it is the right by way of being neighbour. They
are all Kafirs who live side by side with the Muslims!

10- Abu Baseer says: I heard from Imam Sadiq (a.s.): If one refrains
from harassing his neighbour, God ignores his faults on the Day of
Judgement.

11- The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: If one harasses his neighbour due
to greed of his house, God hands over the house of such harasser to his
neighbour.

12- Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: He is far away from the Mercy of Allah, he
is far away from the Mercy of Allah who gives harassment to hid
neighbour. The problem of neighbourhood is an important problem about
which Islam has given much recommendation. Yet, in spite of all this, we
Muslims sometimes do not pay attention to it and harass one-another by
loud talks, troublesome horns, climbing terraces, throwing dirty water
etc in front of the neighbours' housesâ€¦

It is also possible that our neighbour may be in need of some
necessities of life. In such circumstances too we should not lag behind
but must try our best to live sympathetically side-by-side. And this
right is applicable not only to a Muslim neighbour but it applies to
non-Muslim neighbours also.

Hence Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says: Even if your are sitting by the side of a
Jew make a nice kind of sitting. And perhaps it can be said: The wording
is common which makes no difference between big and small. Environment.
Wherever and whenever it is called neighbour it applies in these
traditions. It is difficult to believe that it is obligatory.


**Lesson: 60 : Rights of family members and Islamic Behaviour in
marital life**

Wife and husband are the two big pillars of the family. Both have
rights with respect to one another, which will have to account for if
not maintained even though it can be said that: the responsibility of
the husband is more because his creation is distinct and he is stronger
in capacity. The Lord Almighty has also held the husband as the guardian
and the ward of the family. He says: Men are the maintainers of women
because Allah has made some of them to excel others and because they
spend out of their propertyâ€¦

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said: Man is the guardian of the family
and every guardian is responsible in the matter of those who are in his
guardianship.

The man who is the manager of the family must remember that a woman is
also a human being like a man and she also has her own wishes,
ambitions, right of life and freedom. He must understand that taking a
wife does not mean taking a slave girl. Rather it means selection of a
life partner, friend and sympathiser. It is essential to pay attention
to her internal desires and ambitions too. It is not that man becomes an
absolute owner of the woman and the wife also has rights on their
husbands.

Almighty Allah has said in the Holy Quran: and they have rights similar
to those against them in a just manner. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
said: The angel Jibraeel made so many recommendations regarding the wife
that I thought that it is not permissible to divorce her except in case
of open shamelessness.

It is also recorded from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that: The best of
you is the one who is the best for his family and I am the best among
you for my family.

It is recorded from Imam Baqir (a.s.) that once Ali and Fatima (a.s.)
went to be Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) to get guidance. He says: Then he
Prophet asked Fatima (a.s.) to perform the works within the house and he
asked Ali (a.s.) to do outdoor works. Fatima (a.s.) said: Then I became
so happy that none except Allah knows it.

Ishaaq bin Ammar says: I asked Imam Sadiq (a.s.): What is the right of
a wife on her husband which if carried out the man can be a good man?
The Imam (a.s.) replied: He should feed her fully, clothe here nicely
and if she makes any mistake he must forgive her. The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) said: The most perfect man from the viewpoint of Faith is the
one whose morals are the best. The best among you is the one who behaves
nicely with his family.

It is also recorded from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.): The more the
Faith of a man the more he loves his wife nicely. Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
said: One of the morals of a Prophet is that he loves his wife nicely.
Luqman the wise is reported to have said: A wise man must behave like a
child mild child in his house and he should spare his manly tough
behaviour for outdoor jobs.

When Saad bin Muaaz, who was one of the great companions of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and to whom the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) used to give
much respect, died Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.), like all other mourners,
joined his funeral barefoot. He placed the body of Saad in grave with
his own hands and covered his face. At that time the late Saad's mother
who was observing all these last rites wherein the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) had given so much honour to her dead son, exclaimed: O Saad!
Congratulations for the paradise.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: O mother of Saad! Do not voice such a
claim, because, Saad will experience the clutch of the grave. Thereafter
companions inquired about the clutch of grave from Saad. The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) replied: It was because Saad used to behave badly
with his relatives.

In conclusion, if someone lives the life correctly and pays attention
to the rights of others and of his relatives and gives respect to his
family members, he will live a good and safe life and it will rightly be
said that the family environment is indeed a sweet and restful place.
But if Divine limits have been crossed and human rights have been
trampled under feet, that is a life which is troublesome, tiring and
sorrowful and it can be called a hell on earth.

**Grave responsibility of women**

Ladies must understand that taking good care of husband is not an easy
job, which every woman can fulfil nicely. Rather it requires special
knowledge of working, taste and discipline. A woman who desires to take
care of husband must earn his pleasure. She should have good morals and
nice attitude. She should try to make him a kind, lovable and respectful
husband so that he may prove to be the best guardian for his family, the
best father for his children and a kind tutor. Almighty Allah has given
extraordinary power to a woman. The welfare and happiness of the family
is in her hands.

The woman can make her house a heaven on earth. She can also turn it
into a hellfire. Similarly she can help her husband reach the heights of
progress. She can also make his future dark.

The issue of taking care of husband is so precious and important that
it has been considered a Jihad Holy war of the woman. Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
said: The jihad of a woman is taking nice care of her husband.

It is also recorded from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that: The best
women among you are those who have love and affection. We should also
remember that it is not enough to have love and affection only in the
heart. It should be visible so that family life remains warm. The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: When anyone of you loves your brother or
associate or friends make it know to him. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has said:
Very far from the mercy of God is a woman who troubles her husband and
makes him sorrowful. Every lady who respects her husband and does not
give trouble to him and obeys him is fortunate and successful.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) also said: Every woman who goes to bed when her
husband is displeased with her that is she has not respected his right,
her prayer remains unaccepted until she pleases him.

In the end, both the wife and the husband should know that if there
behaviour is not correct and Islamic, usually, their children become
corrupt and mischievous. In a way, those fellows who are doing bad deeds
in society are those who were brought up in an atmosphere of a
quarrelsome family life. How may are the boys and girls who became
helpless and whose family life is very disturbed and who have turned
their world into a hellâ€¦ At the end of this discussion let all of us try
our best to observe our Islamic and human rights.


**Lesson: 61 : Rights and collusion between government and the
people**

In this regard Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) has said: O people! I have
rights over you and you also have rights over me. Verily your right over
me is that I must not lag behind in wishing well for you and to spend
your Baitul Maal public treasury for you and to educate you so that you
may be freed from ignorance and unawareness and to train you to make you
learned.

And surely my right over you is that you must remain loyal to your
allegiance Bait to me and not ignore well-wishing for me both openly and
secretly, to respond to my call whenever I call you and to obey me when
I order you. It is written in Ali's (a.s.) letter to the chiefs of
staff:


**Lesson: 62 : Islamic brotherhood: The basis and foundation of human
unity**

Most of the sociologists say: man is a social existence and in the
structure of his existence and creation he has strong inclinations
toward a collective life. Now let us see under the shade of which
elements such collectiveness becomes a reality.

Today a group of sociologists are of the opinion that the factors
called race, common history, common land or soil and blood are the
elements that make up nationhood or a unity of communities. It is the
gathering that is made up of the above-mentioned elements which in the
science of rights, is called a nation.

But Islam has not recognised anyone of the above-mentioned factors the
basis of human unity. Rather it has decided that unity of thought and
belief is the foundation of nationhood. Islam has said that the
individuals who have unity of thought and opinion in the matter of
belief and thinking are brothers of one another. The Holy Quran says:
The believers are but brethren, therefore make peace between your
brethren and be careful of your duty to Allah that mercy may be had on
you.

After the relation of father and son, the nearest relation and
affiliation between two human beings living at a time is the relation of
brotherhood. Islam has made this unbreakable tie a must for the Islamic
society and, for the first time in human history, brought into existence
such a great human society wherein a milliard human beings are brothers
of one another in Faith.

Traditions

1- Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: A believing Mo-min is the brother of another
Mo-min, they are like limbs of the same body, when one part is pained
another part also feels that pain and the spirit of both of them is from
the Spirit of God and, in fact, the connection between the spirit of a
believer and God is stronger than the connection of a ray with the
sun.

2- The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: Faithful people are, from the
viewpoint of love and affection, like a single body. When one organ of
the body gets a pain all other organs of the body express their pain
through signs like fear, sleeplessness and grief, and rush to the help
of the part in trouble.

3- Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says: The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) gave a sermon in
Mina wherein he asserted: The value of the blood of Muslims is equal for
all. The shelter given to anyone even by the smallest of them has to be
respected by all of them and in front of aliens they are united and the
possessors of one power.

4- And it is also recorded from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.): The
Faithful persons, in relation with one-another, are like one building
the parts of which strengthen and protect one-another.

5- It is also on record: The Faithful are like one soul.

One of the precious signs of the Islamic brotherhood is unity and
coherence. In this connection Islam has insisted very much through a
number Quranic verses;

And hold fast by the covenant of Allah all together and be not
disunited, and remember the favour of Allah on you when you were
enemies, then He united your hearts so by His favour you became
brethrenâ€¦

About the circumstances leading to the revelation of this Ayat, the
commentators write: One day two persons belonging to the tribes of Aus
and Khazraj respectively named Thalaba bin Ganam and As ad bin Azraarah
clashed with one another and both of them began to announce the great
deeds which their tribes had done after embracing Islam. Thalaba said:
Khuzaimah bin Thabit, the Zus shaadatain having two witnesses in his
favour and Hanzalah (the one who was bathed by angels) who are an honour
for Islam were from us.

Likewise Aasim bin Thabit and Sa ad bin Muaaz also belonged to our
tribe. In reply Asad bin Zurarah who belonged to the Khazraj tribe said:
Four persons from our Qabeelah have served Islam in a great way through
the teaching of Quran: Ubayy bin Ka'b, Muaaz bin Jabal, Zaid bin Thabit
and Abu Zaid. Moreover, Saad bin Ubadah, the chief arbitrator of Madinah
is from us. Matters worsened by and by, both the tribes got alerted and
taking arms in hands stood against one another. It was feared that the
fire of war would once again spread and their land painted with blood.
The news reached the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) who at once came to the
venue and ended this dangerous trouble in his extraordinary way of
advice. He made peace and clear heartedness between them. The above
verses were revealed at that time and, in the form of a common
commandment, gave effective invitation to unity to all the Muslims.

A. And know that this is My path, the right one therefore follow it,
and follow not other ways, for they will lead you away from His way;
this He has enjoined you with that you may guard against evil.

B. And united their hearts; had you spent all that is in the earth, you
could not have united their hearts, but Allah united them; surely He is
Mighty, Wise.

Explanation

The above verse refers to the confrontation between Aus and Khazraj
tribes who had fought for ten years continuously.

Traditions

1. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said: The group that gathered round
an evil individual and the person who desires to create disunity should
be killed.

2. Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) said in a sermon: And always be with the
biggest group the majority supporting the truth as the Hand of God is on
the big group. Refrain from disunity because a single man is a partner
of the devil just as a lonely sheep is the morsel of the wolf. Beware:
anyone who calls you to this slogan meaning the slogan of separatist
Kharijis. Kill him even if he wear my turban.

3. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: The one who gets separated from the group of
Muslims even an inch has cut off the relation of Islam from his self.

4. It is similarly recorded: One who gets away from the group of
Muslims and breaks off his covenant with the Imam leader will meet his
Lord on the Day of Judgement in a condition wherein he will have no
justification to produce.

Now that you have seen some of the verses and traditions about the
benefit of unity and the harms of disunity we should know that this our
great Islamic Revolution which we achieved with the help of the Lord of
the worlds was one of the most important results of the unity formed
under the great leadership of Imam Khomeini, the Naib of the Imam Mahdi
(a.s.). Now that the great revolution has succeeded by the Grace of God
its sustenance and continuance is also dependent on unity.

**Question: What is the meaning of unity?**

Answer: Unity does not mean that everyone gives up his belief or the
Madrassa performs the job of a university or the university attends only
to the job of the Hauza-e-Ilmiyah. Rather the meaning of unity is that
despite difference of belief, there is no tug of war or quarrel. The
Holy Quran says: And obey Allah and His Apostle and do not quarrel for
then you will be weak in hearts and your power will depart, and be
patient; surely Allah is with the patient.

In the matter of unity between Sunnis and Shias the late Ayatollah
Burujardi and the late Sheikh Shaltoot, the chancellor of Al-Azhar
university of Egypt had played a big role just as the martyr Ayatollah
Mutahhari and the martyr Dr. Shariati has played a big role in the unity
of Madrassa and university.

It is essential for Muslims to guard against the evil designs of big
powers especially of the big Shaitan and his servants so that they may
be able to defeat their conspiracies and render the slogan of the
dishonest Englishmen Divide and rule fruitless. Another example of the
result of Islamic unity One of the biggest manifestations of the
radiance of this brotherhood is that a brother never encroaches upon the
life and property and honour of his brother.

This point is reflected in one of the most precious assertions made by
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) in the big audience in Mina. Addressing his
companions he said: Today is the day which is very precious in the sight
of Allah and this land the land of Mina is also likewise very valuable
and so also this month Zilhajj through which we are passing now. Yes, O
people! The life and property and honour of you is respectable for you
one another just as this day and land and month are respectable.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) repeated this phrase for three times then,
facing the sky he said: O Allah! Be witness that I have completed the
conveyance of message fully for the fortification of brotherhood.

Eventually we must remember that whenever the Muslims feel that in the
Islamic society or between two Muslim individuals there is any dispute
they must rise up for its solution on the basis of justice. Otherwise a
peace that is made by encroaching the rights of either of the parties is
not only temporary but it also results in a feeling of dislike for
Islam.


**Lesson: 63 : Permanent peace**

A peace or treaty based on justice and fair play is one of the moral
deeds and/or one of the social orders of Islam. But if an agreement
based on reality, a treaty wherein the interests of the two quarrelling
parties are ensured in a correct manner, an agreement which is overseen
by a group of faithful and God-fearing people is disturbed by one of the
parties by overstepping the limits of justice, then it becomes incumbent
for the Islamic society to oppose and condemn and fight such erring
party until it submits to the commandment of Allah.

In this regard the Holy Quran says: And if two parties of the believers
quarrel, make peace between them; but if one of them acts wrongfully
towards the other, fight that which acts wrongfully until it returns to
Allah's command; then if it returns, make peace between them with
justice and act equitably; surely Allah loves those who act equitably.

And it is recorded from Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) that the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) had repeatedly asserted: A nation which does not take back
the usurped rights of the weak frankly and clearly from the oppressors
will never see success.

Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) thus explains the reason of accepting the
caliphate after a deprivation for twenty-five years: Beware! By God! Who
tore the seed and Who created man, know that had the people not gathered
around me so numerously and had they not got up in my favour and had the
argument not been completed and had not God obtained a covenant and
responsibility from the wise and the knowledgeable in every society that
they should not remain meek spectators in from of the overeating of the
oppressors and the hunger of the oppressed, I would have given up the
reign of caliphate and would have overlooked it and I would have
saturated them with the glass of its beginning and then you would have
understood fully that your world with all its decoration has, in my
eyes, less value than the water coming out of the nose of a sheep.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says: The one who continues to oppress and the one
who assists him and/or who is pleased with his ways stand all in one
line.

**Exploring peace**

Peace and tranquillity is described as one of the most precious Islamic
values which, despite the above-mentioned conditions, is considered a
great Islamic duty. It makes no difference whether the parties are
Muslim or are two big states. In any case it is the duty of every Muslim
individual to do his best of the establishment of peace and
tranquillity.

Here it must be remembered that the peace proclaimed by the dishonest
Saddam is no peace as he intends to renew his strength under pretext of
peace and to restart invading our defenceless cities and to turn them
into ruins. Otherwise the government of the Islamic state of Iran is
ver-ready to made peace with justice and honour on the conditions
mentioned above.

With regard to establishing peace between two warring parties Amirul
Mo-mineen Ali (a.s.) says: From the will of Ali (a.s.) to his sons Hasan
and Husain (a.s.) after being hit fatally by the cursed Ibne Muljim: I
advise you and all my sons in my family and to all those who this will
reaches to be pious and to fear Allah. I recommend organising of your
affairs and making peace among yourselves because I have heard your
grandfather Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) saying: Making peace between Muslims is
higher than prayer and fasting.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says to Mufaddal: When you see scuffle between our
friends, use my money to make peace between them. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) also
said: A peacemaker is not a liar even if he for making peace between two
parties speaks against the facts.


**Lesson: 64 : Islam and racial supremacy**

That all men are equal and that all kinds of discrimination based on
race or class or family are wrong and the principle that the sons of
Adam, from the viewpoint of rights, are equal and that no one is
superior to another due to his belonging to a particular skin colour or
because of difference in language or hand is one the most important
principles for collective or social affairs mentioned in the Holy Quran.
There are many verses on this subject. Islam has thus cancelled, with
red ink, all kinds of superiority-seeking on the basis of things like:
race-worship, pride of language or skin colour and has thus ended the
most complicated collective problems of today's world which even the
most advanced industrial centre America has not been able to solve.

The Holy Quran discusses this problem in simple and easy language and
logic and condemns the superiority complexes based on race, colour and
language by pointing to the birth of man of one father and mother.

Verses

1. O you men! Surely We have created you of a male and a female, and
made you tribes and families that you may know each other; surely the
most honourable of you with Allah is the one among you most careful of
his duty; surely Allah is Knowing, Aware.

2. O people! Be careful of your duty to your Lord, Who created you from
a single being and created its mate of the same kind and spread from
these two, many men and women; and be careful of your duty to Allah, by
Whom you demand one of another your rights, and to the ties of
relationship; surely Allah ever watches over you.

3. And about the creation of Adam (a.s.) the Holy Quran says: He it is
Who created you from clay, then He decreed a term; and there is a term
named with Him; still you doubt.

4. And He it is Who has brought you into being from a single soul, then
there is for you a resting-place and a depository; indeed We have made
plain the communications for a people who understand.

Traditions

1. It is recorded that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said on the day of
victory: O people! God had, in the light of Islam, removed the
distinctions of the days of ignorance and the boastings based on race
from the society. All of you are born of Adam and he too was created
from earth. The best man is he who refrains from sin and disobedience.

2. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: O people! Being an Arab is not the
basis of your personality or a part of yourselves but it is merely a
vain talk and anyone who lacks in doing his duty does not get any uplift
from the glorification of his forefathers. It does not compensate his
short comings.

3. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: All people, right from Adam to
this day, are equal like the teeth of a comb. There is no superiority
for an Arab over an non-Arab, nor for a red skinned over a
black-skinned. The basis of superiority is piety and fear of Allah.

4. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) gave a sermon during the days of
Tashreeq and said therein: O people! Beware, verily your Lord is One,
remember that your father is one, be conscious that there is no
superiority for an Arab over a non-Arab, for a non-Arab over an Arab,
nor for a red over a black nor for a black over a red except because of
piety. Truly the most precious among you in the sight of Allah is the
one who is most pious. Have I conveyed this message to you? They said:
Yes, O Prophet of Allah! Then he said: Those who are present here should
inform those who are absent, about this.

And, practically in action also, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) removed
all the imaginary and superstitious distinctions and for the same
reason, gave Sabaaah daughter of Zubair bin Abdul Muttalib in marriage
to Miqdad. Zubair was an uncle of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and
likewise, arranged the matrimony of Zalfaa with Juwaibar.

As a resume, we must note that, in Islam, greatness is only with
references to spiritual virtues that the Holy Quran has mentioned and
admonished at four occasions:

1 and 2- Regarding Faith and Knowledge: Allah will exalt those of you
who believe, and those who are given knowledge.
3. Concerning jihad: And Allah shall grant to the strivers above the
holders back a mighty reward.
4. Surely the most honourable of you with Allah is the one among you
most careful of his duty; surely Allah is Knowing, Aware.
By the way, Islam has not only disregarded the imaginary and material
superiorities but has explicitly rejected them.


**Lesson: 65 : Backbiting prohibited**

One of the sins which corrupts the society and which creates a state of
suspicion in society and which sometimes, is likely to creep into human
beings in the heinous form of cynicism is backbiting. Quranic verses and
traditions have censured it is a very harsh tone. Here are some
examples: Nor let some of you backbite others. Does one of you like to
eat the flesh of his dead brother? But you abhor it; and be careful of
your duty to Allah, surely Allah is Oft-returning to mercy, Merciful.

In this phrase of the verse, one of the worst immoralities has been
discussed. It is so bad that the Holy Quran, in order to make its
heinousness explicit, compared it with an unprecedented ugly matter.
Backbiting has been compared with eating ones dead brother's flesh! In
other words, we get four points from this Ayat:

1. A Muslim and a brother-in-Faith is like a real brother blood
related
2. His honour is like his flesh.
3. Speaking bad of him in his absence and thereby destroying his honour
and position is like eating flesh from his body.
4. Since he is not present to defend himself against at attack that is
indeed cowardly, he is unaware. He is like a dead body that has been
attacked.

Woe to every slanderer, defamer.

Commentators have, while explaining this verse, quote possibilities:

1. Humazah means big backbiter and Lumazah - big faultfinder.
2. Humazah - who speaks bad face to face and Lumazah - backbiter.
3. Humazah - Pointing to fault by hand and Lumazah - by tongue.
4. Humazah - open bad talk and Lumazah - secret bad talk.

Whatever be its exact meaning this verse applies to all these cases and
asserts that backbiting is Haraam by God. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
said: Everything of a Muslim is prohibited for another Muslim be it his
blood, property or honour. That it, it is imperative for a Muslim. Just
as he safeguards the life and property of a Muslim, he must also protect
the honour and respect of his brother and should not be after his honour
through backbiting.

It is reported to have been said by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.): Keep
away from backbiting as, if fact, backbiting is worse than adultery. If
the adulterer repents Allah may forgive him but if fact, the backbiter
is not pardoned until his victim is pleased with him!

That is, adultery and other similar sins belong to the category of the
rights of God whereas backbiting and its like pertains to the rights of
me. A backbiter, if he dies after repenting, is the last to enter
paradise and the one who insists on this evil is the first to enter the
hell. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said: Backbiting, is more
effective in destroying the religion of a Muslim than the illness of
leprosy.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has also said: Sitting in a mosque awaiting
prayer is worship until he commits hadas. People asked what was meant by
hadas. He said: backbiting.

Now that we have seen a number of verses and traditions about
backbiting (gheebat) let us know what is gheebat or backbiting. It has
been narrated in traditions: gheebat means talking of a thing about your
brother in his ghaibat absence what God has kept covered. Fuqaha have
also said: It means saying something about your brother which, if he
hears, would not like. And it must also be remembered that it is
backbiting if the evil is found in the bitten man and that if that evil
is not there in him it is false allegation.

And sometimes people, in order to justify their deed, say that we say
these words to them on their face also. But it should be remembered that
saying such ting, if itself, even if it falls in the category of Nahy
anil Munkar stopping the evil, is not proper to be uttered before
others. It should also be understood that backbiting is not limited only
to the tongue but it also involves signals and gestures. Similarly, just
as backbiting is Haraam, so is also sitting in a meeting where
backbiting is being done.


**Reasons of backbiting**

1. Jealousy makes one point out the weak points of others whereby one
intends to bring them down in the eyes of people.
2. Sometimes anger and uneasiness also causes backbiting.
3. Sometimes one tries to show off himself as clean and clear by
talking bad about others.
4. Sometimes, just for making a gathering joyful and happy one resorts
to backbiting those who are not present there.
5. Sometimes man describes others offences by way of astonishment and
angrily whereas it should be pointed out to that person and not between
other people.
6. Sometimes some hidden trouble makes people backbite in the form of
friendship and sympathy. Anyway it must be remembered that back-biting
others and dishonouring them due to any of such reasons is, from the
viewpoint of Islam, haraam and prohibited.

**Harms of backbiting**

There are many harms in backbiting both for the individual and the
society.

From the individual viewpoint, it is considered injustice and
oppression to a Mo-min and Muslim brother-in-Faith. What oppression is
greater than if it one destroys the honour of another as it cannot be
compensated in any way!

And from the collective or social viewpoint, backbiting, in one way, is
common in it harmfulness with two other heinous evils of cynicism and
faultfinding.

1. A society having backbiters will never be able to achieve unity and
harmony and integrity and love and hence will never be a group of good
people full of affection and sympathy.

2. Mutual help and assistance required for Holy aims depends upon the
feeling of reliance and trust. A society that reveals the defects of
people and raises curtain from their errors destroys the feeling of
trust that is created through good opinion about others.

3. Talking bad of others in their absence, fans the flames of enmity,
because, the man who has been bitten from back, and whose secret has
been revealed and whose honour has been taken away, becomes very angry
and so he decides to take avenger.

4. If curtain is raised from the hidden sins of people it makes them
hold and carefree and then they insist on their evils, because, what
prevents man from sin is the fear of being dishonoured. So even if he
sins he does so secretly and with caution. If we tear away that curtain
and dishonour him then there will be no reason for him to keep them
secret.

Many people refrain from a series of crimes merely because of the fear
of a decline in their honour and position. If we take away this
deterrent which is in fact a spiritual treasure of a man from him there
will be no other thing to block him from sinning.

Moreover, revealing people secrets does not only encourage them but, in
case of those having weak faith, it also embolden them to do bad things
and in this way back-biting will be a source of spreading immorality and
corruption.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has said: Those who say about Muslims that which they
have themselves seen or heard are those about whom God has said: Surely
as for those who love that scandal should circulate respecting those who
believe, they shall have a grievous chastisement in this world and the
Hereafter.


**Lesson: 66 : The calamity called spying**

One of the mean habits is peeping into the private lives of people. In
this regard the Holy Quran says: O you who believe! Avoid most of
suspicion, for surely suspicion in some cases is a sin, and do not
spyâ€¦

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: Do not try to find the defects of the
believers. The one who remains after finding faults of his brethren, God
Almighty remains after his defects and the one who is followed by God
becomes dishonoured even if he hides himself in his hone. Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) said: Man is at the farthest point from Allah when he makes
friendship with another person and in the mean while, recollects his
mistakes, to dishonour him one day.

Also The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: O those who orally claim to be
Muslims but do not have faith in your hearts! Do not spy for finding
hidden faults of the faithful. Truly if one spies to find faults of the
believers, God also recalls his faults.

In conclusion it must be remembered that spying and being after the
deeds and actions of the people is against the basic essentials of
Islam. Sometimes some servants of the Islamic revolution do such things
in sympathy for Islam and the revolution, whereas such things are
against Islam and the interest of the Islamic society. The is why the
leader of the Islamic revolution, in his 8 point order for the safety of
collective peace and safe administration, on 24th Azarmaah 1361, said
under article 6: -

Nobody has a right to enter anyone's house or shop or factory without
the permission of the owner or to arrest anybody or follows him in the
name of crime detection or to dishonour or insult anybody or to do any
inhuman or un-Islamic deed or to listen to somebody's telephone or tape
in the name of investigation however big the crime may be or to follow
the secrets of people or to spy for others crimes or to reveal whatever
he has received from one even to one person. All these acts are sinful
and some of them are, greater tan the great sins. The one who commits it
is a criminal and deserves to be punished according to Shariat.


**Lesson: 67 : The crime of defamation or slander**

Making false allegation against an innocent person is on of the meanest
misdeeds that have been severely censured by Islam.

Verses

1. The Holy Quran says: And whoever commits a fault or a sin, then
accuses of it one innocent, he indeed takes upon himself the burden of a
calumny and a manifest sin.

2. And those who speak evil things of the believing men and the
believing women without their having earned it, they are guilty indeed
of a false accusation and a manifest sin.


Traditions

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: Making allegation against an innocent is higher
than even the high hills in sinning. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) also said: The
one who falsely damages a Muslim brother makes the faith in his heart
melt away like the melting of salt in water. And the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) has said: If one puts a false allegation on a believing man
or a believing woman or says anything about them which is not is him or
her, the Lord almighty will, on the Day of Judgement, keep him in the
cloud of hell-smoke until he comes out of the responsibility of what he
had said.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: If one makes an allegation against a believing
man or woman saying what is not in him or her, God Almighty, keeps him
in the Teenat-e-Khabaal until what he had said comes out. The narrator
says: I asked: What is Teenat Khabaal? He replied: It is a dirty pus
which comes out of the private part of a bad character woman.

Briefly speaking it should be remembered that slander and defamation or
false allegation is one of the worst kind of lies because it contains
the great evil of falsity as well as the harms of back-biting. Moreover
it is the worst kind of oppression.

It must also be kept in mind that the spread of this cowardly misdeed
in a society becomes the cause of the dislocation of social justice and
indulgence in falsity and entanglement of the innocent and the freeing
of the criminal and the loss of collective trust.


**Lesson: 68 : What is the spreading of indecency?**

One of the dangerous habits and bad deeds is spreading of shamelessness
or indecency in which, sometimes, some people and sometimes even our
pious people get involved.

In this connection, the Holy Quran says: Surely as for those who love
that scandal should circulate respecting those who believe, they shall
have a grievous chastisement in this world and the hereafter; and Allah
knows, while you do not know. As man is a social being, the big society
in which he lives is, from one angle like his house and his sanctuary
and hence the cleanness of the society helps cleaning his house and so
also dirtying the society helps makes his home dirty.

On the basis of this principle, in Islam, there is a severe fight
against every act or deed that pollutes the atmosphere.

If we see that Islam fought severely with backbiting and scandal, one
of its logic is that, as a result of making false allegation against an
innocent person the society becomes polluted which ends in the moral
corruption of the entire society. Similarly if Islam has ordered the
covering of defects or shortcomings, one of its reason also is that a
sin may not become common.

An open offence is greater than a secret sin. Look at this word of Imam
Ali bin Moosa Reza in this connection: One who gives circulation to a
sin is banished and forsaken and the one who covers a sin will be
forgiven by God.

So also if we see that in the above quoted verse the spreading of
scandal has been severely censored it is also because of this. As a
matter of fact, a sin is like fire. When there is a fire at one point in
the society we should try to cool it down or to contain it. But if we
fan the fire and thus carry it from one point to another point it will
engulf everything and then nobody will be able to control it. Apart from
this, the greatness of severity of a sin in the eyes of the common man
and the apparent protection of the society from pollution, in itself, is
a big dam against the flood of corruption. The circulation of scandal
and shamelessness and spread of the sin openly breaches this dam, makes
the sin light in public eye and makes pollution easy.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said: a man approached him and said:
may I be sacrificed for you; people have narrated a deed allegedly done
by a brother-in-faith hearing which I became displeased. When I asked
that person, he denied while all reliable persons have narrated this
thing from that person himself. The Imam said: Refute your own eye and
ear against your believing brother so much so that even if fifty persons
say that he had done something but he says he did not then believe him
and disbelieve them. Never circulate in society a thing which may defame
him and bring his personality down, otherwise you will be the one about
whom God has said: those who love that scandal should circulate
respecting those who believe, they shall have a grievous chastisement in
this world and the hereafter.

And Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) said: Always think good about a deed of
your brother-in-faith until its opposite become clear and do not imagine
badly about him as long as you can consider him correct.

In conclusion we must know that one day each and every organ of our
body will be asked to account for the deeds done and that it will be a
hard questioning.

The Holy Quran says: And follow not that of which you have not the
knowledge; surely the hearing and the sight and the heart, all of these,
shall be questioned.

Finally Muslims must keep in mind that the hypocrites, some times,
through rumour mongering and circulation of allegations, defame and
drive away great personalities from the field and they assassinate the
character of people so severely that they introduce even the most honest
man as the most dishonest. For example, during the last hundred years,
just look what they had done with great men like Ayatollah Sheikh
Fazlullah Noori and Ayatollah Kaashaani and Shaheed Behishti andâ€¦


**Conclusion**

**The man in Quran**

At the end we should know that if we advance toward becoming man by
taking benefit of the Divine Guides and thinking more and more and
strengthening our morals and follow the path of perfection and truth we
shall be as the Holy Quran indicates in these verses:

1. And when your Lord said to the angels, I am going to place in the
earth a khalif.

2. Certainly We created man in the best make.
3. He created man, taught him the mode of expression.
4. Taught man what he knew not
5. And surely We have honoured the children of Adam, and We carry them
in the land and the sea, and We have given them of the good things, and
We have made them to excel by an appropriate excellence over most of
those whom We have created.
6. And finally it is this man about whom Allah has said: He it is who
created for you all that is in the earth
7. And He has made subservient to you whatsoever is in the heavens and
whatsoever is in the earthâ€¦

The above quoted verses say that the value of man is more than
everything and his position is higher than all beings as Allah has said:
We have created everything for you and because of you and made all them
subservient to you.

It is here that we find that Allah has created man for a very great and
precious purpose, everything has been created for man, created so that
man may become the owner of all that is in the earth and then he may be
an active authority. He Man has been declared as the highest being on
the vast field of earth. He is more valuable among all creations because
everything has been created for him.

And finally it is this same man that God has given him strivings in the
path of the Lord and whom He has given the promise of meeting Him: O
man! surely you must strive to attain to your Lord, a hard striving
until you meet Him. And we should also know that is case he does not
improve himself, get trained under the guidance of Divine teachers
leaders and if he destroys morals and makes himself grow like wild grass
then he becomes the subject matter of the following verses:

A. A weak being: Khuliqalâ€¦
B. Very unjust, very ungrateful: Innal insaanâ€¦
C. Niggardly: Wa Kaanalâ€¦
D. Ever hasty: Wa kaanal insaana ajoolaa
E. Given to contention: Wa kaanal insaanu ak sa ra shai in ja da laa
F. Unjust, ignorant In nahu kaa na zalooman jahoolaa
G. Hasty in temperament, greatly grieved when evil afflicts him and
niggardly when good befalls him: Innal insaan khuliqa halooaa, izaa mas
sahus sharru jazooaa wa izaa mas sahul khaira manooaa
H. Beguiled even from the Lord: Yaa aiyuhal insaanu maa ghar ra ka bi
rabbikal kareem?
I. Inordinate: Kallaa innal insaa na la yatghaa
J. Becomes like a dog: Fa ma sa luhu ka ma sa lahil kalb
K. And finally his business becomes like that of a donkey: Masalul laz
zee na â€¦â€¦asfaaraa

L. Becomes worse than an animal: And certainly We have created for hell
many of the jinn and the men; they have hearts with which they do not
understand, and they have eyes with which they do not see, and they have
ears with which they do not hear; they are as cattle, nay, they are in
worse errors; these are the heedless ones.

And if we do not reform ourselves and die with these mean attributes,
tomorrow on the Day of Judgement, these same attributes will take a
physical form and we will be gathered as blind and ugly persons in the
court of final justice: And whoever is blind in this, he shall also be
blind in the hereafter; and more erring from the way.

At the end we hope that the Lord Almighty will, by His Grace, will
guide us to perfect manliness and will not disgrace us tomorrow on the
Day of final Judgement.


