Development in the Light of Morality
====================================

**Lesson: 1 : Knowledge and Wisdom: Islamic Viewpoint**

We begin our first lesson with Knowledge and Wisdom, which is the first
and original pillar of human distinctions and specialities. In the very
first revelation to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) we read, Read in the
name of your Lord Who created. He created man from a clot. Read and your
Lord is Most Honourable, Who taught to write with the pen, taught man
what he knew not.

Also at the beginning of Surah Rahman we read, The Beneficent God,
taught the Quran. He created man, taught him the mode of expression. In
these two verses, first attention has been drawn to the grant of Ilm
(Knowledge) and then to Khilqat (creation) of man.

Also in many verses of this kind, wise people have been addressed with
inspiration like, And He it is who has made the stars for you that you
might follow the right way thereby in the darkness of the land and the
sea; truly We have made plain the communications for a people who know.
In another verse He says, And He it is who has brought you into being
from a single soul, then there is for you a resting-place, and a
depository; indeed we have made plain the communications for a people
who understand.

Also He says about Adam the Father of mankind, And He taught Adam all
the names, then presented them to the angels; then He said: Tell me the
names of those if you are right.

It is not out of place here to remember that as a rule of Arabic
grammar if before a noun there comes Al, it denotes a common category.
On this ground it can be said that God taught all the sciences/knowledge
to Adam. Then He orders the angels to bow before Adam and whosoever does
not bow respectfully is being regarded as one of the unbelievers.

In Islam, upgradation of stages is reserved for Mo-mineen and the
learned. Therefore He says, Allah will exalt those of you who believe,
and those who are given knowledge, in high degrees; and Allah is aware
of what you do. In another verse, it is said about the one who is wise,
He grants wisdom to whom He pleases, and whoever is granted wisdom, he
indeed is given a great good and none but men of understanding mind.

The word Hikmat (wisdom) has been defined in many ways, like knowing
and being acquainted with the secrets of the world, Awareness of the
Truths about of Quran, Reaching to the truth through word and deed and
Knowing Allah. Each one of these meanings has, in it, a deep meaning and
wisdom for man and it is through piety and strenuous efforts that man
has raised himself to the heights of intellect. Moreover, fear of Allah
is reserved for the wise, Those of His servants only who are possessed
of knowledge fear Allah.

Yet in another Ayat the aim behind creation of the skies and the earth
and everything between them is mentioned, Allah is He Who created seven
heavens, and of the earth the like of them; the decree continues to
descend among them, that you may know Obviously the meaning of this Ilm
(knowledge) is the ability of knowing God and this knowledge has no end.
Allah asks His Messenger, (who knows more than all other creation) to
pray, O my Lord! Increase me in knowledge.

Here we mention some sayings of the Masoomeen (a.s.) regarding the
importance of knowledge and wisdom.

A - Amirul Mo-mineen Ali (a.s.) was once asked about Khair (Good). He
said, Good is not that you have more wealth and children. Good is that
your knowledge increases.

Kumail says, Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) held my hand and took me out of
the town. When we reached wilderness he took a deep breath and said, O
Kumail! These hearts are the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. The best
of heart are those that provide room for more knowledge and wisdom.
Remember forever what I tell you.

There are three kinds of people: First - One who knows the Lord;
Second: A student of the path of salvation and truth; and third - a
group like flies who follow every voice; and who are dragged in any
direction the wind blows.

O Kumail! Knowledge is better than money and property. Knowledge is
your security and you have to guard wealth. Money and possessions
decrease by using but knowledge increases with its dispersion.

O Kumail! Knowledge is the only faith of man and man must always follow
it. Every man must, during his lifetime, adopt a way of obedience and
must leave after his death a good remembrance. Knowledge is the ruler
while money is the ruled. O Kumail, the possessors of wealth and
treasures have vanished but the wise and the learned are living. The
learned are alive till the world exists. Their bodies have disappeared
but their high examples exist in the hearts of people.

Then pointing to his chest said: Here is the abundance of knowledge and
wisdom. I wish I could find bearers for it. B - Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.)
narrates from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.), that he said, In Qiyamat the
blood of the martyrs will be weighed against the ink and writings of the
learned and finally the ink of the learned will be held heavier than the
blood of the martyrs. C - It is narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.), On the
Day of Judgement Almighty Allah will call the learned and the
worshipper. Then He would tell the Aabid to proceed to Paradise but the
Aalim would be asked to wait and intercede for those whom he had
taught.

D -Imam Baqir (a.s.) says: The value of one learned man who has
benefited the society is more than the worship of seventy thousand
worshippers.

E - Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: One Rakat of prayer of Aalim is more
valuable then seventy thousand Rakats of an Aabid.

G - It has been recorded from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that, The
superiority of a learned man over a worshipper is like that of the full
moon over other stars.

H - It is reported that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) once addressed Ali
(a.s.), The sleep of a learned man is better than a thousand Rakats
Namaz of a worshippers. O Ali! No poverty is harder than ignorance and
no worship can equal contemplation.

I -The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: For the devil, the existence of
one Faqeeh (jurisprudent) is more intolerable than the existence of a
thousand worshippers.

J -Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.) says, Had people known what benefit
learning gives, they would have run after it even if it required the
blood of hearts and diving deep into oceans. It is to convey that they
would try to learn unto the time of their death.

K - The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) is reported to have said, The loss of
running after an affair without learning about it is more than its
benefit. L - Imam Sadiq (a.s.) is reported to have said, Working without
knowledge is like travelling off the road. The more a blind man walks
the more he gets away from his path.

Verses and traditions regarding knowledge are so many that it is
impossible for us to include all of them here. Yet it should not also be
forgotten that no other school of thought has given so much importance
to knowledge except Islam. So much so that Islam has made it almost
obligatory for a Muslim. We read in traditions: Learning knowledge is
compulsory under every circumstance.

Question: Is obtaining knowledge obligatory? In case it is obligatory
is it Kifaai or Ainee? That is, is it compulsory for some or for each
and everyone in the society?

Answer: The great jurisprudents of Islam are of the opinion that
obtaining Ilm is waajib-e-Ainee so far as it refers to the matters of
belief like the principles of religion and those practical affairs
without which duties cannot be fulfilled; and that beyond it, it is
Waajib-e-Kifaai. But a group of jurisprudents think it is absolutely
compulsory even in that case for those who can afford to obtain
knowledge.


**Encouragement for the learned**

Islam has encouraged learning. Great religious leaders have always
actively inspired scholars giving them preference over all others.
Hence, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.), during the war of Muslims against
Romans, gave the standard to a youth named Usama bin Zaid and ordered
that entire army to follow him.

Also when a group from Bani Hashim was sitting near Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
in a grand gathering, Hishaam bin Hakam who was then a youth arrived.
The Imam got up to greet him, pulled him toward him, kissed his lips and
seated him beside him. This happening displeased all the elders sitting
there. Imam said, "Don't you know that this young man had, during a
discussion, put Amr bin Ubaid (who was a great Sunni scholar) to shame
to such an extent that Amr said: So long as this youth is present in the
class I will not talk?"

**Lesson: 2 : Rebuke for those who know, but do not act accordingly**

After describing the verses and traditions showing the excellence of
the learned we now come to the ayats and traditions condemning those
learned people who do not act according to their knowledge.

Inactive scholars from the viewpoint of Quran
And recite to them the narrative of him to whom We give Our
communications, but he withdraws himself from them, so the Shaitan
overtakes him, so he is of those who go astray. And if We had pleased,
We would certainly have exalted him thereby; but he clung to the earth
and followed his low desire, so his parable is as the parable of the
dog; if you attack him he lolls out his tongue; and if you leave him
alone he lolls out his tongue; this is the parable of the people who
reject Our communications; therefore relate the narrative that they may
reflect.

This verse first turns toward the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and says: The
story of those to whom We gave Our signs but who disobeyed and fell into
the doubts raised by the Devil and finally went astray be recited to
them. The earlier verses had hinted clearly toward the story of those
who had been previously in the line of the Believers and who were
regarded as the carriers of Divine Signs and Knowledge but who, at the
end, stepped out of the line of true path and the Devil too drove them
in the wrong direction with his doubts and as a result they lost the
true path.

The meaning of ansalakha (withdrew) which is from the root word
insalaakh is originally to come out of the skin and it hints that the
verses and the Divine sciences had enveloped them initially in such a
way that it had almost become their skin. But suddenly they came out of
that skin and changed their course entirely.

It can be understood from the phrase faatbaahush shaitaan the Devil
overtook them that in the beginning Shaitan had become almost
disappointed with them, as they had stood firmly on the True Path. But
after the aforesaid diversion, the Shaitan followed them vigorously,
reached them and sat in their path and began to raise doubts in their
hearts and minds and finally brought them in the line of the deviated
people. Thereafter the next verse concludes the subject saying: Had We
willed we could have forcibly kept them on the same path and, could
have, through the said ayats and sciences, given the high status.

But it is well known that keeping people by force on the True Path does
not fit with the will of Allah which gives man the freedom of will and
that it would not indicate ones personality and status. So, without any
break He adds: We left him on the path of his choice and he, instead of
adopting a day to day progress toward heights with the help of his
knowledge and wisdom, turned toward the low level and, following his
passions and desires crossed the downhill stages.

Thereafter the Holy Quran compares this scholar without deeds with a
dog that always keeps its tongue hanging out of its mouth like thirsty
animals. It is here that the Holy Quran says: If you attack him he lolls
out his tongue; and if you leave him alone he lolls out his tongue. He,
under the effect of passions and lust for material tastes, acquired or
brought on himself a state of unlimited and unquenching thirst which
runs parallel to his world-worship. This is not because of need, but is
in the form of an illness like that of a mad dog who suffers from
unquenching thirst and is never satisfied. The same is the condition of
the materialists who are coward and are never gratified no matter how
much they hoard. Thereafter the Holy Quran adds that this state is not
limited to a particular person but It is the example of all the
societies that refute the verses of God.


So O Prophet! Tell these stories to them perhaps they may ponder over
them and find that true path.


