Balam Baoor: a Materialist and a Deviated Scholar
=================================================

As you have observed, the above verses have not mentioned anyone's name
but they talk about a learned scholar who had started walking on the
true path in such a manner that no one imagined he would deviate at any
time. Yet world-worship, lust, greed and passion dragged him to such an
extent that finally he entered the line of the deviators and became a
follower of the Devil.

However, many traditions and commentaries tell us that the name of the
man in question was Balam Baoor who lived in the time of Moosa (a.s.)
and was regarded as one of the famous scholars of Bani Israel. So much
so that even Moosa (a.s.) benefited from him as a powerful propagator.
He had advanced so much in the right path that God answered his prayer.
But due to his inclination toward Firaun, and his promises and threats
he deviated from the true path and lost all his value and finally became
an opponent of Moosa (a.s.).

Though this verse has come in context of Balam Baoor, it is not limited
to him. So Imam Baqir (a.s.) is reported to have said, Originally the
ayat refers to Balam Baoor, then the Lord Almighty mentioned it as an
example of one who gave preference to passion, lust and greed over
God-worship. The likeness of those who were charged with the Taurat,
then they did not observe it, is as the likeness of the ass bearing
books, evil is the likeness of the people who reject the communications
of Allah; and Allah does not guide the unjust people.

What! Do you enjoin men to be good and neglect your own souls while you
read the Book; have you then no sense?

The Holy Quran, in this verse, rebukes Bani Israel and asks them: Why
do you call upon people to do good but keep yourselves away from that
good deed and forget to give admonition and advice to yourselves?

Woe, then, to those who write the book with their hands and then say:
This is from Allah, so that they may take for it a small price;
therefore woe to them for what their hands have written and woe to them
for what they earn.

Though this ayat has been revealed about Bani Israel it is not
restricted to them and includes all the learned people who hide the
truth and give preference to their personal interests over truths of
religion.

O you who believe! Why do you say that which you do not do? It is most
hateful to Allah that you should say that which you do not do.

**Non-practising scholars: Viewpoint of traditions**

It has been narrated from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.), One who earns
knowledge so much that he encounters the ignorant, or flaunts with the
scholars, or invites people toward himself and imagines himself to be a
leader and finally lands himself in Hell is not fit for any leadership,
except for only his family. So if a man draws people to himself even if
among them there is a wiser person who is wiser than him, God will not
shed His Mercy on such person.

2 - It has been narrated from Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.), Anyone who makes
himself a leader of people must, before teaching others, teach himself.
Thereafter he should discipline the society through his own behaviour.
Only after that he should teach others through his tongue. One who
teaches and disciplines himself is more respectable and more honourable
than one who teaches and disciplines people and forgets himself.

3 - It is narrated from Hazrat Ali (a.s.), How many are the learned men
whose character and ignorance destroyed them and who did not benefit
from their learning.

4 - In one of his sermons delivered from the pulpit Amirul Mo-mineen
(a.s.) said, O people! Whenever you learn something, act according to it
so that you may be guided. A learned man who acts against his knowledge
is like a wandering ignorant who has not come to his senses but has
proved that he is worse than a wandering ignorant and both are fruitless
failures.

5 - Sulaim bin Qais says, I heard from Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) who had
quoted the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that, The wise are of two kinds:

1 -Scholars who act according to their knowledge. Obviously this is the
kind which is successful.

2 - A scholar who does not act according to his knowledge - All the
dwellers of Hell are troubled by the foul smell emanating from the
scholar without good deeds. Among the people of Hell more ashamed and
more disappointed is a man who invited others to himself in the world,
who respond to his call and by their good deeds go to Paradise but he
himself due to his inaction, lust, passion and worldly longings goes to
Hell. Following ones own lust and passion prevents man from treading the
true path and his lengthy aspirations make him forget the Day of
Judgement.

6 - It is recorded from Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) that he said, Two types
of people have broken my back: 1 - A sinner scholar who speaks nicely.
2 - Unwise and foolish people. Then he adds: I have heard from the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that: My people will be destroyed by the hypocrite
who speaks nicely and has also a lot of knowledge.

7 -The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: One who loves the material world
loses the fear of the Day of Judgement. If the Lord Almighty increases
someone's knowledge and the latter, in exchange, gets connected with the
world, such a person gets away from Gods Mercy and the Divine anger
increases against him.

8 - It has been quoted from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that, One whose
knowledge increases but his Piety and piety or righteousness does not
grow gets away from Divine Mercy.


**Lesson: 3 : Duty of people regarding deviated Scholars**

It is obvious that Islam and man's collective responsibility demands
that every individual should be serious in facing what is going on all
around him. He must also prepare himself courageously for reforming the
society he lives in. It should not be so that if now he become inactive
and retire from public life.

Yes, every Muslim is a responsible for defending the Islamic way of
life. He must try his best for spreading justice. He should remove all
the hindrances from the path leading to Islamic aims and objects.

Obviously all of us are responsible regarding one another. If we see
that somebody has strayed away from law and order we must try to guide
him. In case we are not able to change his wrongful course we should
keep ourselves away from him and make the matter known to the society so
that society may not be drawn into corruption. The following narrations
explain the individuals duty:

1 - Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: When you notice that a learned man Aalim
has indulged in the material worlds consider him a criminal against
religion and do not trust or rely on him because every lover goes round
the thing he loves. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: God Almighty
revealed to Dawood (a.s.): Do not make a worldly scholar a mediator
between Me and you; that he may prevent you from loving Me because they
are robbers lurking on My path. The least that I do about them is that I
take back the sweetness of prayers from their hearts.

2 - It is reported from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.): So long as they
are not inclined toward the material world, the religious scholars and
jurisprudents are trustees of the Prophet. Being asked what inclination
towards world meant, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) replied, Obedience to a
ruler. So beware of them in the matter of your religion when they begin
to obey a ruler.

These traditions do not even contradict the narrations like Al
Hikmat…??? or Al Hikmatu…... because the intention of these sayings is
that man must take up good words even if the sayer is a hypocrite. But
the former tradition tells us that we must not trust the Ulama who are
undeserving and hence they must not be made out leaders or teachers in
spiritual matters. It is for the same reason that the Imam (a.s.),
concerning the verse Falyanzur…??? says: Man must see what he eats, that
is, from whom he is learning.

Some other narration says: See from whom you are getting your
knowledge.

**The serious danger of issuing Fatwa without knowledge**

One of the duties of the wise and the learned is that he should not
give an opinion regarding something he is ignorant of and must not make
himself guilty of issuing a Fatwa without knowledge. If he does, the
following narrations will apply to him:

1 -The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: The angels on the earth and in the
sky curse the one who issues Fatwa or opinion without knowledge.

2 -Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: Verily it is the meaning of faith that you
must hold truth above untruth even if it harms you and that your words
should not exceed your knowledge.

3- Imam Sadiq (a.s.) also said: One who rushes to reply all the queries
is a mad man. That is, it is not possible for an individual to reply
every question in every respect. Doing so shows that he has no wisdom.

4 -Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) says: When a learned man is asked about a
thing which he does not know he must not feel ashamed to say that he
doesn't know.

Despite all these traditions it is observed that some people are so
proud that they try to answer every question. They give opinion about
everything. Often they are not satisfied about its correctness.
Sometimes they even rush to speak in the gatherings of experts who are
well versed in given matters.

It must be mentioned here that our religious leaders were not like
that. Not only that, they even refrained from giving verdicts and were
not prepared to make their neck a stepping stone for people. They were
true followers of this saying of Imam Sadiq (a.s.): And flee from
issuing verdicts just as you run away from a tiger and do not make your
head a ladder for people.

**Lesson: 4 : Sincerity of Intention in Teaching and Learning**

It is necessary for us to understand that anything that is not done
purely for God and without sincerity gives no benefit to man, rather, it
is harmful for the hereafter.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says: Anyone who aims at getting worldly gains from
knowledge has no share in the Hereafter and one who intends to earn in
the Aakhirat gets both; worldly and otherworldly benefits from Allah.

Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) says: In truth, this world is total ignorance
and senselessness except the places of learning and all the knowledge is
an evidence against man except that on which proper action is taken and
all the deeds are hypocrisy except that which is done with a purity of
intention and this purity too is dangerous unless man sees in what way
his life ends.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) says: Deeds of man are mortgaged by his
intention and everyone gets what he intends. If anybody fights for the
Cause of Allah his reward is with Allah and if one wages a war for
worldly gain his reward remains limited only to this world. Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) said: Allah would gather people on the Day of Judgement according
to their intentions. An Arab came to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and
said:

O Messenger of God! Some people wage jihad on the basis of racial or
national prejudices and some to exhibit their bravery, and some only for
the sake of Allah. In response the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: The way
of only that person is the Way of Allah who fights for the victory of
truth over falsehood.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: Many a times a man who fasts does not
derive anything from his fast except hunger and thirst and many
worshippers worshiping during nights will not get from their awakening
except sleeplessness.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has reportedly said: The reward of every
deed depends upon and is according to the intention and it is the
intended thing that everyone gets; so one who migrates toward Allah and
His Messenger has his migration toward Allah and His Prophet; and if one
migrates for any worldly benefit or for marrying a woman, his migration
is for that thing which he intended.

There are many narrations on this subject and we should know that
nobody is safe from the conspiracy of Shaitan except when under the
shade of purity of deed. The Holy Quran says: He said: My Lord! Because
Thou hast made life evil to me, I will certainly make evil fair seeming
to them on earth, and I will certainly cause them all to deviate, except
Thy servants from among them, the devoted ones. At another place Shaitan
is quoted: Then by Thy Might I will surely make them live an evil life,
all except Thy servants from among them, the purified ones.

So it is well known that special rewards of the Lord reach only the
honest. Likewise it is said about Yusuf (a.s.): Thus it was that We
might turn away from him evil and indecency, surely he was one of Our
sincere servants. It is said about Moosa (a.s.): And mention Moosa in
the Book; surely he was one purified; and he was an apostle, a
Prophet.

**Sincerity and wisdom**

1 - The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: No slave shows sincerity for
forty days except that streams of wisdom begin to flow from his heart to
his tongue.

2 - Imam Baqir (a.s.) said: No slave purifies his Faith for Allah for
forty days, or said: no slave remembered Allah honestly but the Almighty
made him devout and taught the ills and their remedies regarding the
world. Then poured wisdom in his heart and made him talk likewise.

3 - Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says: Verily, everyone fears a Faithful man and
holds him great and respectable. Then added: When his deed is only for
the sake of Allah, He makes everything afraid of him, even the beasts
walking on earth as well as the birds in sky.

4 - Imam Baqir (a.s.) said: Allah says: None of My slaves has sought My
nearness through a deed which I have made obligatory for him and indeed
My slave comes close to Me through voluntary good deeds until I love him
and when I love him I become his ear by which he hears; and become his
eyes with which he sees; and become his tongue by which he speaks; and
become his hand by which he attacks. If he calls Me, I respond and if he
asks something from Me, I give him.

In every circumstance, doing ones duty in the path of Allah with purity
of intention raises one to a great station. Nobody can say that this is
not possible for me, rather, when one starts walking on the way of
Allah, ones strength increases and ones difficulties are solved. As the
Holy Quran says: And as for those who strive hard for Us, We will most
certainly guide them in Our ways; and Allah is most surely with the
doers of good.

**The reality of sincerity**

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: Verily for every fact there is a
reality and the reality of sincerity is that man does not attain
sincerity unless he dislikes a praise by the people for his deeds.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has reportedly said: A man does not become a sincere
slave unless his praise or his denial by the people becomes alike in
this eyes and knows that such testification or falsification makes no
difference in the reality of a thing. So do not be pleased by the praise
of anyone because such praise does make man nearer to his God has does
not make him needless from whatever that has already been destined for
him.

Maybe somebody asks himself whether this is at all possible to achieve?
Yes. A little thought will make you understand that if man makes efforts
and suppresses his whims and passions, truth becomes more and more clear
for him and the Holy Quran also says: And as for those who strive hard
for Us we will most certainly guide them. If man does not try to reform
himself, many a times, his good deeds are likely to result in polytheism
and pretence.


**Lesson: 5 : Hypocrisy**

The word Riyaa is derived from Rooyat which means pointing to or
showing of a deed. Man's aim behind this deed is to attract peoples
towards him. He does it in various ways:

A - By his deeds or actions; for example, he prolongs his actions
during namaz and makes his face appear fearful and courteous.
B - By his words: For example, during his admonitions and sermons he
tries to attract others towards his own person.
C - Sometimes he makes his face appear like that of one who remains
awake through nights in worship.
D - Sometimes he presents himself in such a way that he appears full of
concern for Islam and Muslims.

There is no doubt that all these things do have an aspect of worship as
there are several narrations and verses dealing with them. In the book
Urwatul Wuthqa, in the chapter about ablution (Wuzoo), the late Syed
Muhammad Kazim Tabatabai has quoted nearly ten kinds from which we point
to the following four:

1 - The aim of doing a good deed is only showing of self to people.
2 - The deed has, behind it the intention of both Divine Reward and
show but the latter is greater than the former.
3 - Both the intentions are equal and that each one of the two can make
him do a good deed.
4 - He has the intention of both show, as well as Divine pleasure but
the wish to gain Allah's pleasure is greater.

In other manner this division can also be made like this: Sometimes
Riyaa is in the root of Islam, like the hypocrite who makes him appear
like a Faithful. Sometimes it is in the matter of worship by accepting
the basic beliefs of Islam. But in non-worship acts it can be divided in
five orders viz. Waajib (obligatory), Haraam (prohibited), Mustahab
(preferable), Makrooh (detestable) and Mubaah (admissible).

**Prohibition of making a show in Quranic verses**

O you who believe! Do not make your charity worthless by reproach and
injury, like him who spends his property to be seen of men and does not
believe in Allah and the last day; so his parable is as the parable of a
smooth rock with earth upon it, then a heavy rain falls upon it, so it
leaves it bare; they shall not be able to gain anything of what they
have earned; and Allah does not guide the unbelieving people.

**Some noteworthy points in this verse**

A - From the sentence Do not make your charity worthless we are
enlightened that some of the deeds, it is possible, can snatch away
rewards of good deeds, and this is that very problem of Ahbaat??? We
have explained this in our book Maad yaa aakhareene saire takaamul.

B - The parable of a deed of hypocrisy, that it is like a of rock on
which there is a thin layer of dust is very meaningful, because,
hypocrites hide their coarse and barren inside with a face showing
benevolence and beneficence. They perform deeds that do not have any
firm root. But events in life soon tear off this curtain to expose their
inner selves.

C - The phrase and Allah does not guide the unbelieving people in this
verse mean that a hypocrite is an unbeliever. And those who spend their
property in alms to be seen of the people and do not believe in Allah
nor in the last day; and as for him whose associate is the Shaitan, an
evil associate is he!

We get two points:

A -Company of evil people can affect man's life to such an extent that
it may drag him to the last degree of downfall.
B - The connection of hypocrites or the devil and the devilish deeds is
a continuing connection or relation and not a temporary one.

Surely the hypocrites strive to deceive Allah, and He shall requite
their deceit to them, and when they stand up to prayer they stand up
sluggishly; they do it only to be seen of men and do not remember Allah
save a little. It should be noted that in this Ayat Riyaa has been
considered one of the attributes of hypocrites. Therefore whoever hopes
to meet his Lord, he should do good deeds, and not join anyone in the
service of his Lord. So woe to the praying ones, Who are unmindful of
their prayers, Who do good to be seen.

**Prohibition of Riyaa in Traditions**

1 - Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said to Ibaad bin Kaseer Basri in the masjid: Woe
unto you o Ibaad! keep away from riyaa. Whoever does anything except for
Allah, the Lord abandons him to the one for whom he acted.

2 - The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: Wherever the apparent is more
shining than what is within, it is hypocrisy.

3 - Imam Baqir (a.s.) said: If a man does something for Allah's
pleasure and also entertains someone else's pleasure, he is a
polytheist. From these narrations we come to know that even subordinate
show is Haraam.

4 - Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: The reward of one is with the person for
whom the deed was done. Then added: O Zurarah! Every Riyaa is Shirk.
Every pretense is polytheism.

5 - The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: A group of people is being
ordered to go to hell. The angel in charge of the fire asks: O unlucky
person : What did you do? They say: We performed deeds for others than
Allah; now we have been asked to obtain the reward from the ones for
whom we worked.

6 - The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: Most of my fear regarding you is
in the matter of lesser polytheism. They asked: what is the lesser
polytheism? He said: It is Riyaa; making a show for others. While giving
rewards to people in the Hereafter on the Day of Judgement Allah will
say to the hypocrites: You may take your reward from those you worked
for. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) then said: Seek Allah's refuge from
Hubbul Khizyz. They inquired as to what it was. He replied: It is a
valley in Hell that has been prepared for hypocrites. He added: A
hypocrite will, on the Day of Judgement, be addressed: O Criminal!, O
Dishonest!, O Pretender! Take your reward from the one for whom you
performed your deeds.

7 - The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: Allah never accepts any
performance if there is, in it, even an iota of show. Question: How can
we know that we are pretenders? Some of its forms are so subtle that man
himself is unaware of it. Answer: Firstly: - Everyone who considers his
performance better. The Holy Quran mentions:???

Secondly - Signs of pretenders have been mentioned in several
narrations. For example: There are three signs of a hypocrite: He
becomes happy when people see him performing or worshipping; becomes
lazy in prayers when he is alone; and he likes to be praised for all of
his deeds. Question: In view of the existence of such signs of pretence,
is it not good for man to perform his deeds secretly?

Answer: The great scholars have said: It is better to perform voluntary
good deeds and donations secretly but the obligatory duties should be
carried out openly, especially when the person concerned is being
accused of non-performance of his duties. It is also mentioned in
narrations. Perhaps it can also be said that it can be different for
different people in different circumstances. Whenever one feels pretence
or is doubtful of it he may perform his deeds in secret. Otherwise it is
better to be open especially in the matter of performing ones duties.

Question: Is it pretence even when one gets thoughts in mind but does
not pretend actually?

Answer: No, but sometimes they are satanic thoughts as Satan wants man
to stop from doing good. So the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said: If you
are performing your prayer and Satan suggests that you are a pretender
the man must, in order to defeat Satan, lengthen his namaz.

**Advice and warning**

A Mo-min must always be intelligent and should not be deceived by an
apparent cheating. It is so because some people are very cryptic and, in
order to achieve worldly status, undertake sufferings and painstaking
mortifications, and make worldly pleasures too unlawful for themselves.
Someone asked the Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) about Azeemus Shaqaaq (big
painstaker). The Imam (a.s.) replied: The one who gives up the world for
the sake of the world loses both the world as well as the Hereafter,
like a pretender who suffered pains but without any benefit.

Question: Can hypocrisy be considered even after the performance of a
deed? In other words, if one entertains a thought after the actual
performance of a particular deed if the above mentioned verses and
traditions apply to him?

Answer: Riyaa is only during the performance of a deed. The above
quoted Ayats and narrations do not apply after the performance of a
deed. Some great scholars have explained this matter and some of them
have even considered it as a unanimous opinion. Yet, in a letter from
Imam Baqir (a.s.) to Ali bin Asbaat, it is mentioned:

Maintenance of a deed is more difficult than its performance. It was
asked: what is maintenance of a deed? He replied: A man donates for
pleasing only one God. A reward for a secret good deed is being written
in his account. Thereafter he talks about his deed. So a reward for an
open good deed is written for him, which is less. Then he repeats its
talk until he rubs it out and it is written as Riyaa in his roll of
deeds. He, not only does not get any reward but also earns punishment.

Question: Sometimes a man performs a good deed only to please Allah and
does not have any intention of making a show of it. But when people come
to know about his deed he becomes happy. Is this also Riyaa?

Answer: What we derive from verses and traditions is that one must do a
deed only to obey the commandment of Allah. However, many a time, it is
but natural to feel happy after performance of a good deed except in the
case of one who has undertaken much mortification and has become a real
slave of God. So we have read earlier that the reality of honesty and
sincerity is that man must not like that he should be praised for his
good deeds. It means he has reached a status in his mortification when
He dislikes his praise for his good deeds. Of course, mere feeling of
pleasure, in the absence of a liking for praise, is all right.

Someone asked the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.): We do our duty and do not
like that others should know about it. Yet sometimes people come to know
about it and this makes us feel happy. So what about it? The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) replied: You have earned two rewards: One reward of a
secret deed and the another of its becoming open.

A similar narration has also been quoted from Imam Baqir (a.s.) but at
the end he says: There is none but that one likes that Allah may make
his good deed open, in case he has not done anything for it.

Question: What is the reason of Riyaa and which factors bring it in?

Answer: The factors of pretence are of two types:

A - Not knowing the Holy Being of Allah - If one, really knows the Lord
of the Universe and understands that no one else but He alone is
effective in the universe, he will never entertain any hope but from
only one god. It has been described for us in narrations. Here we quote
two examples:

1 - It has been quoted from Imam Sadiq (a.s.): One of the signs of the
worthiness of a Muslim is that he does not make people happy by making
Allah unhappy like the one who issues Fatwas according to the liking of
the people or speaks what pleases people but makes Allah angry, and does
not reproach people for what Allah has not given them because sustenance
is available neither by the greed of the greedy nor by the asking for it
by man. And if a man runs away from sustenance as he runs away from his
death his sustenance will surely reach him as death surely reaches him.
Then he said: Allah has, due to His justice and equity, put joy and
peace of mind in Faith and resignation and kept grief and anguish in
doubtfulness and discontent.

2 -Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) said: No person has tasted the sweetness of
Faith until he knows that whatever he has got will not be removed from
him and whatever has been taken back from him will not come back to him
and that the giver of profit and loss is only one God, Almighty Allah.
In fact he reaches a stage where he understands that in the cosmos there
is none but only one god, Almighty Allah is effective.

If somebody, really, reaches the stage of certainty that everything is
in the control of the Lord and that if any benefit or loss reaches man
it is from the Lord, then he, thereafter, never deals with anyone else,
leave alone doing anything for his sake!

In conclusion, man should make effort so that the strength of certainly
increases and we, Insha Allah, while discussing Faith, shall describe
the problem of certainty at length.

B - Ambition for position and status makes a man hypocrite. If one
thinks a little he knows that even if one becomes the owner of the whole
world from east to west, one is not going to last for more than a few
days.

It is necessary here that we should deeply study the narrations
relating to love for position so that we may keep ourselves away from
this unbecoming habit or attribute and may not keep, while doing
everything, none but only one God in our view.


**Lesson: 6 : Self - deception and Egotism**

One of the most dangerous attributes that are mostly seen among the
scholars and saints is egotism. It is the same self-centredness for
explaining the meaning whereof great teachers of ethics and morals have
written much.

Egotism is that man thinks himself to be great due to his material
attainments, be those actual virtues in him or only in his imagination.
Some have said: Egotism is that, man due to whatever attribute or
blessing he has thinks that he is great and becomes unmindful of the one
who granted all that to him. They have not considered it self-deceit and
egotism if one considers oneself to be better than others. It is Ujb
even if there is none besides one. Contrary to this, in case of pride,
it is necessary that there is somebody else so that the proud may be
able to imagine himself to be better than the other.

The late Allamah Majlisi (r.a.) has said: Ujb means to imagine
oneself's deed as great and to be pleased with it is in such a way that
he does not consider him at fault but thinks that he has obliged
Allah!

It can be said that there are stages or grades of self-deceit and
egotism. It is not necessary that the egotist must have crossed all the
stages. So it is mentioned in an authentic narration by Ali bin Suved
from Moosa bin Ja'far (a.s.): I inquired about the deed called ujb. The
Imam (a.s.) said: Some of the stages of it are that a bad deed appears
good to one, he considers it nice and becomes happy with it and thinks
that he has done a good thing.???

It is also one of the stages when man believes in God and imagines that
he has favoured Allah! Whereas the truth is that Allah has favoured
him.


