Because It Was He Who Guided Him To Faith
=========================================

In short, it can be said that it is Ujb when man becomes happy with
himself and this is the very first stage of egotism. Sometimes pride and
self-centeredness also branch out from this stage and man begins to
imagine himself to be better than others. Sometimes it so happens that
he imagines that as a result of some of his good deeds he has acquired
some rights over Allah. Scholars have explained this subject from
various aspects.

There are many narrations in this matter. Here, we mention three of
them:

1 - Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: Whoever is taken over by egotism is
finished.

2 - It is narrated either from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) or Imam Baqir (a.s.):
Two men enter a mosque. One is a worshipper and another sinner. Then
they get out of the Masjid in such a condition that the sinner becomes a
Mo-min and the Aabid turns into a sinner. The reason is that the
oft-worshipper enters the mosque happily taking pride in his worship and
thinks only about it whereas the sinner feels very ashamed of his
misdeeds and seeks Allah's pardon.

3 - The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: Lord Almighty addressed Prophet
Dawood (a.s.): O Dawood! Give good tidings to the sinners and warn the
truthful and righteous. Dawood said: How can I give good tidings to the
offenders and warn the pious? Came the commandment: O Dawood! Give good
news to the sinners that I accept repentance and forgive sins and
caution the truthful that they should not be self-centred due to their
good deeds because there is no slave who is called for giving the
account of his deeds ???and he is not destroyed.

Now that we have known that egotism is prohibited from the viewpoint of
traditions, let us discuss some other aspects of it:

1- Worldly and Otherworldly harms of ujb.
2- What is the sign of ujb?
3- How it can be cured?

From the viewpoint of worldly life the harms and corrupting effects of
egotism are many. We point out four of them that have been mentioned in
narrations:

A - Ujb means self-centeredness or egotism. Once man develops this evil
he is no more prepared to obtain any benefit from the centres of
knowledge or from knowledgeable persons, as he imagines himself on their
level and sometimes even above them. Due to this he drags behind in
scholarly achievements or in the progress of knowledge. He remains in a
state of multiple ignorance forever. So most of us, possibly know a
group of them, and in the words of our dear leader of the Islamic
revolution, Imam Khomeini (r.a.) which he had uttered in one of his
final addresses to the students:

Honourable sire! Learn lessons, before your age advance and you turbans
expand, because, then it is likely, you may not be ready to attend study
circles and benefit from them, even though, sometimes, man knows that
lesson is beneficial for him.

The master of the monotheists (a.s.) says:

Egotism prevents progress of knowledge.

He also says: Self-centeredness corrupts ones intelligence.

B - It is but natural that egotism makes a person unpleasant among the
people who become displeased with him and do not care for him. So the
Imam (a.s.) pointing to this, says: One who is pleased with himself
makes many people angry with him.
Yes, it must be said that egotism, in every meaning, is a harmful
ignorance. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says: No ignorance and foolishness is more
harmful than egotism.

C - Egotism takes man away from reality. Consequently he is not able to
benefit from good deeds. For example, once Isa (a.s.) = Isa (a.s.) was
travelling with one of his companions. When they reached seashore, Isa
(a.s.), with full faith in the Lord of the worlds, uttered the Name of
Allah and began to walk on water. The youth accompanying him also took
the Name of God with full Faith and walked on water likewise.

But, during the walk in the sea, egotism took over the latter youth. So
he said to himself proudly: Now how is Isa (a.s.) superior to me? At the
very moment he entertained this thought he went down in the water.
Hazrat Isa (a.s.) saved him and said: This happened due to egotism in
you. If you repent you will return to your earlier condition. The youth
repented and gained his earlier status.

D - An egotist mostly has failed and will fail because the Holy Quran,
says in regard to the unbelievers: Whatever is in the heavens and
whatever is in the earth declares the Glory of Allah, and He is the
Mighty, the wise. He is who caused those who disbelieved of the
followers of the Book to go forth from their homes at the first
banishment; you did not think that they would go forth, while they were
certain that their fortresses would defend them against Allah; but Allah
came to them whence they did not expect, and cast terror into their
hearts; they demolished their houses with their own hands and the hands
of the believers; therefore take a lesson, O you who have eyes!


**The Otherworldly Harm of Egotism**

Egotism makes deeds meaningless. The Holy Quran says: Say: Shall we
inform you of the greatest losers in their deeds? These are they whose
labour is lost in their life and they think that they are well-versed in
skill of the work of hands.

And again says: What! Is he whose evil deed is made fair seeming to him
so much so that he considers it good is like the one who sees the Truth?
Yes, those who think in this way destroy their good deeds, in a way, by
casting favour. So says the Holy Quran: O you who believe do not make
your charity worthless by reproach and injury, like him who spends his
property to be seen of men.

We conclude this discussion with a narration from Imam Sadiq (a.s.):
Egotism is a plant the seed whereof is kufr unbelief and its ground is
nifaq (disharmony) and its water is oppression and its branches are
foolishness and its leaf is waywardness and its fruit is condemnation
and dumping in Hell. So whoever adopts egotism has cultivated and sown
the see of blasphemy and its cultivation will be discord and know that
they are bound to get this fruit.


**Sign of Ujb**

Obviously the sign of egotism is that one considers oneself better than
others and in the Words of the Holy Quran: Nay! Man is evidence against
himself, though he puts forth his excuses. And likewise Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) said: The one who does not recognise the personality of others is
the one who is an egotist.


**Lesson: 7 : Remedy for Egotism**

In reply it must be stated that there are two ways for its remedy: One
is abstract and another detailed. A - Abstract remedy: Man should ponder
over the Greatness of the Creator of the Universe. He must understand
that Greatness belongs only to Him. He must believe that the only one
god is Waajibul Wujood The indispensable Being and that Power and
Eternity are only his attributes and that, opposed to it or in
comparison smallness and mortality belongs to man himself, he must think
over his earlier stages of life, that is, what was he, how many times
and through how much dirty passages has he passed and even now he is
carrying dirt in himself and finally at the end also he will turn into a
carcass.

The Holy Quran describes thus:

Cursed man! How ungrateful is he! Of what thing did He create him? Of a
small life-germ; He created him, then He made him according to a
measure, Then as for the way -- He has made it easy for him, Then He
causes him to die, then assigns to him a grave, Then when he pleases, He
will raise him to life again.

Also he should think about his origin that he was dust in the
beginning, and then he was turned into semen as the Holy Quran mentions:
Who made good everything that He has created, and he began the creation
of man from dust. Then he made his progeny of an extract, of water held
in light estimation.

Then he should again ponder over his weakness. In this respect the Holy
Book says: Allah is he who created you from a state of weakness, then he
gave strength after weakness, then ordained weakness and hoary hair
after strength; he creates what he pleases, and he is the knowing, the
Powerful. As a poet has said: What are we? But nothing in a world of
nothingness, nor do we have anything….

And as another poet says: Sometimes animals eat him away, sometimes
potter moulds you as he likes once when I hit an axe on the ground, I
heard a voice full of pain saying please, I am a scull having eyes and
ears. Every face beneath this ground was once an independent personality
and every picture was a picture of a prince of his time.

How good would it have been had he been left in that state forever. But
he is going to be made live again after some time and he will be made to
stand in a fearful forest. That is the time when he says In the words of
Quran: O! Would that I were dust.

**Detailed Remedy**

Sometimes man takes the path of egotism for his elegance and soundness.
Its remedy is that he should know that this beauty is not in his hands
and many a time it vanishes as a result of an illness. He should also
think that after some time when this beauty is grounded in the dust it
turns into a carcass abhorred by everyone. So warns the Holy Quran: Did
he not know that Allah had destroyed before him of the generations those
who were mightier in strength than he and greater in assemblage. And the
guilty shall not be asked about their faults.

2 - If egotism of man is due to his strength and power, he must
remember that this power is inferior even to a microbe. This man becomes
humble when confronted even with a mosquito. Summary is that this power
and beauty and…. All are from the Creator of this Cosmos and have been
given to him as a trust. The Holy Quran explains:

So that it may become clear how he gets out of the bush of trial.

3 - If egotism is based on wisdom and intelligence and abundance of
knowledge we ought to know that this is a Divine bounty for which we
must be thankful to God. Often even a little illness wipes out all the
knowledge of man, which may be much precious. In the words of Allamah
Ayatollah Haeri: One of the great scholars of Qua had lost all his
intelligence due to an illness to such an extent that he could not
remember his path too. Also I have seen one of the great teachers of the
university of Qum who had become mad and was leading a strange life.
Sometimes when his nerves were at rest, he would hold circles of study
wherein students gathered and he replied to their problems quite
satisfactorily.

Sometimes it is this same knowledge which brings havoc in man's life.
Consequently, he joins circles that anger God. Finally, they reach such
a stage about which the Holy Quran says: So his parable is the parable
of the dog; if you attack him he lolls out his tongue; and if you leave
him alone he lolls out his tongue.

And also says: The likeness of those who were charged with the Tavrat,
then they did not observe it, is as the likeness of the ass bearing
books. Once Imam (a.s.) said: These are the highwaymen of the path.

In short, Man must in all the circumstances be mindful of God so that
he may get salvation from the evil of carnal desires.

4 - If his egotism is because of his race he must realise that no
family relation is loftier than with the progeny of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) and this superiority too, as clarified by the faultless Imams
(a.s.), is only until man follows their line. This relation loses
benefit no sooner than one leaves their path.

And if man feels proud of the power and strength of his forefathers he
must know that practically they his elders are bound by their own deeds
and their greatness no more returns and as, according to a famous
saying: Granted your father was great, but then what good do you get
from the greatness of your father? Someone has also said:

I am the child of myself and my surname is also my civility. I may be
an Arab or a non-Arab. In fact, brave is the one who says: I not the one
who says my father.

5 - If man's pride is due to abundance of wealth and children, firstly,
he should know that these are some of the bounties bestowed by Allah and
have been entrusted to him for some days by way of a trust for his
trial. Also that whenever God sees fit He takes them back. The Holy
Quran says: Your possessions and your children are only a trial…

Secondly, if property and children were the cause of man's greatness,
God would not have given it to His enemies. But, as we know, they have
been in every age, superior to the believers in this respect. Quran
quotes them as saying: And they say: We have more wealth and children,
and we shall not be punished.

Also, in reference to some of the kings belonging to Bani Israel,
quotes: And he possessed much wealth; so he said to his companion, while
he disputed with him: I have greater wealth than you, and am mightier in
followers.

And with regard to the third says: And were it not that all people had
been a single nation, We would certainly have assigned to those who
disbelieve in the Beneficent God to make of silver the roofs of their
houses and the stairs by which they ascend. And the doors of their
houses and the couches on which they recline, And other embellishments
of gold; and all this is naught but provision of this worlds life, and
the hereafter is with your Lord only for those who guard against evil.

And thirdly, All this wealth and children and…. Are not the cause for
final salvation. So, the Holy Quran says: The day on which property will
not avail, nor sons Except him who comes to Allah with a heart free from
evil.

And again mentions: And not your wealth nor your children, are the
things which bring you near us. And many a time the same wealth and
possession and leadership becomes the cause of our misfortune. The Holy
Quran says: Do they think that by what we aid them with of wealth and
children, We are hastening to them of good things? Nay, they do not
perceive.

Again it says: And let not those who disbelieve think that Our granting
them respite is better for their souls; We grant them respite only that
they may add to their sins; and they shall have a disgraceful
chastisement.

In her sermon in front of Yazid in Syria Zaynab e Kubra (a.s.) resorted
to this verse and thereby pointed out that the verse applied to people
like him Yazid. So it is understood from the verses of the Holy Quran
that the Lord Almighty, cautions criminals in case they have not been
drowned in the sea of sins and, in order to awaken them, by describing
the reactions of their misdeeds and their penalties so that they way
return to the true path.

These are those who still have the capacity to be guided and deserve
Gods Mercy and hence their restlessness is considered a bless for them
as we read in the Holy Quran: Corruption has appeared in the land and
the sea on account of what the hands of men have wrought, that He may
make them taste a part of that which they have done, so that they may
return..

But in case of those who have drowned themselves in sins and have
extended their disobedience and rebellion and mischief to its extremity,
God leaves them to their state and, idiomatically, provides them a vast
field so that their backs may be overloaded with sins and thereby make
themselves liable to maximum punishment. They are those who have burnt
all bridges behind them and have left no avenue for returning, have torn
off all barriers of modesty depriving themselves totally of every
qualification to be guided by Divine Light.

Now, how good if man gets cautioned from the very beginning and does
not suffer such grave illness. The way of it is belittling ones self in
such a manner that man does not consider himself at all significant in
the face of Divine Commandments of the Lord of the Universe. He misdeeds
before his eyes. He should think of the favours of God respectfully. He
must feel in his heart that he is nothing and should have a constant
feeling of shame. He should remain ever grateful for Gods bounties and
must realise that whatever case he has is from HIS favour and Grace. He
must never imagine himself worthy of that.

Before other people also he should consider himself little. He must
consider others as better than himself. Imam Baqir (a.s.) has said: He
should consider the aged better than him thinking that they have obeyed
God more. Likewise he must consider the youngsters as better as they
committed fewer sins. Not only this, he must imagine that those about
whose faults he knows are also better than him because of the
possibility that they might have repented or that their end will be good
as the end in unknown. Again he must understand that all those who
reached the position of Prophethood or Imamat or other lofty status were
none but those who had considered themselves lowly and weak.

As the poet has said: Learn lowliness if you are in search of grace
because a high land never obtains water. At the end of this discussion
we beg from God so that HE may guide us whereby we may turn ourselves
into good men.


**Lesson: 8 : Pride and Its Kinds**

Pride is man's attitude of considering himself better than others and
this attribute is one of the calamities called egotism and
self-centeredness. When man exposes or expresses this feeling of
imagining himself better than others it is called or pride or
haughtiness. Sometimes this pride makes one stand up against Truth and
signs of God and HIS Messengers and sometimes against Gods slaves other
people and many a time it so happens that if such a proud man does not
try to improve his inner self he even turns into a disbeliever.

Regarding the first kind, verses so describe: Surely those who are too
proud for my service shall soon enter Hell abased. 2 Your God is One
God; so as for those who do not believe in the Hereafter, their hearts
are ignorant and they are proud. Truly Allah knows what they hide and
what they manifest; surely HE does not love the proud. And when it is
said to them, what is it that your Lord has revealed? They say: Stories
of the ancients.

3-What; whenever then an apostle came to you with that which your souls
did not desire, you were insolent so you called some liars some you
slew. And they said: What! Shall we believe in two mortals like
ourselves while their people serve us?

And if you obey a mortal like yourselves, then most surely you will be
losers. And they say: Why was not this Quran revealed to a man of
importance in the two towns?

And when they said: O Allah! if this is the Truth from Thee, then rain
upon us stones from heaven or inflict us a painful punishment. About
this verse, Allamah Tabarsi quotes Imam Sadiq (a.s.): After the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) appointed Ali (a.s.) to caliphate at Ghadir-e-Khumm
and said: MAN KUNTU MAULAAHU FA ALIYUN MAULAHU this matter spread
everywhere. Noman bin Haaris Qahri who was a hypocrite came to the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and said: You asked us to give witness to the oneness
and ordered us to perform jihad, prayers, fasting, zakat and we accepted
all of it. But you did not remain contented at that and made this boy he
meant Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.) you caliph and said: MAN KUNTU ….. Is
this word from your calf or is it the command of Allah?

They Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) replied: By Allah except whom there is not
Deity, it is from GOD, Noman returned saying: O Allah: if this is the
truth from Thee, then rain upon us stones from heaven. Soon thereafter a
stone fell upon him and he was killed. This Hadith does not come into
conflict with the aforesaid verse that was revealed before Ghadir
because the cause of its revelation was not the event of Noman but Noman
had, in his enmity, referred to extracted from the verse which was
revealed earlier. This is like our prayers wherein we quote the Holy
Quran and say: RAB BA NAA AA TINAA ….

But regarding the second kind: Showing pride against people slaves of
God is also Haraam and, in this regard, the Holy Quran quotes the words
of Luqman like this:

And do not turn your face away from people in contempt, nor go about in
the land exulting overmuch,; surely Allah does not love any
self-conceited boaster.

2 - The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) says: One who has eve an atom size
pride in his heart will never enter Paradise. They asked: O Messenger of
Allah: Some of us do desire to wear good clothes and perform good jobs.
The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) replied: In fact, Allah is beautiful and HE
likes beauty and nicety but what is pride is to reject the truth and to
consider others lower than ones self.

3- Imam Baqir (a.s.) said: Pride and Greatness are the attributes of
God and one who becomes proud stands against the Divine attribute of
Greatness.

4- Imam Baqir (a.s.) said: Greatness is the cover cloth of God. Whoever
takes any part therefrom will be thrown into Hell by God.

5- Imam Baqir and Sadiq (a.s.) have said: Anyone who has the minutest
particle of pride in his heart will not enter paradise.

6- Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: Proud people will, on the Day of Judgement,
arrive in the field of gathering in the from of ants and they will
continue to be crushed under feet until God concludes taking account of
all.

7- The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: Tomorrow on the Day of Judgement
most condemned people will be the proud people.

Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) said: I am astonished by the behaviour of the
son of Adam. His beginning was semen and his end will be a corpse and
during his lifetime too he carries dirt and yet becomes proud. Though
there are many narrations in this regard we suffice with there few and
hope that Almighty God will all of us away from this and from all other
evil attribute. Now that we have known the impermissibility of pride we
restart with some other discussion about Takabbur.


**Lesson: 9 : Pride (continued)**

1- Causes and Reasons of Pride

The problems which may cause pride are:

A - Sometimes knowledge and wisdom ends in this attribution whereby a
man imagines oneself greater and higher than others. Of course this
happens when man has not improved himself. Otherwise, if one takes into
account the dimensions of spirit, the more his knowledge increases the
more he imagines himself to be low and considers all others to be better
than him.

B - And sometimes 'worship' becomes the cause of pride when man sees
that he is a worshipping and obedient man and that others are not like
that. As a result, a kind of pride is created within himself. So that is
better is that such a man should ponder that it is possible that the
deeds which, according to his thinking are good may not lead him
anywhere as has been mentioned in a verse of the Holy Qumran: - "Say:
Shall we inform you of the greatest losers in (their) deeds? (These are)
they whose labour is lost in this world's life and they think that they
are well versed in skill of the work of hands." (Kahn: 103 - 104).

Again it is possible that may be some of the good deeds of a man become
void due to some other bad deeds done by him, leaving him nowhere. C -
And sometimes it is possible a man shows pride because of his 'lineage',
forgetting the fact that lineage does not benefit a man because one day
a man came to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and narrated nine of his
forefathers' names by way of pride. The Holy Prophet (saw's.) said: do
not you know that the tenth of them is you and will be in the hell?

And if we feel proud of our ancestors we must know that our origin is
from dust as mentions the holy Qumran: "Who made good everything that He
has created, and He began the creation of man from dust. Then He made
his progeny of an extract, of water held in light estimation." (Sandal:
7 - 8).

The holy Qumran says that the differences of tribes are for recognition
and they do not bring any distinction for man. "O you men! Surely we
have created you of a male and a female, and made you tribes and
families that you may know each other; surely the most honourable of you
with Allah is the one among you most careful (of his duty); surely Allah
is Knowing, Aware." (Hujarat: 13).

D - "Power and Courage" cause pride. First man must know that if the
proof of personality is his strength then some of the animals may be
more strong and courageous than us. Secondly man, in the face of
illnesses, is so much weak that, as you see, he begins to shiver as a
result of mere fever.

The Holy Qumran says:

"Allah is He Who created you from a state of weakness then He gave
strength after weakness, then ordained weakness and hoary hair after
strength; He creates what He pleases, and He is the Knowing, the
Powerful." (Rum: 54).

E - And if the cause is pride, power and kingdom then we should know
that, it is not only no part of human being, but no kind of assurance of
its continuity is available to us. How many were the people who got up
in the morning but could not maintain their kingdom till night or could
not pass the night with power till next morning. Hence one of the poets
sang about Naadirshaah:- (When night fell he was wearing a crown on his
head but when it dawned he had neither crown nor head. A single turn of
the heaven showed Naadir was not there what to talk of his kingdom!)

2 - Kinds of Pride

The above quoted verses and narrations show that there are three kinds
of pride:

" Pride or arrogance in front of the Creator of the Heaven and the
earth.
" Ego against the Messengers of God.
" Haughtiness in front of the slaves of Allah.

3 - Grades of Pride

And the grades of pride too can be divided into three:

1 - This vice takes root in the heart of man and then his words and
deeds make it known that he considers himself better than others.
2 - He does not express from his tongue but practically he considers
himself to be higher than others.
3 - Man fights against this vice that has occupied his heart. So its
signs are not traceable in his words and deeds. This is less dangerous
than the earlier two types of pride. Yet, we must, under all
circumstances, seek shelter in Allah, the ONLY ONE GOD, so that He may
save us from the evil of our own soul.

4 - Signs of Pride

One of the signs of pride is that man imagines that he is better than
others and is not ready to accept the truth. So it is quoted from Imam
Sadiq (a.s.):

"Pride is to consider people low and truth to be light (weightless)"
(Kafi, 2: 310).

And it is also related from Imam Sadiq (a.s.): "Addressing Hafs he
said: If a man considers himself to be better than others he can be
considered to be proud. Hafs asks: What if a man considers himself
better as he does not commit sin whereas others are sinning? Imam (a.s.)
replied: Alas, Alas. It is possible that fellow is pardoned and he
repents but you are kept in eye for being presented before God for
accounting. Have you not heard the story of Moosa (a.s.) and the
magicians? (That they repented and were considered as true faithful).
(Bihaar 73: 206, 226, 233).

And it has been mentioned that, according to the impeccable Imam
(a.s.), the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) once passed by a group of people who
had gathered round a man. He asked: What is the matter? They replied: O
Prophet of Allah! This man is mad. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: He
is not mad. He has a soul related (spiritual) problem or illness. If you
want to know who is really mad I must say that mad or lunatic is a man
who walks with ego and pride and wonders at his own opinion, while
walking moves his shoulders arrogantly and hopes for heaven (paradise)
from God (and also) no one has been safe from his evil and no one hopes
anything good from him. This kind of man is mad or lunatic and the one
who you think mad is a victim of spiritual ailment.

Sometimes signs of pride can be seen from the manner of speaking,
sitting or walking of people. Also sometimes such person desires that a
group of people should follow him or that others should stand like
slaves in front of him. These are the signs of proud and arrogant
people. It was due to this that the manner of sitting of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) was such that, most of the time, he did not look like
the president of the assembly. Sometimes, while walking o road, he used
to say: Some of you may walk ahead. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) used to
walk behind them. (Bihar 73:206,226,233).

All that has been mentioned above was about pride. But what is the most
important of all is man himself who should know what is his task:

5 - Harm of Pride

A - Whenever man imagined himself to be above others he stayed back
from acquiring knowledge and wisdom and fell deep down in the pot of
multiple ignorance. And as he is not prepared to consult others even
form the worldly viewpoint he many a time, gets loaded with losses. So
much so that sometimes he loses even his kingdom and family like, Khusro
Parvez and Aboo Lahab and Rezashah Pahelvi and ……

B - Pride brings man down in the eyes of God and HIS creation. The Holy
Prophet (SAW) is reported to have said: "Most hated persons are the
proud ones. It is also narrated: "Man yastakbir…."

"The one who is proud is degraded by God".

6 - The Way of Remedying Pride

In the face of this ailment of the soul or spirit what should one do
and in what way it should be driven away? To get rid of this illness it
is necessary to follow some prescriptions:

Firstly: He should think what was he, what he is and what will be he?
Man's first and last is obvious. Practically too he is hot the master of
himself. Is it proper on his part to be arrogant or proud? He must
ponder more over this. Secondly: He must study carefully the verses and
traditions condemning this vice and always remember he same. Thirdly: He
must keep its harms in mind so that the disease is removed fully.

Fourthly: He should practically fight with desires and crush them and
for that purpose he should do that which is not pleasing to the heart.
7 - What Should Society Do While Confronting the Arrogant?

The judgment of intelligence or reason and the order of religion is
that to assist or help anyone in anything wrong or evil is sin, ugly,
disobedience of God and hence all means should be utilized so as to
remove injustice and oppression and sins. The Holy Prophet (S) is
reported to have said:

"Izaa ……"

"Whenever you meet with the courteous of my community be humble before
them and show pride against the arrogant". (Akhlaaq e Bashar, p.172).
Also we read in a well known tradition:

"At ta kab bur…."

"Showing pride (toughness) while facing the arrogant is a kind of
worship.

8 - Who shows pride?

Generally those who suffer from inferiority complex show pride and
imagine themselves to be better than others. What man understands is
that, pride or arrogance is the result of meanness and ignobility of
man. It is recorded from Imam Sadiq (a.s.): "Maa min ……."

"Man does not show arrogance but due to the abjectness which he finds
in himself". (Kafi, 2:312). In another hadith we read: "Maa min
rajulin…."

"No man exhibits pride and arrogance except because of the weakness
which hi sees in himself". (Ibid).


**Lesson: 10 : Love of Status and Fame**

Doubtlessly love for status and fame is one of the attributes, which
often destroys homes and Kingdoms. Similarly it also takes away his
religion and the world from man. If one does not improve oneself from
the very beginning, by the time he attains governance or power, his
entire aim become to rule over people and not to better and develop his
community. So when Mu'awiyah arrived in Kufa and climbed the pulpit he
said: I have nothing to do with your prayers and fasting! My desire is
to rule over you and I have attained it.

In order to give a better understanding of the subject of love for
status and fame, we divide its deliberation into two parts:

1 - The Quranic verses and the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) s and Imams
(a.s.) s narrations prohibiting and condemning love and fame and
status.

2 - What has been condemned is the love for governance. So in the
matter of property and wealth, it is the worldly material love and not
the said things in themselves.


**Condemnation of the over ambitious in the Quran**

A: As for that future abode, We assign it to those who have no desire
to exalt themselves in the earth nor to make mischief and the good end
is for those who guard against evil.

B: Whoever desires this worlds life and its finery, We will give them
in full their deeds therein, and they shall not be made to suffer loss
in respect of them. These are they for whom there is nothing but fire in
the Hereafter, and what they wrought in it shall go for nothing, and
vain is what they do.

C: Whoever desire the gain of the hereafter, We will give him more of
that again; and whoever desire the gain of this world, We give him of
it, and in the Hereafter he has no portion.

It is very well understood from there verses that in the sight of
Quran, love for fame and status is very indecent.

There are many narrations about this. We suffice but with few:

1 - Mummar bin Khalaad says: Imam Moosa bin Ja'far A was asked that man
loves power. Imam said: Maa zimbaane…. For a Muslim the loss from love
for status is more then the loss of a herd of sheep which does not have
a shepherd while it is attacked by two wolves.

2 - Imam Ja'far Sadiq (a.s.) said: Whoever desires status and power is
destroyed.

3 - Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: The one who entertains the love for power
gets destroyed.

4 - It is written in one of the prohibiting orders of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) Beware! The one who takes up the rule and power of a
community will, be brought on the Day of Judgement in such a manner that
his hands will be fastened with his neck. Then, if he had acted
according to Divine commandments during his rule, Allah will disband his
hands. If he had oppressed people he will be taken toward the Hell. How
bad is the place that is Hell.

But it must be remembered that the status which has been condemned is
when man likes it to be the ruler and had worked for getting it.
Otherwise, the status which has been granted by Lord Almighty is not
only unobjectionable but it is also very desirable. Hence the Holy Quran
avers in the words quoting the words of Prophet Yusuf Joseph - (a.s.):
He said: Place me in authority over the treasures of the land, surely I
am a good keeper, knowing well.

Imam Reza (a.s.) said: One who desires to get authority for himself,
gets destroyed as the authority does not befit the one who is not
qualified for it.

But some people, despite knowing that others are more qualified for
status than him or that they are not suitable for it, want to get power
and present themselves in such a way that people may think that they the
power seekers intend to serve Islam and Muslims. But these are satanic
thoughts who deceives man.

Truly if we have seen that others are more fit that us and that they
are more able to perform their duties and yet if we make a show of being
of well-wishers of Islam, is all this not a love for power and an
attempt to divert people from the path of Islam? And again, what
dishonesty is worse than that of a man who does not have any suitability
for a post and yet he, by telling hundreds of lies and playing various
tricks tries to impose himself on people and usurps the place of the
pious, because this does not harm only one person or seize the rights of
an individual but it is a big fraud on the entire society and on the
coming generation.

Said the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.): We must, in every situation, seek
Gods refuge to be safe from the desire of the self and from the evil of
satanic suggestions.


**Lesson: 11 : Love for the world**

What we find in Quranic verses and from the narrations about ambitions
for worldly or material things can be explained in three divisions:

1. Ayats and traditions condemning worldly desires.
2. Praise for desiring admissible worldly things and verses and
traditions permitting it.
3. Combining the above two ideas.

And we, by the help of Almighty God, quote below verses and narrations
explaining the above-mentioned divisions. For detailed study refer to
textbooks of Iqtisaad and Islamic comparison of This world and the
Hereafter.

**Verses condemning materialism**

And this worlds life is naught but a play and an idle sport; and
certainly the abode of the Hereafter is better for those who guard
against evil; do you not then understand?

B: Whoever desires this present life, we hasten to him therein what we
please for whomsoever we desire, then We assign to him the Hell; he
shall enter it despised, driven away. And whoever desires the Hereafter
and strives for it as he ought to strive and he is a believer; as for
these, their striving shall surely be accepted.

C: And this life of the world is nothing but a sport and a play; and as
for the next abode, that most surely is the life - did they but know;.

D: Know that this worlds life is only sport and play and gaiety and
boasting among yourselves, and a vying in the multiplication of wealth
and children, like the rain, whose causing the vegetation to grow,
pleases the husbands men; then it withers away so that you will see it
become yellow, then it becomes dried up and broken down and in the
Hereafter is a severe chastisement and also forgiveness from Allah and
his pleasure; and this worlds life is naught but means of deception.

And there are many traditions also about worldly love. For example we
quote some below:

1 - Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: If one passes his day and night having the
worldly gains his sole aim God makes him poor and upsets his life and he
does not get from the world except that which was destined for him. But
id somebody passes his day and nights with the next world hereafter in
view almighty Allah makes him needless from heart and manages for his
life.

2 - Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: One who develops more attraction toward
worldly things will suffer more restlessness and sorrowful grudge at
time of death.

3 - Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) quotes the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.): The
Dinar and Dirham (worldly wealth) has destroyed your predecessors and it
will likewise destroy you too.

4 - Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: There is a harm to the Hereafter in
desiring the present world, and there is a loss of the this world in
asking for the Hereafter. So let this world be harmed as it is more fir
to be harms.

5 - Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: This world is like river water. The more a
thirsty person drinks of it the thirstier he feels and finally gets
killed.

6 - Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) said: If man will see how speedily his
death is coming toward him he will abhor ambitions and will give up
admiring the world.

These are some examples from many narrations condemning the world.


