Remedy For This Mental Illness
==============================

The remedy is that man must be aware of the individual, collective and
religious harms of this illness. He should also read with attention on
the verses, narrations and historical events of people who had this
ailment like Qaroon, Mansoor Duwaaniqi and â€¦ and should take admonition
from them so that he may improve.


**Lesson: 17 : Oppression**

One of the meanest vices is injustice that will appear before you in
eleven parts:

**Meaning and Kinds of Zulm**

Zulm means putting a thing in a place or instance that does not belong
to it. It is applicable to several circumstances that can be divided
into three headings:

A: About man's relation with God the Lord of the worlds about His self,
or His attributes of being Glorious and Beautiful.

B: Disobeying and opposing Divine commandments and getting out of the
condition of His slavery, Man's tyranny against another person falls in
this category.

C: Man's injustice to himself that falls in the third Category.

On this topic several traditions have been recorded from the Prophets
progeny. We suffice with only this one: It has been reported from Imam
Baqir (a.s.): Injustice is of three kinds: 1 - Injustice which is
pardoned by God, 2 - Injustice that God does not forgive end 3 - The
injustice God does not overlook. However, the injustice which God does
not forgive is shirk polytheism. But the injustice which God pardons is
the injustice which man does to himself as the result of a sin is man's
injustice to himself and the injustice which God pardons is the
injustice which man does to himself as the result of a sin is man's
injustice to himself and the injustice which God does not overlook is
regarding the rights of men on one another. Some have divided injustice
or oppression or tyranny into common and particular: The common kind of
zulm is comprising of all immoral and mean vices whereas the particular
one means any harm or injury or wrong or damage done to others of
whatever kind it may be, physical, monetary or relating to prestige.

**Causes of Zulm**

Sometimes enmity and jealousy causes oppression or injustice. In this
case zulm can be considered as one of the vices of anger. Sometime zulm
may be caused due to greed and covetousness which can fall in the
category of the vices of desire.

**Verses and Narrations Indicating Ugliness of Zulm**

A: And when Luqman said to his son while he admonished him: O my son!
Do not associate aught with Allah; most surely polytheism is a grievous
inequity

B: The way to blame is only against those who oppress men and revolt in
the earth unjustly; these shall have a painful punishment.

C: and whoever among you is unjust, we will make him taste a great
chastisement.

D: And the day when the unjust shall Bite his hands, saying: O! would
that I had taken a way with the apostle; O woe is to me! Would that I
had not taken such a one for a friend! Certainly he had led me astray
from the reminder after it had come to me; and the shaitan fails to aid
man.

E: And do not think Allah to be heedless of what the unjust do; He only
respites them to a day on which the eyes shall be fixed open.


**Vicious effects of injustice**

About the ominous consequences of oppression in this world the Holy
Quran says:

1 - So those are their houses fallen down because they were unjust,
most surely there is a sign in this for a people who know.
2 - see then what was the end of the unjust.
3 - Surely Allah does not do any injustice to men, but men are unjust
to themselves.

Traditions narration too are many in this connection. These examples
should suffice:

1 - Imam Sadiq (a.s.) was asked about the verse he replied: It is a
bridge on the Siraat in the Hereafter which cannot be crossed by a
person who is indebted to others and he has not paid others dues.

2 - The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: Everyone who fears qisaas
retaliation and recompense of deeds prevents himself from oppressing
others.
3 - It is also noted: Save yourselves from tyranny doing injustice to
others as it is will cause darkness on the Day of Recompense.
4 - The worst provision on the Day of Judgement is tyranny to others.
5 - Imam Baqir (a.s.) said: What an oppressed will recover from the
oppressor on the Day of judgement from the religion of the former is
more than what the oppressor had seized from the oppressed in the
world.

6 - Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says: No helper except Allah.
7 - The one who eats his brother's wealth unjustly and does not return
it to him in fact has eaten a piece from Hellfire.
8 - The Holy Prophet is reported to have said: The best crusade is that
a man wakes up in the morning with no intention at all of oppressing
anyone or of doing any injustice to anybody.
9 - It has been recorded from Imam Baqir (a.s.): Oppression in this
world turns into darkness in the other one


**Harms of oppression**

Now from individual and collective viewpoint: An oppressor always keeps
his nerves restless and harms his soul conscience unknowingly. He is
always hated by the society. In fact he has a really dangerous and
because we believe that just as this world has open and manifest causes,
the real hidden causes too are such more powerful behind the scenes.
Regarding oppression, the Holy Quran and the pure progeny of the Prophet
(a.s.) have, through very effective description, warned us of dangerous
consequences. For example:

We read in the Holy Quran:

1 - So those are their houses fallen down because they were unjust,
most surely there is a sign in this for a people who know.
2 - The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has reportedly said: Keep away from
tyranny because tyranny spoils your hearts.
3 - It is noted from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.): Consequence of
oppression is regret.
4 - Imam Baqir (a.s.) said: There is no one who does injustice to
others but that God Almighty puts him oppressor in the same difficult
situation, be it about himself or his wealth. But if the injustice
concerned him and God, then it is possible that God accepts his
repentance and forgives him.
5 - Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has reportedly said: Everyone who oppresses
others falls in the similar trouble either with regard to him or to his
wealth or his children.

True traditions show us that the result of tyranny returns either to
the tyrant himself or to his family and this is the ignoble consequence
of oppression. Now let us look at a philosophical discussion extracted
from Tafseer Al Meezaan, under verse 218 of Surah Baqarah.

Between deeds and between external happenings there is a relation and
what is meant by deed called good and bad and which apply to the
movements or stillness of body and which are intentional and not which
are but natural to the physique like breathing and digestion etc - Tr.
and it is from this angel that the Holy Quran says: And whatever
affliction befalls you, it is on account of what your hands have
wrought, and yet He pardons most of your faults.

And in another Ayah Surely Allah does not change the condition of a
people until they change their own condition; and when Allah intends
evil to a people, there is no averting it And again in this verse says:
This is because Allah has never changed a favour that He has conferred
upon a people until they change their own conditions.

And these verses amply prove that between the events that take place
and the deeds done either good or bad, there is a kind of relation and
this fact is explained in two ayats of the Holy Quran:

One is verse 95 of surah Aaraaf which says: And if the people of the
towns had believed and guarded against evil We would certainly have
opened up for them blessings from the heaven and the earth, but they
rejected, so We overtook them for what they had earned. And secondly, in
Surah Rum it has been said: Corruption has appeared in the land and the
sea an account of what the hands of men have wrought, that He may make
tem taste a part of that which they have done, so that they may
return.

Thus, what events take place in the world, to some extent, are due to
the deeds of people, that is, if man obeys Allah and walks on the path
of His pleasing, doors of good and bounty open up before him. On the
contrary, if he deviates from the path of Gods slavery and walks in the
vales of misguidance and his thoughts and deeds become mean and evil or
rude, and if the society becomes corrupt and that evil of corruption
envelops both the land and the sea, leading the society to oppression
and war etc there is widespread turmoil and likewise natural calamities
like flood and famine and earthquakes fall on mankind. The Lord Almighty
says about the deluge of Iram and the flood of Nuh: Have they not
travelled in the earth and seen how was the end of those who were before
them? Mightier than these were they in strength and in fortifications in
the land, but Allah destroyed them for their sins; and there was not for
them any defender against Allah.

The Lord also says: And how many of the generations did We destroy
after Nuh! And your Lord is sufficient as Knowing and Seeing with regard
to His servants' faults.

Sometimes man invites the consequence of the society, that is, he sees
the good as well as bad results of his deeds. Sometimes he also benefits
from good deeds of his predecessors. But sometimes he also suffers due
to the misdeeds of his elders and predecessors. For example, peruse
these two verses:

1 - And as for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the city,
and there was beneath it a treasure belonging to them, and their father
was a righteous man; so your Lord desired that they should attain their
maturity and take out their treasure, a mercy from your Lord.,

2 - And let those fear who, should they leave behind them weakly
offspring, would fear on their account, so let them be careful of their
duty to Allah, and let them speak right words.

Problem: All collective calamities both common and particular like
flood, earthquake, was and famine and contagious diseases are the
consequences of natural causes, as they happen where and when the causes
are there and they do not take place when the reason for them are not
existing. Thus it is mere imagination that they are the result of any
deeds.

Answer: This criticism is made because the aim and object of the Quran
and the followers of Quran has not been understood properly because, the
one who those who say: Good and bad deeds become the causes of events
which are proportionate with the conduct. Their aim is not to put aside
the natural causes or/and to deny their natural consequences. Similarly
they do not intend to mix the deeds with natural causes in the effect.

Therefore, the aim of the God worshippers is not to, by confirming the
Creator, reject or falsify the law of cause and effect. To believe or be
convinced by the theory of accident and idle talk in the world of
existence. Rather their aim is to prove the existence of the
supernatural and the belief of there being spiritual factors behind what
happens in the material occurrences. That is, a happenings are once and
from one view point related to the material or physical and in a higher
stage connected with a non-material cause. For example, writing which is
related both to the pen and to the writer. In short, flood and
earthquake and â€¦ do have physical causes and yet there are behind them
supernatural or non-physical reasons.

So the same subject is mentioned in verses and narrations regarding
help to society and the reward of kindness and service to parents andâ€¦
Yet from the collective or social viewpoint:

When a society initiates a tendency of injustice and oppression, as its
consequence, this novel dishonesty turns into a tradition which gets
adopted by future generation and at last it overwhelms and imprisons the
society and its generations.

And from the viewpoint of the Hereafter:

It should be kept in mind that oppression is darkness and as its
consequence one will only meet with harassment and trouble. Rather more
than that, a tyranny will see his oppression incarnated or personified.
As the Holy Quran says: And what they had done they will find present
there; and your Lord does not deal unjustly with anyone.

And in another verse it says: Those who do evil shall not be rewarded
for aught except what they did. And in a third ayat says: As for those
who swallow the property of the orphans unjustly, surely they only
swallow fire into their bellies and they shall enter burning fire.

It can be derived from these verses that our deeds, besides their
apparent face, also have a factual or real face which is invisible to us
in this would. But these inner faces will manifest in the Hereafter and
bring forth the personification of deeds.

**The Worst Oppressions**

Not with standing that oppression is ugly and a mean thing, some of its
kinds are worse and more dangerous. We read about it in narrations
like:

1 - Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says: No oppression or tyranny is worse and
harsher than the tyranny wherein the oppressed one does not find any
help except in the Almighty God.

2 - In one of the wills of Imam Sajjad (a.s.) we find that at the time
of his passing away he said: O my dear son! Let it never be so that you
oppress somebody who may not find any helper except God. Other parts on
this topic mean vices will be narrated in subsequent lessons.


**Lesson: 18 : Help in oppression**

Just as oppression is prohibited, friendship with and help to the
oppressor too is prohibited haram. This matter is proved without any
doubt by the logic of both reason and religion. Just as oppression is
ugly so is the assistance to the oppressor because if the oppressor is
not given any help he will not be able to oppress others all alone.
Hence Imam Sadiq (a.s.) tells his friends: Had you not gathered round
Bani Umayyah, our right would not have been usurped.

Now we invite your attention to the followings verses and traditions:

1 - And when you se those who enter into false discourses about our
communications, withdraw from them until they enter into some other
discourse, and if the Satan causes you to forget, then do not sit after
recollection with the unjust people.

And do not incline to those who are unjust, lest the Fire touch you.

3 - The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: When the Day of Judgement rises
an announcer announces: Where are the tyrants and their helpers this
calling also includes those who even filled an inkpot for the unjust
ruler or sew his purse or sharpened a pencil for the oppressors. So
gather them along with the tyrants.

4 - Ibne Sinan says: I heard Imam Sadiq (a.s.) saying: Who ever assists
an oppressor against an oppressed one always remains under Divine anger
until he stops aiding the tyrant.

5 - The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: He in fact steps out of Islam.

6 - Imam Baqir (a.s.) said: A tyrant and the one who helps an oppressor
as well as the one who is pleased with such injustice all the three are
accomplices in the sin.

7 - Ali (a.s.) said: The truth about religion is the same like and
dislike then, as a testimony he referred to the she camel of the Prophet
Saleh (a.s.) saying: the man who killed that camel shot the arrow was
the killer of that camel yet the Divine chastisement fell on all due to
their being pleased in agreement with that misdeed. When the just Imam
will appear,

the one who is pleased with his command and who helps him in his just
deeds is his friend and when an unjust ruler appears arises and then the
one who likes his orders and who assists him in his oppression is his
friend. 8 - The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: The religious
jurisprudents are the honest satisfactory trustees of the Prophet so
long as they do not look at the world. It was asked: O Messenger of God!
What is the meaning of their turning toward the world? He replied:
Following unjust and wrong rulers. So when they do so be careful and be
afraid of them for the sake of your religion.

9 - Safwan bin Mehran says: I went to Imam Moosa bin Ja'far (a.s.), he
said: O Safwan! All of your deeds are good except one. I asked: I
sacrifice myself for you! What is that deed? He replied: Renting your
camels to this fellow, Haroon Rasheed. I said: By God! I did not do so
for fulfilling desire or as play or pastime but I rested them for their
journey to Mecca and I have never accompanied them and.. andâ€¦ Imam
(a.s.) said: Does any amount of that rent remain unpaid to you which
they pay afterward? Do you ever harbour the wish that they return safely
so that you are paid you dues? I said: Yes. Imam (a.s.) said: One who is
pleased with his life is also with him and whoever is with him will go
to hell.

Safwaan said: After this incident I sold all my camels. Thereafter
Haroon called me and asked: I have heard that you have sold your camels.
I said: Yes. He asked, why? I said: I am now an old man and my servants
do not work as they should. Haroon said: Do you think that I am not
aware? I know due to whose instance this thing has happened and he is
Moosa bin Ja'far. I said: I have nothing to do with Moosa bin Ja'far.
Then Haroon said: Had you not been in friendship with me I would have
killed you.

**The Oppressed is also Oppressor if He Becomes Excessive**

Hisham bin Salim says: I heard from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that Sometimes an
oppressed person seeks and prays against the oppressor to such an extent
that finally he himself turns into an oppressor, that in, what the
oppressed wishes for the oppressor is much more than the harm which was
done to him or he himself does to the oppressor which is beyond
proportion whereas the Holy Quran says: Whoever then acts aggressively
against you, inflict injury on him according to the injury he has
inflicted on you.

**Remedy**

If man does not keep his desires under control, they increase step by
step until, sometimes, it begins to enjoy oppressing others and shedding
their blood. Therefore it is recorded in the histories of Hajjaj bin
Yusufs and Moa'viyaas that they enjoyed shedding blood of people.
Therefore man must first control his desires so as he nip them in the
bud. He should also keep an eye on the dangerous consequences of
oppression and the oppressor. He must ponder much in this connection and
if he has, in case, committed an injustice he must repent for it.

**Tawbah of the Oppressor**

In the discussion of Tawbah repentance we have described that every sin
has a particular tawbah Maad yaa Aakhareene Sartakaamuli and injustice
too is not an exception to it. Here we invite your attention to two
narrations in this connection:

1 - An elder of the tribe of Nakha approached Imam Baqir (a.s.) and
said: I have served as a waali or officer of the government continuously
from the days of Hajjaj. Is Tawbah available to me? The questioner says:
The Imam kept silence and did not reply. I asked again: He said: No,
until you pay up the right of everyone whose right was usurped through
you.

2 - Ali bin Hamzah says: I had a friend who was an officer in the
Umayyad government. He asked me to take an appointment with the Imam
Sadiq (a.s.) so that he may be able to see him. I obtained permission.
When he arrived, he saluted said Salaam to the Imam, took a seat and
said: O Imam! May my life be sacrificed for you. I had been an officer
in the Umayyad government and I have earned much money from them. The
Imam said: Had the Bani Umayyah not found people who would write on
their behalf, fight for them and collect revenue wealth for them and
join their assemblies, in truth, our right would not have been usurped.
The questioner repeated a question and asked: Now is there any way of
relief for me? He replied: Will you accept if I say? He said: Yes. The
Imam said: If you can find out the people from whom you obtained money
in the said manner, return their wealth to them and if you cannot find
them then donate the money you have earned in the way of Allah on their
behalf. If you do so I stand surety to your admission to paradise.

Ali bin Hamzah says: whatever he had, he, following the orders of the
Imam, gave away so much so that he gave away even his clothes. I
provided clothing for him. After a time I came to know that he had
fallen ill. I went to se him and sat near his deathbed. His last words
were: O Ali bin Hamzah: The Imam has fulfilled his promise. Then he
breathed his last. When I went to the Imam, his eyes fell on me and at
once he said: By God, I have acted as I had promised with your friend. I
said: By God, you said the truth because he too said so at the time of
his death.


**Lesson: 19 : Tyrants should not be relied upon or supported**

The Holy Quran commands: And do not incline to those who are unjust,
lest the fire touch you, and you have no guardians besides Allah, then
you shall not be helped.

This verse describes one of the most basic guidelines of social and
political and military and religious life and announce to common Muslims
that it is their duty to abide by: Do not lean toward those who have
committed injustice and oppression and that you must not rely on them
nor should you trust them = lest the Fire touch you Fa ta mas sukumun
naar and you have no guardians besides Allah Wa maa lakum min
doonillaahi min awliyaa and in such circumstances it is obvious that you
shall not be helped Sum ma laa tansuroon Now we invite your attention to
some important points:

1 - Meaning of Rukoon inclination: This Arabic words maaddah root is Ra
ka na which means the pillars or walls keeping a building or other
things stand on their base. Thereafter it is used to mean reliance on or
to trust a thing. Though the commentators of Quran have given many
meanings of this word in the context of this verse, all or most of them
have come to a comprehensive conclusion. For example, so have taken it
to mean tamaayal inclination and some to hamkaari cooperation. Some
others say it means Izhaare razayat satisfaction or agreement and some
khair-khaahi was itaa at well-wishing and obedience. All these meanings
contain the sense of reliance and trust and inclination or liking.

2 - In what maters the oppressors should not be relied on or trusted?
Obviously there should be on participation in injustice, oppression and
tyranny nor any assistance should be given to them. Secondly, in the
second stage, it is necessary to abstain from such support to them that
might result in weakening the Muslim society or losing its independence
and thus it turning into a weak and aligned organ because such
inclinations can only make Islamic nation weak and defeated.

But as for, the business and educational relations of Muslims with
non-Muslims meant for securing Muslim interests and the security of
Muslim societies, it does not come in the purview of inclining toward
the tyrants. It is not prohibited by Islam. Such relations did exist
even in the time of the Holy Prophet and they have continued even
thereafter. 3 - Philosophy of banning support to tyrants: Support or
assistance to an oppressor creates much degeneration and chaos not
unknown to anybody. Yet the more we pry in this issue more and more
fresh points come before us.

1 - Support to tyrants makes tem strong and their strengthening causes
widening of oppression and injustice and destruction of a society. Hence
circumstances even if he is helpless a man must not obtain his right by
approaching a tyrant or corrupt judge, because, resorting to such court
implies recognition of such court and government which results in their
strengthening and the harm of such deed sometimes is more than the loss
which lies in the usurpation of ones right.

3 - Depending on oppressors gradually affects the culture of thought of
a society which removes dislike for tyranny and injustice and which
results in encouraging people to oppress others and to be come tyrants
themselves.

3 - As a principle, trust and reliance on others, which results in
becoming their allies, would not bring anything but misfortune. Then
what to talk of inclining toward the tyrants and oppressors.

That society is strong and progressing and advancing which stands on
this won feet as has been explained through a beautiful example in verse
29 of Surah Fatha in the Holy Quran. It says: Like green plants standing
on their stems, not requiring any inclination or alienation with others
for living and growing up. Therefore, a society is free and independent
only when it is self-reliant in every way or aspect and its relations
with others are merely on the basis of mutual interests not like those
of a weak one with a strong one. Such reliance on others,

be it in the field of thought and culture or military and economy or
politics, with only result in enslavement and exploitation. If such
reliance is on tyrants and oppressors its consequence with be
cooperation with their plans of oppression and injustice. Of course, the
above mentioned verse is applicable not only to social relations but it
addresses two individuals too, so much so that a Faithful and free
person must never rely or assist an oppressor because, it results only
in the losing of independence and also in the enlargement of the field
of tyranny and injustice and the strengthening of corruption and
cruelty.

4 - The oppressors: who are they? Commentators have given probabilities
but what can be said is this: All those persons who have done injustice
to or oppressed the people or have enslaved the slaves of Allah and who
have unjustly exploited them for their own interests fall under the
common category of Al zee na aa Manooâ€¦ and the above verse does apply to
them.

Yet it is agreed that those who did a little injustice to others in the
course of their lives do not come in the definition of this word,
because, in that case, only a few will be excepted and then it will not
be permissible for anyone to support anyone. Hence it is proper to take
this in the meaning of one who has assisted a person who had committed
an all round oppression and injustice or tyranny and in this way, the
one who has committed such tyranny even once also falls in this
purview.

5 - Between what can be derived from the above verse and whale the
Ulama of Ahle Sunnah say there is a very wide distance. Sunni scholars,
in their books of jurisprudence and beliefs, have raised the question
whether the obedience of a tyrant and sinner sultan ruler is
obligatory?

**Fabricated narrations**

Ibne Hanbal, Shafei and Malik say patience must be maintained against
the oppression of tyrant rulers.

This stand is based on false and concocted Traditions or traditions.
Here are some examples:

1 - It is quoted from Abu Bakr that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said:
Troubles will arise when sitting will be better than walking and walking
will be better than striving and striving will be better than adding
fuel to the trouble. Beware! Whenever you face such trouble some
situation get dispersed whoever has goats should go for grazing his
goats, or camels, and whoever has agricultural land should engage in the
work of agriculture. A man asked: If one does not have goats, or camels
or agriculture what should he do? He said: He should hit his sword on a
rock and break it so tat he may not fight with the rulers.

3 - It is quoted from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.): If a man dies and he
is not bound by an oath of allegiance of anyone be he an oppressor he
has died the death of the time of ignorance pre-Islamic.

2 - It is quoted from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.): If a man takes
reigns of government in his hands and then begins to disobey God,
whoever observes his offences should dislike him the offender but he
should not raise his hand to fight with him.

4 - It is also quoted from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.): One who dies
without having allegiance of obedience of the leader of the nation has
died the death of ignorance.

5 - Similarly it has been narrated that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
said: If one receives evil from the ruler he should show patience
because if one opposes Muslims to a little extent and then dies, he has
died as if in the time of pre-Islamic ignorance.

6 - They have quoted from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.): It is your duty
to obey the king sultan or shah Even if he grabs your property and flogs
your back.

It was this series of narrations that confused a group of people. Hence
when Imam Husain (a.s.) did not give allegiance and migrated to Mecca,
some people said: Abu Saeed says that: I said to Husain (a.s.): Fear God
and sit in your house and do not rise against your Imam ruler. And after
the martyrdom of Imam Husain (a.s.) a Holy-looking man like Qazi Shurah
said: Husain has been killed by the sword of his grandfather. He argues
that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) had said: Do not fight with a ruler. As
Husain opposed the ruler he got killed.

It is like those who forgot the Quranic verse: Do not support those who
oppress, otherwise fire will overtake you.

Or narrations in this regard such as: The one who please a tyrant
ruler, through a deed which angers God, gets out of the religion of
Allah. It has been quoted from Imam Baqir (a.s.): One who obeys the
disobedients of God has no religion.

Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) has been quoted saying: Obeying an order which
contravenes Gods commandment is prohibited. After it has been made clear
that, from the viewpoint of Islam, assistance to and friendship with
oppressors is prohibited, now we invite your attention to some verses
and narrations prohibiting such aid to and friendship with the
unbelievers:

1 - Let not the believers take the unbelievers for friends rather than
believers; and whoever does this, he shall have nothing of the
guardianship of Allah, but you should guard yourselves against them,
guarding carefully; and Allah makes you cautious of retribution from
Himself; and to Allah is the eventual coming.

2 - O you who believe! If you obey those who disbelieve they will turn
you back upon your heels, so you will turn back losers. Nay! Allah is
your Patron and He is the best of the helpers.

3 - O you who believe! Do not take the unbelievers for friends rather
than the believers; do you desire that you should give to Allah a
manifest proof against yourselves?

4 - O you who believe! Do not take the Jews and the Christians for
friends; they are friends of each other; and whoever amongst you takes
them for a friend, then surely he is one of them; surely Allah does not
guide the unjust people.

5 - O you who believe! Do not take for guardians those who take your
religion for a mockery and a joke, from among those who were given the
Book before you and the unbelievers; and be careful of your duty to
Allah if you are believers.

6 - O you who believe! Do not take your fathers and your brothers for
guardians if they love unbelief more than belief; and whoever of you
takes them for a guardian, these it is that are the unjust. Say: If your
fathers and your sons and your brethren and your mates and your kinsfolk
and property which you have acquired, and the slackness of trade which
you fear and dwellings which you like, are dearer to you than Allah and
His Apostle and striving in His way, then wait till Allah brings about
His command: and Allah does not guide the transgressing people.

Question: why the Holy Quran repeatedly says: you cannot befriend the
unbelievers?

Answer: These verses, in fact, give an important political and social
lesson to Muslims that they should not accept the aliens as friends nor
as guardians and helpers and should not be deceived by their sweet words
of apparently deep love and affection, because, history say that people
having Faith and aim have suffered serious losses in this way.

It we look deeply in the history of imperialism, we find that the
imperialists and colonialists have always penetrated the societies of
their colonies in the garb of friendship and sympathy and development
and construction so much so that the word Colonialism Istemaar that
refers to habitats is used in the same meaning. After strengthening
their clutches in the colonised nations they fall on them mercilessly
and plunder each and every item of their wealth.

In order that this dishonest programme of the unbelievers may not
penetrate the Muslim societies, the Holy Quran prohibits such work with
full force and with complete clarity. Yet, alas, some of the Muslims
have forgotten this Commandment of the Holy Quran and have selected
shelters among the aliens and history gives witness that most of the
hillock of the Muslims have come up only from this source! For this
subject, Spain is a fresh signboard that indicates how Muslims created
the brightest civilization in Spain, but because of relying on the
aliens, how easily lost it too!

The big Ottoman empire which, in a very short duration, broke up and
melted away like the summer ice, and the dirty government of Pahlavis
turned Iran into dependent country and how American consultants were
brought into Iran in the garb of officers and servants who, in fact,
ruled over Iran and who fully bound up Iran with America. Had this great
Islamic Revolution under the leadership of the heart of the weakened
people of the world, Imam Khomeini, not occurred, it was not known
whether the fate of our beloved Iran could have been worse than that of
Spain.

Now we must pay attention and we must take care to safeguard this
independence of ours. We must realise that an alien under every
circumstance even if they participate with us in common interests and
even if the cooperation is in limited fields, in critical circumstances,
they will not only us part with us but will also inflect severe blows on
us. Therefore, our awake Imam, before the success of the Revolution,
told the people in his speeches and announcements to be cautious of the
Marxist groups so that they may not knife you from behind. Despite this,
you saw how they hit us. Had we not the awakened leadership of the Imam
and the general public not supported the Imam, it cannot be said what
would have happened to this Revolution and what kind of fire would have
spread in this country.

For better understanding of this fact also pay attention to a
historical event.

The Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.s.) was so much careful in this matter that
during the war of Uhad, when a hundred Jews mentioned their readiness to
co-operate with Muslims against the polytheists of Mecca, the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) turned them back from half way and did not accept
their assistance. This was despite the probability of their playing and
effective role in the war of Uhad. Why? It was because they, after a
short while, in the critical moments of war, co-operated with the enemy
and also took with them the remaining Muslim forces.

We conclude this discussion with two questions and answers:

1 - Is it permissible for us to participate in their meets and or to
pray for them even if they are our near and dear relatives? The answer
is certainly in the negative. The Holy Quran asserts: It is not fit for
the Prophet and those who believe that they should ask forgiveness for
the polytheists, even though they should be near relatives, after it has
become clear to them that they are inmates of the flaming fire.

2 - If praying for the unbelievers is not permissible then how did
Ibrahim pray for his father? The Holy Quran mentions like this: And
Ibrahim asking forgiveness for his sire was only owing to a promise
which he had made to him; but when it became clear to him that he was an
enemy of Allah, he declared himself to be clear of him that he was an
enemy of Allah, he declared himself to be clear of him; most surely
Ibrahim was very tender-hearted, forbearing.


**Lesson: 20 : Hypocrisy**

One of the very dangerous vices is hypocrisy. When it appears in any
individual or a group it puts the society to peril and deprives it of
every kind of progress. Who is a Hypocrite?

The word munaafiq is derived from the root nifaaq. One whose outward
and inward is not the same or who is called double-faced is a hypocrite.
Here it means a band which acts against logic and reason and which, for
their personal interests and transient benefits, goes against the
decisive majority to such an extent that if they can, they resort to
sabotage. Yet, for fear of the community or lust for current gains, they
make a show of friendship and unity or intimacy.

Hypocrites are not found only in Islam or other religious but they are
also seen in political parties. Generally when the working or course of
the ruling party endangers the interests of a band and they are unable
to oppose the rulers openly they strive to find out people like them and
them form a nucleus of central nucleus of hypocrisy. Sometimes such
people also instigate other aliens to create fissure in the ruling party
and through hues and cries prevent it from enacting its programmers.

In the third stage it is possible that a group is, from the beginning,
not on the platform of the faithful but due to lust makes a show of
being like it or for securing the safety of its life and property
declares itself to be belonging to the rulers group. The above-mentioned
causes motivate the creation of hypocrite groups in global parties that
are based on common thoughts.

Islam is also not an exception to the aforesaid rule. After the
establishment of the Islamic state and party on the basis of Piety and
social justice and moral virtues planted in the hearts of the majority
of the people, groups like the Tudeh party and the Mujaahideene Khalq
and Khalqe Muslaman and stood up or came into being who, outwardly, made
a show of respect to the principles and laws of Islam but who were in
their hearts, staunch opponents of Islam and who passed the military
secrets of the Islamic state to enemies and/or by spreading false
rumours treated fear in the hearts of some Muslims and tried for the
break up of the Islamic state through their relations with anti-Islamic
states.

So, after the victory of the Islamic Revolution, under the leadership
of the great leader, the Naib Imam, Imam Khomeini such groups began
their work of hindrances and sabotage and instigated daily strikes in
schools and factories and made plots and spread rumours. They had
enacted their plans so cleverly in organisations that they were able to
inflict terrible blows on the head office of he Islamic Republican Party
wherein they killed seventy-two representatives of the nation. Again
they conspired in the office of the Prime Minister wherein the popular
leader Brother Rajai and the scholar brother Bahonar were martyred. This
hypocrisy was so deep-rooted that, had there not been the steadfastness
of the Imam and the awakening of the nation, they would have been able
to overturn the Islamic state in Iran, in the early days of the Islamic
Revolution.

After this preamble, we now invite your attention to some of the
Quranic verses and narrations regarding hypocrisy and the hypocrite:

And there are some people who say: We believe in Allah and the last
day; and they are not at all believers. They desire to deceive Allah and
those who believe, and they deceive only themselves and they do not
perceive. There is a disease in their hearts, so Allah added to their
disease and they shall have a painful chastisement because they And when
it is said to them, Do not make mischief in the land, they say: We are
but peace-makers. Now surely they themselves are the mischief-makers,
but they do not perceive. And when it is said to them: Believe as the
people believe they say:

Shall we believe as the fools believe? Now surely they themselves are
the fools, but they do not know. And when they meet those who believe,
they say: We believe; and when they are alone with their Shaitans, they
say: Surely we are with you, we were only mocking. Allah shall pay them
back their mockery, and He leaves them alone in their inordinacy,
blindly wandering on. These are they who buy error for the right
direction, so their bargain shall bring no gain, nor are they the
followers of the right direction. Their parable is like the parable of
one who kindled a fire but when it had illumined all around him, Allah
took away their light, and left them in utter darkness - they do not
see. Deaf, dumb and blind, so they will not turn back. Or like abundant
rain from the cloud in which is utter darkness and thunder and
lightning; they put their fingers into their ears because of the thunder
peal, for fear of death, and Allah encompasses the unbelievers. The
lightning almost takes away their sight; whenever it shines on them they
walk in it, and when it becomes dark to them they stand still; and if
Allah had pleased He would certainly have taken away their hearing and
their sight; surely Allah has power over all things.

In these verses, the Holy Quran shows the signs of the hypocrites
concisely yet in a clear and interesting manner:

1 - The hypocrites, for advancing their evil aims and for crushing
Islam, derive benefit under the cover of Imam.
2 - The hypocrites always pose themselves as men of reform though they
have always been the evildoers.
3 - They consider themselves above the real Muslims who obey the orders
of they Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and they consider themselves as clever
and consider the Muslims as fools whereas, in fact, they themselves are
fools.
4 - They had formed a secret group and were not prepared to announce
the issues they used to discuss in their secret gathering.

Announce to the hypocrites that they shall have a painful chastisement:
Those who take the unbelievers for guardians rather than believers. Do
they seek honour from them? Then surely all honour is for Allah. And
indeed He has revealed to you in the Book that when you hear Allah's
communications disbelieved in and mocked at do not sit with them until
they enter into some other discourse; surely then you would be like
them; surely Allah will gather together the hypocrites and the
unbelievers all in hell.

Those who wait for some misfortune to befall you then If you have a
victory from Allah they say: Were we not with you? And is there a chance
for the unbelievers, they say: Did we not acquire the mastery over you
and defend you from the believers? So Allah shall Judge between you on
the day of resurrection, and Allah will by no means give the unbelievers
a way against the believers. Surely the hypocrites strive to deceive
Allah, and He shall requite their deceit to them,

and when they stand up to prayer they stand up sluggishly; they do it
only to be seen of men and do not remember Allah save a little. Wavering
between that and this, belonging neither to these nor to those; and
whomsoever Allah causes to err, you shall not find a way for him. O you
who believe! do not take the unbelievers for friends rather than the
believers; do you desire that you should give to Allah a manifest proof
against yourselves?

The attributes and features of the hypocrites which we find from these
verses are as follows:

1 - They adopt the way of deceit and conspiracy to attain their evil
aims so much sot that they want to deceive even God while they are busy
in it a kind of deceit has taken place, because, in order to get little
wealth they have lost a big wealth of their own existence and this is a
true example of a well known story quoted by elders wherein it is said
that it was sold to a group of traders: Beware, lest an alien poor may
put a cap on your head defraud you. One said: Perchance they are unaware
and simpleminded people; we shall put cap on their heads. The wise old
man said: I also mean the same thing. In this manner you are earning a
little wealth and giving away a great capital your Faith.

2 - They are away from Allah and do not derive pleasure by remembering
Him in private and hence: when they stand up for praying namaz their
entire selves are in a state of indisposition and feebleness.

3 - Since they have no faith in Allah and His great promises, whatever
good act of noble deed they do, they do it just for showing it to
others, not for God.

4 - Even if they remember Allah and describe Him it is no from the
awareness of heart and mind and even if it is so, it is much less:

5 - They are wandering aimlessly without any fixed programme forming
neither part of the assembly of the faithful nor are they in the line of
disbelievers:

The word Muzahzab is an object name from the root word zabzab which
originally means a particular noise which is created when a hanging
thing is swinged due to its striking with the air waves and this word is
used with regard to moving objects and wandering and wandering persons.
In verse 144 of Surah Nisa we read: O you who believe! do not take the
unbelievers for friends rather than the believers. Do you wish through
this deed to provide before God a clear proof to your own detriment?
Because the hypocrites are to dwell in the lowest stage of Hell and they
will never find a helper therefore, refrain from befriending the enemies
of Allah, as it is a sign of hypocrisy.

It is clearly learnt from this verse that, from the viewpoint of Islam,
hypocrisy is one of the worst kinds of disbelief and hypocrites are the
people who are farthest from God and, on this ground, their place is in
the lowest and the worst stage of the Hell; and it ought to be so,
because, the harms inflicted by them on the Islamic society are in no
way comparable with other dangers. They are those, who, taking undue
advantage of their safety under the cover of verbally expressed belief,
attack shelter less people in a cowardly and unrestrained manner. They
knife others on the back. Doubtlessly, the position of these enemies,
who are both cowards and dangerous, and who appear in the garbs of
friends is far worse than that of the declared enemies who make
themselves know as enemies.

In truth, hypocrisy the behaviour of a people who have no personality
and who are timid and low and mean and corrupt in every way. Yet, in
order to clarify that even such extraordinary people have a way toward
God and for improving their position condition, the Divine verse adds:
except those who repent and amend and hold fast to the Mercy of Allah
and make their behaviours pure for God, will be with the Faithful and
Allah will give a great reward to the Faithful people.

In another Ayat the Holy Quran describes the signs of hypocrites thus:
The hypocritical men and the hypocritical women are all alike; they
enjoin evil and forbid good and withhold their hands; they have forsaken
Allah, so He has forsaken them; surely the hypocrites are the
transgressors. In this verse also five signs of the hypocrites are
mentioned:

First and second: they encourage people to indulge in evil and prevent
them from doing good = That is totally against the working of the
Faithful who always, according to the command Amr bil Maaroof and Nahya
anil Munkar, strive for reforming the society and for clearing it of
corruption. The hypocrites continuously strive for enveloping the
society by corruption and for emptying it of good so that in those
circumstances and conditions, they may attain their evil goals. Yes, A
plunderer seeks a bazaar in turmoil.

Third: They never spend anything, rather close their hands. They
neither spend in the way of God nor help the deprived poor. Neither
their relatives nor other ever benefit from their money:

It is obvious that since they do not believe in the Hereafter life
after death and the spending for good they are stingy in the matter of
wealth. It is likely that, for attaining their evil aims, they say also
spend a lot of money or may spend much money for making a show of their
generosity. But they never do so only with an honest intention of
pleasing God. Fourth: All of their words and deeds declare that they
have forgotten God. Also their lifestyle shows that God also has
forsaken them and deprived them of His blessings and grace and gifts
that is, He has forgotten them and the signs of such forgetting become
obvious throughout the lives of the hypocrite.

Fifth: that the hypocrites are lewd and licentious and live out of the
circle of obedience to God god almighty, in this verse, after describing
the attributes of hypocrites, says:

Allah has promised the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women and
the unbelievers the fire of hell to abide there in it is enough for
them; and Allah has cursed them and they shall have lasting
punishment.

And when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was a disease began
to say; Allah and his apostle did not promise us victory but only to
deceive. This verse and the ones after it are in connection with the war
of Ahzab and is related to Bani Qurayza tribe. It is derived from
Tafseer al-Mizan that those with diseased hearts are people having a
little or less faith and not the hypocrites. But it can be said that:
the reference is a general one and is pointed especially toward
particular persons. But it fully applies to the hypocrites too. So the
Holy Quran, in verse no:10 in Surah Baqarah says about the hypocrites:

It must be kept in mind that the soul of man is like his body. When a
man's body becomes ill and he does not refrain from undesirable food and
does not take medicine his illness becomes serves. Similar is the case
of divine spiritual illnesses. If man doest not try to remedy them, that
is, if he does not do Tawbah, and if be does not revert to obedience of
Divine commandments and continues to belie the Prophet and goes on
sinning, his spiritual disease becomes serious as this is one of the
universal laws.

The difference between a healthy and a sick heart or soul is that, if
it is healthy it likes good and if it is not well it does not like good
and finds it detestable and the body does not accept it. This is what is
mentioned in these verses of Surah Tawbah:

And whenever a chapter is revealed, there are some of them who say:
Which of you has it strengthened in faith? Then as for those who
believe, it strengthens them in faith and they rejoice. And as for those
in whose hearts is a disease, it adds uncleanness to their uncleanness
and they die while they are unbelievers.

And also in the matter of oppressors it says:

And We reveal of the Quran that which is a healing and a mercy to the
believers, and it adds only to the perdition of the unjust. One of the
vices of a hypocrite is lying. Hence they Holy Quran says: When the
hypocrites come to you, they say: We bear witness that you are most
surely Allah's Apostle; and Allah knows that you are most surely His
Apostle, and Allah bears witness that the hypocrites are surely liars.


**Lesson: 21 : Discussion of hypocrisy & hypocrites continued

Some Important Points**

1 - Muslims should remember that the danger which has, till now,
threatened the Muslim society, was the internal assault a blow inflicted
from within by apparently Muslim but really Al Kafir persons.

It is narrated from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that: I do not ear, for
Islam, the known friends and foes because a friend does not assault and
no co-operation is forged with a known enemy. But I fear those
hypocrites who show themselves as Muslims and who assault Islam. So
Samarah bin Jandab and Abu Hurairah who attributed their lies to the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and verse able to harm Islam. Amirul Mo-mineen
(a.s.) says about this group: If people recognize that such persons are
hypocrites and liars they will never testify them and will never believe
them but people got deceived due to their being the Ashaab companions of
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and they tell to themselves that they are
those who have seen the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and have heard this
words and have accepted him and hence they never tell untruth whereas
the masses are not aware of the position of this group.

And these hypocrites were apparently Muslims who, through their lying,
were able to strengthen the foundations of the usurped and oppressive
governments of the Umaiyads and the Abbasids.

And today too our revolutionary masses should know that all the blows
which our Islamic society has suffered were inflicted by the hands of
such people who made themselves appear as Muslims and who penetrated
into the Islamic organizations and consequently succeeded in their evil
aims like bomb blasts, blood shed, strikes, rumour mongering etc.

2 - It is the duty of Muslims that they should admonish the hypocrites
and if thereafter they notice that the hypocrites still do not desist
from hiding themselves under the garb of munafiqat then they should be
removed from the Muslim society and they must be dealt with harshly.
That is why it has been repeatedly stated in the Holy Quran, for
instance:

O Prophet! Strive hard against the unbelievers and the hypocrites and
be unyielding to them; and their abode is hell, and evil is the
destination. It is alike to them whether you beg forgiveness for them or
do not beg forgiveness for them; Allah will never forgive them; surely
Allah does not guide the transgressing people.

Ask forgiveness for them or do not ask forgiveness for them; even if
you ask forgiveness for them seventy times, Allah will not forgive them;
this is because they disbelieve in Allah and His Apostle, and Allah does
not guide the transgressing people.

And those who built a masjid to cause harm and for unbelief and to
cause disunion among the believers and an ambush to him who made war
against Allah and His Apostle before; and they will certainly swear: We
did not desire aught but good; and Allah bears witness that they are
most surely liars. Never stand in it; certainly a masjid founded on
piety from the very first day is more deserving that you should stand in
it; in it are men who love that they should be purified; and Allah loves
those who purify themselves. Is he, therefore, better who lays his
foundation on fear of Allah and His good pleasure, or he who lays his
foundation on the edge of a cracking hollowed bank, so it broke down
with him into the fire of hell; and Allah does not guide the unjust
people. The building which they have built will ever continue to be a
source of disquiet in their hearts, except that their hearts get cut
into pieces; and Allah is Knowing, Wise.

Commentators have written: A group of hypocrites approached the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) an said: Permit us to build a mosque among the tribe
of Bani Salam near Masjid Qubaa so that old sand infirm and ill and
disabled may pray therein and likewise, in rainy nights, when some weak
people who are unable to come to your Masjid may fulfil their Islamic
duty therein. This was the time when the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) was
setting out for the war of Tabuk.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) gave them permission.

But they added to their request whether it is possible that you Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) come there personally and pray therein. The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: At present I am leaving for jihad. On return,
God willing, I will come to that Masjid and pray therein.

When the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) returned from the War of Tabuk, that
group name back to him and said: We request you to come to our mosque
and to pray therein and pray to God so that He may bless us. This
happened when the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) had not yet reached the gate
of Madinah. In the meanwhile Divine Revelation came with the
above-quoted verses, which exposed the secret of their deed. Following
it, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) ordered to put that mosque to fire and
to destroy its remains and to make at that place for collecting city
garbage!

Apparently, if we look at the work of this group along with the offer
which they had made in the beginning we become astonished. But, is it
not that the construction of a mosque and that too for assisting the
weak and the sick and for exigencies really a deed of religious service
as well as a human aid? Yet, in reality, it is a bad deed that brought
such Divine commandment. Why?

However, when we study the hidden aspect of the problem we will see how
well calculated was this Divine Order. Abu Aamir was from the fugitive
Christian monks who had relations with the hypocrites of Madinah. Under
the show of a mosque we wanted to build a centre from where he may be
able to hit deadly assaults on Islam.

3 - Many narrations also give signs of hypocrites, for example:

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: A hypocrite has three symptoms: To
lie while talking, to break promise and to be dishonest when trusted. It
is reported through Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
said: There are three are three things. Anyone who posses as then is a
hypocrite even if he fasts and prays and calls himself a Muslim: the one
who breaches a trust, tells lies and breaks promise.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) also said: If the outward courtesy of body
exceeds the inward courtesy of the heart, then it is, in our view,
hypocrisy. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: There are four signs of a hypocrite:
1 Hardness of heart, 2 Dryness of eye, 3 insistence on sinning and 4
greed to live long in the world.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: Excessive love for status and wealth
grows hypocrisy in the heart of man just as water grows vegetable.

**A Warning to Hypocrites**

If one does not beg forgiveness make Tawbah and dies while having this
dangerous vice he becomes the target of this verse: On the day when the
hypocritical men and the hypocritical women will say to those who
believe: Wait for us, that we may have light from your light; it shall
be said: Turn back and seek a light. Then separation would be brought
about between them, with a wall having a door in it; as for the inside
of it, there shall be mercy in it, and as for the outside of it, before
it there shall be punishment.

They will cry out to them: Were we not with you? They shall say: Yea!
But you caused yourselves to fall into temptation, and you waited and
doubted, and vain desires deceived you till the threatened punishment of
Allah came, while the arch deceiver deceived you about Allah. So today
ransom shall not be accepted from you nor from those who disbelieved;
your abode is the fire; it is your friend and evil is the resort. O God!
We give you the oath of your Holy self and of the high status of your
Friends and of the blood of the martyrs of your path! Keep us far away
from the evil of hypocrisy and selfishness and egotism and make us the
possessors of good morals and attributes of your righteous slaves.


