Man's Covenant With Allah
=========================

Here are some verses about man's trust with God:

And those who break the covenant of Allah after its confirmation and
cut as under that which Allah has ordered to be joined and make mischief
in the land; as for those, upon them shall be curse and they shall have
the evil issue of the abode. And fulfil the covenant Allah when you have
made a covenant, and do not break the oaths after making them fast, and
you have indeed made Allah a surety for you; surely Allah knows what you
do. Commentators have given several meanings of the covenant of Allah
but what is obvious is that it means those promises which men give to
god and obviously the words given to the Holy messengers and the Imams
are also the words given to God, and it includes the promises related
with Faith, jihad etc.

And it should be stated that the religious commands issued through the
Holy Prophet of Islam do contain a kind of the Divine orders and
similarly rational obligations which are the outcome of the God-given
faculty of thinking, intelligence, wisdom and too are linked with
bye-covenant. This is to say religious obligations and rational demands
are covered by Ahdullah or the promise given to God.

He it is Who makes you travel by land and sea; until when you are in
the ships, and they sail on with them in a pleasant breeze, and they
rejoice, a violent wind overtakes them and the billows surge in on them
from all sides, and they become certain that they are encompassed about,
they pray to Allah, being sincere to Him in obedience: If Thou dost
deliver us from this, we will most certainly be of the grateful ones.
But when He delivers them, lo! they are unjustly rebellious in the
earth.

Yes, many people make covenant with Allah during their bad days but
when they are released from that trouble, they forget Allah. So we
should pray to Allah so that He may not leave us to ourselves even for a
moment.

**Promise Keeping between Man and Man**

The Holy Quran says in this connection: O you who believe! Fulfil the
obligations. Raagib says: Obligation is of three sorts: sometimes it is
between man and God, sometimes man's promise with himself and sometimes
between man and the entire humanity.

Since Al has come ahead of the word Uqood and as according to grammar
it denotes a common category and from one angle the sentence is fully
unconditional it can be derived that this Holy verse includes all sorts
of promises and covenants which must be fulfilled those between men and
man's promise to God and so also all the political, trade, family etc
treaties or understandings.

And the Quran in another ayat says: and fulfil the promise; surely
every promise shall be questioned about Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) writes
in his letter to Malik Ashtar: From among the divine commandments, there
is no subject like the keeping of promise, which is most unanimously
agreed, despite other disagreements. Therefore even the idol worshippers
of the days of ignorance were respecting the oath among them since they
had understood the harms of oath breaking.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: One who does not keep his promise has
no religion. Similarly there is another narration from Imam Ali (a.s.):
Almighty Allah does not accept anything from His slaves except a good
deed and nothing except the fulfilment of oath is acceptable in His
court.

And there is another narration from Salman Farsi that also has the same
meaning: The destruction of this community will be caused by their
breach of promises. The Holy constitution of Islam had given importance
to oath keeping to such an extent that even if a common soldier gives
protection to a man or group of the enemy it is incumbent upon all
Muslims to keep that promise.

A group of Islamic scholars is of the opinion that one of the matters
which attracted the idol worshippers and polytheist to Islam in its
earlier period was the same fulfilling of covenants and keeping oaths.
In this connection, Hisham bin Saalim quotes Imam Sadiq (a.s.): The
promise of a Muslim to another Muslim is a vow for which there is no
expiation it means if he breaks it, it cannot be compensated and,
really, it is considered as a promise given to God. So the Holy Quran
says: O group of the faithful! Why do you not do as you say? Be afraid
of this deed of not doing what is said as it will cause a great Divine
anger.

In traditions, keeping of oaths and promise is considered as one of the
signs of faith, like faith in God and the Hereafter. Hence the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) says: Whoever has faith in Allah and the Day of
Judgement must keep the promise whenever he makes it.

**Hypocrisy and Breach of a Vow**

Hypocrisy and double face is one of the worst qualities of man and the
cause of breaching vows and ignoring promise. The Holy Prophet has said
in this connection: There are three qualities and conditions which make
a man hypocrite even if he fasts and prays and is a Muslim in his
opinions:

1 Shows dishonesty when trusted,
2 Tells a lie while speaking and
3 Breaks a promise.

Again Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) says: Even if one undertakes something
through a sign, he should fulfil it. Are all the Promises Honourable?

If Islam has made a series of bonds and agreements as honourable, it
has also ordered the breaking of some, for example relating to the
enemy, when is felt that he is on the verge of dishonesty and breaching
trust of agreement. In that case friendship must not be continued.
Quranic proof of this is How can there be an agreement for the idolaters
with Allah and with His Apostle when they continue to break trusts? At
another place it is mentioned: And if they break their oaths after their
agreement and openly revile your religion, then fight the leaders of
unbelief surely oaths are nothing so that they may desist.

On this ground, fulfilling an oath has been considered as one of the
signs of the faithful and the wise and as one of the salient human
virtue and Islam has consistently emphasised it and has ordered to
ignore a promise given to the enemies of Allah even if they happen to be
ones close relatives. Anyway, much more has been said in the matter of
promise and covenant and its results and fruits. But we think this much
is enough here.

**Lesson: 34 : Honesty**

Honesty is one of the prominent qualities of man and acquiring it is
the virtue, which attracted common confidence and made deviated people
and non-Muslims fall upon the shining lamp of Islam. It created a
peaceful society and made people proceed on the path to progress. This
aim cannot be attained but through action as commanded by Islam: Imam
(a.s.) says: Call people through your deeds not by mere oral invitation.
Some verses Regarding Honesty: Surely Allah commands you to make over
trusts to their owners.

O you who believe! Be not unfaithful to Allah and the Apostle, nor be
unfaithful to your trusts while you know. It is understood from this
verse that: Man, in addition to being dishonest to himself and to
others, sometimes also does so with regard to God and His Apostle. This
last kind of the dirty deed related to dishonesty toward God and His
Prophet has been the target of severest condemnation. Here it is better
to look at the circumstances leading to the revelation of this verse:

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says: When the Apostle of Allah ordered the siege of
the Jews belonging to Banu Quraysh, the order was carried and the group
was under siege for twenty one nights. Finally they demanded that the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) may send Abu Lubabah to them. The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) conceded that request and sent Abu Lubabah to them. Banu
Quraysh, on the issue whether or not it was advisable to accept the
mediation of Saad bin Maaz consulted Abu Lubabah. Abu Lubabah pointed to
his throat that meant that if they accepted it they might be killed.

Jibraeel (a.s.) informed the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) of this. Abu
Lubabah says, he had not taken a few steps when he realised his
dishonest and so he made the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) aware of the same.
Abu Lubabah became very much ashamed and repentant and so he fastened
himself with rope to one of the pillars of the mosque of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and said:

By God! I will never take any food nor drink any water till death
unless Allah accepts my repentance and I desist from this misdeed. For
seven days and nights he remained hungry and thirsty, then fell
unconscious on the ground… At last Allah accepted his repentance and the
news reached himself from the pillar unless the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
himself unfastens the rope and finally the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) did
so…

After this event Abu Lubabah declare that, in order to complete his
repentance, he would give up the house wherein he had committed the sin.
But the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) prevented him from doing so and said:
Give one third of your wealth in the path of Allah. That is enough. And
those who are keepers of their trusts and their covenant As you have
seen, honesty and keeping of trust is one of the Divine orders and is
considered as one of the virtues of the faithful.


**Some Traditions Relating to Trust**

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: One who is not honest trustworthy has
no religion faith. Similarly The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: One who
is dishonest in this world and does not return the trust to its owner
and dies in this state has left the world being out of my ummah nation
and is not considered as my follower and he will meet Allah making HIM
angry and furious, that is, he will meet with Divine chastisement.

Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) said: Keep distance from a dishonest person as,
doubtlessly, dishonesty is one of the worst sins and a dishonest person
will always remain in the fire of hell. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has
said: For recognising people, do not see only how much prayers do they
perform or how much do they fast or how many times he has made hajj
pilgrimage and how much donations he has made. Nor pay attention to his
name and fame regarding his night worship. But keep in mind his
truthfulness and honesty.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: The weight of man's goodness is not in his
bowings and prostrations during his lengthy worship because, these acts
have become his habit in such a way that it they leave them they become
restless, but the balance and measure is their truthfulness and honesty
or trustworthiness.

Yes, so many are the people whose prayers and worships are no more than
habitual routine and they think that through such spiritless rituals
performed without realising the reality behind Divine commandments they
will enter paradise. Those who imagine like this should know that such
worship acting according to it is like soul in a body. If the soul is
dead within a body, it is more than a corpse. We read in the Holy Quran:
Surely We offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the
mountains, but they refused to be unfaithful to it and feared from it,
and man has turned unfaithful to it; surely he is unjust, ignorant. Many
traditions are found explaining the above verse which provide full
evidence about the importance of trustworthiness as explained by the
sinless Imams (a.s.).

In public talks when honesty is discussed mostly they imagine that it
is related to merely wealth but it should be borne in mind that honesty,
in the philosophy of the Holy Quran, has a very vast field which
encircles all the social as well as moral aspects. For example, one of
the trusts is the same Imamat and guidance which, in reality, is one of
the most principled and the most life giving causes leading to wisdom
and progress relating both to matter and spirit.

Imam and guidance is the principle, for bringing which up, Muslims,
especially the Shias have sacrificed much blood. With regard to the
Quranic verse said: dishonesty toward Allah and His apostle is to
disobey their orders and in amaanat dishonesty in trust is dishonesty
regarding what has been obligatory by God. And it is also there in a
Hadith that: Talks is a special gathering is a trust.

It is also mentioned in yet another Hadith that: I, while saying
something, a man looks around him so that others may not hear him his
talk is also considered a trust.

On this basis, the Islamic state and its laws and all the sources of
the Islamic sate and summarily, all the bounties of Almighty Allah like:
mother, children… are trusts from God. Though some of the Divine
ordinances are described as His law and some of the trusts of the
Prophet as his Sunnah and the trusts of the faithful are called their
secrets… At the end of this discussion let us pray to Allah so that He
may make us Truthful and Trustworthy.


**Lesson: 35 : Modesty and Chastity**

The meaning of IFFAT (modesty and chastity), according to dictionary
is: Iffat is one of the human virtues that, bridles passion, the
rebellious power.

And in another lexicon the meaning of IFFAT is: Modesty and chastity
prevents or hold back from bad and undesirable deeds. IFFAT and HAYAA
chastity and modesty controls all the movements and pauses and talks and
writings of man so that they may not do whatever they desire and so that
they may not speak or write down whatever their heart wants.

The lesson of chastity and piety may be taken by us from the Holy
Quran, that is the guide and a pattern for human beings. This is the
Book that, from beginning to end, speaks with soberness and dignity. It
must be said that one of its miracles is also that one cannot find in it
any phrases which is repulsive, boring or far from modesty and so also
there is nothing in it which can be related to a common, ignorant and
untrained person. Chastity and Modesty as Described by the Imams
(a.s.)

1. It is reported from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that: Verily Allah
likes a modest and chaste person and hates a foul tongued and oft
begging person.

2. Also the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said: Three groups will enter
paradise ahead of all, viz., first: A martyr as he the light house of
history and provides light to society. Second: an obedient servant who
listens to his master's admonitions and orders and obeys him. Third: A
man who has modest and chastity and who is also regular worshipper.

3. It is reported from Imam Ali (a.s.): One who wears the dress of
modesty; people do not see his weaknesses.

4. Similarly Ali (a.s.) is reported to have said elsewhere: Modesty and
chastity is the highest worship.

5. It is also the word of Ali (a.s.) that: One who talk too much, his
mistakes increase and consequently the one whose mistakes increase his
modesty decreases and the one who lacks modesty his piety become low and
whose piety is low his soul dies and the one whose soul has died will
enter Hell.

6. The fifth leader of the Shias, Imam Baqir (a.s.) says: No God
worship is higher than the chastity of stomach and genitals.

7. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: Modesty and faith are connected with one
another just like two things fastened by a rope and hence their
existence depends on one another. So if one of them is gone the another
also is lost.

8. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says: One who has no chastity has no faith.

9. At another place Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has said: When you see that
someone does not ashamed while speaking wrong and hearing undesirable
things then know that he is either an unlawful offspring or the devil is
mixed with his embryo.

10. We bring the Hadith from Imam Kazim (a.s.): God has forbidden
paradise for the one who does not hesitate to talk shamelessly or to
behave immodestly.

What we understand from the collection of above traditions is that
modesty and chastity is an attribute that stops man from doing bad and
inhuman activities and also prevents him from speaking whatever comes to
his mind. It is seen in society that once in a while man is so much
ashamed that he does not learn even religious problems. It is also
considered as Hayaa. For example, somebody says so and so is modest,
whereas Islam fights against such circumstances.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said: Modesty is of two kinds, modesty
of wisdom the fruit of which is knowledge and the modesty of folly the
fruit of which is ignorance And at another place the Prophet of Islam
has said: May Allah be kind to him who really maintains modesty toward
Him that is he is modest on these four occasions:

1. Protects his head and whatever is in it like the eye, the ear, the
tongue and the mind from sinning.

2. Belly and whatever is in it should be lawful or permissible,
3. Remembers his grave and its covering,
4. Always remembers the Day of Judgement and Resurrection.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says: One who is hiding his face too much and always
feels ashamed will remain ignorant and unwise. This is because an
excessively modest man does not ask for solution even essential problems
and consequently remains ignorant. Likewise, Misabaahus shariah quotes
Imam Sadiq (a.s.): Haya is of five kinds: 1 - Keeping away from sin, 2 -
Keeping distance from mistakes and faults, 3 - being ashamed of
greatness, 4- Modesty in the matter of friendship and 5- Being ashamed
of mastership. Those who have one of these attributes also have some
stages.

**Some Important points First point**

Modesty is good for everyone but it is nicer and more befitting for
women because we see that Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has divided modesty into ten
wherein nine are for women and one for men. Therefore ladies should give
more importance to modesty and chastity and take more care because, this
deed, is the basis of happiness in life. Many times it so happens that a
little carelessness in modesty destroys the warm atmosphere and leaves a
permanent dot on ones dress.

**Second point**

Those who tear off the curtain or veil of modesty and behave openly
against modesty and spread sins in society have, from the viewpoint of
Islam, no honour or respect at all and hence Islam, allows backbiting of
such persons. So the Prophet of Islam has said: One who tears of the
veil of modesty can be backbited.

**Third point**

The sympathisers and the office bearers of the Islamic state must
remain very alert and they must see that important key posts and
positions are given only to the pious and that this revolution is
administered by those who, whenever any undesirable thought comes to
their mind at once remember the pure blood profusely shed by the martyrs
of Islam and immediately stop from doing any unwise deed and when ever
they see the sacrifice of the deprived in the society feel ashamed as to
why they do not pay their duties in a nice ways and…


**Perfection in the light of Morals**

**Part two : Preface**

Imam Sadiq (a.s.): It is your duty to adorn yourselves with the favours
of morality as the Glorious God likes it and to keep away from
immorality as the Almighty Allah is against it.

Man is a being that has the best ability to reach the peak of
perfection. It is an entity that has begun its upward journey from
nothing or point of zero or nothingness and which moves ahead toward the
point of endlessness and never will its journey toward perfection stop
should he keep moving on its route.

Islam is the highest school of training which nourishes noble virtues
and precious qualities in man and similarly, the spirit of faith
strengthens the sense of awareness and accountability in his character.
For this reason, at no point it is possible that man can, during his
life times, afford to neglect this great training even for a moment.
There are some people who did not appreciate that high status humanity
and considered the perfection of man as limited. But we believe that all
the existence of the world is travelling toward an endless perfection.

As man is a social being, his perfection also takes shape in the midst
of the society along with the group of people. And it is essential for
the perfection of man this society should have regular law and order
rules so that people may be able to conduct their affairs in the light
of and with respect for those rules and regulations and prevent bad and
undesirable incidents and, similarly, fix the boundaries of
responsibility. Yes, if the human society is reformed the members of
that society can attain their final goal. And if the society gets
corrupted, obviously, people will not reach perfection. And it must be
understood that one does not reach perfection unless and until he
proceeds on the path of Divine Guidance brought by the Prophets of
Allah.

Hence it is must to follow the moral orders and commandments of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and his pure and guiltless progeny. Therefore,
in this part also we describe some of the virtue which enable man to
reach perfection from the view point of the Holy Quran and Hadith so
that by the blessings of the Quran and the words of the great Prophet
and his pious progeny we may gain admonition for ourselves and also for
you dear readers. After a review and analysis and examination we will
conclude that only such persons can in the light of the divine laws,
reach human perfection and attain their goal.

It is hoped that these moral lessons will prove effect for our
character building and will help us in our journeys toward perfection
and toward God.


**Lesson: 36 : Self respect**

Ghairat or self-respect is a virtue for which the man-making religion
of Islam has much emphasised and the guiltless Imams have always talked
about it. Religiosity of every Muslim also demands that, besides ones
relatives like wife, children… Ghairat or support and backing based on
self-respect must be extended to the Islamic state and its laws
especially regarding or with respect to the pitiable condition of world
Muslims as almost everywhere complaints against the oppressions of the
imperialism are rising calling for help form the Islamic Republic of
Iran. Thy have emphasised it as our Islamic duty and have never
neglected this matter.

Yes, it is now our duty to Islam and defend the Islamic revolution with
the power of our wealth and lives and to export it the revolution to all
the points of the world where they feel thirst for it, that is for the
truth and justice. It is incumbent upon us all to defend this Islamic
revolution with total courage and self-respect till death. We should
never be like those who have made Islam a means of satisfying their
greed and passion, Rather we should fight with such persons even if they
are our close relatives and they should be excommunicated because the
Holy Quran commands: O you who believe! Do not take your fathers and
your brothers for guardians if they love unbelief more than belief; and
whoever of you takes them for a guardian, these it is that are the
unjust. Say: If your fathers and your sons and your brethren and your
mates and your kinsfolk and property which you have acquired, and the
slackness of trade which you fear and dwellings which you like, are
dearer to you than Allah and His Apostle and striving in His way, then
wait till Allah brings about His command: and Allah does not guide the
transgressing people.

Anyway, everything should be sacrificed for Islam and Quran. But it is
very sorrowful that there are some who, despite claiming to be Muslims,
have become so much negligent that they conspire even with the enemies.
This group of Muslims should imitate that courageous and heroic woman
from Isfahan who says:

I like to take up a gun in my hand to fire the first shot on the heart
of my son who has turned a hypocrite and has be come disloyal to the
beloved Imam and to the dishonest to the martyr-nourishing nation of
Iran.

Yes, truly, a Muslim must be like this and not like the one who
justifies the dishonest behaviour of his son and defends him because
what Islam tells us is that: In case your children turn disloyal and
dishonest they must no more be considered as members of the family.
Hence Allah asserts regarding the son of Apostle Nuh (a.s.): Surely he
is not of your family.

**Words of Religious Leaders about Ghairat**

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: Verily Almighty Allah is zealous and loves
every zealous person and it is for His zeal that He has prohibited
shamelessness open or hidden.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) also has said: Hazrat Ibrahim (a.s.) was
zealous and I am more zealous than him. If a believer has no zeal or
self-respect Allah ruins his position, rubs his nose on earth makes him
defamed. Addressing the Iraqi people Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) says: O
People of Iraq! Do you not feel ashamed when your women mix up with male
mobs in the streets and markets?

**Some Rules for preventing Corruption**

In order to prevent shamelessness and turmoil in society Islam has
framed laws and rules for the society. Some of them are: Ali (a.s.) has
said: Do not mount women on saddled animals as it provides preliminaries
of sin. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said: Women should not walk in
the middle of the roads. Rather they should walk by its sides Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) has said: One of the promises obtained by the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) from women was that: they would not ravel or settle with men
in isolation.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said: One who has faith in Allah and
the Hereafter should not sleep in a place where he can hear the
breathing of a female stranger. Abu Baseer says: I asked Imam Sadiq
(a.s.): How if a woman walks on the road and man looks at her from
behind? The Hazrat replied: Do you like that someone looks at your wife
in this way? I said: No. Then desire for others what you desire for
yourself.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has said: If a man's eye gets injured by an arrow
while peeping into the house of others there is no compensation.

Yes, God and His Apostle love self-respecting and zealous person s.
Many narrations have been recorded in this matter from the innocent
Imams (a.s.). They have given much importance to the problem of Ghairat.
Of course, here it must be remembered that Islam has strictly prohibited
unnecessary harshness and misplaced suspicion and has taken into
consideration only those things that have been prohibited by Islam. It
is obvious that suspicion and undue harshness has torn apart sweet
relations in many families. That is why Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) says to
his son Imam Hasan (a.s.):

Beware of misplaced zeal and undue strictness as this attitude drags
pious women from the right path to wrong lanes. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has
said: Paradise has been denied prohibited to a shameless man who has no
self-respect. Truly, this deserves deep thought, as family affairs are
very fine and delicate. So undue harshness may perhaps result in
corruption and destruction.

Is Ghairat a Must for Women Also?

It is obvious that only Islam has given so much importance to the issue
of Ghairat zeal, self-respect, jealousy and only within the frame of the
Shariah, can Islam moot it. It is also clear that Muslim women also have
some duties and responsibilities in the frame of Islamic laws that much
be adhered to. For example, if a man behaves in an un-Islamic manner his
wife should, in response to her Islamic Ghairat prevent him.

But it is seen that many women show opposition to and fight against
their husbands if they take second or … wide. Now, if the husband has
taken into account and managed to abide by the rules framed by Islam in
this connection, and goes for second marriage, and if the wife opposes
him then, she has not only not acted according to Ghairat but has shown
her jealousy or envy. This is the interpretation of Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
who says: Ghairat of woman is Hasad.

Similarly he has said at another place: Verily, Allah has ordained
compulsory Jihad for men and also a jihad for women. The jihad of men is
to sacrifice his wealth and life in the path of God until finally they
attain martyrdom and the jihad of women is to show patience and
tolerance in course of life to tolerate trouble misbehaviour of their
husbands who act with Ghairat!


**Lesson: 37 : Favourable Opinion**

For dear readers, we divide the subject of favourable opinion in some
kinds:

1 - Having good opinion about god of the universe.
2 - Favourable opinion in respect of the Islamic ruler.
3 - Having good opinion about Muslims.

As regards the first it can be said, with pressure, that if man does
not have a good opinion about the Lord of the Universe, he looks with an
angry eye toward everything in this world and always remains in a state
of sorrow and anxiety and fear. Consequently corruption of morale
envelopes his entire life and for getting out of this condition of
internal grief and continuous burning, he, like polytheists, turns into
a believer in a god of good and a god of bad or evil.

It is obvious that a Monotheist believes in one God and has faith that
the Lord of the universe is all-knowing and Just and also that the
working of the universe is aimful not aimless always experiences peace
of mind and remains pleased with whatever Almighty Allah has destined
for him, because, he knows that He is Merciful and that He wishes good
of the faithful and that He puts them to trials to make them wise and
perfect. Therefore, there are many narrations from the Holy Imams (a.s.)
wherein it is said that: We want nothing except Your pleasure. Masoom
(a.s.) is reported to have said: Having good opinion about the only Lord
creator is that you should not have any hope except from Him and must
not be afraid of anything but your sins.

And regarding the second issue: A nation which elects a leader having
Islamic virtues and conditions must always be obedient to him and also
his well-wisher because only such nation can achieve prosperity and
happiness. The Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.s.) says in this regard: I stand
surely for entrance to Paradise for the one who assures me five things!
It was asked what those things were and he replied:

1 - Having good opinion about the Almighty Allah, 2 - Well-wishing for
the Apostle of Allah, 3 - Favourable opinion about the Book of Allah,
4 - Having good opinion about the Religion of Allah and 5 - Wishing well
for the Islamic society.

Similarly it is recorded from Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.): The heart of a
faithful always has three things: 1 - Sincerity in deed, 2 -
Well-wishing for Muslim leaders and 3 - Remaining attached with the
Muslim society.

**The third problem - Misgiving about men**

If the Islamic society, rather a human society adopts the Islamic laws
and programmes, one of which is having good opinion, many disputes,
rumours, hasty and undue decisions, doubtful news, falsities … all of
which rise from misgivings may be wiped out. Otherwise, the society will
continue to suffer chaos and no one will be safe from others misgiving
and all will be restless. After concluding this them, we now invite your
attention toward the verses and narrations about misgiving:

1 - O you who believe! Avoid most of the suspicion, for surely
suspicion in some cases is a sun, and do not spy…
2 - And follow not that of which you have not the knowledge; surely the
hearing and the sight and the heart, all of these, shall be questioned
about that.
3 - And most of them do not follow anything but conjecture; surely
conjecture will not avail author against the truth…

**Traditions regarding Conjecture**

Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) said: Have a good opinion about whatever is
done by your brother-in-Faith and do not entertain misgiving in his word
until you get a good place and carrier for him.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: Try to find a good excuse and cause
for any of your brothers' deeds. If you cannot find try again. Similarly
The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: Keep away from conjecture as
conjecture is the worst lie Somebody asked Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.); What
is the distance between truth and falsehood. He replied placing his four
hand fingers between his eye and ear: Whatever your eye saw is true and
most of what you ear heard is untrue.

Wash whatever you hear like water and do not speak what you have not
seen, that is, be like a mirror.

**Evil Consequences of Conjecture**

Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.) said: O People! The one who sees tranquillity,
steadfastness in religion and correct behaviour in his brother-in-Faith
must not listen to talks spoken against him. Beware sometimes firing
misses its target conjecture is not reality. A false word will
eventually be rejected even if repeated increasingly because God is
All-hearing and All-knowing. Also know that the distance between true
and false is not more than four fingers. Then he placed his four fingers
between his eye and ear and said: It is false when you say I heard and
it is true when you say I saw.

In conclusion it can be said that consequences of conjecture means:

1 - Conjecture is a calamity that endangers the honour of the
honourable and the servants of the society and the religion.
2 - Misgiving makes the market of rumourmongers flourish.
3 - Conjecture causes destruction of friendly and warn relations within
family and market and office and workshop and everywhere and at all
times.
4 - Suspicion encroaches upon the rights of the members of a society.
5 - Unfavourable guessing results in spying upon people's lives.


