A Call To Prayers On a Cold Wintry Morning
==========================================

It was a wintry morning with much snow falling coupled with the blowing
of a strong cold wind. It was not easy to come out in the open air. Yet
one could see people rushing to their work and students with books in
their hands hastening to their schools.

In one of the mosques in Hamadan (Iran), religious students were
assembling in order to attend a morning class. It was an important
school of Islamic theology and the tutor was also a very great learned
one. His discourses were indeed very thought-provoking and so were his
students quite intelligent.

The tutor was none else but the world famous and a great Persian
thinker and philosopher 'Ibn Sina', popularly known in Europe as
Avicenna. His lectures and writings on various science subjects had
become the standard text books for hundreds of years in the universities
of Europe. Students admired his deep philosophical thinking. They felt
honoured to sit in his class and hear his inspiring lectures.

That cold morning, students had already assembled in the mosque and
were still anxiously awaiting the arrival of their learned tutor. They
were wondering if the intense cold weather that day had delayed his
coming.

A few minutes had passed when suddenly the students witnessed the
graceful arrival of 'Ibn Sina', their great learned tutor. They felt
very happy and stood up as a mark of reverence and respect for him. He
sat down at his usual place and exchanged greetings with his students.

He commenced his discourse in his usual lucid manner that held his
students spellbound. He also gave satisfactory answers to their
questions.

Among the students was one very young and enthusiastic by name 'Bahman
Yar'. He was much more close and attached to 'Ibn Sina' the learned
tutor. He was also the foremost among the clever and advanced students
of the class.

Every time he listened to the lectures of his tutor, he became more and
more fascinated with his deep philosophy and knowledge on every subject.
He would say to his class-mates "I wonder why our tutor 'Ibn Sina' does
not claim to be a prophet despite his supreme intelligence and magic
personality"

It is said that one day by chance 'Ibn Sina' was standing at a baker
and loaf-seller shop. His attention was drawn to a very smart young boy
who was displaying signs of much intelligence.

The boy was saying to the baker "My mother is requesting for a little
fire". The baker responded "Have you brought any pot to carry the fire?"
"No! But I know how to carry it" replied the boy instantly. So saying he
applied some ash over his palm and stretched his hand to the baker who
placed a piece of burning firewood over his palm. Without any
hesitation, the boy took it and went home.

'Ibn Sina was rather amazed to see the intelligence and courage of this
boy. He thought of having him for special training and education under
his personal care. The proposal was communicated to the parents who
agreed and entrusted the boy to his full care.

Thus 'Bahman Yar' since then was staying at no other place except at
the house of his tutor and care-taker, 'Ibn Sina'. They were all the
time to be seen together. The boy being highly intelligent, derived the
best of the knowledge that his tutor could impart.

Years passed and 'Bahman Yar' grew up not only in age but also in
knowledge and understanding under the patronage of his tutor. The
learned tutor was also very proud of this most capable student.

It was one of the coldest nights of the wintry season. Midnight had
passed and the snow-falling was very heavy. Both 'Ibn Sina' and 'Bahman
Yar' were sleeping in one room under warm thick blankets.
The light in the room was already extinguished but the student was
still asking intricate questions on some deep subjects. The tutor was
replying in his usual impressive manner. Fascinated by the supreme
knowledge and deep philosophy of his tutor, he again made the suggestion
which he had made before:

"Oh my learned tutor!" he pleaded "with all this high status of
knowledge that you enjoy and being master of all the sciences, why not
declare yourserf a Prophet? Sir! Don't you think that you even excel
some of the previous prophets in knowledge and your status today is
unparalleled in the world! Should you decide to claim prophethood, no
one would dare challenge you. Let me assure you that I shall be the
first to offer my allegiance and would serve you with full faith."

Since 'Bahman Yar' was still young and immature, his above proposal to
his tutor was rather emotional than logic. 'Ibn Sina' smiled but did not
give any reply.

That night the cold weather had become extreme and there was heavy
snow-falling. Both were already fast asleep. It was past midnight and
suddenly 'Ibn Sina' woke up and raised his head out of the warm
blanket.

Incidentally he was very thirsty and the water-mug in the room was
empty. So he decided to wake up his student to go out and bring him some
water. "Oh Bahman Yar! My son Bahman Yar! Please wake up and bring me
some drinking water from outside" he said repeatedly.

"Why is there no water in the water-mug near your goodself. Sir?" asked
Bahman Yar. "No!" replied Ibn Sina. Bahman Yar raised his head and saw
heavy snowfall outside. The thrilling sound of the strong cold wind also
made him nervous to go out. Again 'Ibn Sina grumbled:

"Oh Bahman Yar! Why the delay? Bring me some water, I am too thristy."
Bahman Yar dared not come out of the warm blankets to face the cold
weather outside the room. He was, therefore, putting forward lame
excuses to his tutor.

"Oh my respected tutor! It is harmful for you to drink water now that
you have just come out of the warmth of thick blankets. It is better you
go to sleep again till the early morning which is not far off" said
Bahman Yar. "My son! Bring me water, I am too thirsty.

I myself am a medical expert and know better what is harmful than you
do. I am unable to sleep, please bring me some water from outside" again
appealed Ibn Sina' In response 'Bahman Yar' again put forward excuses
and argued that he would catch cold and fall sick if he were to go out
in that extreme cold weather. So saying he went back to sleep.

There was dead silence everywhere and no sound of anything was to be
heard. Outside it was still pitch dark except the first light of Subhe
Sadiq (true dawn) in the eastern horizon had commenced to appear.

Suddendly the silence broke with a melodious voice of a muezzin -
caller to prayer from the top of a minaret at the nearby mosque. After
reciting some verses of the holy Qur'an, the muezzin in a loud voice
said "Allaho Akber" - Allah is the Greatest. "Ash-hado an la ailaha
illallah" - I bear witness that there is no god except Allah.

Both the tutor and his student quietly listened to the melodious voice
of the muezzin. The call to prayers then proceeded to the words "Ash
hado anna Muhammadan Rasoolullah" - I bear witness that Muhammed is the
Messenger of Allah. On hearing this, Ibn Sina thought of taking the
opportunity of responding to the repeated proposal made to him by
'Bahman yar'.

He said; "Listen to me, oh my son Bahman Yar. Now I wish to reply to
your repeated suggestion." The student sat up to hear attentively of
what his learned tutor abruptly wanted to say. Ibn Sina then
proceeded:

"You have been suggesting to me several times to claim prophethood,
that people would put full faith in me and that you would be the first
one to do so. Now look, you have been my close student for several years
and benefitted from me a great deal, yet you did not think it prudent to
obey me by coming out of your warm bed for a moment and bring me water
that I badly needed to quench my thirst. Instead you chose to put
forward lame excuses."

"But think of this man who is now calling to prayers at the top of the
minaret after coming out in the coldest weather and making ablution with
cold water in the early hour of this morning. It is for no other purpose
but in obedience to and respect for the command of Allah as conveyed by
His apostle Hazrat Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.) some four hundred years
ago."
"What a great difference there is between me and that Prophet sent by
Allah!"


**Bahlool Proves The Three Facts**

Abu Hanifa was once teaching Islamic beliefs to his students. He was
arguing and challenging the validity of some of the statements which had
been proclaimed by Imam Jafer-e-Sadiq (a.s.). Bahlool happened to be
present as well. Abu Hanifa proclaimed that he could not agree with the
three understated statements as made by the Imam.

The first one was that "Allah can never be seen." According to Abu
Hanifa it was impossible for a thing to exist and yet be invisible!

The second things that the Imam had stated was that "Satan (devil) will
be thrown in the inferno of Hell which will scorch him bitterly" Abu
Hanifa argued: "How was it possible for fire to hurt 'fire' the fact
that Satan was created from fire itself!"

The third statement of the Imam was that "Man alone is responsible for
his actions and Allah - the most powerful - has nothing to do with his
actions." "How is it possible, when Allah alone guides the destiny of
man without Whose will nothing can happen?" This was Abu Hanifa's third
challenge.

As soon as the speaker Abu Hanifa had made these three criticisms,
Bahlool got up, took a piece of brick and aiming at Hanifa, let it go
and cracked Abu Hanifa's head.

Bahlool was caught and taken before the Caliph for punishment. In his
defence, he pleaded that he had done nothing else except reply to the
three criticisms which Abu Hanifa had made against the Imam.

The Caliph asked him to explain as to how and why he chose to reply by
hitting and injuring Abu Hanifa. Bahlool said, "This man claims that if
God is there, then he must be seen. He is now complaining of pain in his
head due to the brick having hurt him; if the pain is definitely there,
can he show me where it is? Well! just as pain can be there, without
being seen, Allah also exists without being seen."

"Secondly, he says that fire cannot burn fire. It is a fact that man is
made out of clay and this brick with which I hit his head is also made
out of clay, if clay can inflict pain and hurt clay, why can't fire do
the same to fire?" "The third thing he says is that man is not
responsible for his own actions but Allah does all things. If this is
so, then why does he want justice from you and why does he want me to be
punished for hurting him?

He might as well transfer the punishment to Allah - Who, according to
him - is responsible for all the actions of man!" Everyone in the court
was stunned at this and Abu Hanifa was dumb founded - having nothing to
say. So Bahlool was released without any punishment.

Thus, while some Muslim sects believe that Allah can be seen, perhaps
on the Day of Judgement, the Shia Muslims say that Allah is the creator
of everything; He was not created and as such he has no body like us
that can be seen. If we can still believe in unseen things like air,
electricity and human soul, why can't we believe in the unseen God?

If we are responsible for our actions and are to be punished or
rewarded accordingly, then it is only fair and just that Allah should
not manipulate or compel us to do things but leave us alone to act the
way we see it fit, and be answerable for those actions ourselves.


