Heraclues and Islam
===================

Arabia, during the time of the Holy Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.), was a
country without any central authority. It was a country far from the
civilised nations of those days.

At the time Prophet Muhammed (s.a.w.) was spreading Islam; asking
people to turn away from worshipping idols to worshipping Allah, the
Almighty, the All-Knower, the Master.

The Prophet sent letters of invitation to Kings and Rulers of various
countries in the world, inviting them to embrace Islam. Many of the
letters were met with a favourable response whilst others were rejected.
In many cases, the Messengers of the Prophet were badly treated and
abused. But the Prophet was not worried by these setbacks. He was
inviting people to the right path and a few setbacks could not deter him
from propagating Islam.

Abu Sufyan, a leader of the tribe of Quraish and the arch enemy of the
Prophet was in Constantinople on a business trip, when the Prophet's
letter of invitation reached Heracleus, the Bazantine emperor of Eastern
Roman Empire. Heracleus, at the time was in his court at Constantinople
celebrating his victory over the Persians.

Heracleus read the letter through an interpreter and then asked the
people in his court, to find out if there was someone in the city who
knew the Prophet. Abu Sufyan with his companions was brought into the
court. The emperor asked Abu Sufyan, "What kind of family does Muhammad
belong to?"

"Noble", replied Abu Sufyan "Has there been a King in his family?"
Heracleus asked.

"No," said Abu Sufyan "Are the people who have accepted his religion
poor or rich?" Heracleus questioned again. "They are poor", replied Abu
Sufyan.

Heracleus was now becoming more and more interested and he went on
asking questions. His next question was, "Are his followers on the
increase or decrease?" "Increasing", Abu Sufyan replied shortly.

"Have you known him to tell lies?" asked Heracleus.

"No", admitted Abu Sufyan.

"Does he ever go against his convents?" Heracleus once again asked.

"Not so far. But we have to see whether he carries out the new
agreement made between us and him", Abu Sufyan answered lengthily for a
change.

"Have you ever fought him in wars?" Heracleus questioned.

"Yes", answered Abu Sufyan "What has been the result?" Heracleus asked,
getting more and more interested.

"Sometimes we have won, sometimes he", replied Abu Sufyan. "What does
he teach?" asked Heracleus "Worship One God, join no partners with Him,
carry out your prayers, be chaste, speak the truth and keep union with
your relatives" answered Abu Sufyan, even surprised at his own answer as
it sounded like he was preaching Islam.

Heracleus, stood up and said, "If all you said is true, then I am sure
that this Prophet's Kingdom will reach here where I am standing. I was
certain that a Prophet was coming, but I didn't know that he would be
born in Arabia. If I were to go there, I would embrace Islam and wash
the Prophet's feet with my own hands." This was the way in which the
Prophet spread Islam.

He impressed them by his truthfulness, honesty, noble character and
dedication in the service of Allah. He did not compel people to accept
Islam under threat of waging wars, nor did he compel people to accept
Islam by the force of the sword. He fought only in defence, and only
when the enemies waged war on him.


**JA'FER - AT - TAIYAAR THE REFUGEE WHO BROUGHT ISLAM TO AFRICA**

When the Holy Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) began to preach religion of
Islam in Mecca, those who did not believe in him and his message,
opposed and troubled him. They called him a lunatic and a sorcerer. They
offered bribes to persuade him to stop preaching the religion. When all
these ways failed, they used harsh threats against the Prophet and the
new Muslim converts.

During all these years, the Holy Prophet enjoyed the protection of his
uncle Abu Talib. He always stood by his newphew and did not let anyone
harm him. The sons of Abu Talib, one by one, accepted Islam. Hazrat Ali
(a.s.) was right, from his childhood, under the care of the Prophet and
was the first one to declare his true faith, Islam, when the Prophet
proclaimed his prophethood. He always stood by the Prophet firmly and
faithfully both in good and difficult times. Among the other sons of Abu
Talib (a.s.), Ja'fer also accepted Islam and so did Aqeel, the other son
of Abu Talib.

The torture and oppression which the Holy Prophet and the small group
of his followers had been subjected to, had increased so much that life
became unbearable. The Holy Prophet decided on an action which not only
saved the lives of his followers but also spread the message of Islam to
other countries. He therefore, decided to send some of his followers to
Abyssinia., which was just across the Red Sea, to the south of Mecca.

The Holy Prophet had great faith in Ja'fer the son of Abu Talib (a.s.)
and brother of Hazrat Ali (a.s.). The handful of Muslim refugees
including men and women under the leadership of Ja'fer crossed the Red
Sea. This is known to be the first migration in the history of Islam,
which occured in the fifth year after the Prophet had proclaimed Islam
in 615 A.D. They were joined by more immigrants who had become the
victims of the enemies of Islam. The number of the refugees rose to
eighty-two men and eighteen women.

On arrival at the capital of Abyssinia, Ja'fer and his companions paid
a visit to the Emperor Negus. The Emperor was very much impressed with
the knowledge, behaviour and the politenes of Ja'fer and he received him
with much honour and entertained him as a respected guest.

When the non-believers of Quraish in Mecca came to know of this,
Abdulla Bin Rabia and Amr Bin 'Aas together with some other people took
some expensive gifts and arrived at the court of the Emperor Negus. On
entering the court, they prostrated (bowed in sajda) before the Emperor
and presented him with the gifts. Then they said, "Someone in our
country has invented a new religion and some people have joined him. We
tried to stop this, but some of his followers have taken refuge in your
country. Now, we appeal to you to throw them out and hand them over to
us."

The Emperor replied that he had already given protection to them and
would not throw them out of the country, but he would ask them to come
there before them. So saying, the Emperor called in the Muslim
refugees.

Hazrat Ja'fer took with him some close companions and arrived at the
court. But he did not prostrate (bow in sajda) before Negus. People in
the court criticised him for this and asked him why he had not bowed
down before the Emperor as was customary. Hazrat Ja'fer promptly
retorted, "We do not bow down before anybody except God."

The Emperor knew that this was the true and basic teaching of divine
religions. He called Ja'fer and gave a respectful place near him. He
then informed Ja'fer that some people from his country of origin had
come there with a complaint that he had deserted his old religion and
started a new one which rejected the original idol-worship. Hazrat
Ja'fer in very impressive language, replied:

"O King! We were in deep ignorance and barbarism; we adored idols, we
lived in unchastity; we ate dead animals, we disregarded the duties of
hospitality and neighbourhood; At that time, God raised among us a man,
who is pure, truthful and honest.

He called us to believe in One God and taught us not to associate
anything with Him. He forbade us to worship idols, enjoined us to speak
the truth, to be faithful to our trusts, to be merciful and to regard
the rights of neighbours. He forbade us to speak evil of women. He
ordered us to keep away from vices, to offer prayers, to pay alms and to
observe the fast"

Negus told Ja'fer to recite some words from the Holy Quran. Ja'fer
commenced with Bismillah and proceeded to recite a few lines from Surae
Maryam with such sincerity and sweet voice that the Emperor and his
people were very much moved and began to weep. When the Emperor heard
the verse concerning Hazrat Isa (Jesus), he was very touched and said
that the words resembled those which were bestowed upon Hazrat Musa
(Moses) and Hazrat Isa (Jasus).

The Emperor rejected the appeal of the Quraish and ordered Amr bin 'Aas
to take away the gifts he had brought. Amr bin 'Aas went away but having
thought of something, he returned to ihe court the next day. He made a
cunning move by suggesting to the Emperor to ask the Muslims as to what
their belief was concerning Hazrat Isa? Hazrat Ja'fer was called to the
court again and was given a very respectful welcome. The Emperor then
asked: "What does your Prophet (Muhammad (s.a.w.)) say about Hazrat Isa
(Jesus)?" The Muslims became worried but Hazrat Ja'fer, with great peace
of mind, replied: "O King! Our Prophet is guided by God in what he
says." Saying this, he proceeded to show an Ayat from the Holy Quran and
requested Negus to read it:

"The Messiah (Isa), son of Marium is but a messenger; messengers before
him have indeed passed away; and his mother was a truthful woman; they
both used to eat food. See how We make the communications clear to them,
then behold, how they are turned away." (5:75)

Negus was extremely pleased to learn this and said: "This actually is
also there in our book of Injil." He then expelled Amr bin 'Aas and the
infidels of Quraish from Abyssinia. From then onwards, Negus had high
regard for and faith in Islam.

Thus Ja'fer had done a great service to Islam. He preached the true
message of Islam in Abyssinia and stayed there for fifteen years before
returning to Medina.

**HAZRAT IBRAHIM AND THE IDOL WORSHIP**

During the olden times, people everywhere used to carve stones and make
idols for worship. These statues were considered as gods, and people
bowed and prayed before them. Namrud, the King of Babylonia, was once
informed by his astrologers that someone was going to be born who would
destroy his kingdom. He would teach people another religious concept:
that of worshipping none but only one God.

On hearing that, Namrud gave orders that no woman would conceive, hence
no child would be born in his kingdom. If any child was born, it would
be killed immediately. The mother of Prophet Hazrat Ibrahim became
pregnant. But by the will of Allah, no sign of pregnancy was to be seen.
When the time of birth of the child came nearer, she went out of the
town and hid in a cave. There, Hazrat Ibrahim was born. She then covered
the child with a cloth, closed the mouth of the cave with stones and
returned home without the child. She told nobody of what had happened.

The child was alone in the cave with no one to care for him. He was
sucking the milk which flowed of his fingers - by the grace of Almighty
God. The child grew up under Allah's protection. From time to time, his
mother would come secretly to the cave to watch him. This went on for
thirteen years. On one occassion when the mother visited the son, he
beseeched her to take him out of the cave. The mother warned that he
would be killed by the King if he came to know about him. But the child
insisted that he be brought out of the cave as 13 years had been a long
time.

Thus Hazrat Ibrahim came out of the cave for the first time. It was
late In the evening when the sun was setting. When the night grew dark,
he saw a star and he said, "Is this my Lord?". But when it set, he said,
"I love not the setting ones." Then, when he saw the moon rising, he
said.

"Is this my Lord?." But when it set, he said, "If my lord had not
guided me, I would have certainly been among the mistaken ones." Then he
saw the sun rising and said, "Is this my Lord? Is this the greatest?."
But when it also set, he said, "O my peoplel Surely, I am clear of what
you set up with Allah. Surely, I have turned myself wholly to the One
Who created the heavens and the earth. I am not of the ones who believe
and worship anything else other than Allah - the one God."

The people, at that time were not only idol-worshippers but they were
also worshipping the stars, the sun, the moon etc. All the time, he was
making them realise their error in their choice of 'gods'. He was
showing his people what they called a god, did not deserve to be called
god and worshipped if it disappeared at times. So Hazrat Ibrahim started
preaching the belief of One god and persuading his people not to worship
anything else but Allah, the one and only God.

Once, it was the time of annual festival in the town and according to
their custom, Namrud, the King, went out of town with all his people to
celebrate the day. Hazrat Ibrahim did not accompany them but stayed
behind. He went to the temple where all the idols were kept, and broke
all of them one by one. He left the biggest idol untouched, but put the
axe on its shoulder.

When the King and his people returned they were very angry to see their
idols destroyed. He said that he would kill the person who had caused
that damage. The people told him that it must be a young man, named
Ibrahim who always preached against the worship of idols. He must have
destroyed them.

When Hazrat Ibrahim was asked if it was he who broke the idols. He
replied, "Why do you not ask the chief (of the idols) who is standing
safe. Perhaps he has done it, that is if your idol gods can speak, ask
them as to who broke them." Thus Hazrat Ibrahim did not utter a lie
denying what he had done. He only wanted the people to first ask their
own idols as to who had done it.

Namrud got very angry and asked his people their opinion. Every one
suggested that Hazrat Ibrahim be punished by burning him alive in a big
fire.

So, Hazrat Ibrahim was jailed, while Namrud ordered that all available
firewood in the forest be collected and be heaped up in one open place.
When this was done, it was set alight. The fire burnt fiercely and
widely for days and days. It had generated so much heat that no bird
dared to fly nearby.

At the appointed day on which Hazrat Ibrahim was to be put in the fire
and burnt, Namrud with his large army and followers came out to that
place to watch. On seeing the huge fire and the intense heat, he began
to ponder as to how it would be possible to convey Hazrat Ibrahim into
the fire. Suddenly Satan, the devil, came and suggested that a type of a
crane be prepared which could be used to hurle Hazrat Ibrahim into the
fire. This would cut out the need of any assistance of human hands to do
the risky job of delivering the Prophet into the raging fire.

The crane was constructed and Hazrat Ibrahim was lifted and readied to
be dumped into the fire. On seeing this tragic happening, the angels in
the heaven and all the creatures in the sky became deeply upset. Taking
permission from Almighty Allah, one by one, they all came to Hazrat
Ibrahim to inquire if they could be of any help to him.

The Prophet said that he was seeking help and protection from none of
them. The one from whom he expected help (that is Almighty Allah), was
fully aware of the dangerous situation in which he was and would help
him if need be.

Just then, the angel, Gibrael came to the Prophet and gave him a ring
on which the following was inscribed (written):

"There is no God but Allah" "Mohammed is the Prophet of Allah" "I
depend and rely upon Allah" "I submit my affair to the will of Allah"
Hazrat Ibrahim put the holy ring on his finger and the grace and
blessing of Allah began to be showered upon him. Then came the command
from Allah, "O fire! Be nothing but coolness and peace for Ibrahim."

Thus the burning fire instantly lost its heat and no harm came to the
Prophet.

It is related that when Prophet Hazrat Ibrahim was being thrown into
the fire, the angels in the heaven and the birds in the air cried in
protest. One of them, a small weak bird decided to burn itself along
with the Prophet. As it was flying towards the fire, the angel Gibrael
was sent by Allah to inquire the reason why it was going to commit
suicide.

The angel stopped the bird on the ground and asked it to explain its
strange action - that of trying to burn itself along with Hazrat
Ibrahim. The bird said: "Don't you know that the friend of God is to be
burnt in the fire? As it is not within my strength to save him, I am
showing my sorrow and sympathy by accompanying him into the fire!"

The angel conveyed this incident to Allah. Then came a command from
Allah to tell the bird that it Would be rewarded for its sincere feeling
shown for the Prophet. It was asked what it wished to have so that the
wish be fulfilled. The bird in reply said: "I do not wish to have
anything from this world. All I wish is to constantly remember Allah in
prayer. There are a thousand and one names of Allah. I know hardly a
hundred names.

I wish to be taught the remaining names." Almighty Allah fulfilled its
desire. As it flew from tree to tree, it went on singing the names of
Allah, thus remembering Him day and night.

To respect and sympathise with the friends of Allah; to remember Allah
constantly in prayer is better than fulfilling worldly desires. This is
what the little weak bird has shown to us. These are the acts of virtue
which would one day undoubtedly earn great rewards from Allah.


