The Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) Enters Madina
===========================================

The camel has, since olden times, proved to be a very useful animal for
desert journeys. It has shown to be dependable and sturdy animal for
desert transport. The reason is that it has been created with certain
special features which are not to be found in any other animal.

It can walk in the hot desert under scorching sun for days and days
without feeling tired or thirsty and arrive at the intended destination
with his rider - the traveller. Hence the Arabs have named this animal
as the 'Ship of the Desert'.

It was this same animal which had fulfilled in excellent manner the
task of conveying the Prophet of Islam from Mecca to Medina. It had also
served well in the cause of Islam.

The Prophet, tried of the tortures by the disbelieving Quraish, decided
to migrate from Mecca to Medina. He had hidden himself in the cave of
Thaur to protect himself against the enemies who wanted to kill him.

Hazrat Ali (a.s.) sent three camels with a guide to the cave. The
Prophet, mounting one of the camels, left the cave in the dark of the
night, destined for Medina. On the way, several miracles took place
which showed that God's help was always there to protect the Prophet
against the attacks of his enemies.

The distance between Mecca and Medina is about three hundred fifty
kilometres. In those days, it used to take eleven days to travel between
the two places. But in this instance, the camel carrying the Prophet
took only eight days to reach Medina. The Prophet (s.a.w.) travelled at
night, resting during the day-time. He was doing so to protect himself
against the desert heat as well as to keep away from being seen by the
enemies.

On the eight day, the Prophet along with his companions reached a place
known as Quba, just two kilometres outside Madina. There he rested for
several days, waiting for Hazrat Ali (a.s.) and family members. After
their arrival they proceeded to enter the city. On seeing the date trees
on the outskirts of the holy city, they felt happy and relieved to have
finally come out safe from the tortures of their enemies.

The people of Madina keenly awaited his arrival. Suddenly someone from
the top of a hill announced that the Prophet had arrived. On hearing
this, the people became wild with extreme joy and recited
"Allah-O-Akbar - Allah-O-Akbar" - "God is Great - God is Great".

The Prophet dismounted the camel just outside Madina and sat down under
a date tree. People rushed forward to greet and welcome him to their
city. He was Ioved by all and everyone was keen to salute him. After the
traditional welcome ceremony, the Prophet mounted his camel to enter the
holy city. All around, there were expressions of great joy. The children
got together and in loud voices chanted the following welcoming
poem: -


"TALA-AL BADRU ALAINA MIN THANAYATIL WADAI WAJABAS-SHUKRU ALAINA MA
DA'A - LLAHA DAI" "The full moon is shining on us from the area of
gardens. We must offer thanks (to Allah) so long as anyone prays before
Allah"

"AYYUHAL MAB-UTHU FIINA JE'TA BIL AMRIL MUTAI JE'TA SHAR-RAFTAL MADINA
MARHABAN YA KHAIRA DAI"

"O The one sent to us, you have come with commands which we shall obey.
You came and graced Madina, we salute and welcome you, 'O' the best
caller (towards Allah)"

It was hardly three years since the people of Madina had embraced Islam
and had started to worship Allah. The young boys in the city were given
a job to eradicate the worship of idols. Wherever they saw an idol, they
destroyed it and set fire to it.

One day, the youths came to know that Omar bin Janah, the chief of
Barti Salma tribe, had still preserved his idol and worshipped it. In
order to impress upon him the uselessness of worshipping an idol made of
wood, they removed it from his place and threw it down a pit. The Chief,
on tracing the idol to where it was lying, brought it back, washed it
and kept it in its original place. But the next day again it was removed
and thrown into the pit.

The Chief was very much disturbed at this. For the last time he brought
home this idol and cleaned it. He then put his sword around its neck and
said to the idol: "If henceforth anybody comes to you, promptly take
action and kill him with the sword."

On the next day, the idol was again missing. This time he found it tied
to a dead body of a dog. There was no effect at all of the sword which
he had tied around the neck of the idol. This incident made him lose
faith in his man-made wooden idol. He abandoned the idol-worship
altogether. On becoming a Muslim, he uttered a poem as under:

"Alas! O'my idol! If you were my god, you would not have reached this
stage and I would not have seen you in the pit along with a dead dog. I
have now put my faith in the Almighty Allah, from Whom come all
blessings. It is He Who has freed me from darkness of ignorance."

This is one of the examples of how the young Muslim volunteers of
Madina helped the Prophet in putting an end to idol worship and spread
the true message of Islam.

When the Prophet entered the city amid great rejoicing, every one
wanted him to stay at his house. Particularly, the chiefs of all the
tribes were keen to have the Prophet as their guest. Everyone insisted
but the Prophet ordered: "Let the reins of the camel loose and I shall
get down and stay where it stops by itself." The camel went ahead
further and further till it stopped at a big open land. It was a place
where people used to dry their dates and other farm produce. It knelt
there and sat.

The Prophet dismounted and asked the people, whose land it was. They
replied that it belonged to two small children by the name of SAHL and
SUHAIL. Nearby was the house of ABU AYYUB. ABU AYYUB'S mother came
forward and took away the luggage of the Prophet to her house. People
again persuaded him to put up in their house but the Prophet asked:
"Where is my luggage?" The reply was that the mother of ABU AYYUB had
taken them to her house.

And the Prophet said: "One has to go to stay at a place where one's
luggage and belonging go to." Some time later, the name of Yathrib was
changed to 'Madina-tun-Nabii' i.e. 'the city of the Prophet! He named
the people of that city as ANSAR (helpers) and those who had migrated
from Mecca as MUHAJIREEN (immigrants). All these people, i.e. the Ansar
and the muhajireen got together and united in the common bond of
brotherhood of Islam.


**Nazr: A Vow With Allah To Be Fulfilled**

Imam Hasan (a.s.) and Imam Husain (a.s.) were still very young probably
in their fifth or sixth year of age. Once, both of them fell sick and
their parents, Imam Ali (a.s.) and Bibi Fatima (a.s.) were grieved to
see them in unhealthy condition.

The Holy Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (s.a.w.) came to see them. He loved
them very much and on seeing them sick, he also was much grieved. They
all prayed for their quick recovery. The Holy Propht suggested to the
parents to keep a Nazr for the restoration of the health of the
children. Thereupon, Hazrat Ali (a.s.) and Bibi Fatima (a.s.) made a
Nazr (a vow) that they would fast three days upon the recovery of the
children.

Allah accepted their prayers and granted their wish. Both the children
recovered from their illness. Hazrat Ali (a.s.) and Bibi Fatima (a.s.)
decided to fast in fulfilment of the Nazr. When the two children came to
know of this, they too decided to fast. The maid-servant in the house,
Bibi Fizza, who loved the children very much also decided to join in the
fast on the happy occasion of their recovery.

On the first day of the fasting, Hazrat Ali (a.s.) went out in the
morning and brought 3 saa wool for spinning and 3 saa barley as its
wages. Bibi Fatima (a.s.) spinned 1 saa wool, then ground 1 saa barley,
and prepared five loaves of bread. In the evening, all of them gathered
to break the fast and each of them had a loaf placed before him. When
they heard the Adhan (call to prayers), they prayed and sat to break the
fast.

Suddenly, a poor man knocked on their door and asked for something to
eat. All of them, one by one, passed their loaves to the beggar. There
was no other food in the house, so all of them had to be content with
water. They went to bed and slept without food. The next day they fasted
again in fulfilment of the Nazr, but yet with almost empty stomach.

Second day, Bibi Fatima (a.s.) again spinned 1 saa of wool, ground 1
saa of barley, and again backed 5 loaves. Again they sat together to
break the fast with the usuai one loaf of bread for each. As they were
about to break the fast, an orphan came all of a sudden to their door
and asked for food saying he was very hungry.

Although the inmates of the house were themselves hungry for two days,
they were happy to feed the boy. Everyone gave his or her bread to the
orphan. They again slept without any food.

On the third day as they sat down to break the fast, a prisoner knocked
at their door asking for something to eat. Although the people of the
house of the Holy Prophet had been suffering from near starvation for
the last three days, they again gave away all the bread to the prisoner
and contented themselves only with water for the third day in
succession.

It was in appreciation of these sacrifices, that Almighty Allah
revealed the whole Sura 'Ad-Dahr', which contains, among other things,
the following Ayat:

"They fulfill vows and fear a day the evil of which shall be spreading
far and wide. " (76:7) This is how Ahle-Bait, the people of the
household of the Holy Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.), kept and fulfilled
their Nazr (vow). They also set example of sacrifice by feeding the poor
and caring for those who were in need.

The tradition of Nazr is a very old one. During the time of Bani
Israel, centuries back, in the name of God, people used to present their
sons at Baitul-Muqdas, in the service of the pious people there. They
used to stay within the walls of the mosques.

Once Imran, the father of Hazrat Maryam (Mary) got the good news that
Almighty would bless him with a child. The child would be so gifted that
with the command of God, he would cure the sick, restore sight to the
blinds, bring life back unto the dead and he shall also be a Prophet of
God. When Bibi Hanna, the mother of Hazrat Maryam, heard this news, she
vowed that she would free the child from the worldly attachments (to
spend life in the service of Allah). The following Ayat in the Qur'an
refers to this event:

"When a woman of Imran said: My Lord! surely I vow to Thee what is in
my womb, to be devoted (to Thy service); accept therefore from me,
surely Thou art the Hearing, the Knowing" (3:35)

Over 2000 years ago people worshipped idols in Arabia. There was a King
by the name of Hassan who decided to destory the Holy Kaaba. Because of
this evil intention, he fell sick and ended being a leper.

Upon realising his mistake, he begged pardon from God and vowed that if
his health was restored, he would place Ghilaf (Covering) over the Holy
Kaaba. This wish of his was fulfilled and he, in turn placed the Ghilaf
made of palm leaves. For many years a new black cover made of thick
cloth is being placed on Kaaba every year.

Thus Nazr is a media by which a human being seeks assistance and
pleasure of God. Whenever one prays to God for assistance, it is
recommended that one uses a media which can take him to God. Nazr is one
of such medias.

Whenever a person keeps a Nazr and prays for something from God and
upon being granted his wish when he fulfills the Nazr which he had
pledged, his faith in Allah is enhanced. As faith increases, one tries
to refrain from sins and endeavours to do more virtuous deeds in order
to please and be nearer to Allah.


