Chapter 2: Interpretation of Umar and his followers
===================================================

15. The calamity of Thursday
----------------------------

It was in the eleventh year of hijra during the Prophet’s illness which
had led to his death. [^1]

### The true fact of this calamity

The authors of *Sihah* (books of Hadith) and the historians had detailed
this event in their books and considered it as one of the true facts.

Al-Bukhari mentioned [^2] a tradition narrated by Ubaydillah bin
Abdullah bin Mas’ood that Ibn Abbas had said: “When the Prophet (S) was
about to die, there were some men in his house among whom was Umar. The
Prophet (S) said: “Come on! Let me write you a book that you will never
go astray after it.” Umar said: “The Prophet (S) has been overcome by
pain. We have the Qur'an. The Book of Allah suffices us.”

The men in the house disagreed. Some of them said: “Approach the
Prophet! Let him write you a book after which you will never go astray.”
Some of them repeated what Umar had said. When they did much noise and
disagreement, the Prophet (S) said to them: “Get out!” Abdullah bin
Mas’ood said: “Ibn Abbas often said: “It was the great calamity when
their clamor and disagreement had prevented the Prophet (S) from writing
that book.”

Muslim has mentioned this tradition in his *Sahih*, vol.2. Ahmad also
has mentioned it in his *Musnad* [^3] and so have all the historians but
they have changed the wording somehow. The actual word of Umar was “…the
Prophet (S) is raving” but they used “the Prophet (S) has been overcome
by pain” in order to soften the horrible statement of Umar.

Abu Bakr Ahmad bin Abdul Aziz al-Jawhari mentioned in *Kitab as-Saqeefa*
[^4] that Ibn Abbas had said: “When the Prophet (S) was about to die, he
said, while there were some men in the house among them was Umar: “Bring
me an inkpot and a piece of paper to write you a book after which you
will never go astray.” Umar said a word which meant that the Prophet (S)
had been overcome by pain and then he added: “We have the Qur'an. The
Book of Allah suffices us.” The men in the house disagreed and disputed
among them. Some of them said: “Approach! Let the Prophet (S) write a
book to you.” Some others said as Umar had said. When they did much
clamor and disagreement, the Prophet (S) became angry and said to them:
“Get out!”

It is clear, out of this tradition, that the historians have quoted the
meaning of Umar’s words and not the exact words he has said.

When the narrators had narrated the exact words of the man, who had
opposed the Prophet (S), they did not mention the name of that man.
Al-Bukhari said in his *Sahih*:[^5] “Qubaysa narrated from Ibn Uyayna
from Salman al-Ahwal from Sa’eed bin Jubayr that Ibn Abbas had said:
“Thursday…and what Thursday is!” He cried until his tears fell on the
ground and then he said: “The Prophet (S) had become very ill on
Thursday. He said: “Bring me a piece of paper to write you a book after
which you will never go astray at all.”

They (the men who were in the Prophet’s house) disputed whereas no one
should dispute before a prophet. They said: “The Messenger of Allah is
raving.” The Prophet (S) said: “Let me alone! What I am in is better
than what you ascribe to me.” When he was about to die, he ordered of
three things: “Drive the polytheists out of Arabia, reward the
delegations as I have rewarded them…” and I have forgotten the third
one[^6] ”.

This is another tradition that has been mentioned by Muslim in his
*Sahih*, by Ahmad in his *Musnad* 289 and by the rest of narrators.
Muslim has mentioned in his *Sahih*, chap. “The will” the tradition from
another way narrated by Sa’eed bin Jubayr that Ibn Abbas had said:
“Thursday and what Thursday is!” His tears began flowing on his cheeks
and then he said: “The Prophet (S) said: “Bring me a blade and an inkpot
(or a tablet and an inkpot) so that I write you a book after which you
will not go a stray at all.” They said: “The Messenger of Allah is
raving.” [^7]

He, who has studied the “calamity” in the *Sihah*, knows well that the
first one, who has said “The Prophet (S) is raving” was Umar and then
the present men, who had adopted his opinion, imitated his situation.
You have seen above the saying of Ibn Abbas in the first tradition “…the
men in the house disputed. Some of them said: “Approach! Let the Prophet
(S) write you a book after which you will never go astray” and some
others said as Umar had said. That is “The Prophet (S) is raving.”

At-Tabarani mentioned a tradition in his book *al-Awsat* [^8] that Umar
had said: “When the Prophet (S) became ill, he said: “Bring me a piece
of paper and an inkpot to write you a book after which you will never go
astray at all.” The women from behind the curtain said: “Do you not hear
what the Messenger of Allah is saying?” I (Umar) said (to the women):
“You are like the women of Yousuf (Prophet Joseph). If he becomes ill,
you press your eyes and if he becomes alright, you ride on his neck.”
The Prophet (S) said: “Let them (the women) alone. They are better than
you.”

You see here that they have not obeyed the order of the Prophet (S). If
they had done, they would have been safe from deviation. Would that they
had been satisfied with disobeying the Prophet (S) only and had not
rejected his order when they said: “The Book of Allah suffices us” as if
he did not know the position of the Book of Allah among them or as if
they were more aware of the Book and its values than him!

And would that they were satisfied with all that and they did not
surprised him with their horrible word “the Messenger of Allah is
raving” while he was about to die! What a word it was that they wanted
to farewell their prophet with! They did not obey him pretending that
the Book of Allah sufficed! Had they not heard the Book of Allah
announcing day and night:

***“and whatever the Messenger gives you, accept it, and from whatever
he forbids you, keep back” (Qur’an 59:7)***

and as if they, when saying: “the Messenger of Allah is raving” had not
read the sayings of Allah:

***“Most surely it is the Word of an honored messenger. The processor of
strength, having an honorable place with the Lord of the Dominion. One
(to be) obeyed, and faithful in trust. And your companion is not gone
mad” (Qur’an 81:19-22)***

***“Most surely, it is the Word brought by an honored Messenger. And it
is not the word of a poet; little is it that you believe. Nor the word
of a soothsayer; little is it that you mind. It is a revelation from the
Lord of the worlds” (Qur’an 69:40-43)***

***“Your companion does not err, nor does he go astray. Nor does he
speak out of desire. It is naught but revelation that is revealed. The
Lord of Mighty Power has taught him” (Qur’an 53:2-5)***

They knew that the Prophet (S) wanted to certify the caliphate of ‘Ali
(as) and the infallible imams of his progeny especially with a written
covenant and therefore they prevented him from writing that book as the
second caliph Umar had confessed later on through an argument between
him and Ibn Abbas. [^9]

If you ponder on the saying of the Prophet (S) “Come on! Let me write
you a book after which you will never go astray” and on his saying in
the tradition of “Thaqalayn”: “I have left to you what if you keep to,
you will never go astray; the Book of Allah and my progeny” you will
know that the purpose of the two sayings is the same. The Prophet (S),
during his illness, wanted to write them the details of what he had
ordered them of in the tradition of “Thaqalayn”.

The Prophet (S) had given up writing that book because the horrible word
of those men had forced him to give up that for there would be no use of
his book. It would cause sedition and disagreement after him for they
would dispute whether his book was out of his raving or not. They
disagreed and disputed and caused much clamor before him and so he had
nothing to do except to say: “Get out!”

If he had insisted on writing that book, they would have persisted in
their saying “the Messenger of Allah is raving” and then their followers
would try their best to prove that the Prophet (S) had really been
raving and they would fabricate many stories and tales to refute that
book and to refute whoever believed in it.

Therefore wisdom had led the Prophet (S) to give up writing that book
lest those people and their followers would open a gap to criticize
prophethood, Allah forbid! The Prophet (S) had found that Imam ‘Ali (as)
and his followers would submit to the content of that book whether it
had been written or not and that the others would not regard nor would
they do according to it whether it had been written or not. Hence wisdom
determined to give up that book for it would lead to opposition and
sedition.

### The excuses of the resistants

Sheikh Saleem al-Bishri, through some of the *muraja’ats* (arguments)
between him and me in Egypt in 1329 A.H. and after that, has justified
that event by saying: “The Prophet (S), when ordering his companions to
bring a paper and an inkpot, might not intend to write anything but he
just wanted to inform them only and then Allah inspired Umar from among
the companions with the intent of the Prophet (S) and so he prevented
the others from bringing the paper and the inkpot. Hence we have to
consider this prevention of Umar as one of his assents to his God and
one of his charismata, may Allah be pleased with him”.

He said: “Thus some of the scholars have said”. Then he said: “But it is
fair to say that the saying of the Prophet (S) “you will never go astray
after it” refutes that situation (of Umar) because the Prophet’s saying
is a conditional statement which means: “if you bring me a paper and an
inkpot and let me write you the book, you will never go astray after
that at all”. Definitely informing of such a thing just for mere
informing to test the others is a kind of clear lying which we have to
exalt the prophets far above especially in a time when not bringing the
paper and the inkpot would be better than bringing them. This
justification is weak from other sides and so we have to find another
justification”.

He said: “What we can say is that the matter was not a compulsory order
that it could not be argued and the arguer would be disobedient but it
was a matter of consultation. The companions often discussed some of
those orders with the Prophet (S) and especially Umar who knew that he
was always in conformity with the benefits and he was inspired by Allah.
Umar, due to his kindness to the Prophet (S), wanted to cause no
tiredness to the Prophet (S) when he would dictate that book while he
was ill; therefore Umar thought that not bringing the paper and the
inkpot would be better.

“Or Umar might fear that the Prophet (S) would write some things that
people would be unable to carry out and so they would deserve punishment
due to that for the orders of the Prophet (S) would be compulsory and
would not be interpreted in another way.

“Or he might fear that the hypocrites would criticize that book because
the Prophet (S) was ill when he wrote it and then it would cause
sedition; therefore Umar said: “The book of Allah suffices us” for Allah
has said:

***“We have not neglected*** ***anything in the book” (Qur’an 6:38)***
and
***“This day have I perfected for you your religion” (Qur’an 5:3)***

as if Umar was certain that the umma would not go astray because Allah
had perfected the religion for it (the umma) and completed His favor on
it.

“This is the justification of the ulama. The saying of the Prophet (S)
“you will never go astray” is decisive and compulsory because trying to
assure what prevents deviation, if one is able to, is compulsory no
doubt. The Prophet’s anger and his saying to the companions “get out”
when they did not obey his order was another evidence showing that the
matter was compulsory and it was not a matter of consultation.

“If you say: if the matter was compulsory, the Prophet (S) would not
give it up just because the companions opposed him as he had not given
up informing of the mission in spite of the opposition of the
unbelievers. The answer is that writing that book was not compulsory to
the Prophet (S) after his companions had opposed him and this did not
mean that bringing the paper and the inkpot was not compulsory
especially when the Prophet (S) ordered them and declared to them that
the book would save them from deviation. The fact is that a command is
compulsory to the commanded one and not to the commander especially if
the benefit of that command concerns the commanded one; therefore
compulsoriness of this order concerned the companions and not the
Prophet (S).

“It might be compulsory to the Prophet (S) too but it became not so when
the companions disobeyed him and said “the Messenger of Allah is raving”
for the book, after that, would not lead save to sedition.

“Some scholars might justify that Umar and those, who had assisted him,
did not understand from the Prophet’s saying that the book would be the
cause of saving every individual of the umma from deviation that no one
would go astray after that at all. They understood from the saying “you
will not go astray” that the whole umma all in all would not go astray
and deviation would not reach every individual in the umma after writing
that book. They knew that it was impossible for the whole umma to go
astray; therefore they thought that writing that book was not necessary.

“They thought that the Prophet (S) just wanted to attract their
attention to the matter due to his kindness and mercifulness. They
opposed the Prophet (S) thinking that the matter was not necessary but
it was out of his kindness and mercifulness so they wanted not to tire
the Prophet (S) when they refused to bring the paper and the inkpot.

“This is all what has been said to justify this doing. But he, who
ponders on this justification, will find it far away from the truth
because the Prophet’s saying “you will not go astray” means that the
matter is necessary as we have said besides that his being angry with
them means that they have left an obligatory order. The Prophet (S) has
ordered them to get out in spite of his great patience and this is an
evidence showing that they have left the most obligatory and the most
useful thing as it has been known of his great morals.

“It would be better, when talking about this event, to say: it was a
matter that took place unlike their conducts. It was a slip and a
stumble of them which we do not know a way to justify. Allah is the
Guide to the straight path.”

Sheikh Saleem al-Bishri tried his best to justify this resistance and to
find an excuse for those resistants but he did not find a way to that.
Rather his knowledge and fairness refused save to refute these trifles.
He was not satisfied in refuting them with one evidence yet he examined
all the evidences he could get. May Allah reward him for what he has
done.

### Refuting the excuses in other ways

As we had other evidences to refute those justifications, I wished at
that time to offer these evidences to him (Sheikh al-Bishri) and asked
him to judge on them.

You (Sheikh al-Bishri) said: they (who defended Umar) said that the
Prophet (S), when he had ordered his companions to bring a paper and an
inkpot, might have not intended to write anything but he just wanted to
test them.

I say, in addition to what you have said: this event took place while
the Prophet (S) was about to die. The time was not a time of testing;
rather it was a time of warning and advising the umma. One, who was
about to die, would be away from fun and jesting. He would be busy with
himself, with his important affairs and the important affairs of his
relatives, especially if he was a prophet.

If he, throughout his life, could not test his people, then how would he
be able, at the time of dying, to test them?

When the companions disputed and did much clamor before him, the Prophet
(S) ordered them to get out. This showed that he had become angry with
them. If the resistants were right, the Prophet (S) would accept that
from them and he would be pleased with them!

He, who studied this tradition and especially their saying “the
Messenger of Allah is raving”, would be certain that those companions
were aware that the Prophet (S) had intended to declare something that
they had hated; therefore they surprised him with that horrible word and
they disputed and made much ado before him.

The crying of Ibn Abbas for this event and his considering it as a
calamity was another evidence refuting this justification.

Those, who justified the event, said: Umar was always right in
perceiving the benefits and he was inspired by Allah. This nonsense
could never be listened to because it showed that the right in that
event was on the side of Umar and not on the side of the Prophet (S) and
it showed that Umar’s inspiration was more truthful than the revelation
that had been revealed to the Prophet (S) by Allah.

They also said: Umar wanted to relieve the Prophet (S) from the
tiredness that he would get if he dedicated that book while he was ill.
It was definitely that writing the book would make the Prophet’s heart
delighted because he would be certain that his umma would be safe from
deviation.

The order and the divine will of the Prophet (S) must be obeyed. The
Prophet (S) wanted the companions to bring him a piece of paper and an
inkpot to write a book and the companions had no right to disobey him or
to oppose his will. Allah said:

***“And it behooves not a believing man and a*** ***believing woman that
they should have any choice in their matter when Allah and His Messenger
have decided a matter; and whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger, he
surely strays off a manifest straying” (Qur’an 33:36).***

The resistance of the companions and their disputes and clamors before
the Prophet (S) were more tiresome to him than dictating that book. So
how did the one, who pitied the Prophet (S) for being tired because of
dictating the book, resist him and surprise him by saying: “the
Messenger of Allah is raving”?

They said: Umar thought that not bringing the paper and the inkpot was
better although the Prophet (S) had ordered of that. Did Umar think that
the Prophet (S) ordered of something which was better to be neglected?

Stranger than that was their saying: Umar might fear that the Prophet
(S) would write some things that people would not be able to carry out
and then they would deserve punishment because of not carrying them out!

How did Umar fear that whereas the Prophet (S) had said: “you will never
go astray at all”? Did they think that Umar was more aware of the ends
than the Prophet (S) and more compassionate and more careful for the
umma? Certainly not!

They also said: Umar might fear that the hypocrites would consider the
book as untrue because the Prophet (S) was ill when he wrote it and this
would cause a sedition.

This was impossible because the Prophet (S) had said: “you will never go
astray”. He had confirmed that the book would save the umma from
deviation; then how would it be a cause for sedition if the hypocrites
criticized it?

If Umar was afraid that the hypocrites might consider the book as
untrue; then why did he lead them to that when he resisted and said:
“The Messenger of Allah is raving”?

As for their saying when interpreting Umar’s saying “the Book of Allah
suffices us” according to these two verses:

***“We*** ***have not neglected anything in the Book” (Qur’an 6:38)***
and
***“This day have I perfected for you your religion” (Qur’an 5:3)***

is not right because these two verses do not refer to being safe from
deviation and they do not assure guidance to people. How could it be
possible for them to leave that book and to depend on these two verses?
If the existence of the Qur'an would save the umma from deviation, then
this deviation and disagreement among the Muslims would not have taken
place! [^10]

They said in their last justification: Umar did not understand from the
Prophet’s saying that that book would be the cause to save every
individual of the umma from deviation but he understood that it would be
a cause that would prevent the umma as whole from going astray and he
(Umar), may Allah be pleased with him, knew that the umma would not get
together on deviation at all whether that book had been written or not
and therefore he resisted the Prophet (S) on that day.

I say, in addition to what you have said:[^11] Umar was not of that kind
that he would not understand from the tradition what had been clear to
all of the people because every one had understood that if that book had
been written, it would have been a perfect cause to save every
individual from going astray. It is this meaning which is understood by
the people.

Umar knew well that the Prophet (S) had not feared for his umma to get
together on deviation because he often heard the Prophet (S) saying: “My
umma does not get together on deviation nor on error” and “A group of my
umma will still keep to the truth.” Allah has said:

***“Allah has promised to those*** ***of you who believe and do good
that He will most certainly make them rulers in the earth as He made
rulers those before them, and that He will most certainly establish for
them their religion which He has chosen for them, and that He will most
certainly, after their fear, give them security in exchange; they shall
serve Me, not associating aught with Me” (Qur’an 24:55).***

There are many clear texts in the Qur'an and the Sunna showing that the
umma as whole will not gather together on deviation. Hence it was not
reasonable that Umar or other than Umar might think that the Prophet (S)
had feared for the umma to be deviate all in all. It behooved Umar to
understand from the tradition what came to mind and not what the Qur'an
and the Sunna had denied!

The Prophet (S) became angry and said to the companions: “Get out!” This
meant that what they had resisted was one of the necessary obligations
which they had to follow. If the resistance of Umar was because he had
misunderstood the Prophet’s saying as they who defended him, pretended,
then the Prophet (S) would have removed his misunderstanding and would
have declared his (the Prophet’s) intent to the companions. In fact if
the Prophet (S) could have convinced them of what he had ordered them,
he would not have got them out of his house. The weeping and sadness of
Ibn Abbas is one of the clearest evidences that prove what we have said.

Indeed this “calamity” can never be excused. If it was, as you said, a
slip and a stumble, it would be easy but it was the disaster that had
broken the back! In fact the resistants were among those who believed in
*ijtihad* against the clear text and in this event they had practiced
*ijtihad* before the text of the Prophet (S). They had their own
opinions and Allah had His own opinion!

### Sheikh al-Bishri admires what we have said

When Sheikh al-Bishri read our speech in refuting those excuses, he
replied to it saying: “You have closed the way before the justifiers,
controlled their routes and separated between them and their intents.
There is no doubt about what you have mentioned and there is nothing
leading to suspect a bit of what you have declared…”

16. Treaty of al-Hudaybiya
--------------------------

On the day of al-Hudaybiya[^12] the Prophet (S) preferred peace to war
and he ordered of that as Allah had revealed to him. The benefit of
Islam required that treaty of peace but that benefit was unknown by the
Prophet’s companions and so some of his companions denied the treaty and
resisted the Prophet (S) openly. The Prophet (S) paid no attention to
their resistance and he went on carrying what he had ordered by Allah
and then the end was of the best ends of the conquerors.

### The event in details

The Prophet (S) left Medina on Monday, the first of Thul Qa’da in the
sixth year of hijra to offer the minor hajj. He feared that Quraysh
might wage a war against him or they might prevent him from offering the
hajj in the Kaaba as they had done before. He called out the people to
offer the minor hajj with him. One thousand and four hundred men of the
Muhajireen, the Ansar and other tribesmen followed him.[^13] Among them
there were two hundred knights.

He took with him (*al-hadiy*) seventy camels as gift to the Kaaba. He
did not take with him weapons except the weapons that travelers might
take with them; swords and water-skins. [^14] When the Prophet (S) and
his companions reached Thul Hulayfa, they marked (*al-hadiy*) the camels
and they became in the state of ritual consecration (*ihram*) so that
the people would know that he and his companions had come as pilgrims
and not warriors.

Then he and his companions went on and after he passed some of the way,
he knew that Khalid bin al-Waleed was in al-Ghameem (a place near Mecca)
with two hundred knights from Quraysh. At the head of them was Akrima
bin Abu Jahl. The Prophet (S) told his companions of that and ordered
them to take the right way in order to avoid the way of Khalid and his
men. They moved around al-Hamdh[^15] and Khalid did not notice them
until he saw the black dust of their army. Khalid and his knights came
near to the Prophet (S) and his companions. The Prophet (S) ordered
Abbad bin Bishr to be with his knights opposite to Khalid.

The time of Dhuhr prayer came. The Prophet (S) offered the prayer with
his companions. The polytheists said: “Muhammad and his companions have
given you the opportunity to overcome them.” Khalid said: “Yes, they
were in inadvertence. If we had attacked them, we would have overcome
them. But after a short time they will have another prayer which is more
beloved to them than themselves and their children.”

Then Allah revealed to the Prophet (S):

***“And when you are*** ***among them and keep up the prayer for them,
let a party of them stand up with you, and let them take their arms;
then when they have prostrated themselves let them go to your rear, and
let another party who have not prayed come forward and pray with you,
and let them take their precautions and their arms; (for) those who
disbelieve desire that you may be careless of your arms and your
luggage, so that they may then turn upon you with a sudden united
attack, and there is no blame on you, if you are annoyed with rain or if
you are sick, that you lay down your arms, and take your precautions;
surely Allah has prepared a disgraceful chastisement for the
unbelievers.***
***Then when you have finished the prayer, remember Allah standing and
sitting and reclining; but when you are secure (from danger) keep up
prayer; surely prayer is a timed ordinance for the believers. And be not
weak hearted in pursuit of the enemy; if you suffer pain, then surely
they (too) suffer pain as you suffer pain, and you hope from Allah what
they do not hope; and Allah is Knowing, Wise” (Qur’an 4:102-104)***

Then the Prophet (S) offered Asr prayer with his companions as “fear”
prayer which was legislated by these previous verses.

***“And Allah turned back the unbelievers in their rage; they did not
obtain any advantage” (Qur’an 33:25).***

17. Aggressiveness of Quraysh and the wisdom of the Prophet (S)
---------------------------------------------------------------

When the Prophet (S) came to al-Hudaybiya, he got much harm from the
polytheists. He and his companions faced rudeness, disgust, hatred and
open enmity from them. Also the polytheists got from the Prophet’s
companions like that and more for they did according the saying of
Allah:

***“..and let them*** ***find in you hardness..” (Qur’an 9:123)***

But the Prophet (S), due to his patience that Allah had granted to him,
tolerated the polytheists with his wisdom, which was a part of his
nature, and his high morals with which Allah had preferred him to the
rest of the prophets and Messengers (S).

The polytheists prevented him from entering Mecca in a rude and
offensive way but he did not become angry nor was his patience provoked.
He dealt with those harsh people with leniency and indifference. He said
humble words about them full of highness that made them see him above
the stars and see themselves under the ground. His words were full of
pity and advice to them and full of divine wisdom that moved their
hearts in spite of their hardness and harshness and also were full of
warning and threatening to uproot them if they kept on their way.

Here are some of the Prophet’s sayings to ponder on them and to find out
the Prophet’s aims. The Prophet (S) said: “Woe unto Quraysh! The war has
exhausted them. What will they lose if they let me alone with the Arabs?
If the Arabs kill me, it will be the wish of them (Quraysh) and if Allah
makes me prevail over them, they will become Muslims honorably and if
they refused (to be Muslims), they will fight me with their full power!
What does Quraysh think? By Allah, Whom there is no god but, I will
still fight for the sake of what my God has sent me to until Allah makes
it prevail or this neck is cut!”

He said attracting them towards his great morals and favors: “I swear by
Him, in Whose hand my soul is, that if Quraysh invites me today for a
plan, in which they ask me for keeping relations of kinship, I will
respond to them.”

He declared his mercifulness through these wise and compassionate words
and then he gathered his companions to consult them for fighting Quraysh
if Quraysh would insist on preventing him from visiting the Kaaba. Most
of his companions or perhaps all of them were ready to fight Quraysh and
other than Quraysh. They were zealous for that.

During that enthusiasm, al-Miqdad rose expressing the situation of the
all. He said: “O Messenger of Allah, we do not say to you as the
Israelites have said to Prophet Moses (S):

***“So go thou and*** ***thy Lord and fight! We will sit here” (Qur’an
5:24)***

but we say: go, you and your Lord, and fight; we will fight with you. O
Messenger of Allah, by Allah, if you take us to Bard al-Ghamad,[^16] we
will go with you even if just one of us will remain alive.”

The Prophet (S) became delighted to hear that. They paid him homage and
promised him to support him until the last breath. They were one
thousand and four hundred men. Among them was the head of the
hypocrites; Ibn Salool.[^17] No one had refrained from paying homage to
him except a man called al-Jadd bin Qays al-Ansari. [^18]

### Fright of the polytheists and request for peace

As soon as Quraysh heard of this homage (the homage of ar-Radhwan)[^19]
their hearts shook and their chests were filled with fright especially
after Akrima bin Abu Jahl with five hundred knights had attacked the
Muslims and the Prophet (S), as mentioned in *al-Kashshaf*, had sent to
him some of his companions who had defeated him and his men and forced
them to retreat until they resorted to the walls of Mecca. Ibn Abbas
said: “Allah has made the Muslims defeat Akrima and his men with stones
until they entered into the house and then they knew that they would not
be able to stand against Muhammad (S) and his companions.”

Then the wise people of Quraysh were obliged to request the Prophet (S)
for peace. They had known before that the Prophet (S) had said: “I swear
by Him, in Whose hand my soul is, that if Quraysh invites me today for a
plan, in which they ask me for keeping relations of kinship, I will
respond to them” so they sent to the Prophet (S) some of their notables,
at the head of whom was Suhayl bin Amr bin Abd Widd al-Aamiry to
represent all of Quraysh before the Prophet (S) to ask for a truce on
some conditions which they had put.

The conditions were too oppressive for the Muslims and so they refused
them but the polytheists of Quraysh insisted on them resorting to the
promise the Prophet (S) had promised to respond to them if whenever they
asked him for a matter of kinship. The Prophet (S) had been ordered by
Allah to grant this promise and to act according to it. He had accepted
their heavy conditions because he obeyed the revelation of Allah and
according to the advantage that Allah had been aware of. Later on all
the Muslims knew that advantage. You will see the details in a coming
chapter inshallah.

### Umar disdains the conditions of the truce

When peace was determined with those conditions by the two sides, Umar
bin al-Khattab became too angry and zealotry occupied his mind. He came
to Abu Bakr while he was flamed up with rage. He said to Abu Bakr:[^20]
“O Abu Bakr, is he not the Messenger of Allah?”

Abu Bakr said: “Yes, he is.”
Umar said: “Are we not Muslims?” Abu Bakr said: “Yes, we are!”
Umar said: “Are they not polytheists?” Abu Bakr said: “Yes, they
are?”
Umar said: “Then why do we submit to their conditions?” Abu Bakr said:
“O man, he is the Messenger of Allah and he never disobeys his Lord, Who
supports him. Keep to him, follow him and obey him until you die. I
witness that he is the Messenger of Allah…” [^21]

Muslim mentioned in his *Sahih*, vol.2 chap. the Truce of al-Hudaybiya
that Umar had said to the Prophet (S): “Are we not on the truth and are
they not on the untruth?”
The Prophet (S) said: “Yes.”

Umar said: “Then why do we submit to their conditions and come back
(without offering the hajj) before Allah has judged between us and
them?”
The Prophet (S) said: “O Ibn al-Khattab, I am the Messenger of Allah
and Allah will never neglect me at all.”

Umar became too angry and went to Abu Bakr saying to him: “Are we not on
the truth and are they not on the untruth?”
Abu Bakr said: “Yes, we are.”
Umar said: “Are our killed ones not in Paradise and are their killed
ones not in Hell?”
Abu Bakr said: “Yes, they are.”

Umar said: “Then why do we submit to them and do not defend our
religion?”
Abu Bakr said: “O Ibn al-Khattab, he is the Messenger of Allah and
Allah will never neglect him at all.” Many other scholars have mentioned
this tradition in their books.

Al-Bukhari mentioned in his *Sahih*[^22] that Umar had said to the
Prophet (S): “Are you not really the Messenger of Allah?”
The Prophet (S) said: “Yes, I am.”

Umar said: “Are we not on the truth and is our enemy not on the
untruth?”
The Prophet (S) said: “Yes, we are.”

Umar said: “Then why do we submit to them and do not defend our
religion?”
The Prophet (S) said: “I am the Messenger of Allah. I do not
disobey[^23] Him and He will support me.”

Umar said: “Have you not told us that we would circumambulate the
Kaaba?”
The Prophet (S) said: “Yes, I have; but have I told you that we would
circumambulate the Kaaba this year?”
Umar said: “No, you have not.”
The Prophet (S) said: “You will come to the Kaaba and you will
circumambulate it.” [^24]

Umar came to Abu Bakr and said to him: “O Abu Bakr, is he not really the
Prophet of Allah?”
Abu Bakr said: “Yes, he is.”

Umar said: “Are we not on the truth and is not our enemy on the
untruth?”
Abu Bakr said: “Yes, we are.”

Umar said: “Then why do we submit and do not defend our religion?”
Abu Bakr said: “O man, he is the Messenger of Allah. He does not
disobey his Lord and Allah will support him. [^25] Keep to him and
follow him. By Allah, he is on the truth.”

Umar said: “Has he not told us that we would go to the Kaaba and would
circumambulate it?”

Abu Bakr said: “Yes, he has, but has he told you that you would
circumambulate the Kaaba this year?”
Umar said: “No, he has not.”
He said: “You will visit the Kaaba and you will circumambulate it.”
Umar said: “I did many things for that.” [^26]

When the Prophet (S) finished writing the book of the truce, he said to
his companions: “Go and slaughter the sacrifices and then cut your
hair.” The narrator added: “By Allah, not one of them moved to carry out
the Prophet’s order. The Prophet (S) repeated that for three times. When
no one of them did that, the Prophet (S) came into his tent and then he
went out without talking to anyone of them. He slaughtered a camel and
then he asked a companion to cut his hair. When the companions saw that,
they began to slaughter the sacrifices and then they cut each other’s
hair until they were about to kill each other.”

Ahmad bin Hanbal mentioned this tradition in his *Musnad* from
al-Musawwir bin Makhrama and Marwan bin al-Hakam. Al-Halabi in his
*Seera* and many other historians, when talking about the truce of
al-Hudaybiya, mentioned that Umar had debated with the Prophet (S) on
that day. Then Abu Ubayda bin al-Jarrah said to him: “O Ibn al-Khattab
(Umar), do you not hear what the Prophet (S) is saying? We resort to
Allah from the evil of the Satan!”

Al-Halabi and other historians mentioned that the Prophet (S) had said
to Umar on that day: “O Umar, I myself have agreed so why have you not
agreed?” They also mentioned that Umar often said after that: “I am
still keeping on fasting, praying, paying charities and setting slaves
free so that my speech I have said to the Prophet (S) may be forgiven…”

### Carrying out the treaty of peace

The Prophet (S) on that day did not pay any attention to the resistance
of those people for he had been ordered by Allah to do that. The treaty
of peace was too heavy because of its oppressive conditions. The Prophet
(S) sent for Imam ‘Ali (as) to write the form of the treaty. He said to
Imam ‘Ali (as): “Write: in the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the
merciful.” Suhayl bin Amr said: “We do not know this. Let him write: in
the name of You, O Allah.”

The Muslims began clamoring and said: “No, by Allah, he will not write
except what the Messenger of Allah has said.” But the Prophet (S)
stopped the dispute by saying to Imam ‘Ali (as): “Write: in the name of
You, O Allah.” Imam ‘Ali (as) wrote the book as the Prophet (S) had
ordered him.

Then the Prophet (S) said to him: “Write: This is what Muhammad, the
Messenger of Allah, has agreed on with Suhayl bin Amr.” Suhayl said: “If
we regarded you as the Messenger of Allah, we would not have fought you
or prevented you from the House (the Kaaba). But let him write: this is
what Muhammad bin Abdullah has agreed on with Suhayl bin Amr.” The
Muslims broke out shouting and denying what Suhayl had said. They
refused that and insisted on writing what the Prophet (S) had said.
Sedition was about to take place.

The Prophet (S) said: “I am Muhammad the Messenger of Allah even if you
do not believe in me. And I am Muhammad bin Abdullah. O Ali, write: This
is what Muhammad bin Abdullah has agreed on with Suhayl bin Amr.” Imam
‘Ali (as) wrote it unwillingly. The Prophet (S) said to him: “O Abul
Hasan (Ali), you will be in the same situation one day” or he said to
him: “O Abul Hasan, you will receive the same and you will respond while
you are oppressed.” [^27]

The conditions of the truce required that the Prophet (S) and his
companions were to go back from al-Hudaybiya to Medina and in the next
year the people of Quraysh were to go out of Mecca so that the Prophet
(S) and his companions would enter it and would stay there for three
days. The Prophet (S) and his companions had to come with no weapons
except swords in the sheaths.

The war between them had to stop for ten years [^28] during which people
would live peacefully. They had to avoid provoking each other. Whoever
of (other tribes of) the Arabs wanted to conclude peace with Muhammad,
[^29] could do that and whoever wanted to ally with Quraysh could do
that. The two sides had not to have hidden grudge in their hearts
against each other. They had to refrain from robbery and treason.

If any one of Quraysh, who believed in Muhammad (S), resorted to
Muhammad (S) without permission of his master, he must be returned to
his master and if some one of Muhammad’s companions resorted to Quraysh
after having apostatized, Quraysh would not have to return him to
Muhammad (S). The Muslims said: “Glory be to Allah! How do we return a
Muslim, who resorts to us, to the polytheists of Quraysh?”

The Muslims found it too difficult to accept this condition. They said:
“O Messenger of Allah, do you accept this condition against yourself?”
He said: “Yes, I do. He, who leaves us after having apostatized, let
Allah do away with him and he, who comes to us after being a Muslim and
we return him to them, Allah will grant him deliverance.”

While the Prophet (S) and Suhayl bin Amr were writing the treaty with
the agreed upon conditions, Abu Jandal al-Aass bin Suhayl bin Amr (the
son of Suhayl bin Amr) came to the Muslims trailing with his ties. Abu
Jandal had become a Muslim in Mecca some time ago but his father had
prevented him from immigrating to Medina. He tied him and put him in
prison. When Abu Jandal heard that the Prophet (S) and his companions
had come to al-Hudaybiya, he played a trick to get out of prison. He
took a way between the mountains until he came to the Muslims who became
pleased to receive him.

But his father Suhayl dragged him with his clothes and hit him on the
face severely [^30] while saying to the Prophet (S): “O Muhammad, this
is the first one whom I will ask you to return to me.” The Prophet (S)
said to him: “We have not finished writing the treaty yet.” Suhayl said:
“Then I will not make peace with you.” The Prophet (S) said to him: “Let
him be my resorter then!” he said: “I will not.” The Prophet (S) said:
“You are to do that.” He said: “I will not do.”

Mukriz bin Hafs and Huwaytib bin Abdul Uzza, who were notable men of
Quraysh, said to the Prophet (S): “O Muhammad, we will protect him for
you.” They took Abu Jandal into a pavilion and took his father away from
him. Then Suhayl said: “O Muhammad, the matter between me and you has
been concluded and completed before my son came to you.” The Prophet (S)
said: “You are right.” Then the Prophet (S) said to Abu Jandal: “Be
patient and wait for the reward of Allah. The treaty of peace has been
concluded before you came and we do not betray. We requested your father
concerning you but he refused. Allah will grant you and the weak like
you with deliverance.”

Here Umar jumped to Abu Jandal tempting him to kill his father and
trying to give him a sword. Umar said, as mentioned in ad-Dahlani’s
*Seera* and other books: “I wished he had taken the sword and struck his
father.” He said to Abu Jandal: “One may kill his father. By Allah, if
we had met our fathers, we would have killed them.” But Abu Jandal did
not respond to Umar in killing his father because he feared to cause
sedition [^31] and he obeyed the Prophet (S) when he had ordered him to
be patient and to wait for the reward of Allah. [^32]

He said to Umar: “Why do you yourself not kill him?” Umar said: “The
Prophet (S) has forbidden us from killing him and other than him.” [^33]
Abu Jandal said to him: “You are not worthier than me of obeying the
Messenger of Allah.” [^34]

Abu Jandal went back to Mecca with his father under the protection of
Mukriz and Huwaytib. They put him in a special place and prevented his
father from harming him in order to be loyal to the promise of
protection they had given to the Prophet (S). After some time Allah
granted deliverance to Abu Jandal and the rest of the oppressed weak
Muslims. You will see that later on inshallah. Praise be to Allah, Who
has supported His servant and carried out His promise.

### The fruit of the peace

The first fruit of the treaty of peace was that it caused the Muslims
and the polytheists to mix with each other. The polytheists began to
come to Medina after the truce and the Muslims began to go to Mecca.

When the polytheists came to Medina and saw the Prophet (S) with his
high morals and exalted conducts, they regarded him highly and
appreciated his divine aspects and then they admired Islam with its laws
and verdicts, with its permissibility and impermissibility, with its
obligations and relations and with all its rules and judgments. They
were affected by the Qur'an and its verses which attracted their minds
and hearts.

They were astonished to see the Prophet’s companions submit completely
to the orders of the Prophet (S). And so they became near to faith after
they had been in the utmost blindness and aggression. When they went
back to their people, they spread the principles of Muhammad (S) and
warned of his conquest.

When the Muslims went to Mecca, they became alone with their relatives
and close friends. They began advising them and inviting them to the
mission of Allah and His Messenger. They showed them the signs of
prophethood and Islam. They showed the Qur'an with its knowledge,
wisdom, social rules, obligations, ethics, maxims and histories of
ancient and previous nations. They worked as preachers inside the heart
of Mecca and this work had a great effect to even the way to the great
conquest which had taken place without fighting or resistance.

One of the advantages of the peace was the mere meeting between the
Prophet (S) and the polytheists in al-Hudaybiya. The polytheists met the
Prophet (S) face to face and saw his great personality and high morals
and guidance which most of Quraysh had known nothing about especially
the youths. Abu Jahl, al-Waleed, Abu Sufyan, Shayba, Utba and their
likes of the idolaters had tried their best to defame the Prophet (S)
and they could poison the public opinion. They had done whatever they
could in order to
“..***put out the light of Allah with their*** ***mouths, and Allah
would not consent save to perfect His light...” (Qur’an 9:32).***

They went to where he had emigrated to kill him with his companions and
to do away with the people who had protected and supported him but Allah
had granted him victory in Badr, Uhud and al-Ahzab;
***“So the roots of the people who were*** ***unjust were cut off; and
all praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds” (Qur’an 6:45)***.

The people of Mecca, after those wars, remained on their deviated
opinion concerning the Prophet (S) for they had not seen him after his
emigration to Medina and they had not known about him except what the
fabricators spread of false news but on the day of al-Hudaybiya when
they mixed with him and with his companions they realized his great
morals and high personality.

Whenever they treated him severely and did bad to him, he treated them
kindly and did good to them. If they were severe and harsh towards him,
he would be kind and merciful to them. He kept on meeting their bad
doings with good doings. He followed the saying of Allah:

***“Repel (evil) with what is*** ***best, when lo! he between whom and
you was enmity would be as if he were a warm friend. And none are made
to receive it but those who are patient, and none are made to receive it
but those who have a mighty good fortune” (Qur’an 41:34-35)***

The Prophet (S) was able at that time to enter Mecca and to visit the
Kaaba by force because Allah had said concerning this event:

***“And if those who disbelieve fought you, they*** ***would certainly
turn (their) backs, then they would not find any protector or a helper”
(Qur’an 48:22)***

and: ***“And He it is Who held back their hands from you and your hands
from them in the valley of Mecca after He had given you victory over
them” (Qur’an 48:24)***.

The polytheists were certain that the Prophet (S) would have defeated
them if he had fought them. They knew that his companions had insisted
on him to fight but he had refused preferring peace, whose end would be
good, to war to save the bloods of people and to respect the Kaaba. The
people of Quraysh knew well that the Prophet (S) had pitied them and
cared for their rights of kinship; therefore he had accepted the truce
with its heavy conditions. He did not have any grudge towards them
although they prevented him and his companions from visiting the Kaaba
and forced them to go back to Medina where many of his companions were
unwilling.

Quraysh thought that this was as retribution to what had happened in the
battles of Badr, Uhud and al-Ahzab for that day they realized that the
Prophet (S) was not responsible for the shed blood of the people of
Quraysh but it was their chiefs of Quraysh who were responsible for
that; like Abu Sufyan, Abu Jahl and their likes who had attacked the
Prophet (S) in his place of emigration and so they forced him to defend
himself and his companions. If they had left him and left those, who
received and protected him, alone, he would not have fought them and he
would have been satisfied with spreading his mission with wisdom and
fair exhortation.

In al-Hudaybiya the Prophet (S) had put out the flame of rage inside the
hearts of those polytheists, removed their hatred and made them know the
reality of their chiefs and masters until they confessed that they had
wronged the Prophet (S) and themselves as well. Hence their hearts
became lenient and they felt that their end would be good if they joined
him and became under his banner. And it was so after the great victory
and the honorable conquest of Mecca; the people of Quraysh, groups by
groups, became Muslims.

### Coming back to Medina

The Prophet (S) had stayed in al-Hudaybiya for nineteen days. After that
he went back to Medina. When he arrived at Kira’ul Ghameem - between
Mecca and Medina - the sura of al-Fat~h was revealed to him. Umar was
still angry why the polytheists had prevented the Muslims from entering
Mecca and forced them to go back unlike what they had expected. The
Prophet (S), when this sura had been revealed to him, wanted to remove
Umar’s anger and grief therefore he said to him - as mentioned by
al-Bukhari:[^35] “A sura is revealed to me that is more beloved to me
than all what is there on the earth.” Then he recited the sura of
al-Fat~h:
***“Surely We have given to you*** ***a clear victory…” (Qur’an
48:1).***

One of the Prophet’s companions said to him: “This is not a victory. We
were prevented from visiting the House (the Kaaba) and two faithful men
were returned (to the polytheists) after they had resorted to us.” [^36]
The Prophet (S) said: “What bad speech this is! Yes, it is the greatest
victory. The polytheists became satisfied to push you away from their
country and they asked you for peace but they found in you what they
disliked. Allah has given you a victory and returned you safe and
rewarded. It is the greatest victory.

Have you forgotten the day of Uhud when:

***“..you ran off precipitately and did not wait for any one, and I was
calling you from your rear”*** ***(Qur’an*** ***3:153)***

Have you forgotten the day of al-Ahzab when:

***“..they came upon you from above you and from below you, and when the
eyes turned dull, and the hearts rose up to the throats, and you began
to think diverse thoughts of Allah” (Qur’an 33:10)***

The Muslims said: “Allah and His Messenger are right. O Prophet of
Allah, by Allah we have not thought of what you have thought of. You are
more aware of Allah and His orders than us.” [^37]
But Umar said then: “O Messenger of Allah, have you not said that you
would enter Mecca safely?”
The Prophet (S) said: “Yes, I have, but have I said to you that I would
enter Mecca this year?”
Umar said: “No, you have not.” [^38]

Sa’eed bin Mansoor mentioned that ash-Shi’bi had said when talking about
the Verse ***(Surely We have given to you a*** ***clear victory)***:
“There was no victory in Islam greater than this before. When the truce
was concluded and the state of war ceased, people felt safe with each
other. So they met and debated with each other and then no one of the
Muslims talked with a prudent one of the polytheists about Islam unless
that one became a Muslim. The people, who believed in Islam during those
two years, were more than the people who had believed in Islam during
all the period before that.

What confirmed this was that the Prophet (S) had come to al-Hudaybiya
with one thousand and four hundred Muslims and then after two years he
had come to conquer Mecca with ten thousand Muslims. The truce was the
first step that paved the way to the great conquest of Mecca after which
thousands of people became Muslims; therefore the peace of al-Hudaybiya
was called as victory because it was the beginning of the great victory
of conquering Mecca.

### Deliverance which the Oppressed were promised

You saw the previous tradition of Abu Jandal, who had played a trick to
get out of prison and then he came with his ties until he resorted to
the Prophet (S) and his companions in al-Hudaybiya. The Prophet (S)
could not protect him and he apologized to him but he ordered him to be
patient and to expect the reward and deliverance of Allah. The Prophet
(S) said to him: “Allah will grant you and the oppressed like you
deliverance.”

Among the oppressed and tortured men in Mecca there was a man called Abu
Baseer[^39] who was one of the Muslim heroes. He played a trick and get
out of prison and then he fled to resort to the Prophet (S) in Medina
after he had come back from al-Hudaybiya. Quraysh wrote a book to the
Prophet (S) to send this man back to them.

They sent the book with a man from Bani Aamir called Khunays and with
him there was a guide to show him the way. They came to the Prophet (S)
with the book. It was written in the book: “You have known well the
conditions we have agreed on in the treaty that you have to send us back
whoever resorts to you of our people. You are to send us Abu Baseer.”

The Prophet (S) said: “O Abu Baseer, we have agreed with these people on
some conditions as you know and we do not betray any one. Allah will
bestow upon you and upon the weak and oppressed people like you His
deliverance. Please go with grace of Allah.”
Abu Baseer said: “O Messenger of Allah, they will make me deviate from
my religion.”
The Prophet (S) said: “O Abu Baseer, go! Allah will grant you and those
around you of the oppressed His deliverance.”

Abu Baseer farewelled the Prophet (S) and went with those two men. When
they arrived at Thul Hulayfa, they sat to rest beside a wall. Abu Baseer
said to one of the men: “O man, is your sword sharp?”
The man said: “Yes, it is.”
Abu Baseer said to him: “Could you show me it?”

The man gave his sword to Abu Baseer. Abu Baseer struck the man with the
sword and killed him and he tried to kill the other one but he ran away
until he came to the Prophet (S). Abu Baseer was running after him. When
the Prophet (S) saw that, he said to the man: “What is the matter with
you?”

The man said: “Your friend killed my friend and I hardly could escape
his sword. I will be killed. O Muhammad, protect me!”

The Prophet (S) promised to protect him. Then Abu Baseer came with the
sword in his hand and said: “O Messenger of Allah, may I die for you!
You have just carried out your promise when you handed me over to them
but I defended my religion in order not to be deviated by them.”

The Prophet (S) said to him: “You can go wherever you like.” Abu Baseer
said: “O Messenger of Allah, this man has robbed the man, whom I have
killed. He robbed his sumpter and sword and you may punish him.” The
Prophet (S) said to him: “If I punish him, his people will think that I
break the promise that I have given to them.”

Then Abu Baseer went to a place through which the caravans of Quraysh
passed. Many oppressed Muslims, who had been imprisoned in Mecca, joined
him after they had been informed of his news and after they had heard
that the Prophet (S) had said about Abu Baseer: “He would wage a war if
he had some men with him.” Those oppressed men began to slip away
towards him. Abu Jandal bin Suhayl bin Amr slipped away from Mecca with
seventy knights, who had become Muslims, and they joined Abu Baseer.
They disliked going to the Prophet (S) at that period of the truce.

Some people of the tribes of Ghifar, Juhayna, Aslam and other Arab
tribes joined them until they became about three hundred warriors. They
began to interrupt the way before the caravans of Quraysh. They killed
any one of Quraysh they captured. They took all the caravans that passed
by them. They prevented people from entering or leaving Mecca. The
people of Quraysh were obliged to write to the Prophet (S) asking him by
the kinship between him and them to protect them. They sent Abu Sufyan
to the Prophet (S) to delegate with him. Abu Sufyan said to the Prophet
(S): “We have given up this condition of the treaty. Whoever resorts to
you (of those oppressed Muslims) you can keep him with no liability.”

Then the Prophet (S) wrote to Abu Baseer and Abu Jandal to come to him
and those, who were with them, could join their families and they were
neither to harm any one of Quraysh passing by them nor to seize any of
their caravans. When the book of the Prophet (S) arrived, Abu Baseer was
dying. He died while the book was still in his hand. Abu Jandal buried
him in that place and built a mosque beside his tomb.

Then Abu Jandal and some of his companions came to the Prophet (S) while
the others went back to their families. The people of Quraysh felt
safety for their caravan henceforth. Then the Prophet’s companions, who
had found it too difficult when the Prophet (S) had sent Abu Jandal back
to Quraysh with his father, knew that obeying the Prophet (S) would be
better than what they liked and they knew that the advantage in
al-Hudaybiya required the treaty of peace and that the Prophet (S) did
not talk out of desire.

They regretted their situation toward the Prophet (S) and they confessed
that they were mistaken; besides that Quraysh appreciated the Prophet’s
situation with them when he accepted the truce to prevent bloodshed.
They knew well that he was truthful, sincere, kind and merciful.

18. The Prophet’s prayer for Ibn Ubayy, the hypocrite
-----------------------------------------------------

When the Prophet (S) wanted to offer the prayer for Ibn Ubbayy, who was
dead, Umar resisted him and objected to him severely and harshly.

Al-Bukhari mentioned in his *Sahih* [^40] a tradition narrated by
Abdullah bin Umar who had said: “When Abdullah bin Ubayy died, his son
came to the Prophet (S) and said: “O Messenger of Allah, give me your
shirt to enshroud my father with it and please pray for him and invoke
Allah to forgive him!” The Prophet (S) gave him his shirt and said to
him: “If you finish enshrouding him, send for us.” When he finished
enshrouding his father, he sent for the Prophet (S).

The Prophet (S) went to offer the prayer for (the dead) Abdullah bin
Ubayy. Umar pulled the Prophet (S) and said to him: “Has Allah not
forbidden you from offering prayer on the hypocrites when He has said to
you:

***“Ask forgiveness for them or do not ask forgiveness for them; even if
you ask forgiveness for them seventy times, Allah will not forgive them”
(Qur’an 9:80)***?”

Ibn Umar added: “After that this verse

***“And never offer prayer for any one*** ***of them who dies and do not
stand by his grave; surely they disbelieve in Allah and His Messenger
and they shall die in transgression” (Qur’an 9:84)***
was revealed to the Prophet (S) and so he stopped offering prayers for
them.”

As if Umar had understood that this verse:
***“Ask*** ***forgiveness for them or do not ask forgiveness for
them…”***
had prohibited offering prayers for the hypocrites. In fact this verse
had not prohibited that. We will explain this soon. When Umar saw the
Prophet (S) standing to offer the prayer for the dead hypocrite, he
thought that he had contradicted the verse that had prohibited such a
prayer and hence Umar did not control his anger. He denied this doing of
the Prophet (S) and so he pulled him to prevent him from offering this
prayer.

Allah forbid! Far be it from Him and far be it from His Messenger! The
verse:
***“Ask forgiveness for them or do not*** ***ask forgiveness for them;
even if you ask forgiveness for them seventy times, Allah will not
forgive them”***
did not show any kind of prohibition. It just informed that whether the
Prophet (S) asked Allah to forgive the hypocrites or he did not ask Him
to forgive them; it would be the same for them and it would not benefit
them a bit.

The umma has agreed unanimously that prohibiting the prayer for the
hypocrites had been determined by this verse:
***“And never offer prayer for any one of them who dies and do not stand
by his grave”(Qur’an 9:84)***
and that this verse had been revealed after this event according to the
consensus of the umma. Yet the tradition of Ibn Umar was clear in
showing this fact; that the verse, which had prohibited offering prayer
for the hypocrites, had been revealed after this event; therefore the
Prophet (S) did not pay attention to this resistance but he overlooked
it due to his great discernment and wisdom.

When Umar insisted too much on trying to prevent the Prophet (S) from
offering this prayer using bad statement that did not behoove one like
Umar to say to one like the Prophet (S), the Prophet (S) said: “O Umar,
be away from me! I have been inspired. It has been said to me:

“***Ask forgiveness for them*** ***or do not ask forgiveness for them;
even if you ask forgiveness for them seventy times, Allah will not
forgive them” (Qur’an 9:80).***

If I know that when I ask Allah more than seventy times to forgive them,
He will forgive them, I will have done more.” Then the Prophet (S)
offered prayer for Ibn Ubayy, participated in his funerals and stood by
his grave.” [^41]

When the Prophet (S) offered the prayer for Ibn Ubayy, he acted
according to what he should do in dealing with people due to their
apparentness. Ibn Ubayy was not one of the unbelievers, who had denied
Islam. He had accepted Islam apparently and announced the *shahada* but
he practiced hypocrisy and yet it had not been prohibited to offer
prayers for the hypocrites; therefore the Prophet (S) had offered prayer
for him owing to his apparent belief and in order to conciliate his
people (the tribe of al-Khazraj), from among whom one thousand men
became Muslims soon after that. Hence the Prophet’s shirt and his prayer
for this man brought the Muslims a great conquest.

Then Umar regretted his hastiness and often said after that: “I have
committed a mistake in Islam that I have never committed its like; the
Prophet (S) wanted to offer prayer for Abdullah bin Ubayy but I pulled
him by his clothes and said to him: “By Allah, Allah has not ordered you
to do so. Allah has said:

***“Ask forgiveness for them or do not ask*** ***forgiveness for them;
even if you ask forgiveness for them seventy times, Allah will not
forgive them”.***

The Messenger of Allah said: “Allah has given me the option by saying
“***Ask forgiveness for them or do not ask*** ***forgiveness for
them”*** and I have chosen…”[^42]

19. The Prophet’s prayers for some of the believers
---------------------------------------------------

Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani said in his *Isaba*, vol.4: “Al-Baghawai and Abu
Ahmad al-Hakim mentioned a tradition narrated by Isma’eel bin Ayyash and
at-Tabarani mentioned a tradition by Baqiyya; both narrated from Buhayr
bin Sa’d from Khalid bin Ma’dan that Abu Atiyya had said:
“A man died at the time of the Prophet (S). Some said (he meant Umar):
“O Messenger of Allah, do not offer the prayer for him!” The Prophet (S)
said: “Has anyone seen him doing something good?” Someone said: “Yes, he
has guarded with us some nights.” Then the Prophet (S) offered the
prayer for him and participated in the funerals unto the grave. He
poured earth on him and said (addressing the dead): “Your companions
think that you will be among the people of Hell but I witness that you
will be among the people of Paradise.” Then he said to Umar: “Do not ask
about the deeds of people but ask about the unseen (or people’s
nature).”

Ibn Hajar also mentioned this tradition in his *Isaba* when talking
about the biography of Abul Munthir. He said: “Mutayyan mentioned a
tradition from Muhammad bin Harb al-Wasiti from Hammad bin Khalid from
Hisham bin Sa’d from Yazeed bin Tha’lab from Abul Munthir who said that
the Prophet (S) had poured earth on the grave three times.

At-Tabarani mentioned the tradition in details from Amr bin Abu at-Tahir
bin as-Sarh from his father from Abdullah bin Nafi’ that Hisham bin Sa’d
had said: “Once a man came to the Prophet (S) and said: “O Messenger of
Allah, so-and-so died and we want you to offer the prayer for him.”
Umar said to the Prophet (S): “He is dissolute; do not offer prayer for
him!”
The man said: “O Messenger of Allah, he was among the guards at that
night when you were there.”

The Prophet (S) went (to offer the prayer for the dead) and I followed
him. When the funerals finished, the Prophet (S) poured earth over the
grave three times and said: “People think evil of him and I think
good.”
Umar said: “O Messenger of Allah, how is that?”
The Prophet (S) said: “O Umar, please be quiet! He, who fights for the
sake of Allah, deserves to be in Paradise.”

20. Paradise is for the monotheists
-----------------------------------

The Prophet (S) has brought good news to the believers that Paradise
would be the reward of believing loyally in the oneness of Allah. He
declared this good news to the people to show them the end of the
monotheists and to encourage the believers to keep on their faith.

He ordered Abu Hurayra to announce that among the people. He said to
him: “Go and tell anyone you meet; who witnesses loyally that there is
no god but Allah, he will be among the people of Paradise.” The first
one that Abu Hurayra met was Umar. He asked him what the matter was. Abu
Hurayra told Umar of what the Prophet (S) had ordered him to do.

Abu Hurayra said - as mentioned in Muslim’s *Sahih*, vol.1: “… and then
Umar hit me on my chest and I fell to the ground. He said: “Go back!” I
went back to the Prophet (S) and began crying. Umar followed after me.
The Prophet (S) asked me: “O Abu Hurayra, what is the matter with you?”
I said: “I met Umar and I told him of what you have told me but he hit
me on my chest until I fell to the ground and he asked me to go back.”

The Prophet (S) said to Umar: “Why did you do that?” Umar said: “O
Messenger of Allah, have you really sent Abu Hurayra to tell whoever
witnesses loyally that there is no god but Allah that he would be among
the people of Paradise?”
The Prophet (S) said: “Yes, I have.”
Umar said to the Prophet (S): “Do not do that! I fear that people may
rely on this. Let them keep on practicing good deeds.”
The Prophet (S) said: “Let them!”

An-Nawawi, here, found an excuse to justify this objection of Umar. He
quoted it from Judge Ayyadh and others. He said that Umar did not object
to the Prophet (S) in this event or that he denied the matter, with
which the Prophet (S) had sent Abu Hurayra, but he feared that people
might rely on this good news and they then would give up doing good. So
Umar thought that keeping this matter secret would be better for people
and would be more advantageous to them than informing them of it.

It was this that led him to hit Abu Hurayra and to make him go back. And
it was this that made him say to the Prophet (S) “do not do that” to
forbid him from carrying out the order he had determined to inform the
believers of the good news of being among the people of Paradise.

This justification is not more than what we have said that Umar has
preferred his own opinion to the clear verdicts of the Prophet (S). It
is just a personal *ijtihad* before a clear divine text. In fact this
event did not concern Umar alone; yet he forced Abu Hurayra, after being
hit, to give up what the Prophet (S) had ordered him to do. Moreover
Umar was not satisfied with this but he asked the Prophet (S) himself to
give up the matter. He said to the Prophet (S) audaciously: “Do not do
that!”

But the Prophet (S), as he had been always, was patient with him and
treated him with discernment. He was as Allah had said about him:

***“Thus it is due to mercy from Allah that*** ***you deal with them
gently, and had you been rough, hard hearted, they would certainly have
dispersed from around you; pardon them therefore and ask pardon for
them, and take counsel with them in the affair; so when you have
decided, then place your trust in Allah; surely Allah loves those who
trust (in Him)” (Qur’an 3:159)***.

This resistance had no effect on the Prophet (S). He himself informed
this good news to his Umma after relying on Allah. Umar himself, Othman
bin Affan, Ma’ath bin Jabal, Ubada bin as-Samit, Utban bin Malik and
many others had heard this from the Prophet (S).[^43] It was one of the
necessities among the different sects of the Muslims.

How odd and astonishing it was that great scholars such as Allama
an-Nawawi, Judge Ayyadh and their likes said that the rightness in this
event was with Umar and they pretended that the Prophet (S) had
confirmed Umar’s opinion. Glory be to Allah! We have not but to resort
to Him!

Here is what an-Nawawi has said: “In this tradition (the tradition of
Abu Hurayra about this event) there is an evidence showing that if an
absolute imam thinks something and one of his followers thinks the
opposite, then the inferior follower has to show his opinion to the
superior imam to think of it. If it appears that the opinion of the
inferior is right, the superior has to adopt it; otherwise he has to
explain to his follower the defects of his opinion…” [^44]

This speech would be listened to if the superior leader was not a
prophet but if he was a prophet, then all the umma had to obey him and
to believe in him sincerely with no suspicion. Allah said:

***“And whatever the Messenger gives you,*** ***accept it, and from
whatever he forbids you, keep back, and be careful of (your duty to)
Allah; surely Allah is severe in retributing (evil)” (Qur’an 59:7)***
and:

***“Most surely*** ***it is the Word of an honored messenger. The
processor of strength, having an honorable place with the Lord of the
Dominion. One (to be) obeyed, and faithful in trust. And your companion
is not gone mad” (Qur’an 81:19-22)*** and:

***“Most surely, it is the Word brought by an honored Messenger. And it
is not the word of a poet; little is it that you believe. Nor the word
of a soothsayer; little is it that you mind. It is a revelation from the
Lord of the worlds” (Qur’an 69:40-43)*** and:

***“Nor does he speak out of desire. It is naught but revelation that is
revealed. The Lord of Mighty Power has taught him” (Qur’an 53:3-5)***
and:

***“Whither then will you go. It is naught but a reminder for the
nations. For him among you who pleases to go straight. And you do not
please except that Allah please, the Lord of the*** ***worlds” (Qur’an
81:26-29).***

21. The pleasure of the Hajj
----------------------------

The Prophet (S) had practiced this pleasure [^45] during the rite of the
hajj. He had ordered the Muslims to practice it after he had been
ordered of it by Allah. Allah has said in the sura of al-Baqara:

***“Whoever profits by combining the visit (umra) with the pilgrimage
(should take) what offering is easy to obtain; but he who cannot find
(any offering) should fast for three days during the pilgrimage and for
seven days when you return; these (make) ten (days) complete; this is
for him whose family is not present in the Sacred Mosque” (Qur’an
2:196).***

Ibn Abdul Birr al-Qurtubi said: “There is no disagreement between the
ulama that this verse ***(whoever profits by*** ***combining the
umra***[^46] ***with the pilgrimage…)*** refers to the umra that is
practiced during the months of the hajj but before the (great) hajj.”
[^47] Umra is obligatory on the people who live forty-eight miles from
Mecca from every direction.

In this kind of hajj, pleasure (sleeping with one’s wife or practicing
temporary marriage) has been permitted during the period between the two
ihrams [^48] (of umra and great hajj). It was this thing that had been
disliked by Umar and some of his followers.

Abu Musa al-Ash’ari permitted this pleasure in his fatwas. One day a man
said to him: “Beware of some of your fatwas. You do not know what
Ameerul Mo'mineen (Umar) has changed (of verdicts).” When Abu Musa met
Umar later on, he asked him about that and Umar said: “I have known that
the Prophet (S) and his companions have practiced this pleasure but I
feared that the men might remain (sleeping) with their wives until they
would go to offer the hajj while their (…) dripping.”[^49]

In another way from Abu Musa that Umar had said: “…it is the Sunna[^50]
of the Messenger of Allah, but I fear that they (the pilgrims) may
remain sleeping with their women and then they go to offer the hajj with
them (keeping on doing this).”[^51]

Abu Nadhra narrated: “Ibn Abbas permitted people to practice this
pleasure but Ibn az-Zubayr forbade people from it. I mentioned this to
Jabir bin Abdullah and he said: “We have been practicing this pleasure
during the time of the Prophet (S) but when Umar became the caliph, he
said: “Allah has permitted his Messenger to do things as He liked and
the Qur'an has been revealed as it has been! Offer the hajj and the umra
as Allah has ordered you[^52] but you have to stop sleeping with women.
Whenever I find a man practicing temporary marriage, I will stone
him.”[^53]

One day he (Umar) made a speech before people from above the minbar and
he said frankly: “Two pleasures were practiced at the time of the
Messenger of Allah but I prohibit them and punish for them; the pleasure
of the hajj (sexual intercourse during the hajj) and temporary
marriage.”[^54]

In another tradition Umar said: “O people, there were three things that
had been practiced at the time of the Prophet (S) but I prohibit them
and punish for them; the pleasure of the hajj, temporary marriage and
(*hayya ala khayril amal*) [^55]” [^56]

All of Ahlul Bayt (as) and all of their followers have denied this doing
of Umar and many of the great companions have not agreed with him on
this.

Muslim mentioned in his *Sahih*[^57] a tradition narrated by Shaqeeq
saying: “Othman forbade people from practicing this pleasure but Ali
permitted people to practice it. Othman said something to Ali and then
Ali said to him: “O Othman, you know that we have practiced this
pleasure at the time of the Messenger of Allah.” Othman said: “Yes, we
have but we were afraid!”

Muslim also mentioned in his *Sahih* that Sa’eed bin al-Musayyab had
said: “Once Ali and Othman met together in Asfan. Othman forbade people
from temporary marriage and umra. Ali said to him: “Why do you forbid
something that the Messenger of Allah has done?” Othman said: “Let us
alone!” Ali said: “I cannot let you…”

Ghunaym bin Qays said - as in *Sahih* of Muslim: “Once I asked Sa’d bin
Abu Waqqas about temporary marriage (during umra) and he said: “We have
practiced it but this man [^58] disbelieves in the Lord of the Throne.”

Abul Ala’ narrated from Mutrif that Imran bin Husayn had said to him: “I
shall tell you something today that Allah may avail you of later on.
Know that the Messenger of Allah (S) has assigned the tenth (of zakat)
to a group of his relatives. Neither a verse has been revealed to annul
that nor has the Prophet (S) prohibited it until he has left to the
better world. But then everyone followed his own opinion.”

Hameed bin Hilal narrated that Mutrif had said: “Once Imran bin Husayn
said to me: “I shall tell you something that Allah may benefit you with.
The Messenger of Allah (S) offered umra and hajj together and he did not
forbid people from doing that, and no verse was revealed to prohibit it
until he died…”

Qatada narrated that Mutrif had said: “Imran bin Husayn sent for me when
he became ill before his death. He said to me: “I am going to tell you
some traditions that Allah may benefit you with after me. If I remain
alive, keep them secret and if I die you can tell them if you like. Know
that the Messenger of Allah (S) has offered umra and hajj together and
then neither a Qur’anic verse was revealed to annul it nor did the
Prophet (S) prohibit it. Then a man [^59] determined according to his
own opinion as he liked.”

From another way Qatada narrated from Mutrif bin ash-Shakheer that Imran
bin Husayn had said: “Know that the Messenger of Allah has offered umra
and hajj together and then neither the Qur'an nor the Prophet (S) have
forbidden us from doing it. Then a man determined according to his own
opinion as he liked.”

Imran bin Muslim narrated from Abu Raja’ that Imran bin Husayn had said:
“The verse of “the pleasure of the hajj” was revealed in the Qur'an and
the Messenger of Allah (S) ordered us to practice it (the pleasure).
Neither did the Qur'an annul this verse nor did the Prophet (S) forbid
us from practicing it until he died. Then a man determined according to
his own opinion as he liked.”

This tradition has been mentioned by Muslim in his *Sahih* in many other
ways narrated from Imran bin Hussayn but we do not want to mention them
all. Al-Bukhari has also mentioned this tradition of Imran bin Husayn in
his *Sahih* vol.1 p.187.

Malik bin Anass has mentioned in his *Muwatta’* [^60] a tradition
narrated by Muhammad bin Abdullah bin al-Harith bin Nawfal bin Abdul
Muttalib that he had heard Sa’d bin Abu Waqqas and ad-Dhahhak bin Qayss
mentioning the pleasure of umra in the year when Mo’awiya bin Abu Sufyan
had gone to offer the hajj. Ad-Dhahhak bin Qays said: “No one does that
(practicing the pleasure) unless he is unaware of the verdicts of
Allah.” Sa’d said: “How bad you said, O my nephew!” Ad-Dhahhak said:
“Umar bin al-Khattab has prohibited that.” Sa’d said: “The Messenger of
Allah (S) has practiced it and we have practiced it at his time.”[^61]

Ahmad mentioned in his *Musnad* that Ibn Abbas had said: “The Prophet
(S) has practiced the pleasure of hajj.” Urwa bin az-Zubayr said: “Abu
Bakr and Umar have prohibited it.” Ibn Abbas asked: “What did Urwa say?”
It was said: “He said that Abu Bakr and Umar had prohibited the pleasure
of hajj.” Ibn Abbas said: “I see that they will perish. I say that the
Prophet (S) has practiced it and they say that Abu Bakr and Umar have
prohibited it!”[^62]

Ayyoob narrated: “Once Urwa said to Ibn Abbas: “Do you not fear Allah?
Why do you permit the pleasure (temporary marriage)? Ibn Abbas said:
“Ask your mother, O Urwa!” Urwa said: “Abu Bakr and Umar did not
practice it.” Ibn Abbas said: “By Allah, I see that you will not repent
until Allah will torture you. We tell you from the Prophet (S) and you
tell us from Abu Bakr and Umar!...”[^63]

Muslim mentioned in his *Sahih*[^64] a tradition talking about someone
who had asked Ibn Abbas about the pleasure of hajj and Ibn Abbas
permitted it whereas Ibn az-Zubayr prohibited it. Ibn Abbas said: “This
is the mother of Ibn az-Zubayr narrating that the Messenger of Allah (S)
has permitted it. You can go to her.” The man said: “We went to her. She
was a blind fat woman. She said: “Yes, the Messenger of Allah (S) has
permitted it.”

At-Tarmithi mentioned in his *Sahih* [^65] that once Abdullah bin Umar
had been asked about the pleasure of hajj and he said that it had been
permissible. The asker said to him: “But your father has prohibited it!”
Abdullah bin Umar said: “Do you see that if my father has prohibited it
and the Messenger of Allah (S) has practiced it, we should follow my
father or follow the Messenger of Allah (S)?” the man said: “We should
follow the Messenger of Allah (S).” Abdullah bin Umar said: “The
Messenger of Allah (S) has practiced it.” There are many other true
traditions in the books of Hadith denying this act of Umar (when
prohibiting the pleasure of hajj).

In the Farewell Hajj (the last hajj of the Prophet (S)) there was a
clear evidence on this matter. Refer to *Sahih* of Muslim [^66] to see
that the Prophet (S) had announced it before more than one hundred
Muslims; men and women of the umma, who had come from different
countries to offer the hajj with the Prophet (S).

When the Prophet (S) announced that, Suraqa bin Malik bin Khath’am got
up and asked: “O Messenger of Allah, is this pleasure for this year only
or forever?” The Prophet (S) interlaced his fingers and said: “Umra has
entered into the hajj, umra has entered into the hajj forever, forever.”

Imam ‘Ali (as) came from Yemen (during the season of the hajj) and found
that Fatima (sa) had put off her ihram and put on colored clothes and
darkened her eyes with kohl. He denied that. She said: “My father has
ordered me to do that.” Imam Ali (S) went to the Prophet (S) asking him
about the matter. The Prophet (S) said: “She is true. She is true…”

22. Temporary marriage
----------------------

Allah and His Messenger have legislated temporary marriage and the
Muslims practiced it during the time of the Prophet (S) until he left to
the better world and they practiced it after that during the reign of
Abu Bakr until he died. When Umar became the caliph, the Muslims still
practiced temporary marriage until he forbade it one day when he said
from above the minbar: “Two pleasures were practiced at the time of the
Messenger of Allah but I forbid them and punish for them; the pleasure
of the hajj and temporary marriage.” [^67]

Allah has permitted temporary marriage when He said in the holy Qur'an:

***“Then as to those whom you profit by, give*** ***them their dowries
as appointed” (Qur’an 4:24)***.

Kinds of marriage in Islam are four. Allah has legislated them in four
verses in the sura of an-Nisa’ (women). We have detailed them in our
book about temporary marriage.
As for the true traditions about temporary marriage, they are too many
and they have been mentioned in all books of Hadith.

Muslim mentioned in his *Sahih*[^68] a tradition narrated by Abu Nadhra
saying: “Ibn Abbas often permitted practicing temporary marriage while
Ibn az-Zubayr forbade it. This was mentioned to Jabir bin Abdullah.

He said: “It has occurred before me. We often practiced temporary
marriage during the time of the Messenger of Allah but when Umar became
the caliph, [^69] he said: “Allah has permitted to His Messenger as He
liked by His will. [^70] Complete the hajj and the minor hajj and avoid
temporary marriage. Whoever practices temporary marriage I will stone
him.” [^71]

We have studied this subject deeply and carefully and then we indicated
the truth in our books; *al-Fusool al-Muhimma* (the important chapters),
*Masa’il Fiqhiyya* (juristic questions), *The Answers of Musa Jarallah*
and what has been published in al-Irfan Magazine, vol.36 part ten in
which we have covered all the sides of the subject. We have explained
that into eight chapters:

1. The essence of temporary marriage with its requirements and legal
limits.

2. The consensus of the umma on its legality in Islam.

3. The evidences of the Qur'an on its legality.

4. Its legality according to the Sunna.

5. The pretense of those who say that it has been abrogated and their
evidence.

6. Traditions showing that the caliph Umar has abrogated it.

The companions and their successors who have denied that from the
caliph. [^72]
8. The opinion of the Shia and their evidences on the subject.

We have just intended to show the truth in our study on this subject.
Our evidences have been derived from the Book, the Sunna and the
consensus of the umma. Let the fair researchers ponder on what we have
written about this subject and then they are free to judge whether it is
permissible or not.

23. Changing the azan
---------------------

We have researched on the traditions concerning the *azan*[^73] during
the time of the Prophet (S) and we have not found this statement “prayer
is better than sleeping” as a part of the *azan*. In fact this statement
was not in the *azan* even at the time of Abu Bakr. Umar had ordered
this statement to be added to the *azan* after passing of some period of
his caliphate when he liked that and admired it to be in the *azan* of
Fajr (dawn) prayer. He determined that and ordered people to announce it
when calling the *azan*. Many true traditions about this matter have
been narrated from the infallible imams (S).

The books of Hadith of other than the infallible imams (S) have had many
such traditions. Malik mentioned in his *Muwatta’*: “Once the caller of
*azan* came to Umar bin al-Khattab to announce the time of Fajr prayer
and he found Umar sleeping. He said to him: “Prayer is better than
sleeping.” Umar admired that and ordered him to add it to the *azan* of
Fajr.”

Az-Zarqani said in his book *Sharh al-Muwatta’* [^74] when commenting on
this word: “Ad-Darqutni mentioned this tradition in his Sunan from
Waqee’ from al-Umari from Nafi’ from Ibn Umar that Umar had said to his
caller (of *azan*):

“When you reach “Come to success!” [^75] in the *azan* of Fajr prayer,
say: Prayer is better than sleeping! Prayer is better than sleeping!” It
was also narrated by Sufyan from Muhammad bin Ajlan from Nafi’ from Ibn
Umar from Umar.”

This tradition has also been mentioned by Ibn Shayba from Hisham bin
Urwa and has been mentioned by some other Sunni scholars.

There was no any value for the (false) tradition narrated by Muhammad
bin Khalid bin Abdullah al-Wasiti from his father from Abdurrahman bin
Isshaq from az-Zuhri from Salim that his father had said: “Once the
Prophet (S) consulted the Muslims about what should attract their
attentions to the times of the prayers. Some of them suggested using a
trumpet but the Prophet (S) disliked it because it was used by the Jews.
Some others suggested using a bell but the Prophet (S) disliked it too
because it was used by the Christians.

At that night a man from the Ansar called Abdullah bin Zayd and Umar bin
al-Khattab were inspired with the call (*azan*) in their dreams. In the
same night Abdullah bin Zayd al-Ansari came to the Prophet (S) and told
him of what he had seen in dream. The Prophet (S) ordered Bilal to
announce it as the *azan*. Then Bilal added to it “prayer is better than
sleeping” and the Prophet (S) approved it.” Ibn Maja mentioned this
tradition in his *Sunan*.

This tradition is null because it has been narrated by Muhammad bin
Khalid bin Abdullah al-Wasiti, about whom Yahya has said: “He is an
immoral man.” Once again he has said about him: “He is nothing
(unreliable)!”

Ibn Adiy said about him: “Ahmad and Yahya denied his traditions
especially when he narrated from his father. He had many other denied
traditions.” Abu Zar’a said about him: “He is weak (untrusted).” Yahya
bin Mo’een said: “Muhammad bin Khalid bin Abdullah is a liar. When you
meet him, slap him!”

Ath-Thahabi talked about him in his *Mizan* and mentioned the criticism
and defects ascribed to him by the scholars.

Like this tradition was the tradition narrated by Abu Mahthoora when he
had said: “I said: “O Messenger of Allah, would you please teach me the
*azan*?” The Prophet (S) rubbed over my head and said to me: “You say
“Allah is great, Allah is great” loudly and then you say in a low voice
“I witness that there is no god but Allah , I witness that there is no
god but Allah, I witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, I
witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah” then you say loudly “I
witness that there is no god but Allah, I witness that there is no god
but Allah, I witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, I witness
that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, come to prayer, come to prayer,
come to success, come to success” if is Fajr prayer you say then “prayer
is better than sleeping, prayer is better than sleeping, Allah is great,
Allah is great, there is no god but Allah, there is no god but Allah”.

Abu Dawood mentioned this tradition from Abu Mahthoora in two ways; one
from Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Abu Mahthoora from his father from his
grandfather, the other from Othman bin as-Sa’ib from his father, who was
unknown as ath-Thahabi had said in his Mizan.

Muslim has mentioned this tradition of Abu Mahthoora in his *Sahih* but
it has not had this statement “prayer is better than sleeping”.

Soon you will see the tradition mentioned by Abu Dawood and others that
has been narrated by Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Zayd about the *azan*
that Bilal has announced after it has been dictated to him by Abdullah
bin Zayd. It has not had “prayer is better than sleeping” although it
was the *azan* of Fajr prayer.

As for Abu Mahthoora, he was one of the freed captives of Mecca [^76]
and he was one of those, whom the Prophet (S) gifted in order to
reconcile them to Islam. When the Prophet (S) went back from Hunayn
victoriously, he was the most hated one to Abu Mahthoora and his orders
and principles were the most hated things to him too. Abu Mahthoora
often mocked at the Prophet’s caller (who announced *azan*) but the
pouch of silver coins, which the Prophet (S) had given, the booties of
Hunayn, which the Prophet (S) had spread among the freed captives, who
were his enemies and who had fought him for a long time, his great
morals towards whoever had announced shahada from among the hypocrites
besides his severity towards the unbelievers and that the Arabs began to
become Muslims group by group, all that forced Abu Mahthoora and his
likes to announce shahada by their tongues whereas their hearts were
still occupied by the idols. He did not emigrate until he died in Mecca.
[^77] Allah is more aware of his inners!

The Prophet (S) had said a word about three men; Abu Mahthoora, Abu
Hurayra and Samra bin Jundub. He warned them by saying: “The last to die
of you, will be in Hell.” [^78]

This was a wise manner of the Prophet (S) to keep the hypocrites away
from running the affairs of the Muslims. As the Prophet (S) was aware of
the inners of these three men, so he wanted his umma to doubt the three
of them and then to avoid them all. He wanted his umma not to entrust
any of them with any affair of Islam and the Muslims. He said that he,
who would die after his two friends, would be in hell but he had
generalized his saying without giving any specification about certain
one of them that any of the three men could be the one who would be in
Hell.

Days and nights passed and the word of the Prophet (S) remained as it
was. The Prophet (S) left to the better world but without specifying his
word; therefore the men of understanding were obliged to keep all the
three men away from any affair of social rights in Islam that was to be
entrusted to the reliable and trustworthy people of the umma. If these
three men were not same in being avoided, the Prophet (S) definitely
would specify one of them in order not to wrong the others.

If you say: the Prophet (S) might have defined one of them with
something but that certain thing had been ignored because of the long
time that had passed.
We say: if there was some definition that had specified one of them,
then the three of them would have not feared that warning in the same
way.[^79]

There was no difference in this matter between not assigning one of them
or that assignment had become unknown because the result would be the
same for us. We would regard the three in the same way.

If you say: the one, who had been said to be in Hell, could not be known
before the death of the first and the second ones and then the remaining
one after the two would be the one whom the Prophet (S) had meant by his
saying and so the saying of the Prophet (S) would not be general or
ambiguous.

We say: first it is impossible for the prophets (S) to hide the truth or
to delay it until its necessary time may pass. In this matter the
required time was connected with the threat and the Prophet (S) would
have indicated it if any one of the three had had any respect because
men, since they became Muslims, would be tried by the civil rights like
imamate in offering prayers, witnesses in legal trials, issuing fatwas,
judging and the likes, which required fairness, truthfulness and piety.

If these three men deserved not to be kept away from all that civil
rights and positions, the Prophet (S) would not delay declaring the
truth concerning them. Far be it from the Prophet (S) to prevent any one
from getting his right and far be it from him to disgrace someone
innocent and to keep him on that disgrace, which he does not deserve,
until he dies (before his two friends)!

And second: by Allah, we have tried our best as possible as we could in
researching and studying the fixed facts but we could not know which one
of these three men had died before the others. The sayings about the
dates of their deaths were either contradicted[^80] or alike and common.
Hence we could not depend on any of them.

Third: the high morals of the Prophet (S), about whom Allah has said:

“***Certainly a Messenger has come to you*** ***from among yourselves;
grievous to him is your falling into distress, excessively solicitous
respecting you; to the believers (he is) compassionate” (Qur’an
9:128)***
would not let him face an innocent one, whom he respected, with such a
severe word. The Prophet (S), who had exalted personality and manners,
would never surprise an innocent one with something bad that he did not
deserve. If there was a good one among these three men, the Prophet (S)
would not include him in this bad surprise; but it had been revealed to
him by Allah to warn the umma against these men and their likes.

***“Nor does he*** ***speak out of desire. It is naught but revelation
that is revealed” (Qur’an 53:3-4).***

He, who knew the opinion of our Sunni brothers of the four sects about
the start of the *azan* and *iqama* [^81] and about legislating them,
would not be astonished to find them submitting to adding to them or
omitting from them. They thought that *azan* and *iqama* had not been
legislated by Allah via revealing them to the Prophet (S). They did not
think that the Prophet (S) had announced them as divine rites determined
by Allah but they were just a result of dreams seen by some companions
as they had narrated in their traditions which they considered as true
and recurrent.

Here are some of these traditions which they consider as the truest ones
of them.

Abu Umayr bin Anas narrated from some of his uncles of the Ansar that:
“The Prophet (S) thought about prayers; how to make people gather to
offer them at their prescribed times. It was said to him: “Raise a
banner and when people see it, some of them will announce that it is
time to offer prayer.” He did not approve this idea. Some people
mentioned to him the trumpet but he disliked it and said it was used by
the Jews. Others suggested using a bell. He said that it was used by the
Christians. At the first he disliked it but then he ordered to make a
bell of wood.

Abdullah bin Zayd, when he saw the Prophet (S) concerned in the matter,
began to think much about it. He was inspired in his sleep with a vision
showing him how to do the azan. He went to the Prophet (S) and said to
him: “O Messenger of Allah, while I was in light sleep, someone came to
me and taught me the azan.” Umar bin al-Khattab had seen that vision in
his sleep but he kept it secret for twenty days and then he informed the
Prophet (S) of it. The Prophet (S) said to him:

“What prevented you from telling me that?” Umar said: “Abdullah bin Zayd
preceded me in telling you and then I felt shy.” The Prophet (S) said:
“O Bilal, get up and do as Abdullah bin Zayd will instruct you!” Then
Bilal announced the azan…” [^82]

Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Zayd al-Ansari said that his father Abdullah
bin Zayd had said: “When the Messenger of Allah (S) had ordered a bell
to be made in order to make people gather to offer the prayers, I saw in
sleep that someone carrying a bell in his hand came to me. I asked him:
“Do you sell this bell?” He said: “What will you do with it?” I said:
“We will call for prayers by it.” He said: “Shall I guide you to what is
better than this?” I said: “Yes, please!”

He said: “You say: Allah is great, Allah is great, Allah is great, Allah
is great, I witness that there is no god but Allah, I witness that there
is no god but Allah, I witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah,
I witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, come to prayer, come
to prayer, come to success, come to success, Allah is great, Allah is
great, there is no god but Allah.” [^83]

After a moment he said to me: “When you stand up to begin the prayer,
you say: Allah is great, Allah is great, I witness that there is no god
but Allah, I witness that there is no god but Allah, I witness that
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, come to prayer, come to success, the
time for prayer has come, the time for prayer has come, Allah is great,
Allah is great, there is no god but Allah.”

In the morning I went to the Prophet (S) and told him of what I have
seen in my sleep. He said: “It is a true vision inshallah. Go with Bilal
and instruct him what you have seen in your sleep. Let him announce it
because his voice is more dulcet than yours.” I went with Bilal and
began teaching him the *azan* and then he announced it. Umar, from
inside his house, heard the *azan*. He came dragging his garment and
saying: “O Messenger of Allah, I swear by Him, Who has sent you with the
truth, that I have seen like what he has seen…” [^84]

Malik abbreviated the tradition in his *Muwatta’*. He mentioned that
Yahya bin Sa’eed had said: “The Prophet (S) wanted to use two pieces of
wood [^85] in order to gather the people to offer the prayers after
beating them with each other. At that time Abdullah bin Zayd al-Ansari
had seen in his sleep two pieces of wood.

He said (in his sleep): “These two pieces of wood are like the ones that
the Messenger of Allah wants to gather people for prayers with.” It was
said to him: “Do you not announce azan for prayer?” He was taught the
*azan* in his sleep. In the morning he came to the Prophet (S) and told
him of that. Then the Prophet (S) ordered the azan to be announced.”
[^86]

Ibn Abdul Birr said: “Some of the companions had narrated the story of
Abdullah bin Zayd about the start of azan in different wordings but near
meanings. The resources of these traditions are recurrent and accepted…”
[^87]

In commenting on these traditions I say:

First: the Prophet (S) would not have to consult the people in
legislating the divine verdicts of the *Shari’ah*. He had just followed
the divine orders that Allah had revealed to him.

***“Nor does he*** ***speak out of desire. It is naught but revelation
that is revealed. The Lord of Mighty Power has taught him” (Qur’an
53:3-5).***

All the prophets have not consulted their peoples about the divine
verdicts:

***“Nay! They are honored servants. They do not precede Him in speech
and (only) according to His commandment do they act” (Qur’an21:26-27)***

Allah has said to his Messenger and the last of His prophets, Muhammad
(S):

***“Say: I only follow what is revealed to*** ***me from my Lord; these
are clear proofs from your Lord and a guidance and a mercy for a people
who believe” (Qur’an 7:203)*** and:

***“Say: It does not beseem me that I should change it of myself; I
follow naught but what is revealed to me; surely I fear, if I disobey my
Lord, the punishment of a mighty day” (Qur’an 10:15)*** and:

***“Say: I am not the first of the Messengers, and I do not know what
will be done with me or with you: I do not follow anything but that
which is revealed to me, and I am nothing but a plain warner” (Qur’an
46:9).***

Allah has warned His Messenger of hastiness even with a movement of the
tongue. He has said:

“***Do not move your tongue with it to make*** ***haste with it. Surely
on Us (devolves) the collecting of it and the reciting of it. Therefore
when We have recited it, follow its recitation. Again on Us (devolves)
the explaining of it” (Qur’an 75:16-19)***

Allah has praised the saying of His Messenger by saying:

***“Most surely, it is the Word*** ***brought by an honored Messenger.
And it is not the word of a poet; little is it that you believe. Nor the
word of a soothsayer; little is it that you mind. It is*** ***a
revelation from the Lord of the worlds” (Qur’an 69:40-43)*** and:

***“Most surely it is the Word of an honored messenger. The processor of
strength; having an honorable place with the Lord of the Dominion. One
(to be) obeyed, and faithful in trust. And your companion is not gone
mad” (Qur’an 81:19-22).***

Second: reason regards the consultation mentioned in these traditions as
null. Consultation with people has no any role in legislation the divine
laws; therefore it was impossible for the Prophet (S) to consult his
companions about the principles of the *Shari’ah*. Would Allah need the
opinions of His servants to determine the laws of His *Shari’ah*?

***“And if he had fabricated*** ***against Us some of the sayings. We
would certainly have seized him by the right hand. Then We would
certainly have cut off his aorta. And not one of you could have withheld
Us from him” (Qur’an 69:44-47).***

Yes, the Prophet (S) consulted his companions about the affairs of this
worldly life such as meeting the enemy, stratagems of war and the likes.
He followed in that the saying of Allah:

***“..and take counsel with them in the affair; so*** ***when you have
decided, then place your trust in Allah” (Qur’an 3:159)***.

In this concern the Prophet (S), in order to reconcile his companions,
could consult them although the revelation sufficed him away from his
companions’ opinions; but as for the laws of religion it was not
possible for him save to follow the revelation.

Third: these traditions showed that the Prophet (S) was confused and
this could not be possible for the infallible prophet, who was so close
to Allah and whom Allah had loved and preferred to all of the creatures
of the worlds. These traditions showed the Prophet (S) in a confused
state until he became in need of people’s consultation; once he disliked
using a bell and then he ordered the bell to be used and then he gave up
the bell and submitted to the vision of Abdullah bin Zayd!

This was impossible for Allah and His Messenger, who was the master and
the last of the prophets and who was the trustee of the mission and
revelation of Allah. In fact the visions of other than the prophets
could not be relied on according to the consensus of the umma.

Fourth: these traditions contradict each other and this leads to brush
them aside especially the two traditions we have just mentioned above;
the one narrated by Abu Umayr bin Anass from some of his uncles of the
Ansar and the one narrated by Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Zayd from his
father. Would that you ponder on them to see the contradiction between
them especially what concerns the vision of Umar!

These two traditions limit the vision to Ibn Zayd and Umar whereas the
tradition of the vision mentioned by at-Tabarani in his book *at-Tafseer
al-Awsat* shows that the vision (of the *azan*) had been seen by Abu
Bakr too. There are other traditions showing that this vision had been
seen by fourteen men of the companions as in *Sharh at-Tanbeeh* by
al-Jubayli. It has also been mentioned that those, who had seen the
vision at that night, were seventeen men of the Ansar besides Umar who
was the only one of the Muhajireen.

Another tradition said that Bilal had seen the vision of the *azan* too.
There are many other contradictions about the subject. Al-Halabi
mentioned some of them which were so astonishing and he tried to bring
these contradictions close together but he failed. [^88]

Fifth: al-Bukhari and Muslim had ignored this version at all. They had
not mentioned it in their *Sahihs* neither from Ibn Zayd nor from Umar
bin al-Khattab nor from any other because it had not been proved to be
true. They mentioned in their *Sahihs* that Umar had said: “The Muslims,
when they had come to Medina, gathered together and assigned the time of
prayer without calling. One day they discussed this matter. Some of them
said: “Let us use a bell like the Christians!” Others said: “Let us use
a trumpet like the Jews!” Then Umar said: “Why do you not send someone
to call out the time of prayers?” The Prophet (S) said: “O Bilal, get up
and call out for the prayer!” Then Bilal called out.”

This is all what has been mentioned in the *Sahihs* of al-Bukhari and
Muslim about legislating the *azan*. They have ignored anything
concerning the start of *azan* other than this. This tradition
contradicts all the previous traditions mentioned about the vision of
*azan*. This tradition shows that the *azan* has started according to
Umar’s suggestion and not according to his vision or the vision of
Abdullah bin Zayd or anyone else.

Also this tradition shows clearly that the Prophet (S) has ordered Bilal
to call out the *azan* during the meeting of consultation, in which Umar
was present, whereas those traditions of the vision shows that the
Prophet (S) had ordered Bilal to call out the *azan* at the dawn when
Ibn Zayd has told the Prophet (S) about his vision that it was one night
after the consultation at least where Umar was not there but he has
heard the *azan* while he was in his house and then he came dragging his
garment and saying: “I swear by Him, Who has sent you with the truth,
that I have seen in my sleep as he has seen.”

I adjure you by Allah, could you bring this tradition close to those
ones? Certainly not! I swear by Allah and the truth!

Al-Hakim has ignored the traditions of the vision of *azan* and *iqama*.
He has never mentioned any of them in his *Mustadrak* as the two
sheikhs; al-Bukhari and Muslim have done. This shows that these
traditions are untrue.

Al-Hakim took on himself to follow all the true traditions that
al-Bukhari and Muslim had not mentioned in their *Sahihs* and since he
himself had not mentioned the traditions talking about the vision of
*azan* in his *Mustadrak*, so it has become clear that these traditions
were not true.

Al-Hakim had said a word showing that these traditions of the vision
were null and they were just fabricated lies. He said: “The two sheikhs
(al-Bukhari and Muslim) ignored the tradition of Abdullah bin Zayd about
the vision and *azan* because Abdullah had died before this event (of
the *azan*)…” [^89]

What confirmed this fact was that the *azan*, according to the Sunnis,
had started after the battle of Uhud. Abu Na’eem mentioned in his book
*Hilyatul Awliya’* when talking about the biography of Umar bin Abdul
Aziz that Abdullah al-Umayri had said: “Once the daughter of Abdullah
bin Zayd bin Tha’laba came to Umar bin Abdul Aziz and said to him: “I am
the daughter of Abdullah bin Zayd. My father participated in the battle
of Badr and he was martyred in the battle of Uhud.” Umar said to her:
“Ask for whatever you like!” He gifted her (what she asked him for).”

If Abdullah bin Zayd had seen the vision of *azan* as they pretended,
his daughter would have mentioned that to Umar bin Abdul Aziz as she had
mentioned his fighting in Badr and his martyrdom in Uhud.

Sixth: Allah has ordered the believers not to preceded Allah and His
Messenger and not to raise their voices above the voice of the Prophet
(S), lest their deeds would be vain. Allah has said:

***“O ye who believe! Put not yourselves forward before Allah and His
Messenger; but fear Allah: for Allah is He Who hears and knows all
things. O you who believe! Do not raise your voices above the voice of
the Prophet, and do not speak loud to him as you speak loud to one
another, lest your deeds became null while you do not perceive” (Qur’an
49:1-2).***

The reason behind the revelation of these verses was that some people of
Bani Tameem had come to the Prophet (S) asking him to appoint a man from
them as a chief over them. Abu Bakr said: [^90] “O Messenger of Allah,
appoint al-Qa’qa’ bin Ma’bad as chief over them!” Umar bin al-Khattab
said immediately: “O Messenger of Allah, appoint al-Aqra’ bin Habis from
bani Mujashi’.” Abu Bakr said to Umar: “You just want to oppose me!”

They disputed before the Prophet (S) and their voices became too loud.
Then Allah revealed these verses to the Prophet (S) because Abu Bakr and
Umar had preceded the Prophet (S) and hastened in giving their opinions
besides their disputing and clamoring before the Prophet (S).

Allah has addressed all the believers with these verses to be as a rule
for them how to behave before the Prophet (S). These verses have
forbidden every faithful man and faithful woman from being opinionated
before the Prophet (S) and from preceding him in everything. The saying
of Allah:
***“O ye who*** ***believe! Put not yourselves forward before Allah and
His Messenger”***
means that no Muslim has the right to give his opinion on a matter
before Allah and His Messenger would determine. As if those men, who
preceded the Prophet (S) in giving their opinions, deemed themselves to
be of high ranks that they had the right to decide on the public
affairs; therefore Allah had warned the believers of their mistake and
showed them their obligation that they would have not to exceed.

The saying of Allah:
***“O you who believe! Do not raise*** ***your voices above the voice of
the Prophet”***
refuted the concept of that those people had a right to decide on the
affairs of the Muslims or they had a special position near Allah and His
Messenger for that whoever raised his voice above the voices of the
others thought that he had a special rank or authority over the others
and this could not be possible or accepted from anyone in the Prophet’s
presence.

He, who ponders on the sayings of Allah:
***“..fear Allah: for*** ***Allah is He Who hears and knows all things”
(Qur’an 49:1)*** and:
***“..lest your deeds became null while you do not perceive”***
***(Qur’an 49:2)***,
will find the truth as it is.

And he, who knows that Allah has not approved what Abu Bakr and Umar
have done when opinionating before Allah and His Messenger, will be
certain that Allah does not permit people to consult on legislating the
laws of His *Shari’ah*. Would that our people know!

Seventh: *azan* and *iqama* are parts of the very daily obligations and
He, Who has legislated them, is the same Who has legislated the daily
obligations. They are the greatest divine rites, with which the Islamic
umma has been distinguished from all the other nations and religions.
They (*azan* and *iqama*) are examples of high eloquence, magnificent
meanings and exalted aims.

They announce the truth too openly; Allah is great, I witness that there
is no god but Allah, I witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah -
with praising him and praying Allah to bless him, come to prayer, come
to success, come to the best of deeds. He, who calls out these facts,
does not fear save Allah and does not submit to any tyrant.

This is a living mission as one of the scholars has said about it. As if
you see that all the life listens and assents to it and as if man begins
prayer since the first moment when he hears the first words of the
*azan* and *iqama*. Man contacts with the world of the unseen since he
listens to *azan* and *iqama*.

It is a mission, in which the earth and the heaven meet together and the
submission of man mixes with the greatness of the Creator. The eternal
truth comes to man’s mind at every time of prayers, as if it is a new
tiding!

Allah is great, Allah is great, there is no god but Allah, there is no
god but Allah…it is the call of *azan*, with which the Muslims get ready
to offer the prayers. It is the living call which utters the eternal
fact; the fact that is too simple but too wonderful because it is the
richest fact that is in no need of being repeated throughout the ages
and at the same time it is the fact that is in need much more of being
repeated among the businesses of this worldly life and the signs of
mortality.

A Muslim becomes in a state of praying since he hears the *azan*
inviting him towards the prayer. Through the *azan* a Muslim remembers
the greatness of Allah and this is the essence of the essence of the
prayers.

The calmness of the night opens up with it (*azan*) as if it is one of
the living phenomenon of nature to which hearings and souls assent,
birds and trees listen, water and air hasten and all the world rises to
respond since the first call of the caller… [^91]

In short, *azan* and *iqama* are things that the human beings could
never contrive even if all of them would gather together. To Allah we
resort and Him we ask not to make us among those who distort the bright
facts especially those of the laws of Allah, His *Shari’ah* and His
signs.

Eighth: the Sunni’s traditions about the start of *azan* and *iqama*
contradict the true traditions narrated from the infallible imams of
Ahlul Bayt (as). And definitely any tradition that contradicts the true
traditions of Ahlul Bayt (as) has no any value near us.

In the book *Wasa’il ash-Shia ila Ahkam ash-Shari’ah* it is mentioned
that Imam Abu Abdullah Ja’far as-Sadiq (S) has said: “When Gabriel has
brought the *azan* to the Prophet (S), he (Gabriel) uttered the *azan*
and the *iqama* and then the Prophet (S) ordered Ali to send for Bilal.
When Bilal came, the Prophet (S) taught him the *azan* and ordered him
to announce it (at the times of the prayers).”

This has been mentioned by Muhammad bin Ya’qoob al-Kulayni, as-Sadooq
Muhammad bin Ali bin Babwayh al-Qummi and the sheikh of the Shia
Muhammad bin al-Hasan at-Toosi. It suffices us that the truthfulness and
piety of these scholars could never be doubted.

Sheikh Shahid Muhammad bin Mekki has mentioned in his book *ath-Thikra*
(the memory) that Imam as-Sadiq (S) has dispraised some people, who
pretended that the Prophet (S) had taken the *azan* from Abdullah bin
Zayd al-Ansari. Imam Sadiq (S) said: “Gabriel has revealed it (*azan*)
to your prophet and you pretend that the Prophet (S) has taken it from
Abdullah bin Zayd!”

Al-Halabi in his *Seera* mentioned that Abul Ala’ had said: “Once I said
to Muhammad bin al-Hanafiyya (Imam Ali’s son): “We narrate that the
*azan* has started according to a vision that a man from the Ansar has
seen in his sleep.” He became very angry and said: “You have come to a
basic principle of Islam and a sign of your religion and pretended that
it has been issued according to a vision that a man of the Ansar had
seen in his sleep; a vision that it could be true and could be false or
it could be a bad dream!” I said to him: “But this tradition is spread
among people.” He said: “By Allah, it is the very untruth…”

Sufyan bin al-Layl said: “Once I visited al-Hasan bin ‘Ali (as) in
Medina. The people, in his meeting, discussed the matter of *azan*
before him. Some of them said that the *azan* had started after a vision
seen by Abdullah bin Zayd. Al-Hasan bin ‘Ali (as) said: “The matter of
*azan* is greater than that. Gabriel has called out the *azan* and
*iqama* in the Heaven and then he has revealed them to the Messenger of
Allah…” [^92]

Haroon bin Sa’d narrated from Shahid Zayd bin Imam Ali bin al-Husayn
(as) from his fathers that Imam ‘Ali (as) had said: “The Messenger of
Allah has been taught the *azan* in the night of his ascension to Heaven
when prayer has been determined as an obligation.” [^93]

24. “Come to the best of deeds”
-------------------------------

This statement was a part of the *azan* and the *iqama* at the time of
the Prophet (S) but the men of authority during the reign of the second
caliph Umar tried to make people understand that “the best of deeds” was
the jihad for the sake of Allah in order to go to it zealously and they
thought that calling out “come to the best of deeds” for prayers was
just a call to the five daily obligations and this contradicted their
aim.

In fact they conceived a fear of this statement if it would remain in
the *azan* and *iqama*. They thought that it would discourage people
from jihad because if people knew that prayer was the best of deeds
besides its easiness and peacefulness, they would rely on its reward and
they would keep away from jihad and its dangers.

The men of authority at that time had devoted themselves to spread Islam
and to conquer the east and the west. Definitely conquering countries
required to stimulate the zeal of the soldiers to rush into dangers for
the sake of that. The soldiers had to love jihad until they would feel
that it was the best of deeds, which they would be rewarded for on the
Day of Resurrection.

Therefore they preferred to omit this part of *azan* because they
preferred the benefit to following the holy *Shari’ah*. The second
caliph, Umar, had said from above the minbar - as mentioned by
al-Qoushaji in his book *Sharh at-Tajreed*: “Three things were practiced
at the time of the Messenger of Allah but I prohibit them and punish for
them; temporary marriage, the pleasure of the hajj and “come to the best
of deeds”.” [^94]

And then all the Muslims after Umar, except Ahlul Bayt (as) and their
followers, omitted this part of *azan* “come to the best of deeds”.

When the martyr of Fakh al-Husayn bin Ali bin al-Hasan bin Ali bin Abu
Talib revolted in Medina during the reign of al-Hadi, the Abbasid
caliph, he ordered the caller to announce “come to the best of deeds” in
the azan and the caller did. [^95]

Al-Halabi mentioned in his *Seera* [^96] that Ibn Umar and Imam Zaynul
Aabideen Ali bin al-Husayn (as) used to say “come to the best of deeds”
after “come to success” in the *azan*. This has been mentioned in the
true and recurrent traditions of Ahlul Bayt (as). Refer to their
traditions and jurisprudence to see their opinions about the matter.

### Note

The parts of the *azan*, according to the Shia, are eighteen; four
times: “Allah is great” and twice for each of: “I witness that there is
no god but Allah”, “I witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah”,
“come to prayer”, “come to success”, “come to the best of deeds”, “Allah
is great” and “there is no god but Allah”.

The parts of the *iqama*, according to the Shia, are seventeen; two
times for each of “Allah is great”, “I witness that there is no god but
Allah”, “I witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah”, “come to
prayer”, “come to success”, “come to the best of deeds”, “the time for
prayer has come”, “Allah is great” and one time “there is no god but
Allah”.

It is desirable to say “blessing and peace be upon Muhammad and his
progeny” after mentioning his name in the *azan*. Also it is desirable
to say “I witness that Ali is the guardian of Allah” after “I witness
that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah” in the *azan* and in the
*iqama*.

He, who prohibited saying “come to the best of deeds” and its likes in
the *azan* and said that they were heresies, had committed a mistake and
had gone astray. Any caller (of *azan*) in Islam may recite a desirable
word to be attached to the *azan* such as the verse :
***“And say: (All) praise is due to Allah,*** ***Who has not taken a
son” (Qur’an 17:111)***
or another word such as “blessing and peace be upon you, O Messenger of
Allah” or something like that.

This has not been legislated by Allah as a part of the *azan* and at the
same time it is not a heresy or prohibited at all because all of the
callers (of *azan*) do not consider it as a part of the *azan* but they
recite it as a desirable thing according to some general evidences and
also the statement “I witness that Ali is the guardian of Allah” is
recited according to some general evidences.

A little of ordinary speech of human beings annuls neither the *azan*
nor the *iqama* and it is not prohibited. Then why do they say that it
is prohibited and it is a heresy? Why do they want to separate the
Muslims especially in these days?

25. Changing the rules of divorce
---------------------------------

The three-divorce, after which a divorced wife cannot return to her
husband except after getting married to another one and then being
divorced, is called the third divorce which is preceded by two returns
after two divorces; that is to say: a husband divorces his wife for the
first time and then he gets her back, then he divorces her for the
second time and gets her back again and then he divorces her for the
third time. Now she becomes prohibited for him as a wife unless she gets
married to another man and then this man divorces her.

This is the three-divorce after which a wife becomes prohibited for her
husband until she marries another man and then the second husband
divorces her. Allah has said:

***“Divorce may be twice, then*** ***keep (them) in good fellowship or
let (them) go with kindness… So if he divorces her (the third time) she
shall not be lawful to him afterwards until she marries another husband;
then if he divorces her there is no blame on them both if they return to
each other (by marriage)” (Qur’an 2:229-230)***.

Here is the interpretation of these verses by one of the great scholars
of the Arabic language. Az-Zamakhshari says in his Tafseer
al-Kashshaf:
“***Divorce may be twice*** means to be repeated twice and not to be
pronounced all at once like His saying:
***“Then turn back the eye twice”(Qur’an 67:4)*** which means a time
after another.

…It is also said that it means the twice revocable divorce - one time
after the other - because there is no return after the third divorce…if
he (the husband) divorces her (the wife) for the second time as Allah
has said ***(Divorce may*** ***be twice)***…or if he divorces her for
the third time after the two divorces, she will not be his legal wife
after that unless she will get married to another man and then this man
will divorces her…

This is the meaning of the verse that comes to mind straightway and such
all the interpreters have interpreted this verse. The saying of Allah
***“So if he divorces her (the third*** ***time) she shall not be lawful
to him afterwards”*** cannot be applied to the saying of a husband to
his wife: “You are divorced, you are divorced, you are divorced in one
occasion” unless he has divorced her twice before that and after each
one he has got her back.

But Umar, during his caliphate, saw that men had got used to divorce
their wives the third divorce by using one certain diction [^97] and so
he forced them to do what they had bound themselves with as a kind of
punishment and discipline. There are many true traditions that have
ascribed this doing to Umar.

Tawoos mentioned that Abu as-Sahba’ had said to Ibn Abbas: “Has
(uttering the form of divorce three times in one occasion) not been
considered as one divorce during the time of the Prophet (S) and the
time of Abu Bakr?” Ibn Abbas said: “Yes, it has, but at the reign of
Umar, people got used to this kind of divorce and he (Umar) made it
permissible to them?” [^98]

Muslim mentioned another tradition that Ibn Abbas had said: “During the
time of the Prophet (S), the time of Abu Bakr and the first two years of
the reign of Umar the divorce of three-repeated-statement (in one
occasion) was considered as one divorce. Then Umar said: “People have
hastened in a matter which had deliberateness to them. Would that we
permit it to them!” And then he permitted it to them.” [^99]

Al-Hakim has mentioned this tradition in his *Mustadrak* and said that
it was true according to the conditions of the two sheikhs; al-Bukhari
and Muslim. Ath-Thahabi has also mentioned it in his book *Talkhees
al-Mustadrak* and said that it was true according to al-Bukhari and
Muslim. [^100]

Ahmad bin Hanbal has mentioned this tradition of Ibn Abbas in his
*Musnad* [^101] and many other scholars of Hadith have mentioned it in
their books. [^102]

Sheikh Rasheed Redha has mentioned this tradition in al-Manar Magazine
[^103] from Abu Dawood, an-Nassa’iy, al-Hakim and al-Bayhaqi and then he
said: “From among the judgments of the Prophet (S) was the tradition
that al-Bayhaqi had mentioned from Ibn Abbas.[^104] Ibn Abbas said:
“Rukana has divorced his wife three times in one occasion. He became too
sad for her. The Prophet (S) asked him: “How did you divorce her?” He
said: “Three times.” The Prophet (S) asked him: “In one occasion?” He
said: “Yes.” The Prophet (S) said: “It is one divorce. You can get her
back if you like.”

An-Nassa’iy mentioned a tradition narrated by Makhrama bin Bukayr from
his father that Mahmood bin Labeed had said: “Once the Prophet (S) was
told that a man had divorced his wife three times together in one
occasion. The Prophet (S) became very angry. He got up and said: “Is it
played with the Book of Allah while I am still among you?” A man said:
“O Messenger of Allah, should we kill him?” [^105] Besides this there
are many other true traditions and therefore the ulama of Islam and the
reliable scholars have admitted this fact.

Among them is Professor Khalid Muhammad Khalid who has said in his book
(Democracy): “Umar bin al-Khattab ignored the holy religious texts of
the Qur'an and the Sunna when benefits required him to do that. As the
Qur'an had determined a share of zakat to be paid to those, whose hearts
were reconciled to Islam by these gifts, the Prophet (S) and Abu Bakr
used to do that but when Umar became the caliph, he said: “We do not pay
anything for faith in Islam.”

And as the Prophet (S) and Abu Bakr had permitted selling bondwomen,
Umar prohibited it.
And as the three-divorce, which took place in one occasion, was
considered as one divorce according to the Sunna and the consensus, Umar
came to ignore the Sunna and to destroy the consensus.” [^106]

Dr. ad-Dawaleebi said in his book *Usool al-Fiqh*: [^107] “Among the
verdicts that Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) had changed according
to the base of “the change of the verdicts owing to the change of time”
was permitting the third divorce if it took place in one occasion
whereas at the time of the Prophet (S), the time of Abu Bakr and some
time of Umar’s caliphate if the three divorces took place (or were said
together) in one occasion, they were considered as one divorce as proved
by the true tradition of Ibn Abbas when Umar had said: “People have
hastened in a matter which had deliberateness to them. Would that we
permit it to them!” And then he permitted it to them.”

Dr. ad-Dawaleebi added: “Ibn al-Jawziyya said: “But Ameerul Mo’mineen
Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) saw that people began to make
little of the matter of divorce and that they did it with one statement
and in one occasion, he thought that the benefit required to punish them
by executing such divorce that when they knew of that they would refrain
from divorcing their wives.

Umar saw that this had a benefit in its own time and he thought that
what had been during the time of the Prophet (S), Abu Bakr and some time
of his rule was the most suitable for people because they feared Allah
and refrained from divorcing their wives…this was one example on “the
change of the verdicts owing to the change of time”. [^108] The
companions perceived the good policy of Umar in disciplining his
citizens in this concern and so they agreed with him on that and they
gave such a fatwa to whoever asked them about such a matter. [^109]

But Ibn al-Qayyim himself came and gave his opinion concerning his own
time. He wanted to go back to the verdicts that were at the time of the
Prophet (S) because time had changed too and the three-divorce were
executed with one word and this had led to permit the marriage that had
been impermissible at the age of the companions. [^110] He said: “If
punishment led to corruption more than the corruption of the doing
punished for, then giving up this punishment would be more beloved to
Allah and His Messenger.” [^111]

He added: “Ibn Taymiyya said: “If Umar (may Allah be pleased with him)
saw that the Muslims had misused the permissibility of the return of a
divorcee to her previous husband, he would go back to the verdicts that
had been at the time of the Prophet (S).” The valuable notices of Ibn
Taymiya have led the legal courts in Egypt to the laws that had been at
the time of the Prophet (S) owing to the base of “the change of times”.
[^112]

26. The prayer of Taraweeh
--------------------------

**26. The prayer of Taraweeh** [^113]

This kind of prayers had not been legislated by the Prophet (S) nor had
it been offered at the time of Abu Bakr and Allah had never legislated
to offer *Nafila* [^114] prayer congregationally except for the prayer
of *Istisqa’* (invoking Allah for rain).

Allah had legislated congregation to offer the obligatory prayers like
the five daily prayers, the prayer of *Tawaf* (circumambulation), the
prayers of the two feasts (Eid), prayers of *Aayat* (signs; eclipse and
the likes) and the prayer of funerals (for the dead).

The Prophet (S) was used to offer the supererogatory prayers in the
nights of Ramadan individually. He advised the Muslims to offer these
prayers and they offered them as they had seen the Prophet (S) offer
them. So was the matter during the reign of Abu Bakr until he died in
the year thirteen of hijra and then Umar became the caliph.

In that year Umar fasted at Ramadan and offered the prayers as the
Prophet (S) and Abu Bakr had done without any change. When the next
Ramadan of the fourteenth year of hijra came, Umar with some of his
companions came to the mosque. He saw the people busy offering
supererogatory prayers; some rising, some prostrating, some reciting the
Qur'an and some glorifying Allah in a scene that did not please him and
he saw that he had to reform this “unpleasing” scene; therefore he
legislated the prayer of *Taraweeh* [^115] for them to be offered at the
beginning of night and to be offered congregationally.

He sent his books to the different countries and appointed two imams in
Medina; one for men and the other for women to lead the people in
offering *Taraweeh* prayer congregationally. This fact has been
mentioned in many true traditions.

Al-Bukhari and Muslim mentioned in their *Sahihs* that the Prophet (S)
had said: “He, who spends the nights of Ramadan in offering its
supererogatory worships faithfully and sincerely, Allah will forgive all
his previous sins.” The Prophet (S) died and the rites of Ramadan were
still as they were; nothing changed even at the time of Abu Bakr and
some period of Umar’s rule. [^116]

Al-Bukhari mentioned in his *Sahih* too that Abdurrahman bin Abdul
Qarriy [^117] had said: “One night of Ramadan I went with Umar to the
mosque. People were scattering here and there and each one was busy
doing something. Umar said: “I see if I could gather them to one imam it
would be better.” Then he decided and gathered them to Ubayy bin Ka’b. I
went with Umar in another night and we saw the people offering the
prayer behind their imam. Umar said: “How good heresy it is!”

Allama al-Qastalani said [^118] when mentioning this saying of Umar “How
good heresy it is”: “He (Umar) called it “heresy” because the Messenger
of Allah (S) had not decided it to be congregational nor to be offered
at the beginning of night nor had Abu Bakr (may Allah be pleased with
him) decided that…” The same has been mentioned in *Tuhfat al-Bari* and
other books of Hadith.

Allama Abul Waleed Muhammad bin Shuhna said in his book *Rawdhat
al-Manadhir* when mentioning the death of Umar among the events of the
year twenty-three of hijra: “He was the first who had prohibited selling
bondwomen, the first who had made people say four Takbeer “Allahu
akbar-Allah is great” in the prayer of funerals, the first who had
gathered people to an imam in offering *Taraweeh* Prayer…”

As-Sayooti mentioned in his book *Tareekh al-Khulafa’* the initiatives
of Umar that he had quoted from al-Askari [^119] saying: “He (Umar) was
the first to be called Ameerul Mo’mineen, the first who had decided
Taraweeh prayer to be congregational and to be offered at the beginning
of night in Ramadan, the first who had prohibited temporary marriage,
the first who had made people say four *Takbeers* in the prayer of
funerals…”

Muhammad bin Sa’d said in his *Tabaqat*: “He (Umar) was the first who
had decided *Taraweeh* prayer to be congregational and to be offered at
the beginning of night in Ramadan and ordered people to follow that and
sent his books with this order to the different countries. It was in
Ramadan of the year fourteen of hijra. He appointed two imams to lead
the prayer of *Taraweeh* in Medina; one for men and the other for
women…”

Ibn Abdul Birr said in his book *al-Istee’ab* when mentioning the
biography of Umar: “It was he, who had lit the month of fasting
(Ramadan) with the prayer of *Taraweeh*.”

These scholars (may Allah forgive them) saw that Umar had found out
(with his *Taraweeh*) a wisdom that Allah and His Messenger had been
inattentive of.

It was they themselves who were inattentive of the wisdom of Allah and
His laws and systems. The wisdom behind not legislating supererogatory
prayers of Ramadan to be offered congregationally is to let a believer
be alone with his Lord in the heart of night in his house invoking Him,
complaining to Him his grief, supplicating, repenting, hoping, resorting
and confessing that there is no shelter save Allah’s and there is no
savior save Him.

Therefore Allah has let the obligations of Ramadan free from the tie of
congregation to let the believers be alone with their Beneficent Lord in
a spiritual connection. Making these obligations congregational may
limit their use and benefit.

In addition to that; offering these *Nafilas* individually would not
deprive the houses of blessing and honor of prayers and it would
encourage the young generation to love prayers and to try imitating
their parents and grandparents. This would have great effect on children
and would fix faith in their minds and hearts.

Once Abdullah bin Mass’ood asked the Prophet (S): “Which is better; to
pray in my house or in the mosque?”

The Prophet (S) said: “Do you not see how near to the mosque my house
is? To pray in my house is more beloved to me than to pray in the mosque
except for the obligatory prayers.” This has been mentioned by Ahmad,
Ibn Maja, Ibn Khuzayma and Zakiyuddeen Abdul Adheem bin Abdul Qawiy
al-Munthiri.

Zayd bin Thabit narrated that the Prophet (S) had said: “O people, offer
your prayers in your houses except for the obligatory prayers because
offering prayers in the house is better.” It has been mentioned by
an-Nassa’iy and Ibn Khuzayma.

Anas bin Malik narrated that the Prophet (S) had said: “Honor your
houses with some of your prayers.” The Prophet (S) also said: “The
example of the house, in which Allah is mentioned, and the house, in
which Allah is not mentioned, is like a living person and a dead one.”
It has been mentioned by al-Bukhari and Muslim.

Jabir bin Abdullah narrated that the Prophet (S) had said: “If one of
you finishes his prayer in the mosque, let him give a share of his
prayer to his house. Allah will grant his house with good because of his
prayer (in it).” It has been mentioned by Muslim, Ibn Khuzayma and
others.

But the caliph Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) was a man of
organizing and strictness. He admired the congregational prayers, which
had great social benefits which our ulama had discussed in full details.
The Islamic *Shari’ah* has not ignored this side of the obligatory
prayers but at the same time it has let the *Nafilas* to the other
benefits of people. Allah has said:

***“And it behooves not a believing man and a*** ***believing woman that
they should have any choice in their matter when Allah and His Messenger
have decided a matter” (Qur’an 33:36).***

27. The prayer of funerals
--------------------------

The Prophet (S) was used to say five *Takbeers* (Allahu akbar-Allah is
great) in the prayer for the dead but the second caliph Umar admired to
say only four *Takbeers* and he made people do that too. Many scholars
have mentioned this fact such as as-Sayooti in his book *Tareekh
al-Khulafa’*, Ibn Shuhna in his book *Rawdhatul Manadhir* and others.

Professor Khalid Muhammad Khalid has also mentioned this in his book
*Democracy* which we have mentioned above.

Ahmad bin Hanbal mentioned in his *Musnad* [^120] a tradition narrated
by Zayd bin Arqam that Abdul A’la had said: “Once I offered a prayer for
a dead person behind Zayd bin Arqam and he recited five *Takbeers*. Abu
Eesa Abdurrahman bin Abu Layla came to him (to Zayd), caught his hand
and said to him: “Have you forgotten?” Zayd said: “No, but I have
offered the prayer behind my beloved Abul Qasim (the Prophet) (S) and he
recited five *Takbeers*. I will not give up that forever.”

Zayd bin Arqam has offered the prayer of funeral for the companion Sa’d
bin Jubayr, who was famous as Sa’d bin Habta, [^121] and recited five
*Takbeers* as mentioned by Ibn Hajar in his *Isaba* and by Ibn Qutayba
in his *Ma’arif*.

Ahmad bin Hanbal mentioned a tradition narrated by Huthayfa that Yahya
bin Abdullah al-Jabir had said: “Once I offered a prayer of funerals in
al-Mada’in behind Eesa the mawla of Huthayfa and he recited five
*Takbeers* and then he turned towards us and said: “I have neither
forgotten nor have I mistaken but I have recited Takbeer as my master
Huthayfa bin al-Yaman have offered a prayer for a dead and he had
recited five *Takbeers* and then he turned towards us and said: “I have
neither forgotten nor have I mistaken but I have offered the *Takbeers*
as the Prophet (S) have recited them.” [^122]

28. Bequeathing between brothers and sisters
--------------------------------------------

Allah has said:

***“They ask you for a decision of the*** ***law. Say: Allah gives you a
decision concerning the person who has neither parents nor offspring; if
a man dies (and) he has no son and he has a sister, she shall have half
of what he leaves, and he shall be her heir she has no son; but if there
be two (sisters), they shall have two-thirds of what he leaves; and if
there are brethren, men and women, then the male shall have the like of
the portion of two females; Allah makes clear to you, lest you err; and
Allah knows all things”*** ***(Qur’an 4:176).***

The verse is clear in concerning the obligation of bequeathing between
brothers and sisters if the bequeather has no children. The word “son”
here refers to the boy and the girl all the same. [^123]

But Umar bin al-Khattab interpreted the word “son” mentioned in the
verse to mean the male offspring only and so he equalled in inheritance
between the daughter of a bequeather (a dead man) and his full sister;
therefore he gave each of them a half of the inheritance. Then all the
four Sunni sects followed him in this concern.

As for the infallible imams of Ahlul Bayt (as) and their followers, they
have agreed unanimously on that the brothers and sisters and other
relatives of a bequeather would have no right in the inheritance if the
bequeather had a child whether it was a boy or a girl and whether it was
one child or more. Their evidence was the saying of Allah:

***“..and those who are akin*** ***are nearer one to another in the
ordinance of Allah” (Qur’an 33:6)***

They are too strict in depriving the other relatives of the inheritance
if the bequeather has children even if it is one daughter. He, who wants
to know more about the traditions of the Shia about the subject of
inheritance, can refer to *Wasa’il ash-Shia ila Ahkam ash-Shari’ah* and
the other Shiite books of Hadith.

Once Ibn Abbas was asked about a man who had died and left a daughter
and a full sister. He said: “The sister has no right to take anything
from the inheritance and the daughter takes a half of the inheritance as
her obligatory right and the other half belongs to her because she is
the nearest relative to the dead man.” The asker said to Ibn Abbas: “But
Umar has judged something else!” Ibn Abbas said: “Are you more aware
than Allah?”

The asker said: “I could not be certain of that until I asked Ibn Tawoos
and mentioned to him what Ibn Abbas had said. Ibn Tawoos said to me: “My
father told me that he had heard Ibn Abbas saying: “Allah has said:
***“..if a man dies (and)*** ***he has no son and he has a sister, she
shall have half of what he leaves…” (Qur’an 4:176)***
but you say: she shall have half of what he leaves even if he has a son
(child).” [^124]

29. Shortage of inheritance
---------------------------

The Muslims have disagreed about the permissibility of shortage of
inheritance. Shortage of inheritance is that inheritance becomes less
than the shares of the heirs. For example when the heirs are two sisters
and a husband; each sister should get a third of the inheritance and the
husband should get a half of it.

The matter was ambiguous for the second caliph Umar. He did not know
which of them Allah had given priority to the other so that he would
give him/her priority and so he determined to distribute the shortage
among the all according to the proportion of their shares and this was
the utmost result he could reach to achieve justice when the matter
became ambiguous to him.

But the infallible imams and the ulama of Ahlul Bayt (as) have known the
prior and the later in this matter (and the people of a house are more
aware of what there is in it).

Imam Abu Ja’far al-Baqir (S) has said: “Ameerul Mo'mineen ‘Ali (as)
said: “He (Allah), Who has counted the grains of the sand of Aalige,
knows that the shares (of inheritance) do not exceed six [^125] if they
(people) know the ways of their solution.”

Ibn Abbas often said: “Whoever likes I will challenge him before Allah
near the Black Rock (in the Kaaba). Allah has never mentioned in His
Book two halves and a third.” He also said: “Glory be to Allah, the
Almighty! Do you think that He, Who has counted the sand of Aalige, has
made in an inheritance a half and a half and a third? These two halves
cover all the inheritance so where will the third be?”

It was said to him: “O Ibn Abbas, then who was the first one who had
lessened (changed) the shares?” He said: “When the shares of inheritance
became confused to Umar and they conflicted with each other, he said:
“By Allah, I do not know which of you Allah has given priority and which
of you He has made later! I cannot but to distribute the inheritance
equally among you.”

Ibn Abbas said: “By Allah, if you give priority (in distributing
inheritance) to those, whom Allah has given priority and you delay
those, whom Allah has delayed, no share of inheritance will be
lessened.” It was said to him: “Which one Allah has given priority and
which one He has delayed?”

He said: “Every share Allah has not replaced except with another
obligatory share (to the same heir) is the one that He has given
priority and every share that may be omitted if being conflicted with
others is the one that Allah has delayed. Allah has given priority to
the husband (of the (dead) bequeather) who should have a half of the
inheritance but if another share conflicts with his, he should have a
quarter. The same is said about the wife and the mother.

But as for the shares that He has delayed they are the shares of the
daughters and sisters who should have a half and two thirds but if there
are other shares that conflict with theirs, they should get the
remainder of the inheritance. If what Allah has given priority and what
He has made later (of the shares) gathered together, those, which Allah
has given priority, should be given first and if something of the
inheritance remains, it should be given to the heirs, whom Allah has
made later.” This tradition has been mentioned by the Second Martyr in
his book *ar-Rawdha*.

Al-Hakim has mentioned in his *Mustadrak* [^126] that Ibn Abbas had
said: “The first one, who had lessened the shares (of inheritance), was
Umar. By Allah, if he has given priority (in distributing the shares of
inheritance) to those, which Allah has given priority and he has delayed
those, which Allah has delayed, no share would be lessened.” It was said
to him: “Which of them Allah has given priority and which of them He has
delayed?”

He said: “Each share that Allah has not replaced except with another
obligatory share (to the same heir) is the one that Allah has given
priority like the shares of a husband, a wife and a mother and every
share that is omitted if being conflicted with others is the one that
Allah has delayed like the shares of sisters and daughters who should
have the remainder of the inheritance. If what Allah has given priority
and what He has delayed gather together, the prior heirs should be given
their shares first and the remainder of the inheritance should be given
to the others…” [^127]

Hence if a husband, a mother and daughters are the heirs, the husband
and the mother should be given their second (replaced) shares; a quarter
of the inheritance for the husband, a sixth for the mother and the
remainder of the inheritance should be divided equally between the two
daughters.

If there are sisters among these heirs, they will not deserve anything
of the inheritance at all because the ranks of heirs due to kinship
according to the belief of the infallible imams of Ahlul Bayt (as) and
their followers are three; the first rank includes a father and a mother
(without their fathers and mothers), sons and daughters, the second rank
includes brothers, sisters, grandfathers and grandmothers and the second
rank includes uncles and aunts (both father and mother’s brothers and
sisters).

No one from the second rank inherits the bequeather if there is an heir
from the first rank and so on.
***“…and the*** ***possessors of relationships are nearer to each other
in the ordinance of Allah” (Qur’an 33:6)***.
This is the belief of the infallible imams of Ahlul Bayt (as), whom
Allah and His Messenger have made as equal as the Book until the Day of
Resurrection, and this is the belief of all of the Shia. Two sisters
from the second rank will not inherit the bequeather if his mother is
alive and Allah, the Almighty, is more aware!

30. Inheritance of grandfather when there are brothers
------------------------------------------------------

Al-Bayhaqi mentioned in his *Sunan* and in *Shu’abul Eeman* [^128] that
Umar had asked the Prophet (S) about the inheritance of a grandfather
when there were other brothers and the Prophet (S) had said to him: “O
Umar, why do you ask about this? I think that you will die before you
will have understood this matter.” The narrator of this tradition,
Sa’eed bin al-Musayyab, said: “Umar died before understanding this
matter.”

Umar has been confused in this matter throughout his rule that he has
given seventy different judgments on it. Ubayda as-Salmani said: “I have
written down one hundred different judgments determined by Umar on the
matter of the inheritance of grandfather.” [^129] Umar himself said: “I
have decided on the matter of grandfather’s inheritance many judgments
that I might have deviated from the truth.” [^130] At last Umar referred
to Zayd bin Thabit in this matter.

Tariq bin Shihab az-Zuhri said: “Umar bin al-Khattab has decided on the
matter of the inheritance of grandfather when there were other brothers
with him different judgments and then he gathered the companions and
brought a tablet to write on it. They thought that he would make the
grandfather (mentioned in the verse) as a father [^131] but at this time
a snake appeared and they separated. Then Umar said: “If Allah has
willed to fix it, he would have done so.”

Then Umar went to Zayd bin Thabit in his house and said to him: “I have
come to you about the matter of the grandfather and I want to make him
as a father.” Zayd said to him: “I do not agree with you to make him as
a father.” Umar became very angry and went away. Later on he sent for
Zayd. Zayd wrote down his opinion about the matter on a tablet and sent
it to Umar. When it reached Umar, he made a speech before the people and
read for them what Zayd had written on the tablet and said: “Zayd has
given his opinion about the matter of grandfather and I have approved
it.” [^132]

31. Common inheritance
----------------------

The case was that a woman had died and left a husband, a mother, two
brothers from her mother but not her father and two other brothers from
her mother and father at the reign of the second caliph Umar. This case
was offered twice before the caliph. In the first time he judged to give
the dead woman’s husband his share, which was the half of the
inheritance, to give her mother her share, which was a sixth, to give
her two brothers from her mother the third; sixth to each of them and he
excluded her two full brothers.

In the second time Umar wanted to decide the same judgment but one of
the dead women’s full brothers said to him: “Suppose our father is a
donkey, then you are to join us with our brothers due to our relation to
our mother.” And then he distributed the third of the inheritance among
the four brothers equally. A man said to Umar: “You have not done so in
that year!” Umar said: “That case was as we have judged then and this
one is as we judge now.” [^133]

This case has been called as “*al-Himariya*” because one of the brothers
has said to Umar: “Suppose that our father is a donkey (*himar*)…” It
might also been called as *al-Hajariyya* or *al-Yammiyya* because it has
been narrated that one of the brothers has said to Umar: “Suppose that
our father is a rock (*hajar*) thrown in the sea (*yamm*).” Also it
might be called as “*al-Umariyya*” because Umar has had two different
judgments on it. It has also been called as “common inheritance”. [^134]

It was one of the famous cases among the jurisprudents of the four Sunni
sects although they have disagreed among them about it; Abu Haneefa and
his two companions, Ahmad bin Hanbal, Zafar, and Ibn Abu Layla thought
that the two full brothers had had no right of their mother inheritance
as Umar had decided in the first time while Malik and ash-Shafi’iy
thought that the two full brothers had the right to participate with
their other two brothers in the third of their mother’s inheritance as
Umar had decided in the second time.

As for the infallible imams of Ahlul Bayt (as) and their Shia, they have
divided the heirs according to their relationship into three orderly
classes. No one of the next class would inherit if someone of the
previous class was available at all. Mother, according to the Shia, is
from the first class unlike brothers and sisters, who are from the
second class. This has been detailed full in the jurisprudence of the
Shia.

According to this principle, the judgment on this case would be as the
following; the husband would get half of the inheritance as his due
right and the rest would be for the mother of the dead woman; some of it
as her due right and the other would belong to her because she was the
nearest relative (first class) to the dead. No one of the brothers and
sisters would get anything of the inheritance since their sister’s
mother was alive.

32. The share of the heirs
--------------------------

Allah has said:

***“Men shall have a portion of what the*** ***parents and the near
relatives leave, and women shall have a portion of what the parents and
the near relatives leave, whether there is little or much of it; a***
***stated portion” (Qur’an 4:7)*** and:

***“Allah enjoins you concerning your children: The male shall have the
equal of the portion of two females (Qur’an 4:11)***.

All the verses of bequeathing and inheriting are in the same way of
being general. They are mentioned in Sura of an-Nisa’ (4). So are the
true traditions and the consensus of the umma concerning this subject.

Imam Abu Abdullah Ja’far as-Sadiq (S) has said: “Islam is to witness
that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is the Messenger of
Allah, with which the bloods (of the Muslims) are spared and according
to which marriages and inheriting are managed.”

Imam Abu Ja’far Muhammad al-Baqir (S) has said: “Islam is as it appears
via sayings and doings. It is that on which the groups of people of all
the Islamic sects. It is that with which the bloods are spared,
according to which marriages and inheriting are managed and with which
people have gathered together on prayers, zakat, fasting Ramadan and
offering the hajj. With it all these people have got out of unbelief and
entered into faith.”

But Malik bin Anas has mentioned in his *Muwatta’* that Sa’eed bin
al-Musayyab had said: “Umar bin al-Khattab refused to give the non-Arabs
[^135] their inheritances except one who was born from Arab parents.”
Malik added: “If a pregnant woman comes from the land of the enemy and
gives birth to her child in the land of the Arabs, then her child will
inherit her when she dies and she will inherit her child when he dies
according to the Book of Allah.” [^136]

33. Uncle’s inheritance from his sister’s son
---------------------------------------------

Sa’eed bin Mansoor mentioned in his *Sunan*: “Once a man recognized his
sister, who had been taken captive in the pre-Islamic period. He found
her with a son but he had not known who the father of the son was. He
bought them both and set them free (for they were as slaves). The son
(when he grew up) gained some wealth and then he died. The uncle came to
Ibn Mas’ood and told him the matter.

Ibn Mas’ood asked him to go to Umar and then to come back to tell him
what Umar would say. He went to Umar and told him his matter. Umar said
to him: “He (the nephew) is not your relative and he is not included in
the verdicts of inheritance.” Umar refused to let the man inherit his
nephew. The uncle went back to Ibn Mas’ood and told him what Umar had
said. Ibn Mas’ood came with the man to Umar and said to him: “How did
you give this fatwa to this man?”

Umar said: “I have not found him as one of his blood relations nor has
he been among those who have deserved inheritance; therefore I have not
permitted him to inherit that young man. What do you think, O Abu
Abdullah?” Ibn Mas’ood said: “I see him as a kin (for being his uncle)
and a benefactor (for he has set his nephew free from being as a slave)
and so I see that he has the right to inherit his nephew.” And then Umar
annulled his first judgment and permitted the man to inherit his
nephew.”

This event has been mentioned by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi in his *Kanzol
Ummal*, vol. 6 p.8. This fatwa would have been true if the mother had
died before her son.

34. Iddah of a pregnant woman
-----------------------------

Al-Bayhaqi mentioned in his book *Shu’ab al-Eeman* that once a pregnant
woman had asked Umar for a legal judgment saying to him: “I have given
birth to my child after the death of my husband and before the end of my
*iddah*.” He asked her to wait until the end of the longest one of the
two terms of *iddah*. [^137]

Ubayy bin Ka’b objected to Umar at the presence of the woman and said to
him that her *iddah* had ended since she had given birth to her child
and he permitted her to get married before the end of the four months
and ten days (of the *iddah*). Umar said nothing to the woman save this
statement: “I am hearing what you are hearing” [^138] and he gave up his
fatwa. After that Umar agreed with Ubayy bin Ka’b and said: “If she had
given birth to her child and her husband was still not buried yet, she
could get married.” [^139] The followers of the four Sunni sects have
followed this principle until nowadays.

But we, the Shia, have found in the holy Qur'an two verses opposing each
other concerning the *iddah* of a woman whose husband dies while she is
pregnant; in the first verse Allah has said:

***“and (as for) the pregnant women, their*** ***prescribed time is that
they lay down their burden” (Qur’an 65:4)***
and in the second one He has said:
***“And (as for) those of*** ***you who die and leave wives behind, they
should keep themselves in waiting for four months and ten days (Qur’an
2:234).***

A pregnant woman, whose husband dies, can get married after giving birth
to her child if she follows the first verse even if she has not passed
the period of *iddah* mentioned in the second verse but if she follows
the second verse, she can get married only after passing the period
mentioned in the verse even if she has not given birth to her child yet.
In both suppositions she will objects to one of the verses and she
cannot follow both of the verses at the same time unless she will wait
until passing the longer of the two periods (either to pass four months
and ten days or until giving birth to her baby) and then she has no way
except to do that. This is what has been narrated from Imam Ali (S) and
Ibn Abbas. [^140] The Shia have followed their imams in acting according
to this opinion.

### Note

The Muslims have disagreed on the beginning of the *iddah* of death,
[^141] which is four months and ten days. The Sunni believe that the
*iddah* of death begins since the husband dies whether the wife knows of
her husband’s death or she does not know because of his being far away
from her or because of any other reason.

As for the Shia, they believe that the *iddah* of death begins when a
wife knows of her husband’s death even if the death has taken place some
time ago. She has no right to get married until she passes the *iddah*,
which is four months and ten days, since the moment she knows of her
husband’s death. And then she can get married according to the clear
verse after passing the *iddah* and after the mourning that a wife has
to show after the death of her husband.

35. Marrying a missing husband’s wife
-------------------------------------

Ad-Dawaleebi said: [^142] “…also Umar has judged according to his own
opinion concerning the wife of a missing husband. He judged that a wife
of a missing husband can get married after passing four years since the
absence of the husband and after passing the *iddah* even if it had not
been proved that her husband had died so that the wife would not remain
in suspense forever.

“So was the opinion of Malik bin Anas which was unlike the opinion of
the Hanafites and the Shafiites who believed that a wife had to wait
until she would become certain of her husband’s death because he would
be considered as alive until a certain evidence on his death would
appear.

“But the opinion of Umar was worthy of being regarded because it
protected the wife of a missing husband from certain harms and dangers.
He permitted the wife of a missing husband to get married despite that
this decision opposed the clear texts of the *Shari’ah*, on which the
rest of jurisprudents depended. This was not but changing the verdicts
according to the change of the conditions which must be regarded to
avoid some harms. The Prophet (S) had said: “No harm (to be done against
the others) and no reciprocal harm!” Allah had said:

***“..and He has not laid upon you any*** ***hardship in religion” (
Qur’an 22:78)***.

“In doing so, Umar did not annul the legal texts but he activated them
in the light of the benefit and according to the different
circumstances…”

As for the Shia, they have followed their infallible imams of Ahlul Bayt
(as) in this matter. They have had fixed texts deciding according to the
apparent principles. These texts say that when no information can be
obtained about a missing husband, his wife, if there is someone spends
on her, must wait until her husband comes or his death is proved or
something like that. But if the wife has no one to spend on her, she can
bring her case to the legal judge to decide.

When she does so, the judge will begin to search for the missing husband
for four years in the possible places, in which the husband can be
found, otherwise he looks for him in everywhere since the moment when
the wife offers her case before him. Then the judge divorces her or he
orders her guardian (the one who is responsible for her) to decide. It
is necessary that the guardian may decide first but if he refuses to
divorce her, then the judge is to divorce her but after passing the
period of researching or after the return of the messengers who go to
look for the missing husband or the like.

After that the wife spends the period of the *iddah* of death which is
four months and ten days and then she can get married. If the missing
husband comes back during her *iddah*, he will have the right to marry
her again but if he comes back after the *iddah*, he will have no right
to marry her whether he finds her married or not. This is the principle
of the Shia on this matter according to their infallible imams (S).

36. Selling bondwomen
---------------------

All the Sunni Muslims of the four sects have confirmed that the one, who
had prohibited selling bondwomen, was Umar whereas it had been
permissible at the time of the Prophet (S), the reign of Abu Bakr and
some time of Umar’s rule. They have considered that as one of Umar’s
virtues as they have considered *Taraweeh* Prayer and its likes.

But the scholars, who have looked for the truth of this matter, found in
the true prophetic traditions that the Prophet (S) had prohibited
selling bondwomen and so found that Umar had followed those traditions
and acted according to them. He (Umar) said to his son Abdullah that he
had heard the Prophet (S) saying: “A bondwoman is not to be sold, nor to
be given as a gift, nor to be bequeathed and not to be considered as
entailment. Her owner enjoys himself with her along his life. When he
dies, she is to be set free.”

Ibn Abbas narrated that the Prophet (S) had said: “Every bondwoman, who
gives birth to a child from her master, becomes free after his death.”

These two traditions have been mentioned by Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin
al-Hasan at-Toosi in his book *al-Khilaf*, vol.2. And according to the
apparent meaning of the two traditions, it was clear that Umar had not
prohibited selling bondwomen due to his own opinion, but he had acted
according to the tradition of his son Abdullah and the tradition of Ibn
Abbas.

But Sheikh at-Toosi was forced by the traditions of the infallible imams
of Ahlul Bayt (as) about this subject to interpret these two traditions
in a way to make them submit to the doctrine of Ahlul Bayt (as). He
said: “When a bondwoman gives birth to a child from her master while she
is still in his possession, she will have the right to be free due to
her bearing a child.

It is not permissible to sell a pregnant bondwoman and when she gives
birth to her child, she is still in the possession of her master and she
is not permissible to be sold as long as her child is alive but when her
child dies, she may be sold anyhow. If her master dies, she is made in
the possession of her child and then she is set free due to that. If her
master does not leave save her, the share of her child (in her) is set
free and she becomes among the shares of the rest of the heirs.

Such was the opinion of ‘Ali (as), Ibn az-Zubayr, Ibn Abbas, Abu Sa’eed
al-Khidri, Ibn Mas’ood, al-Waleed bin Uqba, Suwayd bin Ghafla, Umar bin
Abdul Aziz, Ibn Seereen and Abdul Melik bin Ya’la. Dawood said: “It is
permissible to dispose of her in any way” but he did not give any
details. Abu Haneefa, his companions, ash-Shafi’iy and Malik said: “She
is not permissible to be sold nor to be disposed of in any way but she
is to be set free when her master dies.”

Sheikh at-Toosi added: “Our evidence on that is the consensus of the
sect (the Shia) and their traditions. Also there is no disagreement on
the possibility of being slept with by her possessor but if she becomes
dispossessed, sleeping with her becomes not possible. The rule says that
she is a slave and he, who pretends that she is freed after the death of
her master, has to show the evidence on that.

The tradition narrated by Ibn Abbas that the Prophet (S) had said:
“Every bondwoman, who gives birth to a child from her master, becomes
free after his death” means that when her master dies and she becomes
her child’s possession, then she is set free due to that. The tradition
narrated by Abdullah bin Umar that the Prophet (S) had said: “A
bondwoman is not to be sold, nor to be given as a gift, nor to be
bequeathed and not to be considered as entailment. Her owner enjoys
himself with her along his life. When he dies, she is to be set free”
means that she cannot be sold as long as her child is alive. When her
master dies, she is set free due to what we have said in the first
tradition.”

37. Necessity of Tayammum when there is no water
------------------------------------------------

**37. Necessity of** ***Tayammum***[^143] **when there is no water**

It suffices as evidence on this matter that Allah has said in the sura
of al-Ma’ida:

***“O you who believe! when you rise*** ***up to prayer, wash your faces
and your hands as far as the elbows, and wipe your heads and your feet
to the ankles; and if you are under an obligation to perform a total
ablution, then wash (yourselves) and if you are sick or on a***
***journey, or one of you comes from the privy, or you have touched the
women, and you cannot find water, betake yourselves to pure*** ***earth
and wipe your faces and your hands therewith” (Qur’an 5:6)***

And He has said in the sura of an-Nisa’:

***“O you who believe! do not go near prayer when you are intoxicated
until you know (well) what you say, nor when you are under an obligation
to perform a bath, unless (you are) traveling on the road, until you
have washed yourselves; and if you are sick, or on a journey, or one of
you comes from the privy or you have touched the women, and you cannot
find water, betake yourselves to pure earth, then wipe your faces and
your hands; surely Allah is Pardoning, Forgiving” (Qur’an 4:43)***

The true traditions on this matter are many and one confirming the other
and all the umma has agreed unanimously on that except Umar, the only
one who had contradicted the consensus. The famous traditions narrated
from him showed that he had believed that one[^144] who had no water,
had not to offer the prayer until he would find water.

Al-Bukhari and Muslim mentioned in their *Sahihs* a tradition narrated
by Sa’eed bin Abdurrahman bin Abzi from his father that once a man had
come to Umar and said to him: “I have been in ritual impurity and I
could not find water to perform the ritual ablution.” Umar said to him:
“Do not offer the prayer!” Ammar bin Yassir was present then.

Ammar said: “O Ameerul Mo’mineen, have you not remembered once when you
and I were in a brigade (during a war) and we became impure and could
not find water (to perform ablution). You did not offer the prayer but I
rubbed myself with earth and offered the prayer. Then the Prophet (S)
said: “It would have sufficed you to hit the earth with your hands and
then you blow and rub your face and your two hands.” Umar said: “O
Ammar, fear Allah!” Ammar said: “If I do not narrate it!!” [^145] Umar
said: “We will see how to deal with you!”

It has been said that Ibn Mas’ood had adopted the opinion of Umar in
this matter. Al-Bukhari, and others, mentioned a tradition that Shaqeeq
bin Salama had said: “Once I was with Abdullah bin Mas’ood and Abu Musa
al-Ash’ari. Abu Musa asked Abdullah bin Mas’ood: “O Abu Abdurrahman, if
one becomes impure and he does not find water, what will he do then?”
Abdullah ibn Mas’ood said: “He does not offer the prayer until he finds
water.”

Abu Musa said: “Then how about the saying of Ammar when the Prophet (S)
has said to him: “It would have sufficed you to…”?” Ibn Mas’ood said:
“Do you not see that Ammar has not been satisfied with that?” Abu Musa
said: “Let us put the saying of Ammar aside! What do you do with this
verse…” he recited to him the verse of Tayammum mentioned in the sura of
al-Ma’ida. Abdullah did not know what to say.” [^146]

I say: Abdullah bin Mas’ood was cautious in his speech with Abu Musa
because he feared both Umar and Abu Musa. There is no doubt in that.
Allah is more aware!

38. Two supererogatory Rak’as after Asr prayer
----------------------------------------------

Muslim mentioned in his *Sahih* [^147] a tradition narrated by Urwa bin
az-Zubayr from his father that Aa’isha (the Prophet’s wife) had said:
“The Prophet (S) had never ignored the two rak’as (which he had been
used to offer) after Asr prayer in my house at all.”

He also mentioned a tradition narrated by Abdurrahman bin al-Aswad from
his father that Aa’isha had said: “There were two prayers that the
Messenger of Allah (S) had never ignored, when being in my house,
neither secretly nor openly; two rak’as before Fajr Prayer and two
rak’as after Asr Prayer.”

He mentioned another tradition that al-Aswad and Masrooq had said: “We
witness that Aa’isha has said: “Whenever the Messenger of Allah (S) was
in my house, he offered the two rak’as after Asr prayer.” But Umar bin
al-Khattab prohibited them (these two rak’as) and punished whoever
offered them.

Malik mentioned in his *Muwatta’* [^148] a tradition narrated by Ibn
Shihab from as-Sa’ib bin Yazeed who said that he had seen Umar bin
al-Khattab beating al-Mukandar [^149] because he had offered two rak’as
after Asr prayer.

Abdurrazaq mentioned that Zayd bin Khalid had said that once the caliph
Umar had seen him offering two rak’as after Asr prayer and beaten him
for that…then Umar said: “O Zayd, unless I fear that people may take it
(the prayer after Asr prayer) as a (ladder) to prayer until the night, I
will not punish for it.”

He also mentioned a tradition like that narrated by Tameem ad-Dariy but
he said in it “…Umar said: “…but I fear that some people may come after
you that they offer prayers since the afternoon until the sunset that
they may offer prayers during the time, [^150] at which the Prophet (S)
had prohibited from offering prayers.”

39. Displacing Abraham’s temple
-------------------------------

The temple of Prophet Abraham (S) is the rock by which the pilgrims
offer prayer according to the saying of Allah:
***“Take as*** ***your place of worship the place where Abraham stood
(to pray)” (Qur’an 2:125).***

Abraham and Ishmael (S), when building the House, stood on this rock to
hand over rocks and clay. The rock was stuck to the Kaaba but the Arabs
after Prophet Abraham (S) moved it to its place nowadays. When Allah has
sent Muhammad (S) as the prophet and granted him with means of power, he
stuck the rock to the Kaaba again as it had been at the time of his
fathers Abraham and Ishmael. When Umar became the caliph, he displaced
it as it is nowadays. At the time of the Prophet (S) and the time of Abu
Bakr the rock was stuck to the Kaaba. [^151]

In the seventeenth year of hijra Umar enlarged the mosque by adding to
it some of the companions’ houses around it. The companions had refused
to sell their houses but Umar tore down their houses and put their
prices in the treasury until they later on, took their monies. [^152]

40. Weeping for the dead
------------------------

The sorrow of man for losing his loved ones and his crying for them are
parts of the sentiment of human beings besides that they are among the
requirements of mercy if they are not accompanied with bad sayings and
doings.

The Prophet (S) has said: “Whatever comes out of the heart and the eye
is from Allah and mercy and whatever comes out of the hand and the
tongue is from the Satan.” [^153]

The Muslims have done so everywhere and always without having any
evidence to prohibit it. The necessity required it (sorrowfulness or
crying) to be permissible.

In fact the Prophet (S) himself has cried in many occasions and he has
approved the others when crying in many occasions and admired it
(crying) in other occasions. In fact he might have invited to it.

The Prophet (S) had cried for his uncle Hamza, the lion of Allah and the
lion of His Messenger. Ibn Abdul Birr and other historians said “When
the Prophet (S) saw Hamza killed, he cried and when he saw him
mutilated, he sobbed.” [^154]

Al-Waqidy said: “The Prophet (S) often cried when Safiyya [^155] cried
and he sobbed when she sobbed.” He added: “Fatima began crying and the
Messenger of Allah (S) began crying too for her crying.” [^156]

Anas bin Malik said: “When the army of the Muslims was in Mu’ta, Zayd
took the banner but he was injured. Then Ja’far took the banner and he
was injured too. Then Abdullah bin Rawaha took the banner and he was
injured too. The Prophet’s eyes were shedding tears…” [^157]

Ibn Abdul Birr said in his *al-Istee’ab*: “The Prophet (S) cried for
Ja’far and Zayd and he said: “They are my brothers, friends and
talkers.”

Anass said: “…then we came to him (to the Prophet (S)) while Ibraheem
(the Prophet’s son) was dying. The Prophet’s eyes began shedding tears.
Abdurrahman bin Ouff said to him: “Do you cry while you are the
Messenger of Allah?!” The Prophet (S) said: “O Ibn Ouff, it is mercy!”
Then he cried again and said: “The eye sheds tears and the heart becomes
sad but we do not say what discontents our Lord. O Ibraheem, we are sad
for your leave!” [^158]

Usama bin Zayd said: “The daughter of the Prophet (S) sent for him that
one of her sons had died. The Prophet (S) went with Sa’d bin Ubada,
Ma’ath bin Jabal, Ubayy bin Ka’b and Zayd bin Thabit. The Prophet (S)
lifted the boy while his breath was still clattering. The Prophet’s eyes
began shedding tears. Sa’d said: “O Messenger of Allah, what is this?”
The Prophet (S) said: “It is mercy that Allah has put in the hearts of
His people. Allah has mercy on the merciful ones of His people…” [^159]

Abdullah bin Umar said: “One day Sa’d bin Ubada became ill. The Prophet
(S) came to visit him with Abdurrahman bin Ouff, Sa’d bin Abu Waqqas and
Abdullah bin Mas’ood. He found him in the middle of his relatives. The
Prophet (S) asked: “Is he dead?” They said: “No, O Messenger of Allah.”
The Prophet (S) began crying. When the people saw the Prophet (S)
crying, they began crying too. Then the Prophet (S) said: “Allah does
not punish for the tears of the eyes nor for the sadness of the heart
but He punishes and has mercy (on people) for this.” He pointed to his
tongue.” [^160]

Ibn Abdul Birr said in *al-Istee’ab*: “When the Prophet (S) was informed
that Ja’far had been martyred, he went to his wife (Ja’far’s wife) Asma’
bint Umays and consoled her. Then Fatima (S) (the Prophet’s daughter)
came in crying and saying: “O uncle!” The Prophet (S) said: “Let the
criers cry for one like Ja’far!” [^161]

The historians like Ibn Jareer, Ibnul Atheer, Ibn Katheer and Ibn Abd
Rabbih mentioned the tradition of Ibn Umar that Ahmad bin Hanbal had
mentioned in his *Musnad*. [^162] Ibn Umar narrated: “When the Prophet
(S) (and his army) had come back from the battle of Uhud, the women of
the Ansar began crying for their killed husbands. The Prophet (S) said:
“But Hamza has no one crying for him!” Then the Prophet (S) went to bed.
When he woke up, he heard the women crying. He said: “Then they are
crying for Hamza today.”

Ibn Abdul Birr in *al-Istee’ab* quoted from al-Waqidy his saying: “The
women of the Ansar, after this saying of the Prophet (S) “But Hamza has
no one crying for him”, did not cry for a dead one of the Ansar unless
they cried for Hamza first.”

Crying for Hamza at the time of the Prophet (S), the time of the
companions and the time of the companions’ successors was clear evidence
on the permissibility of the crying for one like Hamza even if it was a
long time since he had died.

The saying of the Prophet (S) “But Hamza has no one crying for him” and
his saying “Let the criers cry for one like Ja’far” proved that crying
for (good) dead people were desirable.

In spite of all that, Umar bin al-Khattab had prohibited crying for a
dead man whatever great he was. In fact he beat with a stick, threw with
stones and threw soil on whoever cried for the dead. He did that since
the time of the Prophet (S) and he kept on that until the end of his
life. [^163]

Ahmad bin Hanbal mentioned in his Musnad a tradition narrated by Ibn
Abbas about the death of Ruqayya, the Prophet’s daughter, and the crying
of women for her and then he said: “…Umar began beating the women with
his whip. The Prophet (S) said to him: “Let them cry!” The Prophet (S)
sat by the tomb and Fatima (sa) was crying beside him. The Prophet (S)
began wiping Fatima’s eyes with his dress compassionately.” [^164]

Ahmad also mentioned in his *Musnad* [^165] a tradition narrated by Abu
Hurayra that once a procession of funerals passed by the Prophet (S).
Among them there were some women crying. Umar scolded them. The Prophet
(S) said: “Let them cry. The heart is sad and the eye is shedding
tears.” [^166]

Aa’isha and Umar were in disagreement on this matter. Umar and his son
Abdullah narrated that the Prophet (S) had said: “A dead is tortured
because of the crying of his relatives for him\\her.” In another
tradition: “…because of some of his relatives’ crying” in a third saying
“because of the crying of (people of) the quarter” in a fourth one “he
is tortured in his grave whenever it is cried for him” in a fifth one
“whoever is cried for, is tortured”. All these sayings are untrue due to
reason and tradition.

An-Nawawi said, when mentioning these sayings: “All these narrations
have been narrated by Umar and his son Abdullah.

Aa’isha denied that and accused them of being forgetting or mistaken.
She refuted their sayings by reciting the saying of Allah:
***“..no bearer of burden shall bear the burden of*** ***another”
(Qur’an 6:164)***

Ibn Abbas and all of the infallible imams of Ahlul Bayt (as) have denied
these traditions and confirmed that the narrators were mistaken. Aa’isha
and Umar were still in disagreement about this matter until Aa’isha
cried for her father when he died. Because of that there were some
things happened between them. At-Tabari mentioned in his *Tareekh
al-Khulafa’*, vol.4 when talking about the events of the thirteenth year
of hijra, that Sa’eed bin al-Musayyab had said:

“When Abu Bakr died, Aa’isha (with her fellow women) began crying for
him. Then Umar came to her house and forbade her and the other women
from crying for Abu Bakr. They refused to refrain from crying. Umar said
to Hisham bin al-Waleed: “Go inside the house and bring me the daughter
of Ibn Abu Quhafa (Aa’isha the daughter of Abu Bakr).” Aa’isha said to
Hisham when she heard the saying of Umar: “I forbid you from entering my
house.” Umar said to Hisham: “Enter the house! I have permitted you.”
Hisham went in and brought Umm Farwa, Abu Bakr’s sister, to Umar. Umar
began beating Umm Farwa with his stick. When the crying women heard
that, they separated here and there.”

Here we attract the attention of the men of understanding to search
about the reason that has led Fatima (sa) to be away from the country
when she wanted to cry for her father (S). She went, with her two sons
and her fellow women, to al-Baqee’ (graveyard). They cried for the
Prophet (S) under the shadow of a tree there and when this tree was cut,
Imam ‘Ali (as) built her a house in al-Baqee’ to weep for her father in
it. It was called “the house of sorrows”.

This house had been visited by the different generations of this umma
like the other sacred places. This house was demolished recently by the
order of King Abdul Aziz bin Sa’ood al-Jundi when he prevailed over
Hijaz and he destroyed the sacred places in al-Baqee’ according to his
Wahabite belief. It was in the year 1344 A.H. In the year 1339 we have
got the honor of visiting this house (the house of sorrows) when Allah
has granted us with the favor of offering the hajj and visiting the
Prophet (S) and the places of his pure family in al-Baqee’.

41. The Prophet (S) confirms truthfulness of Hatib
--------------------------------------------------

Al-Bukhari mentioned in his *Sahih* a tradition narrated by Abu Owana
that Husayn had said: “Once Abu Abdurrahman and Habban bin Atiyya
disputed. Abu Abdurrahman said to Habban: “I knew what had encouraged
your friend - he meant Ali - to shed the bloods.” Habban said: “Woe unto
you! What was that?” Abu Abdurrahman said: “Something I have heard him
saying it.” Habban said: “What is it?”

Abu Abdurrahman said: “Ali said: “One day the Prophet (S) sent for us;
me, az-Zubayr and Abu Marthad, and all of us were knights, and he said
to us: “You go to Rawdhat Haj. [^167] There is a woman there having a
letter from Hatib bin Abu Balta’a to the polytheists. Bring me the
letter.” We set out on our horses until we found the woman where the
Prophet (S) had said to us that she was on a camel. Hatib had written a
letter to the people of Mecca informing them that the Prophet (S) would
attack them.

We asked the woman: “Where is the book which you have?” She said: “I do
not have any book.” We made her camel kneel down and we searched her
baggage but we did not find any book. My two companions said: “We do not
think that she has a book.” I (Ali) said: “We know well that the Prophet
(S) has not told a lie.” Then I swore: “By Him, Who is sworn by, either
you take out the book or I shall disrobe you.” [^168] She took the
letter out of her garment.” They brought the letter to the Prophet (S).

Umar said: “O Messenger of Allah, he (Hatib) has betrayed Allah, His
Messenger and the believers. Let me behead him!” The Prophet (S) said to
Hatib: “O Hatib, what made you do that?” Hatib said: “O Messenger of
Allah, I still believe in Allah and His Messenger but I wanted to do the
people (the polytheists) a favor so that they would not harm my family
and properties. Every one of your companions there has someone of his
tribe to defend his family and properties.” The Prophet (S) said to his
companions: “He is right. Do not say to him save good.”

Umar said again: “O Messenger of Allah, he has betrayed Allah, His
Messenger and the believers. Let me behead him!” [^169] It was necessary
for Umar not to say that after the Prophet (S) had told them that Hatib
was right and after he had ordered them not to harm him.

42. The Prophet’s book to his emirs
-----------------------------------

Malik bin Anas and al-Bazzaz mentioned [^170] that the Prophet (S) had
sent books to his emirs asking them that when they wanted to send him
their mails they should make their letters and books with fine titles
and in fine forms. When Umar knew that, he got up saying: “I do not
know! Shall I say or shall I keep silent?” The Prophet (S) said to him:
“O Umar, say!” Umar said to the Prophet (S): “You have forbidden us from
being pessimistic but how do you become pessimistic now?” The Prophet
(S) said: “I am not pessimistic but I have chosen the best.”

43. Dividing the charities
--------------------------

Ahmad bin Hanbal mentioned in his Musnad [^171] that Salman bin Rabee’a
had heard Umar saying: “One day the Prophet (S) distributed charities
among some people. I said to him: “O Messenger of Allah, there are other
people who are more deserving than these people; they are the people of
the Suffa.” [^172] The Prophet (S) said: “You ask me greedily (and at
the same time) you intend to make me miser while I am not.”

But the division had been done as Allah and His Messenger willed. Abu
Musa said that Umar had asked the Prophet (S) about some things that the
Prophet (S) disliked until he became angry. Umar saw the anger in the
Prophet’s face. [^173]

44. The Prophet (S) orders Umar to hide his faith
-------------------------------------------------

Muhyiddeen ibn al-Arabi mentioned that the Prophet (S) had said to Umar
bin al-Khattab, when he had become a Muslim: “Keep your faith secret.”
But Umar refused to do that and he announced his being a Muslim openly.
[^174]

Necessity then required the Muslims to conceal their faith because the
mission would not succeed except with concealment but the (valor) of
Umar led him to announce his being a Muslim even if he would contradict
the order of the Prophet (S)!

45. Fasting at the beginning of Islam
-------------------------------------

In Ramadan, at the beginning of Islam, a fasting Muslim could eat,
drink, sleep with his wife and do the other permissible things since the
sunset until he offered Isha’ prayer or he slept. If he offered Isha’
prayer or he slept, it would be impermissible for him to eat, to drink,
to sleep with his wife or to do other things that were not permissible
for a fasting one until the next night.

But one night after Isha’ prayer Umar slept with his wife. He regretted
what he had done. He came to the Prophet (S) and said to him: “O
Messenger of Allah, I apologize to Allah and to you my mistaken soul…”
He told the Prophet (S) of what he had done. Then some men got up and
confessed that they often did as Umar had done after Isha’ prayer.

Then Allah revealed to the Prophet (S) this verse:

***“It is made lawful to*** ***you to go into your wives on the night of
the fast; they are an apparel for you and you are an apparel for them;
Allah knew that you acted unfaithfully to yourselves, so He has turned
to you (mercifully) and removed from you (this burden); so now be in
contact with them and seek what Allah has ordained for you,*** ***and
eat and drink until the whiteness of the day becomes distinct from the
blackness of the night at dawn, then complete the fast till night”***
***(Qur’an 2:187)***[^175]

The verse showed clearly that they disobeyed Allah more than one time
but Allah had forgiven them and accepted their repentance and He
permitted them to practice what had been impermissible for them as mercy
from Him.

46. Prohibiting wine
--------------------

Allah has revealed three verses about wine; the first was:

***“They ask you about intoxicants and games of chance. Say: In both of
them there is a great sin and means of profit for men, and their sin is
greater than their profit” (Qur’an 2:219).***

After this verse some of the Muslims drank wine and others refrained
from drinking it until a man offered his prayer while he was drunk and
so he mistook in reciting the verses in the prayer. Then Allah revealed:

“***O you who believe! Do not go*** ***near prayer when you are
intoxicated until you know (well) what you say” (Qur’an 4:43)***

After the revelation of this verse some Muslims drank wine and some
others gave it up. Some historians mentioned that one day Umar drank
wine and then he took a jawbone of a camel and struck Abdurrahman bin
Ouff on the head. Then he sat weeping for the killed people of the
battle of Badr and reciting some poetry of al-Aswad bin Ya’fur:

“Is he unable to keep death away from me,
or resurrect me when my bones become destroyed?
Is there someone who tells the Beneficent
that I have given up the month of fast?
Say to Allah to prevent me my drink
And say to Allah to prevent me my food.”

The Prophet (S) was informed of that and he became very angry. He went
out dragging his garment and he hit Umar with something he had in his
hand. Umar said: “May Allah save me from His wrath and from the wrath of
His Messenger!” Then Allah revealed:

***“The Shaitan only desires to cause*** ***enmity and hatred to spring
in your midst by means of intoxicants and games of chance, and to keep
you off from the remembrance of Allah and from prayer. Will you then
desist”(Qur’an 5:91)***.

Umar said: “We desist! We desist!” [^176]

47. The Prophet (S) forbids from killing al-Abbas and others
------------------------------------------------------------

**47. The Prophet (S) forbids from killing al-Abbas and others**[^177]

During the battle of Badr the Prophet (S) said to his companions: “I
know that some men of Bani Hashim have been forced to go to the battle
(to fight against the Muslims) unwillingly. We have no need to fight
them. When you meet any one of them (the Hashemites), you are not to
kill him and if any one of you meets Abul Bukhturi bin Hisham bin
al-Harith bin Asad, he has not to kill him [^178] and if any of you
meets al-Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib (the Prophet’s uncle) he has not to
kill him because he has gone to war unwillingly.”

The Prophet (S) had forbidden his companions from killing any one of the
Hashemites and then he had forbidden them from killing his uncle
al-Abbas especially to confirm and to stress on that al-Abbas were not
to be killed. When al-Abbas had been captured as prisoner, the Prophet
(S) had spent that night sleeplessly. His companions asked him: “O
Messenger of Allah, why could you not sleep?” He said: “I heard my uncle
writhing in his ties and I could not sleep.” They went and set al-Abbas
free of his ties and then the Prophet (S) could sleep. [^179]

Yahya bin Katheer said: “On the day (the battle) of Badr the Muslims had
captured seventy men of the polytheists, among whom was al-Abbas, the
Prophet’s uncle. Umar bin al-Khattab was responsible for tying him.
Al-Abbas said: “O Umar, by Allah, what leads you to tighten my ties is
because of my slapping you for the sake of the Messenger of Allah.”

The Prophet (S) heard the moaning of al-Abbas and he could not sleep.
The companions asked: “O Messenger of Allah, what prevents you from
sleeping?” He said: “How can I sleep while I hear the moaning of my
uncle?” Then the Ansar set him free…”[^180]

All the Prophet’s companions of the Ansar, the Muhajireen and others
knew well what high position Abul Fadhl al-Abbas had near the Prophet
(S). When the Prophet (S) heard the word of Abu Huthayfa bin Utba bin
Rabee’a bin Abd Shams, who fought with the Prophet (S) in Badr, when he
said: “Do we kill our fathers and brothers and we leave al-Abbas free?
By Allah, if I meet him, I will strike him with the sword” he became
very angry for that and then he said to Umar provoking his zeal: “O Abu
Hafs, is it right that the face of the Prophet’s uncle is struck with
the sword?” Umar said: “By Allah, it was the first day that the Prophet
(S) had called me as Abu Hafs.” [^181]

The war came to an end. The Prophet (S) gained victory and his army
returned with honor. Seventy of the tyrants were killed and other
seventy of them were captured. The prisoners were brought dragging their
ties. Abu Hafs (Umar) began inciting to kill them with severe words. He
said: “O Messenger of Allah, they have (considered you as a liar)
disbelieved in you, exiled you and fought you. Would you permit me to
kill so-and-so (one of his relatives) and permit Ali to kill his brother
Aqeel and permit Hamza to kill his brother al-Abbas?”

Glory be to Allah! Al-Abbas and Aqeel were neither among those who had
considered the Prophet (S) as a liar nor among those who had exiled him
nor among those who had harmed him! They were with him in the Shi’b
during the long period of the blockade against the Hashimites suffering
distresses with him. They had been taken to the battle unwillingly as
the Prophet (S) himself had witnessed and the Prophet (S) had forbidden
his companions from killing them under the heat of the war so how would
they be killed while they were captives?

As the withering of al-Abbas had worried the Prophet (S) and prevented
him from sleeping, then how would he become if his uncle was killed for
no reason? Al-Abbas had been a Muslim before that but he had concealed
his faith for a wisdom behind which there was contentment to Allah and
His Messenger and goodness to him and to the umma. [^182]

48. Taking ransom from the prisoners of Badr
--------------------------------------------

When Allah has granted His servant and Messenger with victory on the day
of distinction, the day on which the two parties met; the prisoners have
been brought to the Prophet (S). It seemed then that he would keep them
alive so that Allah might guide them to His religion later on; and it
happened by the grace of Allah!

But the Prophet (S) decided, after forgiving them, to take ransom from
them in order to weaken them so that they would not be able to stand
against him again and that he would be stronger than them with that
ransom. This was the best for the two parties and it was the loyalty to
Allah and to His people undoubtedly;

***“Nor does he speak out of desire. It is*** ***naught but revelation
that is revealed” (Qur’an 53:3-4)***.

Though the Prophet (S) was merciful in nature and wherever he found a
way he would not fail to show his mercy.

Umar thought that all of the prisoners should be killed as a reward
because they had considered the Prophet (S) as a liar, harmed him,
exiled him and fought him. Umar was too determined to do away with them
and that they should be killed by their Muslim relatives.
But the Prophet (S) had exemplified the word of Allah:

***“I*** ***follow naught but what is revealed to me; surely I fear, if
I disobey my Lord, the*** ***punishment of a mighty day” (Qur’an
10:15).***

The Prophet (S) forgave them and set them free after taking the ransom.
After that those, who were ignorant of his infallibility and wisdom,
became as if they
***“cannot arise*** ***except as one, whom the Satan has prostrated by
(his) touch, does rise. That is because they say”(Qur’an 2:275)***
that the Prophet (S), when keeping them (the prisoners) and taking
ransom from them, acted according to his own ijtihad (opinion) [^183]
whereas the right thing for him was to kill them and to get rid of their
evil. They depended on false and fabricated traditions that neither
reason nor custom would accept.

Among those false traditions was this one: “After the Prophet (S) had
taken the ransom from the prisoners of Quraysh (and set them free), Umar
came to him and found him and Abu Bakr crying. Umar said to them: “What
are you crying for?” The Prophet (S) said: “We are about to be afflicted
with a great torment because we have contradicted (Umar) Ibn al-Khattab.
If torment comes down, no one will be safe from it except Ibn
al-Khattab.” [^184]

(They said) then Allah revealed:

***“It is not fit for a*** ***prophet that he should take captives
unless he has fought and triumphed in the land; you desire the frail
goods of this world, while Allah desires (for you) the hereafter; and
Allah is Mighty, Wise. Were it not for an ordinance from Allah that had
already gone forth, surely there would have befallen you a great
chastisement for what you had taken to” (Qur’an 8:67-68).***

***“And they did not assign to Allah the attributes due to Him”(Qur’an
6:91)*** when they went far in deviation and ascribed ijtihad to the
Prophet (S) whereas Allah said:

***“It is naught but*** ***revelation that is revealed” (Qur’an
53:4).***

They were too ignorant when they thought that the Prophet (S) had been
mistaken and they went astray to the full when they preferred the saying
of other than the Prophet (S). They became confused with this verse and
became blind before its intents. They said that it had been revealed to
scold the Prophet (S) and his companions when they - as the fool had
pretended - preferred the pleasures of this life to the afterlife by
keeping the prisoners alive and taking ransom from them before they
“..***had fought and triumphed*** ***in the land” (Qur’an 8:67).*** They
pretended that no one innocent of that sin save Umar and if the great
chastisement would come down, no one would be safe from it except Umar!

Had told lies he who had pretended that the Prophet (S) had kept the
prisoners and taken ransom from them before he ***“..had*** ***fought
and triumphed in the land..”.***

The Prophet (S) did that after he had fought and killed the heroes and
tyrants of Quraysh like Abu Jahl bin Hisham, Utba, Shayba bin Abu
Rabee’a, al-Waleed bin Utba, al-Aas bin Sa’eed, al-Aswad bin Abdul Asad
al-Makhzoomi, Umayya bin Khalaf, Zam’a bin al-Asad, Aqeel bin al-Aswad,
Nabeeh, Munabbih, Abul Bukhturi, Handhala bin Abu Sufyan, Tu’ayma bin
Adiy bin Nawfal, Nawfal bin Khuwaylid, al-Harith bin Zam’a, an-Nadhr bin
al-Harith bin Abd ad-Dar, Umayr bin Othman at-Tameemi, Othman and Malik,
the brothers of Talha, Mas’ood bin Umayya bin al-Mugheera, Qayss bin
al-Faqih bin al-Mugheera, Huthayfa bin Abu Huthayfa bin al-Mugheera, Abu
Qayss bin al-Waleed bin al-Mugheera, Amr bin Makhzoom, Abul Munthir bin
Abu Rifa’a, Hajib bin as-Sa’ib bin Uwaymir, Ouss bin al-Mugheera bin
Louthan, Zayd bin Malees, Aasim bin Abu Ouff, Sa’eed bin Wahab, Mo’awiya
bin Abdul Qays, Abdullah bin Jameel bin Zuhayr bin al-Harith bin Asad,
as-Sa’ib bin Malik, Abul Hakam bin al-Ahnass, Hisham bin Umayya bin
al-Mugheera…to the seventy heads of disbelief and the chiefs of
polytheism.

After all that how could the Prophet (S) have taken ransom before
fighting? Would that they had minds! How did they dare to blame the
Prophet (S) after his victories, O you Muslims?! Allah forbid! The
Prophet (S) is too far above all what they have raved!

The fact was that the verse had been revealed to scold those who wanted
to obtain the caravans and to capture their keepers as Allah had said
about the event:

***“And when Allah*** ***promised you one of the two parties that it
shall be yours and you loved that the one not armed should be yours and
Allah desired to manifest the truth of what was true by His words and to
cut off the root of the unbelievers” (Qur’an 8:7)***.

The Prophet (S) had consulted with his companions and said to them: “The
people (the polytheists) have set out on their camels. Are camels more
beloved to you or fighting?” They said: “Camels are more beloved to us
than meeting the enemy.” One of them said to the Prophet (S) when he saw
him insisting on fighting: “You should have told us about fighting so
that we could get ready for it. We have come to obtain the camels and
not to fight.” The Prophet (S) became too angry. [^185]

Then Allah revealed:

***“Even as your Lord caused you to go forth*** ***from your house with
the truth, though a party of the believers were surely averse. They
disputed with you about the truth after it had become clear, (and
they*** ***went forth) as if they were being driven to death while they
saw (it)”*** ***(Qur’an 8:5-6).***

Then Allah wanted to convince them by justifying the situation of the
Prophet (S) in his insisting on fighting and in his indifference to the
camels and their keepers when He said:

***“It*** ***is not fit for a prophet”*** (from among the prophets who
had come before your Prophet Muhammad) ***“that he should take***
***captives unless he has fought and triumphed in the land” (Qur’an
8:67);*** so your prophet would have no captives ***“unless he has
fought and triumphed in the land”*** like the other previous prophets
before him. But you wanted, by taking the camels and capturing their
keepers, to obtain the pleasures of this life but Allah wanted the
hereafter by doing away with His enemies and Allah is (Mighty, Wise).
Might and wisdom at those days required to do away with the power of the
enemies and to put out their flame.

Then Allah said scolding them:
“***Were it not*** ***for an ordinance from Allah that had already gone
forth”*** to prevent them from taking the camels and capturing their
keepers, they would have captured the people and taken their camels. If
they had done so “..***surely there would have*** ***befallen you a
great chastisement for what you had taken to” (Qur’an 8:68)*** before
fighting in the land!

This is the meaning of the verse and it cannot be interpreted into other
than this meaning. I do not know that there is someone preceding me in
this interpretation when I have mentioned this verse and explained it in
my book *al-Fusool al-Muhimma* (the important chapters). [^186]

49. Prisoners of Hunayn
-----------------------

When Allah made His Messenger defeat the tribe of Hawazin in Hunayn and
granted him with that great victory, the caller of the Prophet (S)
announced: “No prisoner is to be killed!”

Umar bin al-Khattab passed by a tied captive called Ibn al-Akwa’ who had
been sent before by the tribe of Huthayl to Mecca as a spy on the
Prophet (S) to convey the news of the Prophet (S) and his companions.
When Umar saw him, he said: “This is the enemy of Allah. He had been
spying on us. He is a captive here. Kill him!” One of the Ansar beheaded
him. When the Prophet (S) was informed of that, he scolded them for
doing that and said: “Have I not ordered you not to kill any captive?”
[^187]

After killing this one, they killed Jameel bin Ma’mar bin Zuhayr. The
Prophet (S) sent for the Ansar while he was very angry. He said to them:
“Why did you kill him whereas my messenger has come to you ordering you
not to kill any prisoner?” They apologized and said that Umar had
ordered them to kill the prisoner. The Prophet (S) became angry and
deserted them (Umar) until Umayr bin Wahab interceded with him (for
Umar) and then he forgave them. [^188]

Among those, who had been killed in Hunayn, was a woman from Hawazin.
She was killed by Khalid bin al-Waleed. The Prophet (S) became very
angry when he passed by her body, around which many people had gathered.
The Prophet (S) said to one of his companions: “Follow after Khalid and
say to him that the Prophet (S) orders you not to kill women, children
or employees.” It has been narrated by Ibn Ishaq.

Ahmad bin Hanbal said: “Abu Aamir bin Abdul Melik narrated from
al-Mugheera bin Abdurrahman from Abu az-Zinad from al-Muraqqi’ bin Sayfi
that his grandfather Rabah bin Rabee’ had told him that once the Prophet
(S) had come back from one of his battles where Khalid bin al-Waleed was
the leader of the army. Rabah and the companions of the Prophet (S)
passed by a killed woman, who had been killed by of the front of the
army. They stopped looking at her astonishingly.

When the Prophet (S) arrived, they spread out. The Prophet (S) stopped,
looked at her and said: “She would not have fought!” He said to one of
his companions: “Follow after Khalid and say to him not to kill a woman
or an employee.” [^189] It has also been mentioned by Ibn Dawood,
an-Nassa’iy and Ibn Maja from al-Muraqqi’ bin Sayfi.

50. The fleers from jihad
-------------------------

Allah has prohibited fleeing from jihad at all by this verse:

***“O you who believe! When you meet those who disbelieve marching for
war, then turn not your backs to them. And whoever shall turn his back
to them on that day, unless he turn aside for the sake of fighting or
withdraws to a company, then he, indeed, becomes deserving of Allah's
wrath, and his abode is hell; and an evil destination shall it be”
(Qur’an 8:15-16)***

It is a clear and absolute text in a clear verse of the holy Qur'an. But
some of the companions have interpreted it according to their own
opinions preferring the benefits to obeying the holy texts. In fact they
have violated this clear text in many occasions.

One of those occasions was on the day of Uhud. Ibn Qam’a attacked Mus’ab
bin Umayr (may Allah be pleased with him) and killed him thinking that
he was the Prophet (S). He returned to Quraysh telling them that he had
killed Muhammad. The polytheists began bringing good news to each other.
They said: “Muhammad was killed! Muhammad was killed! Ibn Qam’a killed
him.” The Muslims were frightened and they fled unknowing what to do as
Allah has said expressing their state:

***“When you ran off precipitately and did not*** ***wait for any one,
and the Messenger was calling you from your rear, so He gave you another
sorrow instead of (your) sorrow” (Qur’an 3:153).***

The Prophet (S) was calling upon them: “O slaves of Allah, come to me! O
slaves of Allah, come to me! I am the Messenger of Allah. He, who
attacks the enemy, will be in Paradise!” He was calling upon them while
he was at the rear but they did not turn to any one at all (while
fleeing).

Ibn Jareer and Ibnul Atheer mentioned in their *Tareekh*: “The defeat of
the fleeing group of the Muslims, among whom was Othman bin Affan and
others, took them to al-A’was. They stayed there for three days and then
they came back to the Prophet (S) who said to them when he saw them:
“You have gone where you liked!” [^190]

Ibn Jareer and Ibnul Atheer also mentioned that Anas bin an-Nadhr, who
was the uncle of Anas bin Malik, met Umar, Talha and some of the
Muhajireen, who had put their weapons aside and given up fighting. He
asked them: “Why have you given up fighting?” They said: “The Prophet
(S) has been killed”. He said to them: “Then what do you do with life
after him? Die for what the Prophet (S) has died for!” Then he attacked
the polytheists and fought them until he was killed. Seventy stabs and
strokes were found in his body and no one could know him save his
sister.

They mentioned that Anas bin an-Nadhr had heard some of the Muslims,
among whom were Umar and Talha, saying when they heard that the Prophet
(S) had been killed: “Would that Abdullah bin Abu Salool come to take
safeguard for us from Abu Sufyan before they kill us!” Anas said to
them: “O people, if Muhammad has been killed, the Lord of Muhammad has
not been killed. Fight for what Muhammad has fought for! O Allah, I
apologize to You for what these people say and acquit myself from what
they do!” Then he fought until he was martyred. [^191] Blessings of
Allah be upon him.

And another one of those occasions was:

***“..on the day of Hunayn, when your great numbers made you vain, but
they availed you nothing and the earth became strait to you
notwithstanding its spaciousness, then you turned back retreating. Then
Allah sent down His tranquility upon His Messenger and upon the
believers” (Qur’an 9:25-26)***
who kept to the Prophet (S) when his companions fled; the companions
among whom was Umar as al-Bukhari said in his *Sahih* [^192] when
mentioning a tradition that Abu Qatada al-Ansari had said: “…on the day
of Hunayn the Muslims fled away and I fled with them. I saw Umar among
the fleers. I said to him: “What is the matter with the people?” He
said: “It is an affair of Allah…”

And another occasion; when the Prophet (S) marched to conquer Khaybar,
he sent Abu Bakr at the head of the army. He was defeated and came back.
[^193]

Imam ‘Ali (as) said: “The Prophet (S) marched to conquer Khaybar. He
sent Umar at the head of the companions (the army). He and his
companions were defeated and came back; one cowarding the other…” [^194]

Al-Hakim mentioned in his *Mustadrak* [^195] that Jabir bin Abdullah had
said: “The Messenger of Allah said: “Tomorrow I will send a man, who
loves Allah and His Messenger and they love him. He will not turn his
back (to the enemy). Allah will grant him victory.” The men looked
forward to it. Ali was sore-eyed on that day. The Prophet (S) asked him
to set out with the army. Ali said: “O Messenger of Allah, I can see
nothing.” The Prophet (S) spit in Ali’s eyes and gave him the banner.

Ali asked: “O Messenger of Allah, what shall I fight them for?” The
Prophet (S) said: “To witness that there is no god but Allah and that
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. If they do, they will spare their
bloods and monies and their reward will be with Allah.” He fought them
(the people of Khaybar) and defeated them.”

Al-Hakim, after mentioning this tradition, said: “Al-Bukhari and Muslim
have agreed on the tradition (of the banner) but they did not mention it
in this way.” So has been said by ath-Thahabi in his *Talkhees* after
mentioning the tradition.

Iyass bin Salama narrated that his father had said: “We have fought with
the Prophet (S) in Khaybar when he spit in Ali’s eyes and they recovered
and then the Prophet (S) gave him the banner. Marhab came out to Ali
reciting:

“Khaybar has known that I am Marhab,
Expert hero with sharp weapons
When wars come flaming.”

Ali (may Allah be pleased with him) came out to him reciting:

“It is me, whom my mother has called me Haydara,
like a lion of forest with bad look.
I kill (many of) you with the sword.”

Ali struck Marhab and split his head and then the victory came.” [^196]

And another occasion during the battle of as-Silsila in the valley of
ar-Raml (sand); it was like the battle of Khaybar. First the Prophet (S)
sent Abu Bakr and then he came back defeated with his army. Then the
Prophet (S) sent Umar who came back with defeat too. After that the
Prophet (S) sent Imam ‘Ali (as) who came back with victory, booties and
captives. [^197]

The battle of as-Silsila is other than the battle of Thaat as-Salasil,
which was in the seventh year of hijra under the leadership of Amr bin
al-Aas. Abu Bakr, Umar and Abu Ubayda were among the army on that day
according to all of the historians.

There were some problems between Umar and Amr bin al-Aas as al-Hakim has
mentioned in his *Mustadrak*. [^198] Abdullah bin Burayda narrated that
his father had said: “The Prophet (S) had sent Amr bin al-Aas to the
battle of Thaat as-Salasil as the leader of the army, in which Abu Bakr
and Umar were as soldiers. When they arrived at the place of the battle,
Amr ordered his army not to light any fire. Umar bin al-Khattab became
angry and tried to attack Amr but Abu Bakr forbade him from doing that
and said to him that the Prophet (S) had appointed Amr as the leader
because he knew that he was expert in the affairs of the wars and then
Umar became quiet.”

Al-Hakim said, after mentioning this tradition, that it was true and
ath-Thahabi said the same after mentioning the tradition in his
*Talkhees*.

### Note

The Prophet (S) had wise ways in announcing the virtues of Imam ‘Ali
(as) and in preferring him to the rest of the companions. The
researchers knew that well.

Among these ways was that the Prophet (S) had never appointed any one as
a leader over Imam ‘Ali (as) neither in war nor in peace whereas the
other companions had been under the leadership of others. [^199] The
Prophet (S) had appointed Amr bin al-Aas as the emir over Abu Bakr and
Umar in the battle of Thaat as-Salasil. When the Prophet (S) left to the
better world, Usama bin Zayd, although he was too young, was the emir
over the heads of the Muhajireen and the Ansar like Abu Bakr, Umar, Abu
Ubayda and their likes.

When the Prophet (S) appointed Imam ‘Ali (as) as a leader of an army, he
joined to his army famous personalities but when he appointed other than
him, he excluded him from those armies and kept him to be with him.
[^200]

When the Prophet (S) sent two brigades; one under the leadership of Imam
‘Ali (as) and the other under the leadership of another one, he ordered
them that when the two brigades gathered together, both would be under
the leadership of Imam ‘Ali (as) and when they separated again, each one
would lead his brigade. [^201]

The Prophet (S), more than one time, had sent other than Imam ‘Ali (as)
on the armies but they came back unsuccessfully and then the Prophet (S)
sent Imam ‘Ali (as) to obtain great victories [^202] and in this way the
virtue of Imam ‘Ali (as) appeared better than if the Prophet (S) would
have sent him from the first.

The Prophet (S) might have sent other than Imam ‘Ali (as) in a task, to
which the necks stretched, and then Allah revealed to the Prophet (S)
that: “No one is to carry out your tasks save you or a man from you”
meaning Imam ‘Ali (as) as it was with the matter of the sura of Bara’a
and breaking the covenants of the polytheists on the day of the great
hajj. [^203]

51. The Prophet (S) orders his companions not to answer Abu Sufyan in Uhud
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

On the day of Uhud, the Prophet (S) and his companions stopped at the
bank of the valley and they let the mountain behind them. The
polytheists were three thousand and seven hundred armored warriors and
two hundred knights. There were fifteen women with them. The Muslims
were two hundred armored fighters and two knights.

The two armies got ready to fight. The Prophet (S) (and his companions)
turned his face to Medina and left the mountain of Uhud behind him. He
made the archers, who were fifty men, behind him and appointed Abdullah
bin Jubayr as their emir and said to him: “Keep the knights away from us
by the arrows. Do not let them attack us from behind. Keep on your
places whether we win or lose for we will not be attacked except from
this defile (*shi’b*); the defile of Uhud.”

Talha bin Othman, the bearer of the polytheists’ banner, came out
calling: “O companions of Muhammad, you claim that Allah will hasten us
to Hell by your swords and He will hasten you to Paradise by our swords.
Let some one of you, who wants to hasten me to Hell by his sword and to
be hastened to Paradise by my sword, advance!”

Ibnul Atheer said in *al-Kamil*: “…Ali bin Abu Talib came out to him and
struck him and his leg was cut. He fell to the ground and his private
parts appeared. He begged Ali and Ali left him alone. He weltered in his
blood until he died. The Prophet (S) said: “*Allahu akbar* - Allah is
great. The (ram) of the battalion!” The Muslims began crying: “*Allahu
akbar*” after the Prophet (S). The Prophet (S) said to Ali: “What
prevented you from finishing him off?” Ali said: “He begged me by Allah
and kinship. I felt shy to kill him after that.”

After that Imam ‘Ali (as) withstood. He killed the bearers of the banner
one after the other. Ibnul Atheer and other historians said: “The
Muslims killed the bearers of the banner and it remained thrown on the
ground; no one approached it. Then Amra bint Alqama al-Harithiyya took
the banner and raised it and then Quraysh gathered around the banner.
Then a slave of Bani Abd ad-Dar, who was very strong, took the banner
and he also was killed. He, who had killed the bearers of the banner,
was Ali bin Abu Talib. Abu Rafi’ said that.”

People fought severely. Hamza, Ali, Abu Dijana and some of the Muslims
had done well in the fight. Allah granted them victory and the
polytheists were defeated. The women of the polytheists fled to the
mountain. The Muslims entered the camp of the polytheists to rob their
properties. When the archers saw their fellows robbing, they left their
places in the defile and hastened to rob too forgetting what the Prophet
(S) had ordered them of.

When Khalid bin al-Waleed, who was with the polytheists on that day, saw
that the archers in the defile were a few, he killed them and attacked
the Prophet’s companions from the rear. The fled polytheists came back
again with activity and fought the Muslims and defeated them after
killing seventy of Muslim heroes, among whom was Hamza bin Abdul
Muttalib, the lion of Allah and of His Messenger.

On that day the Prophet (S) fought severely until all his arrows
finished. His bow was broken and he was injured in his cheek and his
front. One of his teeth was broken and his lip was cut. Ibn Qam’a
attacked him with his sword and was about to kill him.

Imam ‘Ali (as) and five men of the Ansar, who were martyred then, fought
before the Prophet (S) and defended him. Abu Dijana made himself as
armor for the Prophet (S). The arrows stuck into the back of Abu Dijana
while he was covering the Prophet (S) with his body. Mus’ab bin Umayr
fought bravely and then he was martyred. He was killed by Abu Qam’a, who
thought that he had killed the Prophet (S).

He went back to Quraysh saying: “Muhammad is killed.” The people began
crying: “Muhammad is killed! Muhammad is killed!” The Muslims fled
aimlessly. The first one, who recognized the Prophet (S), was Ka’b bin
Malik. He shouted at the top of his voice: “O Muslims, this is the
Messenger of Allah. He is alive. He is not killed.” The Prophet (S)
asked him to keep silent. [^204]

Then Imam ‘Ali (as) and his companions took the Prophet (S) to the
defile, in which he protected himself. Imam ‘Ali (as) and his companions
surrounded the Prophet (S) defending him.

Ibn Jareer and Ibnul Atheer in their *Tareekhs* and other historians
said: “…the Prophet (S), while he was in the defile, saw some
polytheists. He said to Ali: “Attack them!” Ali attacked them, killed
some of them and scattered the others. The Prophet (S) saw another group
of the polytheists. He said to Ali: “Do away with them!” Ali attacked
them, killed some of them and scattered the others. Gabriel said: “O
Messenger of Allah, this is the assistance!” The Prophet (S) said: “He
(Ali) is from me and I am from him.” Gabriel said: “And I am from you
both.” Then a voice was heard saying: “No sword save *Thul Faqar* [^205]
and no youth save Ali!”

Imam ‘Ali (as) began bringing water with his leather shield to wash the
Prophet’s wounds but the bleeding did not stop. [^206]

Hind (Abu Sufyan’s wife) and her fellow women went to the martyrs of the
Muslims and began mutilating their bodies. They made from the ears, the
noses and the fingers of the martyrs necklaces and rings. She had given
Wahshi her rings and necklaces for his killing Hamza. Hind cut open the
chest of Hamza and took out his liver. She chewed it but she found it
unpleasant and then she emitted it.

Then Abu Sufyan came near to the Muslims and said: “Is Muhammad among
you?” He repeated that three times. The Prophet (S) said to his
companions: “Do not answer him!” [^207] Abu Sufyan said: “O Umar, I
adjure you by Allah, have we killed Muhammad?” Umar said: “By Allah, no,
you have not. He is hearing your speech.” [^208]

Umar preferred his opinion in answering Abu Sufyan to the order of the
Prophet (S) when forbidding them from answering Abu Sufyan.

52. Spying and its prohibition
------------------------------

Allah has said:

***“O you, who believe, avoid most of*** ***suspicion, for surely
suspicion in some cases is a sin, and do not spy nor let some of you
backbite others. Does one of you like to eat the flesh of*** ***his dead
brother? But you abhor it; and be careful of (your duty to) Allah,
surely Allah is*** ***Oft-returning (to mercy), Merciful” (Qur’an
49:12).***

The Prophet (S) has said: “Avoid suspicion! Suspicion is the falsest
speech. Do not spy on each other, do not hate each other, do not envy
each other and do not oppose each other. Be brothers…”

But Umar, during his rule, found that spying brought benefits and
goodness to the state. He patrolled at night and spied at day. One
night, while he was patrolling in Medina, he heard a man singing in his
house. He climbed the wall of the man’s house. He found that there was a
woman with him and a bottle of wine. He said to the man: “O enemy of
Allah, have you thought that Allah protects you while you are disobeying
Him?”

The man said: “O Ameerul Mo’mineen, do not hasten! If I have committed
one sin, you have committed three sins; Allah has said: ***“Do not spy”
(49:12)*** but you have spied, and He has said: ***“..and*** ***go into
the houses by their doors” (2:189)*** but you have climbed the wall and
He has said***: “When you enter houses, greet*** ***each other”
(24:61)*** but you have not greeted us.” Umar said: “Would you do me
good if I forgive you?” The man said: “Yes, I would.” Then Umar forgave
him and went out. [^209]

As-Sadiy said: “One night Umar went out with Abdullah bin Mas’ood. He
saw a light of fire. He (with Ibn Mas’ood) followed the light until he
entered the house. There was a lamp inside the house. He came in and
left Abdullah bin Mas’ood in the courtyard. There was an old man
drinking wine and there was a songstress singing for him. Suddenly Umar
attacked the old man saying to him: “I have never seen a scene uglier
that a scene of an old man waiting for his end!”

The old man raised his head and said: “In fact, your doing is uglier
than what you have seen from me; you have spied whereas Allah has
prohibited spying and you have entered the house with no permission.”
Umar said: “You are right.” Then he went out biting his garment, crying
and saying: “May Umar’s mother lose him!”… The old man avoided to attend
the meetings of Umar for some time.

One day while Umar was sitting in his meeting, the old man came hiding
himself not to be seen by Umar and he sat at the end of the meeting.
Umar saw him and asked some of his companions to bring him. The old man
thought that Umar would scold him. Umar said to him: “Come near to me!”
Umar still asked him to be nearer until he seated him beside him. Umar
said to the man: “Bring your ear near to me!” He said to him: “I swear
by Him, Who has sent Muhammad with the truth, that I have not told any
one of people about what I have seen from you even Ibn Mas’ood, who was
with me…” [^210]

Ash-Shi’bi said: “Once Umar missed one of his companions. He said to Ibn
Ouff: “Let us go to the house of so-and-so.” They went there and found
that the door of his house was open while he was sitting and his wife
was pouring something into a cup and giving it to him to drink. Umar
said to Ibn Ouff: “It is this thing that has kept him away from us!” Ibn
Ouff said: “How do you know what there is in the cup?” Umar said: “Do
you fear that this may be spying?” Ibn Ouff said: “Yes, it is spying.”
Umar said: “Then how do we repent of this?” Ibn Ouff said: “Do not make
him know that you have seen what he has done!!...” [^211]

Al-Musawwir bin Makhrama narrated from Abdurrahman bin Ouff that one
night he (Abdurrahman) and Umar were patrolling in Medina. While they
were walking, a lamp was lit in one of the houses. They went towards the
house and found the door closed. There were some people inside the house
making loud noises. Umar took Abdurrahman’s hand and said to him: “This
is the house of Rabee’a bin Umayya. They are drinking wine now. What do
you think to do?” Abdurrahman said: “I think that we have done what
Allah has prohibited; we have spied.” Then Umar went away and left them
alone. [^212]

Tawoos said: “One night Umar went out patrolling. He passed by a house,
in which there were some people drinking wine. He shouted at them (from
outside): “Are you committing sins?” Some of them said to him: “Allah
has forbidden you from doing this!” He went back and left them alone.”
[^213]

Abu Qulaba said: “Umar narrated that Abu Mihjan ath-Thaqafi drank wine
in his house with his friends. One day Umar broke into Abu Mihjan’s
house. Abu Mihjan said to him: “O Ameerul Mo’mineen, this is not
permissible to you. Allah has forbidden you from spying.” Umar asked
Zayd bin Thabit and Abdurrahman bin al-Arqam and they said to him: “He
is right, O Ameerul Mo’mineen.” Umar went out and let him alone.” [^214]

He, who followed the traditions about Umar’s spying, will find clearly
that spying has been a part of his policy. As if he thought that legal
penalties would be annulled when the ruler committed mistakes; therefore
he did not punish any one of those sinful people. Yet he did not harm
any one of them. We do not know how he was satisfied to finish his
spying in this way without any effect on those sins! He encouraged the
sinners to commit more sins when they saw this leniency of their imam!!

53. Legislating a limit to women’s dowries
------------------------------------------

The dowry of a woman must be from among what a Muslim man has possessed;
such as material properties, religious things or some kinds of services.
Deciding that belongs to the spouses themselves whether it is much or
little on condition that it has not to be too little that it may have no
value such as a grain of wheat for example. It is desirable that it has
not to be more than the expense of a year which is about five hundred
dirhams. [^215]

Once Umar decided to prohibit the excessiveness in women’s dowries in
order to make marriages easy to keep the youths away from adultery and
sins. One day he made a speech on this matter. He said through his
speech: “If I am informed that a dowry of a woman exceeds the dowries of
the wives of the Messenger of Allah, I will get that back from her.” A
woman got up and said to him: “Allah has not left that to you to decide
on it. Allah has said:

***“And if you wish to have (one) wife in*** ***place of another and you
have given one of them a heap of gold, then take not from it anything;
would you take it by slandering (her) and*** ***(doing her)***
***manifest wrong. And how can you take it when one of you has already
gone in to the other and they have made with you a firm covenant”***
***(Qur’an 4:20-21).***

He changed his mind and gave up his decision saying: “Do you not wonder
at an imam, who has mistaken, and at a woman, who has been right? She
vied with your imam and defeated him.’ [^216]

In another tradition Umar said: “Every one is more aware than Umar. You
hear me saying like this and you do not deny that of me until a woman,
who is not more aware than your women, refute me.” [^217]

In another tradition it has been said: “A woman got up and said: “O Ibn
al-Khattab, Allah gives us and you deprive us of (our rights)” and she
recited the mentioned above verse. Umar said: “All the people are more
aware than Umar.” Then he gave up his decision.” [^218]

The defenders of Umar justified this event as evidence on his fairness
and confession! And how many such cases he had with men and women
showing his fairness and confession whenever he admired a saying or a
doing!

As it has happened to him with the Prophet (S) when he had been asked
about some things he disliked. Al-Bukhari mentioned that Abu Musa
al-Ash’ary had said: “One day the Prophet (S) had been asked about some
things he disliked for they did not concern reasonable people nor were
they among the matters that the prophets had been sent to explain. When
his companions asked him many such questions, he became angry for they
insisted on silly things which had no use to them.

Then he said to them: “Ask me” as if he found that they became ashamed
or shy because they made him angry and so he wanted to ease them and to
show them his mercifulness by saying to them “Ask me”. Abdullah bin
Huthafa asked him: “O Messenger of Allah, who is my father?” The Prophet
(S) replied: “Your father is Huthafa.” Another one, who was Sa’d bin
Salim, asked him: “O Messenger of Allah, who is my father?” The Prophet
(S) said: “Your father is Salim the mawla of Abu Shayba.” They asked the
Prophet (S) such questions because people had suspected their lineage.
When Umar saw that the Prophet (S) was very angry, he said: “O Messenger
of Allah, we repent of whatever makes you angry.”

Umar became pleased when the Prophet (S) approved that Abdullah was the
son of Huthafa and Sa’d was the son of Salim as their mothers had
claimed.

Al-Bukhari also mentioned in his *Sahih* that Abdullah bin Huthafa had
asked the Prophet (S) who his father was and the Prophet (S) had said to
him that his father was Huthafa.

Muslim mentioned in his *Sahih*: “Abdullah bin Huthafa was ascribed to
other than his real father. When his mother heard about his question to
the Prophet (S) about his real father, she said to him: “I have never
seen a son more undutiful than you! Have you believed that your mother
has committed what the women of the pre-Islamic age had been used to
commit so that you expose her before people?”

When Umar heard the answer of the Prophet (S) to Abdullah, he knelt down
before the Prophet (S) and said admiring the answer of the Prophet (S)
that approved the claim of Abdullah’s mother: “We have been satisfied
with Allah as god, Islam as a religion and Muhammad as a prophet.”
[^219] Umar said that joyfully because the Prophet (S) had covered many
mothers, who had committed adultery in the pre-Islamic time;
nevertheless believing in Islam cancelled (forgave) the sins committed
before.

54. Changing legal penalties
----------------------------

Once the slaves of al-Hatib bin Balta’a had participated in stealing a
camel of a man from the tribe of Merina. They were brought before Umar
and they confessed that they had done that. Umar ordered Katheer bin
as-Salt to cut their hands. When they were taken to be punished, Umar
brought them back and sent for their master’s son Abdurrahman bin Hatib
and said to him: “I swear by Allah, unless you have employed them and
left them hungry, I would have cut their hands. By Allah, since I have
not done so, I will impose a fine on you that will make you suffer
much…” [^220]

Umar, when not punishing the stealing slaves, might think that they were
obliged, because of hunger, to steal the camel to satisfy their hunger
and so they might be among those whom the Qur’anic verse had talked
about:

***“But he who is driven*** ***by necessity, neither craving nor
transgressing, it is no sin for him” (Qur’an 2:173)***

But they confessed the theft and they did not claim that necessity had
driven them to do that. And if they had claimed that, then the ruler
would have to ask them for what must prove their claim, but Umar did not
do save pitying them and being severe to Abdurrahman bin Hatib. We do
not know how Umar has known that the masters left their slaves hungry
that they were obliged to steal!

55. Taking non-legislated ransom
--------------------------------

Once some people of Yemen came to Abu Kharash al-Huthali, the companion
and the poet, as guests during the season of hajj. He took his water
skin and went in the night to bring them some water. On his way back, he
was stung by a snake before reaching his guests. He hastened to them,
gave them the water and said to them: “Cook your sheep and eat it!” He
did not tell them what had happened to him. When the morning came, Abu
Khurash was dead. They buried him before they left.

When the news reached Umar, he became very angry and said: “Had it not
been for a sunna (rite), I would have ordered that no Yemenite would be
received at all and I would have written to all the countries about
that.” Then he wrote to his emir on Yemen ordering him to arrest the
men, who had been the guests of Abu Khurash al-Huthali, to take ransom
from them for Abu Khurash and to punish them with severe punishment for
their doing!!! [^221]

56. Penalty of adultery
-----------------------

Ibn Sa’d mentioned in his *Tabaqat* [^222] that once Burayd had come to
Umar and scattered his quiver. A piece of paper appeared from the
quiver. Umar took it and read it. It had some verses of poetry.

He said to his companions: “Send for Ja’da from the tribe of Sulaym.”
When Ja’da came, Umar whipped him one hundred whips after tying him and
he forbade him from visiting any woman, whose husband was absent.

There was no evidence on punishing this man due to these verses of
poetry, which no one knew who had composed. They just instigated the
caliph against Ju’da by claiming that he had committed sins against
young girls from the tribes of Sa’d bin Bakr, Sulaym, Juhayna and Ghifar
by tying them and trying to violate their honors. This was all what had
been ascribed to Ju’da in these verses of poetry.

Even if it was proved to be true, it would not be enough to punish the
man with that legal penalty. Yes, it required him to be scolded and
censured. What the caliph did might be of this kind but what difference
was between what he had done with this man and what he had done with
al-Mugheera bin Shu’ba that you will see soon inshallah.

57. Canceling the penalty of al-Mugheera
----------------------------------------

Al-Mugheera bin Shu’ba had committed adultery with some married women
such as Umm Jameel bint Amr from the tribe of Qays and this event was
one of the most famous events in the history of the Arabs. It was in the
seventeenth year of hijra. All the historians, who had recorded the
events of that year, had mentioned this event in their books. Abu Bakra,
[^223] who was one of pious companions of the Prophet (S) and one of the
keepers of the prophetic traditions, Nafi’ bin al-Harith, who was also
one of the Prophet’s companions, and Shibl bin Ma’bad had witnessed
against al-Mugheera in this case.

The witness of these three men was clear and certain that they had seen
al-Mugheera doing his sin with their eyes but when the fourth witness,
Ziyad bin Sumayya, came to witness, the caliph made him understand that
he intended not to disgrace al-Mugheera and then he asked him about what
he had seen. He (the fourth witness) said: “I heard fast breathing and I
saw him sleeping on her abdomen.” Umar asked him: “Did you see him
inserting his (…) into her
(…) and taking it out like a stick in a kohl jar?” He said: “No, but I
saw him lifting her legs and I saw his testicles swaying between her
thighs. I saw strong motivation and heard loud breathing.” Umar asked:
“Did you see him inserting his (…) and taking it out like a stick in a
kohl jar?” He said: “No, I did not.” Umar said: “Allah is great! O
Mugheera, get up and beat them!” He executed legal penalties against the
three witnesses.

Here are the details of this event as Judge Ahmad ibn Khillikan has
mentioned in his book *Wafiyyat al-A’yan*. He said: “As for the matter
of al-Mugheera bin Shu’ba and the witness against him…Umar had appointed
al-Mugheera bin Shu’ba as the emir of Basra. He often left Darul Imara
(the ruler’s office) at midday and Abu Bakra often met him and asked
him: “Where is the emir going?!” He said: “To do something.” Abu Bakra
said: “The emir is visited and he does not visit!”

He often went to a woman called Umm Jameel bint Amr, whose husband was
al-Hajjaj bin Utayk bin al-Harith bin Wahab al-Jashmi…while Abu Bakra
and his brothers Nafi’, Ziyad and Shibl bin Ma’bad, the sons of Sumayya,
were in their room and Umm Jameel bint Amr was in the opposite room, the
wind opened the door of Umm Jameel’s room and they saw al-Mugheera and
the woman in a state of making love. Abu Bakra said: “It is an ordeal
that you are afflicted with! Look!” They looked until they became
certain of what al-Mugheera and the woman had done.

Abu Bakra sat out waiting until al-Mugheera came out. He said to him:
“Since you do so, then you have to retire from the emirate!” Al-Mugheera
went to lead the people in offering Dhuhr Prayer and Abu Bakra went
there too. Abu Bakra said to al-Mugheera: “By Allah, you do not lead us
in the prayer after you have done your sin!” The people said: “Let him
lead us in the prayer for he is the emir and you write to the caliph
Umar about that.” They wrote to Umar and he ordered them all;
al-Mugheera and the witnesses to come to him.

When they came, Umar sat in his meeting and sent for the witnesses and
al-Mugheera. Abu Bakra advanced and Umar asked him: “Did you see him
between her thighs?” Abu Bakra said: “Yes, by Allah, as if I saw clefts
of smallpox on her thighs!” Al-Mugheera said to him: “You were very
accurate in your look!” Abu Bakra said: “Yes, I wanted to be certain of
what Allah would disgrace you with.” Umar said to Abu Bakra: “No, until
you witness that you have seen him inserting his (…) in her (…) like a
stick in a kohl jar.” Abu Bakra said: “Yes, I witness of that.” Umar
said: “O Mugheera, a quarter of you has gone!”

Then Umar called for Nafi’ and asked him: “What do you witness of?” He
said: “I witness of what Abu Bakra has witnessed of.” Umar said: “No,
until you witness that you have seen him doing with her as a stick in a
kohl jar.” He said: “Yes, until he reached the top.” Umar (may Allah be
pleased with him) said to al-Mugheera: “Your half has gone!” Then Umar
called for the third witness and asked him: “What do you witness of?” He
said: “Like the witness of my two companions.” Umar said to al-Mugheera:
“Three thirds of you have gone!”

Then Umar wrote to Ziyad who was absent. When Ziyad came, Umar held his
meeting in the mosque. The heads of the Muhajireen and the Ansar
attended the meeting. When Umar saw Ziyad coming, he said: “Come to me!
I see a man that Allah will not disgrace a man of the Muhajireen via his
tongue!” Then Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) raised his head
towards him and said: “What do you have with you, O you droppings of
bustards?”

It was said that al-Mugheera had got up to Ziyad and Ziyad said: “No
cache for a perfume after a bride!” Al-Mugheera said to him: “O Ziyad,
remember Allah and remember the Day of Resurrection. Allah, His Book,
His Messenger and Ameerul Mo’mineen have spared my blood except if you
say what you have not seen. Let not a bad scene lead you to say what you
have not seen. By Allah, if you were between my abdomen and her abdomen,
you could not see my (…) going into her (…).”

Ziyad’s eyes began shedding tears and his face became reddish. He said:
“O Ameerul Mo’mineen, I have not seen exactly what the others have seen
but I saw a state of making love and I heard fast breathing and I saw
him sleeping on her abdomen.” Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) asked
him: “Did you see him inserting it as a stick in a kohl jar?” He said:
“No, I did not.” It was said that Ziyad had said: “I saw him lifting her
legs and saw his testicles swaying between her thighs then I saw strong
motivation and I heard loud breathing.” Umar said: “Did you see him
inserting it like a stick in a kohl jar?” He said: “No.” Umar said:
“Allah is great! O Mugheera, get up and beat them!” Al-Mugheera whipped
Abu Bakra eighty whips and then he whipped the rest.

Umar admired the saying of Ziyad and so he cancelled the legal penalty
of al-Mugheera. Abu Bakra said after he had been whipped: “I wtness that
al-Mugheera has done so and so.” Umar intended to whip him again but Ali
bin Abu Talib said to him: “If you whip him, then you have to stone your
friend (al-Mugheera).” Umar left Abu Bakra alone and asked him to
repent. Abu Bakra said: “You ask me to repent just to accept my
witness.” Umar said: “Yes.” Abu Bakra said: “I will never witness
between two persons as long as I live.” When the witnesses were whipped,
al-Mugheera said: “Praise be to Allah Who has disgraced you.” Umar said:
“Allah disgraced a place, in which they saw you.”

Umar bin Shayba mentioned in his book *Akhbar al-Basra* (the news of
Basra) that when Abu Bakra had been whipped, his mother slaughtered a
sheep and put its skin on Abu Bakra’s back because, as it was said, that
he had been whipped too severely. Abdurrahman bin Abu Bakra said that
his father, Abu Bakra, had taken an oath that he would never talk with
Ziyad as long as he lived. When Abu Bakra was about to die, he
recommended that no one would offer the prayer (after his death) for him
except Abu Barza al-Aslami, whom the Prophet (S) had associated as a
brother with Abu Bakra. When Ziyad heard of that, he left to Kufa. As
for al-Mugheera bin Shu’ba, he was grateful to Ziyad and he did not
forget his favor.

Once Umm Jameel came to Umar bin al-Khattab during the season of hajj
while al-Mugheera was present. Umar asked al-Mugheera: “O Mugheera, do
you know this woman?” He said: “Yes, she is Umm Kulthoom bint Ali.” Umar
said to him: “Do you confuse me? By Allah, I do not think that Abu Bakra
has told a lie when he witnessed against you and I found that you were
afraid that I would stone you with stones from the heaven!”

Sheikh Abu Ishaq ash-Shirazi said in his book *al-Muhaththib*: “…and
three men witnessed against al-Mugheera; Abu Bakra, Nafi’ and Shibl bin
Ma’bad…Ziyad said: “I saw buttocks rising and two legs as if they were
two ears of a donkey and I heard loud breathing but I did know what
there was behind them.” And then Umar whipped the three witnesses and he
did not punish al-Mugheera. The jurisprudents discussed the saying of
Ali (may Allah be pleased with him) to Umar “if you whip him, you have
to stone your friend”. Abu Nasr bin as-Sabbagh said: “He wanted to say
to Umar that if this saying was as another witness then the number of
witnesses would be completed (four witnesses) otherwise you have whipped
him for his first witness) and Allah is more aware!”

This is the end of Ibn Khillikan’s saying about this tragedy and its
concerns. Refer to *Wafiyyat al-A’yan*, vol.2, biography of Yazeed bin
Ziyad al-Himyari.

Al-Hakim mentioned this event in his *Mustadrak*, vol.3 p.448, biography
of al-Mugheera. Ath-Thahabi mentioned it in his *Talkhees al-Mustadrak*
and all the historians, who have mentioned the biographies of
al-Mugheera, Abu Bakra, Nafi’ and Shibl bin Ma’bad and the historians,
who have recorded the events of the seventeenth year of hijra, mentioned
the details of this event.

58. His severity to Jabala bin al-Abham
---------------------------------------

Once a delegation of five hundred knights from Akk and Jafna came on
their trotting Arab horses wearing garments brocaded with gold and
silver and at the head of them was Jabala, who had put on his head his
crown on which was the earring of his grandmother Maria. They all became
Muslims and the Muslims became too delighted and pleased with them and
with their followers who would join them. Jabala and his companions
attended the season of hajj with the caliph since their first year of
being Muslims.

While Jabala was circumambulating the Kaaba, a man from Fazara trod on
his loincloth and untied it. Jabala slapped the man. The man resorted to
Umar. Umar ordered Jabala either to let the man slap him or to content
the man. Umar was too strict in his order until Jabala became desperate.
When the night came, Jabala and his companions left towards
Constantinople and they all became Christians unwillingly. They found
favor with Hercules and got honor and magnificence above what they
wished. [^224]

In spite of all that, Jabala often cried regretting what he had missed
of the religion of Islam. He had composed the following verses of
poetry:

“The honorables became Christians because of a slap,
There would be no harm if you were a little patient!
I was encircled with obstinacy and zeal,
And I sold the sound eye for one-eyedness.
Would that my mother had not begotten me!
Would that I had gone back to the people that Umar said!
Would that I grazed cattle in a desert!
Or I was a captive in Rabee’a or Mudhar!”

I said: Would that the caliph had not driven this Arab emir and his
people away even if he would have tried every means to content that man
of Fazara whether the emir would know or
would not know! It was too far that Umar would do such a thing!

Umar wanted to break the pride of Jabala from the first occasion! And
this was his wont with every noble and honorable one! This is well known
by the men of understanding who have studied his conducts.

You have seen above his severity to Khalid whereas he was from his
relatives.

How much difference there was between his two days; his day with his
friend al-Mugheera when he cancelled his due punishment for adultery and
his day with Khalid when he insisted on stoning him and if Abu Bakr was
not there Khalid would have been stoned. The strength and vanity of
Khalid led Umar to be too severe to him. The same was with Jabala; the
pride and nobility of him led Umar to be very severe to him too unlike
al-Mugheera, who was more obedient to Umar than his shadow and who was
meaner than his shoes in spite of his cunning and tricking; therefore
Umar kept him despite his lewdness.

The policy of Umar required terrifying the citizens by being severe to
the honorable and proud people like Jabala and Khalid. He might have
terrified the citizens by punishing his close relatives as he had done
to his son Abu Shahma and Umm Farwa, Abu Bakr’s sister and he might have
done that with those who had no benefit to him whether in politics or
other things as he had done to Ja’da as-Salami, Dhabee’ at-Tameemi, Nasr
bin Hajjaj, his cousin Abu Thu’ayb, the poor Abu Hurayra and their
likes.

He kept to austerity in his food, abode and sumpter. He was patient
towards desires and he refrained from pleasures. He was satisfied with
subsistence. He spread the booties among the umma openhandedly without
preferring himself or his family to the others. He enriched the
treasury. He was too strict in punishing his officials…and many things
like that which helped him to drive the umma with his stick, to shut up
the tongues and to bridle the mouths.

No one of his officials had escaped his punishment save Mo’awiya despite
the differences between them. He had never punished Mo’awiya nor had he
blamed him for anything. He had left him free doing whatever he liked.
He said to him: “I neither order you nor I forbid you.” He, who knew
Umar, would know that he had preferred Mo’awiya for something in his
mind!

59. His severity to Abu Hurayra
-------------------------------

Umar had appointed Abu Hurayra as the *wali* of Bahrain in the year
twenty-one of hijra. In the year twenty-three he deposed him and
appointed Othman bin Abul Aas ath-Thaqafi instead of him. The caliph not
only deposed Abu Hurayra but also he saved from him ten thousand dinars
for the treasury, alleging that he had stolen them, which they were of
the Muslims. It was a famous case.

Ibn Abd Rabbih al-Maliki mentioned (in his book *al-Iqd al-Fareed*, in
the first pages of vol. 1) that the caliph Umar had sent for Abu Hurayra
and said to him: “You know well that I had appointed you as the *wali*
of Bahrain and you were barefooted and now it came to my ears that you
have bought horses for one thousand and six hundred dinars.” Abu Hurayra
said: “We had some horses that bore and gifts that cumulated”. The
caliph said: “I counted your livelihood and income and I found that it
is over than yours and you have to return it”. Abu Hurayra said: “You
cannot do that”. Umar said: “Yes, I can and I will beat you on the
back.”

Then Umar got up and beat him with his stick [^225] until he wounded him
and said to him: “Pay the money back.” Abu Hurayra said: “Exempt me for
the sake of Allah.” Umar said: “That would be if it was halal
(permissible) and that you paid it back obediently. Have you come from
the farthest lap of Bahrain with people’s taxes to be in your pocket,
neither for Allah nor for the Muslims? Umayma [^226] has begotten you
just to graze donkeys.”

Ibn Abd Rabbih mentioned that Abu Hurayra had said: “When Umar deposed
me in Bahrain, he said to me: “O enemy of Allah and enemy of His Qur’an,
did you steal the wealth of the Muslims?” Abu Hurayra said: “I am not an
enemy of Allah or His book, but I am an enemy of your enemies. I did not
steal the wealth of the Muslims.” Umar said: “Then how did you get ten
thousand dinars?” He said: “We had some horses that bore, gifts that
cumulated and shares that multiplied.” Umar took the money from me but
when I offered the Fajr (dawn) prayer, I asked Allah to forgive him.”

This tradition was also mentioned by Ibn Abul-Hadeed in his book *Sharh
Nahjul-Balagha*, vol. 3, [^227] and was mentioned by Ibn Sa’d in his
book *at-Tabaqat al-Kubra* (Abu Huraya’s biography) [^228] narrated by
Muhammad bin Seereen that Abu Hurayra had said: “Umar said to me: “O
enemy of Allah and enemy of his Qur’an, did you steal the wealth of the
Muslims…etc.” Ibn Hajar mentioned this tradition in his book *al-Isaba*
but he modified it and changed the truth in a way dissented from all the
others in order to purify the fame of Abu Hurayra. But he forgot that he
defamed the man, who had beaten Abu Hurayra on the back, taken his money
and deposed him.

60. His severity to Sa’d bin Abi Waqqas
---------------------------------------

Umar had appointed Sa’d bin Abu Waqqas as the emir of Kufa and then he
had been informed that Sa’d concealed himself in his palace from people.
Umar sent for Muhammad bin Maslama and said to him: “Go to Sa’d in Kufa
and burn down his palace over him and do not do anything until you come
back to me!” Muhammad went to Kufa and set fire to the palace in order
to surprise Sa’d. Sa’d came out saying: “What is this?” Muhammad said:
“This is the determination of the caliph.” He left it until it was burnt
down and then he left to Medina.

61. His severity to Khalid bin al-Waleed
----------------------------------------

When Khalid was the emir of Qinnisreen (by Umar), al-Ash’ath bin Qays
asked him for some gift. Khalid gifted him with ten thousand (dirhams or
dinars). Umar knew about that where nothing of Khalid’s deeds was
unknown by Umar. Umar sent for the mailman and he wrote with him to Abu
Ubayda, his emir on Hims (in Syria): “Make Khalid stand on one leg, tie
the other with his turban and put his cap off in public before the
officials of the state and notable people until he tells you where from
he has gifted al-Ash’ath. If it is from his own money, this will be
wasting and Allah does not like the wasters and if it is from the wealth
of the umma, this will be treason and Allah does not like the traitors.
Depose him in any case and join his job to yours.”

Abu Ubayda wrote to Khalid and Khalid came to him. Then he gathered the
people and he sat on the minbar in the great mosque. The mailman got up
and asked Khalid where he had gifted al-Ash’ath from. Khalid did not
answer while Abu Ubayda was silent saying nothing. Bilal al-Habashi got
up and said: “Ameerul Mo'mineen (Umar) has ordered of so and so…”

He took off Khalid’s turban and cap, made him stand up and tied his leg
with his turban and then he asked him: “Wherefrom have you gifted
al-Ash’ath? Is it from your money or from the money of the umma?” He
said: “From my money.” He set Khalid free and put the cap and the turban
on his head again with his hands saying: “We obey our guardians, glorify
them and serve them.”

Khalid remained confused. He did not know whether he had been deposed or
not because Abu Ubayda did not tell him of that for he respeted him and
glorified him. When Khaild’s coming to Umar delayed, he gussed what had
happened so he wrote to Khalid: “You are deposed. Withdraw from the
emirate!” After that Umar had not entrusted Khalid with any position
until he died.

62. Beating and exiling Dhabee’
-------------------------------

One day a man came to Umar and said to him: “O Ameerul Mo'mineen,
Dhabee’ at-Tameemi met us and he began asking us about the
interpretation of some verses of the Qur'an and he said to me: “O Allah,
enable me to overcome him (Umar)!” One day while Umar was sitting during
a banquet he had made for people, Dabee’ came wearing good cloths and a
turban. He sat eating with people. When he finished eating, he asked
Umar: “O Ameerul Mo'mineen, what is the meaning of this saying of Allah:

***“Weth-thariyat tharwa, wel-hamilat waqra”***
***“I swear by the wind that scatters far and wide, then those***
***clouds bearing the load (of minute things in space” (Qur’an
51:1-2)***

Umar said to him: “Woe unto you! It is you!” Umar got up, uncovered his
arms and began whipping the man until his turban fell down. He had two
plaits of hair. Umar said: “I swear by Him, in Whose hand Umar’s soul
is, that if I have seen you with a shaven head, I would have beheaded
you.” Then he ordered the man to be imprisoned in a house.

Every day he took him out to whip him one hundred whips. When he became
well, Umar took him out to whip him another hundred whips. Then he
carried him on a camel and sent him to Basra and wrote to his official
there Abu Musa ordering him to forbid people from mixing with him. He
ordered Abu Musa to make a speech for people telling them that Dabee’
wanted to obtain knowledge but he went astray. After that Dhabee’ became
mean among people until he died whereas he had been the chief of his
people before. [^229]

63. Exiling Nasr bin Hajjaj
---------------------------

Abdullah bin Burayd said: “One night while Umar was patrolling, he
arrived at a house, inside which there was a woman singing for other
women:
“Is there a way to get some wine to drink, or to be with Nasr bin
Hajjaj?”

Umar said: “As long as she lives, she will not get that!” In the morning
he sent for Nasr bin Hajjaj. [^230] Umar looked at him and found him
very handsome. He ordered him to collect his hair.

He did and when his forehead appeared he became more handsome. Umar
asked him to put on a turban. He put on a turban and then his plentiful
hair appeared from under the turban and he seemed more handsome. Umar
asked him to cut his hair. He cut his hair and he seemed too handsome.
Then Umar said to him: “O bin Hajjaj, you have charmed the women of
Medina. Do not neighbor me in a town I live in!” Then Umar exiled him to
Basra. After spending some days in Basra, Nasr sent a letter to Umar
having some verses of poetry, in which he had showed his innocence and
asked Umar to let him go back to his house.

Umar said: “Certainly not, as long as I am the ruler!” When Umar was
killed, Nasr rode his sumpter and joined his family in Medina.

64. Exceeding the legal penalty with his son
--------------------------------------------

Once Umar’s son Abdurrahman, surnamed as Abu Shahma, drank wine in Egypt
when Amr bin al-Aas was the *wali* there. The *wali* Amr bin al-Aas
ordered Abu Shahma’s hair to be cut and then he was whipped according to
the legal penalty at the presence of his brother Abdullah bin Umar. When
Umar was informed of that, he wrote to Amr bin al-Aas to send him Abu
Shahma in *aba* and on a camel without a saddle. He stressed on that and
ordered him with severe words.

Amr bin al-Aas sent Abu Shahma in the condition as Umar had ordered and
wrote to Umar that he had punished Abu Shahma with the legal penalty;
cutting his hair and whipping him in the courtyard and he swore by Allah
that it was the place, in which the legal penalties were executed on the
Muslims and (*ahlul thimma*) the Christians and the Jews. He sent the
book with Abdullah bin Umar (Umar’s son).

Abdullah bin Umar brought the book and his brother Abdurrahman and came
to his father in Medina while Abdurrahman was putting on an *aba* and
was unable to walk because he was ill and tired of sitting on the bare
back of the camel all the way from Egypt to Medina. Umar became too
severe with his son. He said to him: “O Abdurrahman, have you done this
and that?” Then he cried: “Bring me the whips!”

Abdurrahman bin Ouff interceded with Umar saying to him: “O Ameerul
Mo'mineen, he has been punished with the legal penalty and his brother
Abdullah has witnessed that.” But Umar paid no attention to him rather
he rebuked him. Umar began whipping his son Abdurrahman (Abu Shahma),
who was shouting at his father: “I am ill and you are going to kill me!”
Umar did never pity him and gave a deaf ear to his son’s crying until he
finished the number of the legal whips. After that he imprisoned him and
a month later Abdurrahman died. [^231]

If Amr bin al-Aas was trusted in the affairs of the Muslims (the legal
penalties) and he was reliable near Umar, then he told Umar that he had
punished Abu Shahma at the presence of his brother Abdullah, who was the
most trusted one to his father from among the family of al-Khattab;
hence Umar had no any evidence to punish his son again and if Amr bin
al-Aas was not trustworthy and he was not truthful in his swear, then
how had Umar appointed him as the *wali* of Egypt to execute the
verdicts and penalties of Allah and how had he entrusted him with the
bloods , honors and properties of the people?

According to the *Shari’ah* a sick person is not to be punished before
recovering health and the punished one (with legal penalty) is not to be
imprisoned especially if he is ill or that imprisonment may harm him but
Umar was fond of preferring his own opinions to the legal verdicts.

65. Cutting the tree of al-Hudaybiya
------------------------------------

It was the tree, under which the Prophet (S) had been paid homage by his
companions to die for him. It was called the homage of ar-Radhwan. Among
the results of this homage was the great conquest of Mecca. Some of the
Muslims often offered prayers under this tree to get blessing and to
thank Allah for the great victory they got after the homage under this
tree.

When Umar knew that they offered prayers under this tree, he ordered the
tree to be cut. He said: “Since this day if any one returns to offer
prayer near this tree, I will kill him with the sword as an apostate is
killed.” [^232]

Glory be to Allah! Praise be to Allah! Allah is great!!! How amazing!
Yesterday the Prophet (S) ordered him to kill Thul Khuwaisira, the head
of the hypocrites, and he refrained from killing him respecting his
prayer and today he draws his sword to kill the believers who offer
prayers under this tree; the tree of ar-Radhwan!!

Woe! Who has made the bloods of the faithful prayers so cheap to him?
This was the seed that grew and fruited in Najd (where the Satan would
appear).

How many seeds like this Umar had such as his saying to the Black Rock
(of the Kaaba): “You are just a rock; neither benefit nor harm. Unless I
have seen the Prophet (S) kissing you, I would have never kissed you.”

This word became as a principle due to which many ignorants prohibited
kissing the holy Qur'an and glorifying the shrine of the Prophet (S) and
the other sacred shrines. They lost by doing that many virtues as Allah
has said:

***“… and*** ***whoever respects the sacred ordinances of Allah, it is
better for him with his Lord” (Qur’an 22:30)*** and

***“… and whoever respects the signs of Allah, this surely is (the
outcome) of the piety of hearts” (Qur’an 22:32);***

and they did not love Allah sincerely as one of the poets has said:
“It is not the love of the country that has filled my heart, but it is
the love of one who has dwelled in the country.”

66. Umm Hani complains against him to the Prophet (S)
-----------------------------------------------------

At-Tabarani mentioned in *al-Kabeer* a tradition narrated by Abdurrahman
bin Abu Rafi’ that Umm Hani bint Abu Talib had said to the Prophet (S):
“O Messenger of Allah, Umar bin al-Khattab met me and said to me:
“Muhammad will not avail you of anything.” The Prophet (S) became angry.
He made a speech saying to the people: “Why do some ones pretend that my
intercession will not benefit my family? My intercession will avail Ham
and Hakam.” [^233]

The Prophet (S) became angry in another occasion when a son of his aunt
Safiyya died and he consoled her. When she went out, a man [^234] met
her and said to her: “Your kinship with Muhammad will not avail you of
anything.” She began crying until the Prophet (S) heard her voice and
hurried to her. She told him of what happened. He became angry and asked
Bilal to announce the azan.

The Prophet (S) got up to make a speech. He praised Allah and then he
said: “Why do some people pretend that my kinship does not avail (my
relatives)? Every kinship and means will be severed on the Day of
Resurrection except my kinship and means. My kinship is connected in
this life and in the afterlife.” [^235]

67. The day of consultation (an-Najwa)
--------------------------------------

On that day all the people had missed goodness save Imam ‘Ali (as). He
was the winner of that goodness with no partner; neither Abu Bakr nor
Umar nor any of the human beings. Here is the Qur’anic verse of that day
and ponder on it and do not be among those whom Allah has meant when
saying:

***“Do*** ***they not then reflect on the Quran? Nay, on the hearts
there are locks” (Qur’an 47:24)***

This is the verse:

***“O you who believe! When you*** ***consult the Messenger, then offer
something in charity before your consultation; that is better for you
and purer” (Qur’an 58:12).***

No one had ever acted according to this verse except Imam ‘Ali (as).
This has been confirmed by the consensus of the umma. Az-Zamakhshari in
*al-Kashshaf*, at-Tabari in *at-Tafseer al-Kabeer*, ath-Tha’labi in
*at-Tafseer al-Adheem*, ar-Razi in *Mafateeh al-Ghayb* and the other
interpreters have said that in their books when interpreting this verse.

Al-Hakim mentioned in his *Mustadrak* [^236] that Imam ‘Ali (as) had
said: “There is a verse in the Book of Allah that no one has acted
according to before me and no one will act according to after me. It is
the verse of (*an-Najwa*) consultation. I had a dinar and I sold it for
ten dirhams. Whenever I consulted the Prophet (S) I offered a dirham
before my consultation and then the verse was annulled by this one:

***“Do you fear that you will not (be able to) give in charity before
your consultation? So when you do not do it and Allah has turned to you
(mercifully), then keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and obey Allah
and His Messenger; and Allah is Aware of what you do” (Qur’an 58:13).***
[^237]

This scolding included Umar and the rest of the companions except Imam
‘Ali (as) because he had never (feared that he would not be able to give
alms in charity) nor had he opposed the order so that he would need to
repent.

Ar-Razi here arose as one who “..***cannot arise except as*** ***one,
whom the Satan has prostrated by (his) touch, does rise”
(Qur’an2:275)***. He said: “This verse distresses the hearts of the poor
and makes them sad because they cannot pay charities, it embarrasses the
rich because it imposes on them heavy duty and it causes the Muslims to
criticize each other. Acting according to this verse causes separation
and gloominess and giving up acting according to it causes cordiality.
What causes cordiality is worthier of being followed than what causes
separation and gloominess…”

How odd his raving was! It contradicted the saying of Allah:
***“..that is better for you and*** ***purer”*** and His saying ***“So
when you do not do it and Allah has turned to you (mercifully), then
keep up prayer”***.

Refer to this raving in his *tafseer* *Mafateeh al-Ghayb*, vol.8 p.168.

Would that he had said: “Zakat and hajj distress the hearts of the poor
and bring them sorrow because the poor cannot do them and they (zakat
and hajj) embarrass the rich because they impose on them heavy duty;
therefore carrying them out causes separation and gloominess and giving
up carrying them out causes cordiality and friendliness and whatever
causes cordiality and friendliness is worthier of being followed than
what causes separation and gloominess; therefore according to the
analogy of this (imam) giving up the zakat and the hajj is worthier.

In fact his analogy requires giving up all the religions in order not to
lead to separation and disagreements. We resort to Allah to save us from
the torpor of mind and the raving of tongue. There is no power save in
Allah, the Mighty, the High!

68. His indulgence to Mo’awiya
------------------------------

Umar let Mo’awiya, who had been appointed by Umar as the *wali* of Sham,
free to the full to do whatever he liked, to behave as his deviant mind
led him, to rule however he wished. He lived at ease indifferent to
anything other than what he chose to himself unlike what Umar had
admired of his emirs.

Once Umar saw Mo’awiya in Sham surrounded with splendor like that of
Kasra (the emperor of Persia) and wearing highly brocaded cloths that
the nature of Umar disliked and hated but he did not say to him then
except: “I neither order you nor I forbid you”. He gave him permission
and option to do whatever he liked and so he ravaged left and right and
there was no one daring to stand against his vanity and corruption. One
of the fruits of this seed that Umar had grown in Mo’awiya was his
transgression against Imam ‘Ali (as) in Siffeen and after that was what
he did against Imam Hasan (as) in Sabaat.

Since then the Umayyads had seized the wealth of Allah, enslaved His
people and taken the religion of Allah as a means to achieve their greed
and tendencies. We are Allah’s and to Him we shall return and those who
do wrong will come to know by what a (great) reverse they will be
overturned!

69. His illegal order
---------------------

He often ordered of some things against the *Shari’ah* and then he gave
up after being reminded.

First: Muhammad bin Mukhallad al-Attar mentioned in his *Fawa’id*:
[^238] “Once Umar has ordered a pregnant women to be stoned. Ma’ath bin
Jabal denied that and said to Umar: “If you have an evidence against
her, you have no evidence against the one in her abdomen.” Umar annulled
his judgment and said: “Women have become unable to beget one like
Ma’ath. Were it not for Ma’ath, Umar would perish.”

Second: al-Hakim mentioned in his *Mustadrak* [^239] that Ibn Abbas had
said: “Once a mad pregnant woman was brought to Umar and he decided to
stone her. Ali said to him: “Have you not known that obligations are not
imposed on three: a mad one until he becomes sane, a child until he
becomes adult and a sleeping one until he awakes?” Then Umar set the
woman free.”

This woman was different from that woman. That one, about whom Ma’ath
reminded the caliph, was not mad and the caliph could stone her but
after giving birth to her child and then the caliph would have to ensure
the nursing of the child after stoning his mother but as for the second
woman, Umar could not stone her at all because she was mad.

The judge of the judges Abdul Jabbar in his book *al-Mughni* had a long
speech about stoning a pregnant woman and this was a point of argument
between him and Sharif al-Murtadha in his book *ash-Shafi*. Ibn Abul
Hadeed mentioned the arguments of both of them in *Sharh Nahjul
Balagha*, vol. 3 pp.150-152.

Third: Ahmad bin Hanbal mentioned in his *Musnad* [^240] that Abu
Dhabyan al-Janbi had said: “One day a woman, who had committed adultery,
was brought to Umar, who ordered her to be stoned. Ali took the woman
away from Umar’s men and prevented them from stoning her. They went back
to Umar telling him that Ali bin Abu Talib had prevented them from
carrying out the order of the caliph Umar. Umar said: “He (Ali) did not
do that unless he knew something!” He sent for Ali. Ali came to Umar,
who was somehow angry.

He said to Ali: “Why did you prevent these men from executing my order?”
Ali said: “Have you not heard the Prophet (S) saying: “Three ones are
free from being considered as sinful; a sleeping one until he awakes, a
child until he becomes adult and a mad one until he becomes sane”?” He
said: “Yes, I have.” Ali said: “This woman is mad. The adulterer might
have committed the sin with her while she was mad.” Umar said: “I do not
know!” Ali said: “I also do not know!” Umar set the woman free and he
did not stone her.” [^241]

Fourth: Ibn al-Qayyim mentioned in his book *at-Turuq al-Hakamiyya fee
as-Siyasa ash-Shar’iyya* (the wise ways in legal politics) that once a
woman had been brought to Umar and she confessed that she had committed
adultery. Umar ordered the woman to be stoned. Ali asked him to delay
his order a little that she might have an excuse which might save her
from the punishment.

He asked the woman: “What has led you to commit adultery?” She said:
“There was a herdsman with me (in the pasture) who had water and milk
among his camels but I had not. I became thirsty and I asked him for
some water or milk. He refused to give me unless I would (give him my
self). I refused to submit to him for three times but when I became too
thirsty and I thought that I was about to die, I submitted to him and he
gave me some water.” Ali said: “Allah is great! ***“..but*** ***whoever
is driven to necessity, not desiring nor exceeding the limit, then
surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful” (Qur’an 16:115).***

Al-Bayhaqi mentioned in his *Sunan* that Abu Abdurrahman as-Sulami had
said: “Once a woman had become too thirsty. She passed by a shepherd and
asked him for some water but he refused to give her unless she would let
him make love with her. She submitted to him. Umar consult the people
about stoning her. Ali said: “She was obliged to do that and I think
that she is to be set free.” Umar set her free.” [^242]

Fifth: Ibn al-Qayyim said: [^243] “Another woman was brought to Umar and
she confessed and confirmed that she had committed adultery. Ali was
present then. He said: “She talks as if she has not known that it
(adultery) is impermissible.” He did not punish her.”
Ibn al-Qayyim added: “This is accurate insight.”

Sixth: Ahmad Ameen said in his book *Fajr al-Islam*: [^244] “A case was
offered to Umar that a man had been killed by his father’s wife and her
lover. Umar hesitated to kill two persons for one. Ali said to him: “If
a group of people participate in a theft, will you cut the hands of all
of them?” Umar said: “Yes, I will.” Ali said: “It is the same here.” He
did as Ali said to him and he wrote to his official: “Kill them both! If
all the people of Sana’a participated in killing him, I would kill them
all.”

Seventh: Ibn Abul Hadeed said: “Once Umar sent for a woman to ask her
about something. She was pregnant and because of fearing him, she
miscarried of her fetus. He asked the great companions to give him a
fatwa about this matter. They said to him: “You are not to be blamed
because you are discipliner.” Ali said to him: “If they wanted to
compliment you, they have cheated you and if this was their opinion
after trying their best, they have mistaken. You have to free a
(believing) slave (as a penance).” Umar and the companions referred to
Ali’s opinion.” [^245]

Eighth: Umar was confused what to do to a man from the first Muhajireen,
who had fought in the battle of Badr. He was Qudama bin Madh’oon. One
day he was brought to Umar after drinking wine. Umar decided to whip
him. He said to Umar: “Why will you whip me? The Book of Allah is
between me and you.” Umar said: “Where is it in the Book of Allah that I
should not whip you?”

He said: “Allah says in His Book:

***“On those*** ***who believe and do good there is no blame for what
they eat, when they are careful (of their duty) and believe and do good
deeds, then they are careful (of their duty) and believe, then they are
careful (of their duty) and do good (to others), and Allah loves those
who do good (to others)” (Qur’an 5:93)***.

“I am from among (those who believe and do good). I have attended with
the Prophet (S) in Badr, al-Hudaybiya, al-Khandaq and other events”.
Umar did not know how to reply. He said to his companions: “Let any of
you reply to him!” Ibn Abbas said: “These verses have been revealed as
an excuse for the deceased Muslims and as a reminder to the remaining
believers because Allah says:

***“O ye*** ***who believe! Intoxicants and gambling, (dedication of)
stones, and (divination by) arrows, are an abomination of Satan's
handwork: eschew such (abomination), that ye may prosper” (Qur’an
5:90)***

Then he recited the other verse among which was:

***“..they are careful (of their*** ***duty) and believe and do good
deeds, then they are careful (of their duty) and believe, then they are
careful (of their duty) and do good”.***
He added: “Allah has prohibited drinking wine, then would he, who drank
wine after it has been prohibited, be pious and God-fearing?” Umar said:
“You are right. Then what do you see?” Ali gave a fatwa to whip Qudama
eighty whips. The penalty of a winer has become such since that
day.[^246]

Ninth: Ibn al-Qayyim mentioned in his book *at-Turuq al-Hakamiyya*, p.27
a case of a woman, who had loved a young man from the Ansar but when he
did not respond to her, she played a trick. She took an egg and poured
its albumen on her dress and between her thighs and then she came to
Umar crying. She said to him: “This (young) man has raped me and
disgraced me among my family and this is the sign of what he has
committed with me.” Umar asked some women and they said that there was
some sperm on her cloths and body.

Then Umar wanted to punish the young man, who was crying for help and
saying: “O Ameerul Mo'mineen, make sure of the matter! By Allah, I have
not committed any sin. I have never intended to do anything to her. She
tried to seduce me to yield to her but I refused.” Ali was present. Umar
asked him: “O Abul Hasan, what do you think about them?” Ali looked at
the woman’s cloth and he asked for boiling water. He poured the hot
water over the dress and the white became solid. He took it, smelt it
and tasted it and he found that it had the taste of egg. He scolded the
woman and she confessed the truth.

Tenth: Ibn al-Qayyim in his book *at-Turuq al-Hakamiyya*[^247] mentioned
that two men from Quraysh had paid one hundred dinars to a woman as
deposit and they said to her: “Do not give back the money to any one of
us if the other is not with him.” After a year one of them came and said
to the woman: “My friend died and I want the money.” She refused to give
him the money and said: “You both have said to me not to give the money
to any of you if the other was with him. I will not give it to you.” He
asked her relatives and neighbors to intercede with her until she agreed
to repay him the money.

After another year the second man came to her and asked her to give him
the money back. She said to him: “Your friend has come to me and he
pretended that you had died and I gave him the money.” They went to Umar
to judge on their case. Umar wanted to judge against the woman. She
asked him to send them to Ali bin Abu Talib to judge on their case.

Umar sent them to Ali, who perceived that the two men had deceived the
woman. He said to the man: “Have you not asked the woman not to repay
the money to any of you unless the other one would be with him?” The man
said: “Yes, we have.” Then Ali said to him: “Go and bring your friend
and then the woman will give you the money; otherwise you have no right
to ask her for anything.”

Eleventh: Ahmad bin Hanbal mentioned in his *Musnad* [^248] a tradition
narrated by Ibn Abbas that once Umar had been confused about the doubt
in prayer (being uncertain how many rak’as one has offered). He asked
his servant: “O boy, have you heard from the Prophet (S) or any of his
companions if one became uncertain in his prayer, what he should do?”
After a moment Abdurrahman bin Ouff came and asked Umar: “What is the
matter with you?” Umar said: “I asked this boy if he had heard from the
Prophet (S) or any of his companions if one doubted in his prayer what
he should do.” Abdurrahman said: “I have heard the Prophet (S) saying:
“If one of you becomes uncertain in his prayer…” Refer to this
tradition; it has a fatwa from Abdurrahman which is opposite to what has
been narrated from the Prophet (S) by the Shia.

The cases like these ones were many! They showed that Umar soon
submitted to the truth in such matters since he recognized it and he
submitted to whoever reminded him if he ignored; nevertheless he was too
severe when determining his policies without paying any attention to
anyone. He was too severe to his officials; whether to their bodies or
their properties. He often confiscated some of their monies to the
treasury and he often dealt with them with his stick severely!

He might burn down their houses over them as he had done to his emir of
Kufa, Sa’d bin Abu Waqqass when he ordered to burn down his palace. Once
again he beat Sa’d with his stick when Sa’d competed with people to
reach him. Once again he (Umar) saw some people following Ubayy bin Ka’b
in the street and then he raised his stick to hit Ubbay. Ubbay said to
him: “O Ameerul Mo'mineen, fear Allah!” Umar said to him: “O Ibn Ka’b,
what are these crowds behind you? Have you not known that it is conceit
to the followed one and meanness to the followers?”

The *darrah* [^249] of Umar was a whip of torment, which the great
companions feared, until it was said that it was more frightening than
the sword of al-Hajjaj.[^250]

He had beaten Umm Farwa bint Abu Quhafa severely with his *darrah* when
her brother Abu Bakr died and she with other women, at the head of whom
was Aa’isha, began crying for him. He did pay no attention to her
position that she was the aunt of Aa’isha and the sister of Abu Bakr.
Hisham bin al-Waleed pulled her in a mean way to the street. Umar wanted
to frighten the other women, who soon ran away here and there. How
harshly he often behaved to achieve his policy without having any pity
towards anyone and without fearing any end!

He had said to Imam ‘Ali (as) and his companions, who had refused to pay
homage to Abu Bakr, when they were in the house of Fatima (sa): “I swear
by Him, in Whose hand my soul is, either you come out to pay homage or I
shall burn down the house over you.” The daughter of the Prophet (S)
went out crying and shouting. When she saw what Umar and his men had
done to Imam ‘Ali (as) and az-Zubayr, she said: “How soon you have
attacked the family of the Messenger of Allah!”[^251]

And many many of such political situations which were as Imam ‘Ali (as)
had said when talking about entrusting Umar with the caliphate by Abu
Bakr: “…he made it (the caliphate) in a harsh land, which was full of
stumbles and which could not be avoided. A man in it was like a rider of
a reluctant camel, if he tightened its noseband, he would tear its nose
and if he loosened its noseband, it would insert him into difficulties.
People were afflicted with confusion, fickleness and objection…” [^252]

70. Inventing the Shura
-----------------------

When Umar was about to die, he invented the Shura to choose the caliph
after him. He appointed a committee of six persons pretending that Ali,
the Prophet’s brother and guardian, was one of them.

Ali, who was the best of the human beings after the Prophet,
who was the very self of the Prophet (S).
Muhammad and Ali were the two eyes of the world;
one was the right and the other was the left.
Muhammad was the city of knowledge and Ali was its gate
and whoever wanted to come to the city,
had to enter it from its gate.

O my Lord! What was the Shura invented for?! Had he (Ali) been compared
with the first one (Abu Bakr) so that he would be compared with these
ones and their likes?! Certainly not! But “…a man (Sa’d) listened to his
rage and the other (Abdurrahman) sided with his kin (Othman) for this
and that. [^253]

This Shura had many bad consequences and evil results that had caused
great harm to Islam. Umar had in this Shura contradictories that he
would have better not done!

When he (Umar) was stabbed [^254] and he became desperate of remaining
alive, he was asked: “Would that you have appointed the caliph after
you!” He said: “If Abu Ubayda was alive, I would appoint him a caliph
because he was the trustee of this umma [^255] and if Salim, the mawla
of Huthayfa was alive, I would appointed him a caliph because he was too
sincere in his love to Allah.” [^256]

His son Abdullah was mentioned to him but he refused to appoint him as
the caliph. The companions went out and then they came back to him
saying: “O Ameerul Mo'mineen, Would that you have determined a decree!”
He said: “I have decided, after my first saying, to entrust your affair
with a man, who is the best among you to lead you to the truth” meaning
Ali (S). They said to him: “What prevents you from that then?” he said:
“I cannot bear it (the caliphate) alive and dead.”

Then he said: “You are to keep to these ones; Ali, Othman, Abdurrahman,
Sa’d, az-Zubayr and Talha. They should consult to choose one from among
them. If they choose that one as the caliph, then they have to support
and assist him.” Then he sent for those six men and said to them: “When
I die, Suhayb should lead the people in offering the prayer. You have to
deliberate for three days and when the fourth day comes you must have an
emir from among you.”

Then he ordered Abu Talha al-Ansari to select fifty men from the Ansar
with their weapons to supervise these six men until they should choose
one from among them within three days after Umar’s death. He ordered
Suhayb to lead the prayers during that time. He ordered the six men to
be inside a house under the supervision of Abu Talha with his sword and
his armed men.

He said to Abu Talha: “When five men agree on one opinion and the sixth
one objects to them, you should split his head with your sword and when
four of them agree and two refuse, you should behead them both and if
each three of them had an opinion, the caliph should be from the group
of Abdurrahman and then you should kill those three if they would refuse
to submit but if the three days elapsed while they have not agreed on
one yet, you should kill all the six [^257] and let the matter of the
caliphate to the Muslims to elect whoever they liked.” This is the
summary of the covenant of the Shura. [^258]

If Umar was unwilling to undertake the caliphate as he pretended, then
why did he insert himself in what he had fled from and arrange in the
worst and most harmful and dangerous way?! He chose six men out of the
whole umma and described them with what prevented them from being chosen
as caliphs that we have not mentioned here! [^259]

Then he arranged the matter in a way that it would lead to choose Othman
as the caliph in any way and without a bit of doubt! [^260] Which
bearing (that Umar pretended to refrain from) was more than this?! What
was the difference between appointing Othman openly and limiting the
matter in a way that would lead to him alone and would kill the
rejecters?

Would he have appointed Othman or any one else and not put the slave
Suhayb over their heads with Abu Talha and his men with their drawn
swords to kill them (Ali and the others) if they opposed that critical
plan which Umar had planned to them!

If he had entrusted the caliphate to anyone he liked, the umma would not
have seen him slight their (these six men’s) bloods and be indifferent
to shedding their bloods [^261] nor would have the umma seen him despise
them by preferring the slave Suhayb to them in offering the prayer of
his (Umar’s) funerals and the five daily prayers.

As if he was not satisfied with despising and disgracing them when he
said: “If Abu Ubayda was alive, I would appoint him a caliph and if
Salim was alive, I would appoint him a caliph” preferring them to these
six men, among whom was the Prophet’s brother, guardian and heir, Aaron
of the umma, the judge, the gate of the house of wisdom, the gate of the
city of knowledge and the one who had had the knowledge of the Book;
Imam ‘Ali (as).

As for Salim, he was neither from Quraysh nor was he an Arab. He was a
foreigner from Istakhr or Karmad. He was a slave owned by Abu Huthayfa
bin Utba’s wife, whose name was Thubayta bint Ya’ar bin Zayd bin Ubayd
bin Zayd al-Ansari al-Ousi. [^262] The umma had agreed unanimously due
to the legal verdicts that imamate would not be permissible for one like
Salim, [^263] then how did Umar say: “If Salim was alive, I would
appoint him a caliph?” [^264]

This *Shura* had caused competition and sedition between these six men
that led to separation and disagreement among the Muslims for each one
of these six men found himself as well-qualified for the caliphate and
equal to the others whereas before the *Shura* (of Umar) they did not
think in this way. In fact Abdurrahman was a follower of Othman, Sa’d
was a follower of Abdurrahman and az-Zubayr was one of Imam Ali’s
followers, who had supported him on the day of the Saqeefa.

It was him (az-Zubayr) who had drawn his sword [^265] defending Imam
‘Ali (as) and it was him who was among the few ones who had escorted
Fatima (sa) to her tomb and offered the prayer for her where she had
been buried under the darkness of night [^266] according to the will of
Fatima (sa) herself and it was him who had said during the reign of
Umar: “By Allah, if Umar dies, I will pay homage to Ali” [^267] but the
Shura made him look forward to the caliphate and so he parted with ‘Ali
(as) as the others did. He went to fight against Imam ‘Ali (as) in the
battle of al-Jamal (the camel).

Abdurrahman bin Ouff himself regretted his doing when he had preferred
Othman to himself in the matter of the caliphate and then he parted with
him and tried his best to depose him from the caliphate but he did not
succeed. And people knew well what Talha and az-Zubayr had done to
incite people against Othman and then Aa’isha joined them assisting
Talha and hoping that the caliphate might come back to Taym. [^268] She
often said: “Kill Na’thal (meaning Othman) for he has disbelieved!”
[^269]

These ones and their followers activated their opposition against Othman
until they encouraged the people of Medina and the other countries to
revolt against him and then to kill him. When Othman was killed and the
people paid homage to Imam ‘Ali (as) to be the caliph, Talha and
az-Zubayr were the first ones who had paid the homage but their position
in the *Shura* raised their greediness to the caliphate and made them
break their homage to Imam ‘Ali (as) and then to wage a war against him.
They (Talha and az-Zubayr) revolted against Imam ‘Ali (as) and Aa’isha
joined them hoping that Talha might be the caliph.

Blood was shed in Basra (the battle of al-Jama), Siffeen and
an-Nahrawan, fatal seditions spread here and there and bloody wars were
waged; all those horrible events were the consequences of Umar’s
*Shura*, which made opponents to Imam ‘Ali (as) competing with him in
his right and fighting him to extort this right from him. Moreover, it
was this *Shura* that had incited Mo’awiya to stretch his neck towards
the caliphate. [^270] Then Mo’awiya and each one of the men of the
*Shura* became impassable obstacles in the way of Imam ‘Ali (as), who
had intended to show the truth and to restore what had been corrupted.

The *Shura* of Umar had incited the umma against Othman [^271] and
planted seeds that took roots and grew after the killing of Othman that
was an opportunity seized by the people who had fought Imam ‘Ali (as) in
al-Jamal, Siffeen and an-Nahrawan.

How odd and wonderful the order of Umar was! He ordered the six men,
whom he had nominated for the *Shura* so that one of them should be
elected as the caliph after him, to be killed if they would not achieve
his order before the end of the third day after his death!!!

Woe! Could we believe that it was permissible for him (Umar) to kill
these six men or any one of them just because of delaying carrying out
his order after the third day of his death?!
But indeed he had ordered to kill them while he was comfortable and
tranquil with that. He had ordered Abu Talha al-Ansari and his men with
this order and stressed on them and on Suhayb to execute it.

The Muslims saw and heard,
But none denied or felt pain!

This was the utmost persistence of Umar. He went on his exaggeration to
the farthest point! He knew well the position of these six men more than
any other one of the companions and he witnessed then that the Prophet
(S) died while he had been pleased with them.

Among the six there was one, who was the brother of the Prophet (S) and
who was to the Prophet (S) as Aaron was to Moses but he was not a
prophet. He was the vizier and the guardian of the Prophet (S). He was
the father of the two grandsons of the Prophet (S). He was the hero of
Badr, Uhud and Hunayn and he was the one who had the knowledge of the
Book.

Umar had better avoid exposing this great man and the rest of the six to
this danger and to this meanness and disgrace! He could entrust the
matter with no one and he would let the Muslims choose whomsoever they
liked and then he would be truthful in his saying: “I cannot bear it
alive and dead.”

Or he could appoint Othman as the caliph openly as Abu Bakr had
appointed him (Umar) before and so he would be frank in what he had
intended to do with no deceit or trickery for he had arranged the matter
of the Shura in a way that it must lead to the caliphate of Othman
definitely. Umar had not preferred Abdurrahman to the other five ones,
unless he knew that this would affect the matter and he knew that Sa’d
would not object to Abdurrahman at all.

People knew this trick of Umar even if he thought that he had blinded
the matter and said: “I do not bear it alive and dead.”

What did the Muslims think if the Prophet (S) heard Umar ordering Abu
Talha by saying to him: “When five men agreed on one opinion and the
sixth one objected to them, you should split his head with your sword
and when four of them agreed and two refused, you should behead them
both and if each three of them had an opinion, the caliph should be from
the group of Abdurrahman and then you should kill those three if they
would refuse to submit but if the three days elapsed while they have not
agreed on one yet, you should kill all the six”? O Muslims, be liberal
in your opinions and say what you think! We are Allah’s and to Him we
shall return!

[^1]: The Prophet’s death was on Monday; four days after this event.

[^2]: In his Sahih, vol.1 chap. “Knowledge” and vol.4 chap. “The sick”.

[^3]: Vol.1 p.325.

[^4]: As in Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol. 2 p.20.

[^5]: Vol.2 p.118

[^6]: Definitely the third thing was the order which the Prophet (S)
wanted to write down to his umma in order not to go astray after that at
all but politics had forced the narrators to pretend that they had
forgotten it as the mufti of the Hanafites (in Soor) Sheikh Abu Sulayman
Haj Dawood ad-Dada has said.

[^7]: This tradition with the same wording has been mentioned by Ahmad
in his Musnad, vol.1 p.355 and by other scholars of Hadith.

[^8]: Kanzol Ummal, vol. 3 p.138.

[^9]: Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.3 p.114.

[^10]: The Prophet (S) did not say: “I want to write the legal verdicts”
so that one might say: “The book of Allah suffices us to understand the
verdicts”. If we supposed that the Prophet (S) wanted to write the
verdicts, then writing them might be the cause to save the umma from
deviation and hence no one would be excusable in neglecting that book
and pretending to be satisfied with the Qur'an. In fact if that book had
nothing except to save from deviation only, it would not be permissible
to leave it depending on the Qur'an. You know well that the umma is in
necessary need of the sacred Sunna and it cannot do without it to depend
on the Qur'an only because concluding the verdicts from the Qur'an is
not easy for every one. If the Qur'an has sufficed without the Sunna,
Allah would have not ordered the Prophet (S) to explain it to the
people. Allah has said: “and We have revealed to you the Reminder that
you may make clear to men what has been revealed to them” (Qur’an 16:44)

[^11]: The author addresses Sheikh al-Bishri.

[^12]: Al-Hudaybiya is a village about nine miles from Mecca.

[^13]: It was also mentioned that they were more and it was mentioned
that they were less. The Prophet (S) took with him his wife Umm Salama
(may Allah be pleased with her). Many of the nomads had not followed
him. They were hypocrites whom Allah had dispraised in the Sura of
al-Fath which had been revealed after this event: “and Allah is wroth
with them and has cursed them and prepared hell for them, and evil is
the resort” (Qur’an 48: ). Among those, who went with him, were
al-Mugheera bin Shu’ba and Ibn Salool, who had paid homage to him under
the tree in al-Hudaybaiya.

[^14]: Umar said to the Prophet (S): “O Messenger of Allah, you fear Abu
Sufyan and his companions. Why do you not take weapons with you?” The
Prophet (S) said: “I do not take weapons with me while I am going to
offer the hajj.”

[^15]: A place near al-Hudaybiya.

[^16]: It was one of the impenetrable forts in Yemen. Marching towards
that fort did mean that they would face inevitable death because the
fort was very strong and defended. The fort, whose inhabitants were
polytheists, was surrounded by mountains and the ways leading to it were
very rough.

[^17]: Al-Halabi said in his Seera: “The historians, who had recorded
the history of the battle of al-Hudaybiya, mentioned that Quraysh had
sent a message to Ibn Salool while he was with the Prophet (S). They
said to him: “You can enter Mecca, if you like, and circumambulate the
Kaaba.” His son Abdullah (may Allah be pleased with him) said to him: “O
father, for the sake of Allah, do not shame us everywhere. How will you
circumambulate the Kaaba while the Prophet (S) will not?” Then he
refused to do that and said: “I will not circumambulate the House until
the Prophet (S) will do.” When the Prophet (S) knew of that, he thanked
Ibn Salool and asked Allah to be pleased with him. So bn Salool was one
of those who had paid homage to the Prophet under the tree. Hence no one
of those, who were with the Prophet (S) in al-Hudaybiya, had refrained
from paying homage to the Prophet (S) except al-Jadd bin Qays al-Ansary
according to all of the historians.”

[^18]: Al-Halabi said in his Seera that Salama bin al-Aqwa’ had said:
“We have promised the Prophet (S) to die for him and none of us has
refrained from that save al-Jadd bin Qays. He has stuck to the armpit of
his camel to hide himself.

[^19]: This homage had been paid to the Prophet (S) under a tree;
therefore it had been called the homage of the tree and it also had been
called the homage of ar-Radhwan (pleasure of Allah with the believers)
due to the saying of Allah: “Certainly Allah was well pleased with the
believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree” (Qur’an
48:18) and His saying at the end of the sura: “Allah has promised those
among them who believe and do good, forgiveness and a great reward”
(Qur’an 48:29). Blessed were those who had kept to faith and good doings
until they met their Lord Who had been pleased with them and praised
them in His Book and promised them with forgiveness and great reward.
Allah said: “And if you desire Allah and His Messenger and the latter
abode, then surely Allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a
mighty reward” (Qur’an 33:29) and “(As for) those who say: Our Lord is
Allah, then continue in the right way, the angels descend upon them,
saying: Fear not, nor be grieved, and receive good news of the garden
which you were promised (Qur’an 41:30). The sincere believers are far
above all the false traditions the fabricators have fabricated against
them for the holy verses of the Qur'an refute all these false
traditions.

[^20]: As in Halabi’s Seera and other books of history.

[^21]: Woe! As if Umar doubted the prophethood of the Prophet (S)!

[^22]: Vol.2 p.81

[^23]: The Prophet’s saying “I do not disobey Him” confirms what we have
said that the Prophet (S) has been ordered by Allah to carry out the
truce as it has been taken place.

[^24]: In the year of al-Fath (the conquest) when the Prophet (S) took
the key of Mecca, he sent for Umar. When he came, the Prophet (S) said
to him: “O Umar, it is this that I have said to you.” In the farewell
hajj (al-wada’) when the Prophet (S) stopped at Arafa, he sent for Umar
too and said to him: “It is this that I have said to you.

[^25]: Abu Bakr’s saying “he does not disobey his Lord” showed that Abu
Bakr was aware that the Prophet (S) had been ordered by Allah to
conclude the agreement of peace.

[^26]: This word of Umar showed clearly the great doings he had done to
spoil the peace and because of that Umar and his followers did not obey
the Prophet when he ordered them to slaughter the sacrifices until he
repeated his order for three times. You will see the details later on
inshallah.

[^27]: This saying of the Prophet (S) has been considered by all of the
Muslims as one of the signs of prophethood and one of the signs of
Islam. The details have mentioned in al-Halabi’s Seera, ad-Dahlani’s
Seera and other books of history.

[^28]: Due to other traditions mentioned by the historians the period of
the truce was two years or four years.

[^29]: The tribe of Khuza’a concluded a treaty with the Prophet (S).
They had been before the allies of the Prophet’s grandfather Abdul
Muttalib. The tribe of Bakr allied with Quraysh. Then a war took place
between Khuza’a and Bakr, in which Quraysh supported their ally (the
tribe of Bakr) against the Prophet’s ally (the tribe of Khuza’a) and
hence Quraysh broke the treaty of al-Hudaybiya with the Prophet (S) and
then the Prophet (S) declared to invade Quraysh. The result of that
invasion was the great victory and the significant conquest of Mecca.

[^30]: The Muslims began weeping for him.

[^31]: If Suhayl had been killed on that day, sedition would have
occurred between the Muslims and Quraysh the evil of which would have
spread everywhere.

[^32]: No doubt that when Umar tempted Abu Jandal to kill his father, he
objected to the Prophet (S), who had ordered Abu Jandal to be patient
and to expect the deliverance of Allah.

[^33]: This was another objection to the Prophet (S), who had forbidden
his companions from killing Suhayl and other than Suhayl but Umar had
tempted Abu Jandal to kill Suhayl.

[^34]: Abu Jandal had a brother called Abdullah, who had become a Muslim
before Abu Jandal. Abdullah had gone with the polytheist to the battle
of Badr but he had been a Muslim before that but he had concealed his
faith. When he arrived at the place of the battle, he joined the Prophet
(S) and fought with him in Badr and in all the battles of the Prophet
(S) after that. As for Abu Jandal, the first battle he participated in
was the conquest of Mecca.

[^35]: In his Sahih, vol.3 chap.The battle of al-Hudaybiya.

[^36]: How! Allah, the Almighty, said: “Surely We have given to you a
clear victory…” and the Prophet (S) recited it as it had been revealed
to him by Allah but this man said: “This is not a victory!” Do you know
who this man is?!

[^37]: Refer to the story of al-Hudaybiya in ad-Dahlani’s Seera and the
other books of history.

[^38]: Al-Halabi’s Seera and others.

[^39]: His name was Utba bin Asad bin Jariya bin Usayd ath-Thaqafi. Ibn
Abdul Birr mentioned his biography in his book al-Istee’ab. Ibn Ishaq
and other historians have mentioned this story in their books of
biographies. Here we quoted it from al-Halabi’s Seera.

[^40]: Vol.4 p.18 and vol.3 p.92. It has also been mentioned by Ahmad in
his Musnad and by others.

[^41]: It has been mentioned by al-Bukhari, Muslim, at-Tarmithi, Ahmad
bin Hanbal, Ibn Jareer, Ibn Abu Hatim, Ibn Mardwayh and others. Refer to
Kanzol Ummal by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, vol.1 p.247.

[^42]: Mentioned by Ibn Abu Hatim from ash-Shi’bi from Umar and
mentioned in Kanzol Ummal and Muntakhab Kanzol Ummal printed on the
margins of Ahmad’s Musnad.

[^43]: Refer to Muslim’s Sahih.

[^44]: Sharh Sahih Muslim, vol.1 p.404.

[^45]: During offering the umra (minor hajj) and the great hajj together
(in the same year), the Muslims, after carrying out some rituals of the
hajj, may sleep with their wives or practice temporary marriage. This is
called “the pleasure of the hajj”.

[^46]: Umra is the minor hajj.

[^47]: Sharh Sahih Muslim by an-Nawawi, vol.7 p.46.

[^48]: Ihram is the sacred state into which a Muslim must enter before
performing a pilgrimage, during which sexual intercourse, shaving,
cutting one's nails, and several other actions are forbidden.

[^49]: Musnad of Ahmad, vol.1p. 50.

[^50]: He means the pleasure during the hajj.

[^51]: Musnad of Ahmad, vol.1 p.49.

[^52]: By Allah, I do not know what to say! Has the Prophet (S) offered
the hajj and umra unlike what Allah has ordered him? Was Umar more aware
of the orders and verdicts of Allah than the Prophet (S)?!

[^53]: Sahih of Muslim, vol.1 p.467.

[^54]: This famous saying of Umar has been mentioned by most of the
historians. Refer to Tafseer of ar-Razi when interpreting the verse
no.196 of the sura of al-Baqara (2) and the verse no. 24 of the sura of
an-Nisa’ (4).

[^55]: Come on to the best of deeds! It is a part of azan.

[^56]: Sharh at-Tajreed by al-Qoushaji.

[^57]: Vol.1 p.472-475.

[^58]: He meant Mo’awiya bin Abu Sufyan, who had forbidden people from
practicing the pleasure of umra following the same way of Umar and
Othman.

[^59]: He means Umar.

[^60]: Vol. 1, p.130.

[^61]: Refer to Sharh Muwatta’ Malik by az-Zarqani, vol.2 p.178 to see
the explanation of the author about this tradition.

[^62]: Refer to Jami’ Bayan al-Ilm by Ibn Abdul Birr and Mukhtasar Jami’
Bayan al-Ilm by al-Muhammisani p.226.

[^63]: Ibid.

[^64]: Vol.1, p.479.

[^65]: Vol.1, p.157.

[^66]: Vol.1, p.157.

[^67]: Ar-Razi protested, in his book at-Tafseer al-Kabeer when talking
about the verse (Then as to those whom you profit by, give them their
dowries as appointed) against prohibiting temporary marriage by Umar.

[^68]: Vol.1 p.467

[^69]: This saying shows clearly that prohibiting temporary marriage has
not been determined before Umar.

[^70]: Would that someone knows if this word could justify a way to
prohibit temporary marriage! Had Umar thought that this matter concerned
the Prophet (S) especially or concerned his time only? Certainly not!
Lawful things of Muhammad are lawful until the Day of Resurrection and
his unlawful things are unlawful until the Day of Resurrection.

[^71]: Stoning is one of the punishments of the Heaven which cannot be
legislated except by a prophet. One, who believes in the permissibility
of temporary marriage, has concluded its decree from the Book and the
Sunna. If he is right in his conclusion, he cannot be blamed and if he
is mistaken unintendedly, he is considered to be in obscurity and so he
cannot be punished.

[^72]: Among them was Abdul Melik bin Abdul Aziz bin Jurayj Abu Khalid
al-Mekki who was one of the famous scholars among the companions’
successors. Ibn Khillikan mentioned his biography in his book Wafiyyat
al-A’yan, Ibn Sa’d in his Tabaqat, vol.5 p.361 , Ibn al-Qaysarani in his
book al-Jam’ Bayna Rijal as-Sahihayn, p.314 and ath-Thahabi in his Mizan
and he said about him: “He is one of the reliable scholars, who has been
trusted by the all. He has got married to ninety women in temporary
marriage. He thought that temporary marriage was permissible. He was the
jurisprudent of Mecca at his time.” Al-Ma’moon also during his reign has
denied prohibiting temporary marriage (by Umar) and ordered his
officials to announce its permissibility - as mentioned by Ibn Khillikan
in his book Wafiyyat al-A’yan when talking about the biography of Yahya
bin Aktham. Muhammad bin Mansoor and Abul Ayna’ once came to al-Ma’moon.
They found him brushing his teeth and saying angrily (repeating the
saying of Umar) : “Two pleasures were practiced at the time of the
Messenger of Allah and at the time of Abu Bakr but I (Umar) prohibit
them! Who are you (this is the complement of al-Ma’moon) O you scarab,
so that you prohibit what the Messenger of Allah and Abu Bakr have
practiced?” Muhammad bin Mansoor wanted to talk with al-Ma’moon but Abul
Ayna’ made a sign to him and said: “A man saying so about Umar bin
al-Khattab, how can we talk to him?!” They did not talk to him. Then
Yahya bin Aktham came to him and warned him that sedition might take
place (if he permitted temporary marriage)…”

[^73]: Azan is the call for the prayers (in their times).

[^74]: Vol.1 p.25.

[^75]: Hayya alal falah.

[^76]: When the Muslims conquered Mecca, the Prophet (S) forgave the
polytheists and set them free.

[^77]: Refer to al-Isaba, Abu Mahthoora’s biography.

[^78]: Refer to Samra’s biography in al-Istee’ab, al-Isaba and other
books.

[^79]: As it is well-known by whoever studies their affairs after this
threat.

[^80]: Some historians said that Samra had died in the year fifty-eight
of hijra and Abu Hurayra in fifty-nine whereas other historians said
that Abu Hurayra had died in fifty-seven of hijra and so on for the
three of them. As for the alike dates, some historians said that the
three of them had died in fifty-nine of hijra without referring to the
time, the day or the month in which they had died.

[^81]: A prerequisite call to the prayer.

[^82]: It has been mentioned by Abu Dawood in his Sunan, vol.1 chap.
Start of Azan and it has been mentioned in many other books of Hadith.
The Sunni scholars have considered it as a true tradition.

[^83]: This azan - as the narrators, who had narrated this tradition
from Abdullah bin Zayd, claimed - was the first azan in Islam. As you
see, it does not have “prayer is better than sleeping” although it was
for Fajr prayer. Then wherefrom has it come to be a part of the azan, O
you Muslims?!

[^84]: Mentioned by Abu Dawood as-Sajistani in his Sunan, at-Tarmithi in
his Sahih, Ibn Hayyan in his Sunan, Ibn Khuzayma in his Sunan, Ibn Maja
in his Sunan and other scholars of Hadith.

[^85]: Az-Zarqani said in his book Sharh al-Muwatta’ when commenting on
this tradition: “It is the bell; a long piece of wood that is beaten
with a smaller one to produce sound.” Az-Zarqani here has a noticeable
comment on the tradition of Abdullah bin Zayd. I ask the researchers to
refer to Sharh al-Muwatta’, vol.1 p.120-125.

[^86]: For details, refer to Sharh al-Muwatta’ by az-Zarqani.

[^87]: Sharh al-Muwatta’ by az-Zarqani.

[^88]: In his Seera, vol.2, chap. Azan.

[^89]: Al-Mustadrak, vol.4 p.348.

[^90]: Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.3 p.127

[^91]: Da’iy as-Sama’ (the caller of Heaven) by Professor al-Aqqad,
p.136-142.

[^92]: Al-Hakim’s Mustadrak, vol.3 p.171.

[^93]: Mushkil al-Aathar by at-Tahawi, Kanzol Ummal by al-Muttaqi
al-Hindi, vol.6 p.277.

[^94]: The name of al-Qoushaji was Ala’uddeen Ali bin Muhammad. He was
one of the scholars of the Ash’arites. This has been mentioned by Tash
Kubri Zada in his book ash-Shaqa’iq an-Nu’maniyya. His biography has
been mentioned by other historians. He has written many books such as
Sharh at-Tajreed, ar-Risala al-Muhammadiyya, ar-Risala al-Fat~hiyya and
other books.

[^95]: Mentioned by Abul Faraj al-Isfahani in his book Maqatil
at-Talibiyeen and mentioned by all the historians who had talked about
the revolution of the martyr of Fakh against the tyrants and injustice.

[^96]: Vol.2 p.110.

[^97]: Either to repeat this statement “You are divorced” three times in
one occasion or to say “you are divorced thirdly”.

[^98]: Sahih of Muslim, vol.1 p.575, Sunan of al-Bayhaqi, vol.7 p.336,
Sunan of Abu Dawood.

[^99]: Sahih of Muslim, vol.1 chap. Divorce.

[^100]: Al-Mustadrak and Talkhees al-Mustadrak, vol.2 p.169. These two
books are printed together and the numbers of their pages are the same.

[^101]: Musnad of Ahmad, vol.1, p.314.

[^102]: Al-Bayhaqi in his Sunan, vol.7 p.336, al-Qurtubi in his Tafseer,
vol.3. p.130.

[^103]: Vol.4 p.210.

[^104]: Seera of Ibn Ishaq, vol.2 p.191.

[^105]: Qassim Ameen al-Misri has mentioned this tradition in his book
Tahreer al-Mar’a (liberating woman) p.172, from an-Nassa’iy, al-Qurtubi
and az-Zayla’iy narrated by Ibn Abbas.

[^106]: Democracy, p.150.

[^107]: P.246.

[^108]: Glory be to Allah! If the mujtahids had had the right to change
the verdicts, like this fatwa, according to the change of time even in
that short time between the rule of Abu Bakr and Umar, then the verdicts
and the texts of the Book and the Sunna would have vanished. Woe! How
dangerous it will be if the mujtahids follow such a rule, which Allah
has never revealed!

[^109]: Had they had any proof on that?!

[^110]: Time had no change and the change of time did not require
changing the legal verdicts determined by the Book and the Sunna but Ibn
al-Qayyim did what he thought that it was the verdict of Allah.

[^111]: Glory be to Allah! What is this playing with the Shari’ah of
Allah?!

[^112]: No! But owing to the verdicts of the Book and the Sunna!!

[^113]: Nightly prayer during Ramadan.

[^114]: Supererogatory practice (prayer).

[^115]: Nafila is a prayer offered in the nights of Ramadan. The Sunni
offer it congregationally while we, the Shia, offer it individually as
the Prophet (S) has offered and as he has ordered: “Offer prayers as you
see me offering them.”

[^116]: Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.1 p.233, Sahih of Muslim, vol.1 p.283.

[^117]: Abdul Qarriy was the official of Umar over the treasury. He
narrated traditions from Umar, Abu Talha, Abu Ayyoob and Abu Hurayra.
His son Muhammad, az-Zuhri and Yahya bin Ja’da bin Hubayra narrated
traditions from him. He died in the year eighty of hijra.

[^118]: In the fourth page of his book Irshad as-Sari fee Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhari, vol.4.

[^119]: He was al-Hasan bin Abdullah bin Suhayl bin Sa’eed bin Yahya
surnamed as Abu al-Laghawi. He had written a book called al-Awa’il (the
firsts or the initiatives).

[^120]: Vol.4 p.370.

[^121]: Habta was his mother.

[^122]: Mentioned by Ahmad in his Musnad, vol.5 p.406, and by
ath-Thahabi in his Mizan al-I’tidal from Jareer ad-Dhabbi from Yahya
al-Jabir.

[^123]: The lexicons of the Arabic language prove this matter clearly.
Allah says: “Allah enjoins you concerning your (sons) children: The male
shall have the equal of the portion of two females” (4:11). When an Arab
man begets a girl he may say: By Allah, it is not a good son! In Arabic
“son” refers to either a boy or a girl.

[^124]: Mustadrak of al-Hakim, vol.4 p.339 and it has been mentioned by
many other scholars of Hadith.

[^125]: People at the time of Imam ‘Ali (as) usually supposed everything
to be of six parts as people nowadays suppose twenty-four carats. Imam
‘Ali (as) wanted to say: would that you know the solutions of the shares
when they conflict with each other! They do not exceed six shares. Since
you do not perceive the ways of (distributing) the six shares, you add
to the six inasmuch as the shortage. For example if the heirs are two
parents, two daughters and a husband, the parents have two shares of the
six, the two daughters have four (and so the six shares are complete)
and then you add one and a half to the husband and so the shares exceed
the six and become seven and a half shares and this is impossible to be
imposed by Allah at all.

[^126]: Vol.4 p.340.

[^127]: Al-Hakim said, after mentioning this tradition: “This is a true
tradition according to the conditions of Muslim but they (al-Bukhari and
Muslim) did not mention it in their Sahihs.” Ath-Thahabi has mentioned
it confessing its truthfulness. We have accurate researches on this
subject in our book The Answers of Musa Jarullah, let them be referred
to.

[^128]: And mentioned by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi in Kanzol Ummal, vol. 6
p.15.

[^129]: Mentioned by Ibn Shayba and al-Bayhaqi in their Sunan and Ibn
Sa’d in his Tabaqat and al-Muttaqi al-Hindi in Kanzol Ummal, vol. 6
p.15.

[^130]: Kanzol Ummal, vol. 6 p.15 from al-Bayhaqi in Shu’ab al-Eeman.

[^131]: It means to be treated as a father concerning the matter of
inheritance.

[^132]: Hayat al-Haywan (animal life) by ad-Dimyari, chap.
(Hayya-snake). He, who wants to see the confusion of Umar in this
matter, can refer to the books of Hadith, the matter of inheritance. For
example, let refer to Kanzol Ummal and Mustadrak of al-Hakim when
talking about inheritance.

[^133]: Mentioned by al-Bayhaqi and Ibn Abu Shayba in their Sunan and by
Abdurrazaq in his Jami’ as in Kanzol Ummal, vol. 6 p.7, and mentioned by
ash-Sharqawi in his Hashiya printed with al-Tahreer by Sheikh Zakariyya
al-Ansari. The author of Majma’ al-Anhur fee Sharh Multaqa al-Abhur
said: “Firstly Umar believed in not participating all the brothers in
the inheritance of their mother and then he changed his mind. The reason
behind changing his mind was that he had been asked about the case and
he answered according to his own opinion concerning the matter of
inheritance and then one of the full brothers said to him: “O Ameerul
Mo’mineen, if we suppose that our father is a donkey, are we not from
one mother?” Umar pondered a little and then he said: “You are right.
You all are from one mother.” Then he spread the third of the
inheritance among all of them.” This event has been mentioned in this
way by Ahmad Ameen in his book Fajr al-Islam, p.285.

[^134]: For more details refer to Taj al-Aroos by al-Wasiti.

[^135]: Refusing to give the non-Arabs their inheritance might be
because that it had not been proved to Umar that those people were legal
heirs or that the dead was a Muslim and the heirs were unbelievers or
that it had not been proved to Umar that they were among the relatives
of the dead who would have deserved to inherit him. Allah is more aware!

[^136]: Muwatta’ of Malik, vol.2 p.11.

[^137]: Four months and ten days.

[^138]: Kanzol Ummal, vol. 5 p.166

[^139]: Sunan of al-Bayhaqi, Sunan of Ibn Abu Shayba and Kanzol Ummal,
vol. 5 p.166.

[^140]: Mentioned by az-Zamakhshari in his Kashshaf when interpreting
this verse (and (as for) the pregnant women, their prescribed time is
that they lay down their burden). This is the opinion of Ahlul Bayt (as)
and it is the most cautious opinion.

[^141]: When a woman’s husband dies.

[^142]: In his book Usool al-Fiqh, p.241.

[^143]: Tayammum is performing ritual ablution, before offering prayers
and other obligations, with earth when there is no water.

[^144]: Irshad as-Sari fee Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari by al-Qastalani, vol.2
p.131.

[^145]: Ammar said that out of his fear from Umar because the saying of
Umar “We will see how to deal with you” was as a threat to Ammar.

[^146]: Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.1 p.50.

[^147]: Vol.1, p.309

[^148]: At the end of the chapter (prohibiting praying [two rak’as]
before Fajr prayer and after Asr prayer).

[^149]: Ibn Muhammad bin al-Mukandar al-Qarashi at-Taymi al-Madani, as
in Sharh al-Muwatta’ by az-Zarqani.

[^150]: He meant the time of sunset that the Prophet (S) had forbidden
from offering prayers in. The true prophetic traditions about this
matter have been mentioned in the books of Hadith. Malik in his Muwatta’
mentioned a tradition from Ibn Umar that the Prophet (S) had said: “Do
not offer prayers at the sunrise nor at the sunset.” The wisdom behind
this was that the umma shouls not imitate the Magi in their worshipping
the sun when rising and when setting. But the caliph Umar became
cautious to prevent the Muslims from offering prayers after Asr prayer
at all and not only the time of the sunset. And so he contradicted the
Shari’ah even if he intended to do good. Would that he had been
satisfied with prohibiting offering this prayer without beating the
servants of Allah while offering their prayers before their Lord!

[^151]: Tabaqat of Ibn Sa’d, vol.3 p.204, Tareekh al-Khulafa’ of
as-Sayooti, p.53, Sharh Nahjul Balagha of Ibn Abul Hadeed, vol.3 p.113,
Kitab al-Haywan of ad-Dimyari, Tareekh Umar by Abul Faraj al-Jawzi p.60.

[^152]: Mentioned by Ibn al-Atheer in Al-Kamil, the events of the 17th
year of hijra and by other historians.

[^153]: A tradition narrated by Ibn Abbas and mentioned by Ahmad in his
Musnad, vol.1 p.335.

[^154]: Al-Istee’ab by Ibn Abdul Birr, biography of Hamza bin Abdul
Muttalib.

[^155]: She was the Prophet’s aunt.

[^156]: Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol. 3 p.387.

[^157]: Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.1 p.148, vol.3 p.39.

[^158]: Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.1 p.154.

[^159]: Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.1 p.152, Sahih of Muslim, vol.1 chap.
Crying for the dead.

[^160]: Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.1 p.155, Sahih of Muslim, vol.1 p.341.

[^161]: In this tradition the Prophet (S) has approved crying for the
dead and ordered of it. In fact the crying of Fatima (sa) only could be
enough evidence on the subject.

[^162]: Vol.2 p.40.

[^163]: Al-Bukhari's Sahih, vol. 1 p.255

[^164]: Vol.1 p.335.

[^165]: Vol.2 p.333.

[^166]: One day during his caliphate, Umar heard some women crying
inside one of the houses. He came into the house and began beating the
crying women until their veils fell down of their heads. Then he said to
his servant: “Beat the weeping women…beat them. They have no sanctity…”
Refer to Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.3 p.111.

[^167]: It may be Rawdat Khakh, which is a place between Mecca and
Medina.

[^168]: Imam ‘Ali (as) threatened to disrobe her of her outer garment in
which the book was.

[^169]: Al-Bukhari's Sahih, vol. 4. chap. Forgiving the apostatized.

[^170]: As in Hayat al-Haywan by ad-Dimyari, chap. “luqha” she-camel.

[^171]: Vol.1, p.20.

[^172]: Suffa means shed, in which the neediest people lived at that
time. It was erected beside the mosque of the Prophet (S).

[^173]: Al-Bukhari’s Sahih, Vol.1, p.19.

[^174]: Tareekh Falsafatul Islam (history of the philosophy of Islam) by
Muhammad Lutfi, p.301.

[^175]: Refer to Tafseer al-Kashshaf by az-Zamakhshari and the other
books of Tafseer to see the interpretation of this verse. Refer to Asbab
an-Nuzool by al-Wahidy, p.33 for this tradition.

[^176]: Al-Mustatraf fee Kulli Fanin Mustadhraf by Shihabuddeen
al-Absheehi, vol.3 chap.74. It has also been quoted by some scholars
from Rabee’ul Abrar by az-Zamakhshari. Al-Fakhr ar-Razi has referred to
some of this event in his Tafseer al-Kabeer, vol.3 p.446 when
interpreting the Qur’anic verse “The Shaitan only desires to cause
enmity and hatred to spring in your midst by means of intoxicants and
games of chance”. He said: “It has been narrated that when Allah has
revealed “O you who believe! Do not go near prayer when you are
intoxicated”, Umar said: “O Allah, declare to us a full declaration
about wine! And when this verse “The Shaitan only desires to cause
enmity and hatred to spring in your midst by means of intoxicants and
games of chance, and to keep you off from the remembrance of Allah and
from prayer. Will you then desist” was revealed, Umar said: “O our Lord,
we desist!”

[^177]: The Prophet (S) had forbidden from killing al-Abbas (the
Prophet’s uncle). It has been mentionen in many true traditions and the
books of Hadith are full of such traditions. All the historians, who
have recorded the history of the battle of Badr, have mentioned this and
mentioned that the Prophet (S) had forbidden from killing any one of the
Hashemites.

[^178]: Al-Bidayeh wen-Nihayeh by Ibn Katheer, vol.3 p.284 and other
books of history like Seera of Ibn Ishaq. The Prophet (S) has forbidden
his companions from killing Abul Bukhturi because he was one of those
who had broken the bond (as-Saheefa) of the blockade against the
Hashimites and he was among those who had not harmed the Prophet (S) or
showed him what he disliked. The Prophet (S) intended to keep him alive
so that Allah might guide him to the right path one day. In the thick of
the battle al-Mujthir bin Ziyad al-Balawi met Abul Bukhturi and said to
him: “The Messenger of Allah (S) has forbidden us from killing you.”
Abul Bukhturi had a companion with him. He was Junada bin Maleeha from
bani Layth who had come with him from Mecca. Abul Bukhturi said to
al-Mujthir: “Will my friend not be killed too?” Al-Mujthir said: “No by
Allah, we will not leave your friend. The Messenger of Allah has ordered
us about you alone.” Abul Bukhturi said: “Then I will die with him. I do
not let the women of Quraysh in Mecca say that he has left his friend
alone for the sake of his own life.” They fought each other until
al-Mujthir killed him. Then al-Mujthir came to the Prophet (S) and said
to him: “I swear by Him, Who has sent you with the truth! I have
insisted on him to be as prisoner to bring him to you but he refused
except to fight me. We fought each other until I killed him.”

[^179]: It has been mentioned by the historians who have recorded the
events of the battle of Badr.

[^180]: Kanzol Ummal, vol. 5 p.272, also mentioned by Ibn Asakir.

[^181]: Al-Bidayeh wen-Nihayeh, vol.3 p.285.

[^182]: Ahmad Zayni Dahlan, the Mufti of the Shafiites, said in his book
as-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.504 when mentioning al-Abbas during the
battle of Badr: “Al-Abbas, according to what the scholars and historians
had said, had become a Muslim a long time ago but he had concealed his
faith. He became delighted when the Muslims obtained victory. The
Prophet (S) often told him of his secrets when he was in Mecca and he
always accompanied the Prophet (S) when going to invite the different
tribes to believe in Islam. Al-Abbas always encouraged the tribes to
support the Prophet (S). He had attended the homage of al-Aqaba which
was between the Prophet (S) and the Ansar. All that showed that he was a
Muslim. The Prophet (S) had ordered him to stay in Mecca in order to
write to him the secrets and news of Quraysh. When Quraysh wanted to go
to the war in Badr and called upon people to fight (against the Muslims)
he could not but to go with them; therefore the Prophet (S) had said on
the day of Badr: “He, who meets al-Abbas, has not to kill him because he
has gone to the war unwillingly.” This did not contradict the Prophet’s
saying when he asked him for redemption: “Apparently you were against
us” because his being apparently against them did not contradict his
being with them in his innerness. The Prophet (S) treated him according
to his apparent condition to please the hearts of the companions where
he had treated their fathers, sons and tribes in the same way. Al-Abbas
had properties and monies near the people of Quraysh and he feared that
if he had announced his being a Muslim, his properties would have been
lost among them. He had concealed his faith according to the order of
the Prophet (S). The Prophet (S) himself had not told his companions
about the faith of his uncle out of his kindness to his uncle and
because he had feared that his uncle’s monies would have been lost. The
Prophet (S) had had another aim in concealing his uncle’s faith. He
wanted him to be as a spy to bring him the news of Quraysh. But then
when Islam prevailed over Quraysh on the day of conquering Mecca,
al-Abbas declared his faith openly. He had not declared his faith until
the conquest of Mecca. Al-Abbas often asked the Prophet (S) to permit
him to immigrate to Medina to be with the Prophet (S) but the Prophet
(S) wrote to him: “Your stay in Mecca is better to you.” In another
tradition the Prophet (S) had written to him: “O uncle, stay in the
place where you are. Allah will complete the hijra (emigration) with you
as he has completed prophethood.” And it was so because al-Abbas was the
last emigrant for he had met the Prophet (S) in al-Abwa’ where he had
not known that the Prophet (S) had gone to conquer Mecca and then he
went back with him…”Al-Halabi in his Seera has had clearer speech about
the preceding faith of al-Abbas and his wife Umm al-Fadhl, who had
immigrated to the Prophet (S) too early. Refer to that and to the
sayings of the other scholars about this subject.

[^183]: Ad-Dahlani in his as-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.512.

[^184]: As-Seera an-Nabawiyya by ad-Dahlani, vol.1 p.512, other
traditions having somehow the same meaning mentioned in as-Seera by
al-Halabi and al-Bidayeh wen-Nihayeh quoted from Ahmad bin Hanbal,
Muslim, Abu Dawood and at-Tarmithi all narrated from Umar bin
al-Khattab.

[^185]: Al-Halabi’s Seera, ad-Dahlani’s Seera and other books of
history.

[^186]: Chap.8.

[^187]: Sheikh al-Mufeed’s Irshad, chap. the battle of Hunayn.

[^188]: Ibid.

[^189]: Al-Bidayeh wen-Nihayeh by Ibn Katheer, chap. The battle of
Hunayn.

[^190]: These details have been mentioned by all the historians who have
talked about the Battle of Uhud.

[^191]: This story has been mentioned by the historians who have
detailed the events of the battle of Uhud.

[^192]: Vol.3 p.46. Al-Bidayeh wen-Nihayeh by Ibn Katheer, vol.4 p.329
from al-Bukhari, Muslim and others.

[^193]: Mustadrak of al-Hakim, vol.3 p.37, Talkhees al-Mustadrak by
ath-Thahabi.

[^194]: Mustadrak of al-Hakim, Talkhees al-Mustadrak of ath-Thahabi.

[^195]: Vol.3, p.38.

[^196]: Mustadrak of al-Hakim, who said it was a true tradition
according to the conditions of al-Bukhari and Muslim. So was said by
ath-Thahabi in his Talkhees.

[^197]: Refer to al-Irshad by Sheikh al-Mufeed for more details.

[^198]: Vol. 3, p.43.

[^199]: Once al-Hasan al-Basri was asked about Imam ‘Ali (as) and he
said: “What shall I say about one, who has obtained the four aspects;
being entrusted with the sura of Bara’a, what the Prophet (S) has said
about him in the battle of Tabook… if he missed any thing of virtues
other than prophethood, the Prophet (S) would exclude him, the saying of
the Prophet (S): …the two weighty things; the Book of Allah and my
family and that no emir has ever been appointed over him at all whereas
the emirs have commanded other (companions) than him…” Refer to Sharh
Nahjul Balagha, vol. 1 p.369

[^200]: As he had done in the battle of Khaybar when he appointed Abu
Bakr and then Umar as the leaders but he was not under their leaderships
but when he appointed Imam ‘Ali (as) as the leader, they both were under
his leadership. Praise be to Allah for all of that!

[^201]: Ahmad bin Hanbal mentioned in his Musnad, vol.5 p.356 that
Burayda had said: “The Prophet (S) had sent two armies to Yemen; one of
them was under the leadership of Ali bin Abu Talib and the other was
under the leadership of Khalid bin al-Waleed. He said to them: “If you
meet together, Ali will be the leader of the two armies and if you
separate, each one of you will lead his army.” We met the tribe of
Zubayda and we fought each other. The Muslims defeated the polytheists.
We killed the warriors and captured the women. Ali chose a woman from
among the captives to himself. Khalid sent a letter with me to the
Prophet (S) telling him about that. When I came to the Prophet (S), I
gave him the book. It was read to him. The sign of anger seemed on the
face of the Prophet (S). I said: “O Messenger of Allah, you have sent me
with a man and ordered me to obey him and I did as I was ordered.” The
Prophet (S) said: “Do not involve yourself with Ali in any problem! He
is from me and I am from him and he is your guardian after me.” This
tradition has been mentioned by other scholars of Hadith. Refer to our
book al-Muraja’at, no.36.

[^202]: As in the battle of Khaybar and the battle of Thaat as-Salasil
mentioned above.

[^203]: We have written a good research on this subject in our book Abu
Hurayra. Please refer to p.157-188, tradition no.18.

[^204]: That the enemy might hear him and might attack the Prophet (S)
again.

[^205]: Thul Faqar was the name of the famous sword of Imam ‘Ali (as).

[^206]: After that Fatima (sa) burnt a piece of a straw mat and put some
of the ash on the wound and then the bleeding stopped. She had attended
the event. She embraced her father while he was wounded and she was
crying.

[^207]: Ibn Jareer’s Tareekh, Ibnul Atheer’s Tareekh, Ibn Sa’d’s
Tabaqat, al-Halabi’s Seera, ad-Dahlani’s Seera, al-Bidayeh wen-Nihayeh
by Abul Fida’ and all the books of history that have recorded the events
of the battle of Uhud.

[^208]: As if the Prophet (S) was not safe from Abu Sufyan and his men
to attack him if they knew that he was still alive; therefore he ordered
his companions not to answer Abu Sufyan and as if Umar, when answering
Abu Sufyan, was not afraid and did not think that the caution of the
Prophet (S) was justifiable!

[^209]: Makarim al-Akhlaq by al-Khara’ity, Kanzol Ummal, vol. 2 p.167,
Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol. 3 p.96, Ihya’ul Uloom by al-Ghazali, p.137.

[^210]: Al-Qat’ wes-Sariqa (cut and theft) by Abu al-Sheikh, Kanzol
Ummal, vol.2 p. 141.

[^211]: Kanzol Ummal, vol. 2 tradition no.3694.

[^212]: Narrated by Abdurrazaq, Abd bin Hameed and al-Khara’ity in
Makarim al-Akhlaq, Kanzol Ummal, vol.2 tradition no.3693, Mustadrak of
al-Hakim, vol.4 p.377, Talkhees of ath-Thahabi.

[^213]: Kanzol Ummal, vol. 2 p.141.

[^214]: Ibid.

[^215]: According to the value of that time.

[^216]: Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol. 3 p.96 and mentioned by other
historians and scholars of Hadith.

[^217]: Az-Zamakhshari in his Kashshaf when interpreting the mentioned
verse.

[^218]: At-Tafseer al-Kabeer by ar-Razi, vol.3 p.175. Ar-Razi had a
stumble in his speech when talking about this verse. He said: “I think
that the verse has no evidence showing that exceeding in dowries is
permissible…to the last of his crooked speech, in which he wanted to
refute the woman in order to defend Umar but he complicated the
situation unknowingly. Refer to Tareekh Umar bin al-Khattab by Abul
Faraj al-Jawzy, p.150. it has a tradition narrated by Abdullah bin
Mus’ab and another one narrated by Ibn al-Ajda’ showing the speech of
Umar, in which he has decided to prohibit the exceeding dowries and the
refutation of the woman which has led Umar to give up his decision after
confessing that the woman was right.

[^219]: Al-Bukhari's Sahih, vol. 1 p.19.

[^220]: A’lam al-Muwaqqi’een, p.32, Fajr al-Islam by Ahmad Ameen, p.287,
al-Isaba by Ibn Hajar, vol.2 biography of Abdurrahman bin Hatib.

[^221]: Al-Istee’ab by Ibn Abdul Birr, Hayat al-Haywan by ad-Dimyari,
chap. of “snake”.

[^222]: Vol.3, p.205.

[^223]: Not Abu Bakr.

[^224]: Al-Iqd al-Fareed by Ibn Abd Rabbih al-Andalusi, vol.1 p.187,
Arabic Lessons for secondary schools, vol.1 p.62 edition of al-Kashshaf
Press, Beirut, quoted from al-Aghani by Abul Faraj al-Isfahani.

[^225]: A dry bunch of dates he was used to hold in his hand.

[^226]: Umayma was Abu Hurayra’s mother. This word of the caliph was
among the worst words of abuse.

[^227]: P.104, edition of Egypt.

[^228]: Vol.4, p.90.

[^229]: Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol. 3 p.122.

[^230]: He was Nasr bin Hajjaj bin Alabit al-Bahzi as-Salami.

[^231]: This was one of the famous events in the history of Umar. It has
been mentioned by the most of the historians. Refer to Sharh Nahjul
Balagha, vol. 3 p. 123. Ibn Abul Hadeed mentioned in the same volume of
his book that Umar had whipped one of his sons for drinking wine until
he died. All the historians, who have talked about Abu Shahma, mentioned
this case such as Ibn Abdul Birr in his Istee’ab, ad-Dimyari in Hayat
al-Haywan and Ibn al-Jawzi in his book Tareekh Umar, chap.77.

[^232]: Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol. 1 p.59.

[^233]: Ham and Hakam were two tribes of Yemen, which had no any kinship
with Quraysh, the Prophet’s tribe.

[^234]: He was Umar bin al-Khattab undoubtedly.

[^235]: Thakha’ir al-Uqba by Muhiuddeen at-Tabari.

[^236]: Vol.2, p.842.

[^237]: Al-Hakim after mentioning this tradition in his Mustadrak said:
“It is a true tradition according to the conditions of the two sheikhs;
al-Bukhari and Muslim but they have not mentioned it.” The same has been
said by ath-Thahabi after mentioning it in his Talkhees al-Mustadrak.

[^238]: Al-Isaba by Ibn Hajar, biography of Ma’ath bin Jabal.

[^239]: Vol.4, p.389.

[^240]: Vol.1, p.154.

[^241]: Mustadrak of al-Hakim, vol.4 p.389, Talkees al-Mustadrak by
ath-Thahabi. Al-Bukahri has summarized the tradition in his Sahih, vol.4
p.117 saying: “Ali said to Umar: “Have you not known that three are free
from being considered as sinful; a mad one until he becomes sane, a
child until he becomes adult and a sleeping one until he awakes.”

[^242]: At-Turuq al-Hakamiyya fee as-Siyasa ash-Shar’iyya by Ibn
al-Qayyim, p.53

[^243]: Ibid., p.55.

[^244]: p.285, quoted from the book A’lam al-Muwaqqi’een.

[^245]: Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.1, p.58.

[^246]: Mustadrak of al-Hakim, vol.4 p.376, Talkhees al-Mustadrak by
ath-Thahabi.

[^247]: P.30

[^248]: Vol. 1, p.190.

[^249]: Darrah is a dry bunch of dates (after losing its fruits).

[^250]: Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol. 1 p.60. Al-Hajjaj was a tyrant emir
of the Umayyad state.

[^251]: Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol. 1 p.134.

[^252]: Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol. 1.

[^253]: Referring to horrible event that Imam ‘Ali (as) disliked to
mention openly.

[^254]: On Wednesday, four days before the end of Thul Hijja, 23 A.H.
and he died three days after that and then he was buried on Sunday.

[^255]: If Abu Ubayda was the trustee of this umma, then Imam ‘Ali (as)
was worthier of the umma than itself as they had known well. Umar
himself had congratulated him of that on the day of al-Ghadeer.

[^256]: I do not think that he has forgotten his coming back with the
banner after the coming back of his friend (Abu Bakr) from Khaybar
defeated and sorrowful and I do not think that he has forgotten the good
news of the Prophet (S) to Imam ‘Ali (as), who has obtained the great
victory, nor has he forgotten the saying of the Prophet (S) on that day:
“By Allah, I will give the banner tomorrow to a man, whom Allah will
grant victory. He loves Allah and His Messenger and Allah and His
Messenger love him.”

[^257]: Umar’s slighting the bloods of these men might encourage the
killers of Othman to slight his blood and might encourage the Kharijites
to slight the bloods of Imam ‘Ali (as) and his companions on the days of
al-Jamal, al-Basra, an-Nahrawan and Siffeen when fighting him and
killing him later on and encouraged Yazeed to slight the blood of the
master of the martyrs Imam Husayn (as) in Kerbala for Umar was the
example especially for those people with no doubt!

[^258]: Umar’s covenant of Shura in this way as we have summarized is
proved by the recurrent traditions that have been mentioned by all the
historians and scholars of Hadith. Refer to al-Kamil by Ibn al-Atheer,
vol.3, the events of the year 23 of hijra, Tareekh al-Umam wel Mulook by
by Ibn Jareer, the events of 23 A.H., Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol. 1 p.62
and the rest of the books of history.

[^259]: To see how Umar has described them, refer to Sharh Nahjul
Balagha, vol.1 p.72 and you will find wonders!

[^260]: Therefore Imam ‘Ali (as) said: “It (the caliphate) gone away
from us.” His uncle al-Abbas said - as in al-Kamil by Ibn al-Atheer and
Tareekh al-Umam wel Mulook by Ibn Jareer: “…how did you know?” Imam ‘Ali
(as) said: “Othman has been compared to me…they are with the majority;
if two men will choose a man and the other two men will choose a man,
then they will be with the group of Abdurrahman and Sa’d will never
object to his uncle Abdurrahman at all and Abdurrahman is the kin of
Othman; they will never disagree at all. Even if the other two are with
me, they will not avail me.”

[^261]: In spite of that Allah has strongly prohibited shedding blood in
the clear verses of the Qur'an and it has been prohibited by the
prophetic traditions and by the consensus of the umma.

[^262]: Al-Istee’ab by Ibn Abdul Birr, biography of Salim.

[^263]: Many scholars have declared the consensus on this matter such as
an-Nawawi in his book Sharh Sahih Muslim, chap. of Imamate.

[^264]: They justified that by saying that Umar had said that as an
ijtihad by him due to his own opinion. Among those who have mentioned
this excuse was Ibn Abdul Birr in his book al-Istee’ab. Refer to that to
see that they were indifferent to the legal verdicts and the clear texts
of Allah and His Messenger.

[^265]: Abu Bakr Ahmad bin Abdul Aziz al-Jawhari mentioned in his book
Kitab as-Saqeefa a long tradition which also has been mentioned by Ibn
Abul Hadeed in Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol. 2, saying: “Umar with a gang,
among whom were Usayd bin Khudhayr and Salama bin Aslam, went to the
house of Fatima (sa). Umar said to them (to Ali and the companions who
were with Ali inside the house): “Come out to pay homage.” They refused
to do that and az-Zubayr came out to them with his sword. Umar said:
“Arrest the dog!” Salama bin Aslam jumped to him (to az-Zubayr) and took
the sword from his hand and threw it against the wall…”

[^266]: Imam ‘Ali (as) had lead his few companions in offering the
prayer of funerals for Fatima (sa) and Abu Bakr had not been allowed (or
even informed) to offer the prayer for her. Refer to Sahih of
al-Bukhari, vol.2 p.39 and Sahih of Muslim, vol.2 p.72.

[^267]: Once Umar said from above the minbar in a long speech he made:
“…I have been informed that someone of you has said: “by Allah, if Umar
dies, I will pay homage to so-and-so.” Let no one be deceived to say
such a thing. By Allah, the homage of Abu Bakr was a slip…but Allah has
saved (the umma) from its evil…” Refer to Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.4
p.119. Al-Qastalani said in his book Irshad as-Sari when explaining this
tradition that az-Zubayr bin al-Awwam often said: “If Umar dies, I will
pay homage to Ali. The homage of Abu Bakr was a slip but it was
accomplished.” This saying reached Umar, who became very angry and then
he made that speech. Such was what all the scholars, who had explained
Sahih of al-Bukhari, mentioned in their books.

[^268]: Taym was the tribe of Abu Bakr, the father of Aa’isha.

[^269]: All the historians have mentioned that she had incited people
against Othman. One of her coevals blamed her by reciting the following
verses of poetry: The outset is from you and the vicissitudes of time is
from you, Storm is from you and rain is from you. You have ordered the
emir to be killed, And said to us that he has disbelieved! Refer to
al-Kamil by Ibn al-Atheer, vol.3 p.8.

[^270]: Abu Othman mentioned in the book of as-Sufyaniyya as in Sharh
Nahjul Balagha, vol. 1 p.62 that Ma’mar bin Sulayman at-Tameemi narrated
from his father from Sa’eed bin al-Musayyab that Ibn Abbas had said: “I
have heard Umar saying to the men of the Shura: “If you cooperate,
support each other and become loyal to each other, you will eat (obtain)
it (the caliphate), you and your progeny but if you envy each other,
disagree with each other and hate each other, then Mo’awiya bin Abu
Sufyan is to be the caliph over you.” Mo’awiya was the emir of Sham,
appointed by Umar, at that time. It is clear that this word has
nominated Mo’awiya and encouraged him to ask for the caliphate with all
his power and as possible as he could use deceit and trick. When the
fate of the caliphate after Umar became in Othman’s hand, it meant that
it would become in Mo’awiya’s hand after Othman; therefore Umar had
arranged the Shura in a way that it would consequently drive the
caliphate to Othman as we have said. In short, Othman, before facing his
fate, he had made five persons compete with Imam ‘Ali (as) and fight him
to extort his legal right. Othman was not satisfied with this until he
incited Mo’awiya to stretch his neck towards the caliphate as it has
been clear to the men of understanding.

[^271]: On the day of the Shura, Umar had said to Othman: “As if I see
that Quraysh has entrusted you with this matter (the caliphate) and then
you will make Bani Umayya (the Umayyads) and Bani Ma’eet over the necks
of people and will prefer them to the others with the wealth and then a
group of the Arabs will come to you to slaughter you in your bed. By
Allah, if they do, you will do, and if you do, they will do.” Then Umar
grasped the forelock of Othman and said: “When that occurs, remember my
saying. It will take place.” Ibn Abul Hadeed said in Sharh Nahjul
Balagha, vol. 1 p.22 after mentioning this tradition: “Our Sheikh Abu
Othman has mentioned this tradition in his book as-Sufyaniyya and it has
been mentioned by others when talking about the insight of Umar.” This
confirms our saying that Umar has intended, out of the caliphate of
Othman, to pave the way for Mo’awiya because he knew that Othman would
be killed and then the way would be opened for Mo’awiya to reach the
caliphate. In fact the very caliphate of Othman would take Mo’awiya to
the throne! The outset is from you and the vicissitudes of time is from
you, Storm is from you and rain is from you. You have ordered the emir
to be killed, and said to us that he has disbelieved!


