Chapter 3: Othman and his followers’ Interpretations
====================================================

71. His kindness to his relatives
---------------------------------

Othman was kind to his relatives [^1] (the family of Abul Aas). [^2] He
loved them very much and preferred them to the all of the umma until he
paid attention neither to the blamers nor to the revolters. He violated
many Qur’anic verdicts and many holy texts of the sacred Sunna of the
Prophet (S) and the traditions that had been followed before him in
order to satisfy his relatives.

Ibn Abul Hadeed said: [^3] “The prediction of Umar about Othman turned
out to be true. Othman made the Umayyads tread on the necks of people.
He entrusted them with the emirate of the different countries and gifted
them with the wealth of the Muslims. In his days Armenia was conquered.
He took all the khums [^4] of its booties and gifted it to Marwan.”

Ibn Abul Hadeed added: “Once Abdullah bin Khalid bin Usayd asked Othman
for a present. He gave him four hundred thousand dirhams…he permitted
al-Hakam bin Abul Aas to return to Medina after the Prophet (S) had
exiled him from it and Abu Bakr and Umar had refused to let him return.
He gave him one hundred thousand dirhams.

“The Prophet (S) had given the Muslims a place of a market in Medina
called Nahrooz as charity but Othman, after being the caliph, gifted it
to al-Harith bin al-Hakam, Marwan’s brother and he gave Fadak to Marwan,
which Fatima (sa) had asked for after the death of her father as her
inheritance one time and as donation the other time but she had been
deprived of it…he prevented all the Muslims from grazing their cattle in
the pastures around Medina except the Umayyads..

“…he gave Abdullah bin Abu Sarh all the booties the Muslims had got when
conquering north Africa, from Tripoli to Tangier, without giving any
share to any other Muslim…he gave Abu Sufyan bin Harb two hundred
thousand (dirhams) from the public treasury on the same day when he gave
Marwan bin al-Hakam one hundred thousand (dirhams) from the treasury
when he had married him his daughter Umm Abban.

“On that day Zayd bin Arqam, who was the keeper of the treasury, brought
the keys of the treasury and put them before Othman and began crying.
Othman said to him: “Do you cry because I help my relatives?” Zayd said:
“No, but I think that you have taken these monies instead of the monies
you had spent for the sake of Allah at the time of the Messenger of
Allah. By Allah, if you give Marwan one hundred dirhams, it will be too
much.” Othman said: “O Ibn Arqam, throw the keys! We will find other
than you.”

Ibn Abul Hadeed added: “One day Abu Musa brought him (Othman) great
wealth from Iraq (as land taxes) and he distributed it all among the
Umayyads. He married his daughter Aa’isha to al-Harith bin al-Hakam and
he gave him one hundred thousand dirhams from the treasury after
deposing Zayd bin Arqam from the treasury…

“…besides these things he committed many other faults that made the
Muslims bear grudge against him…such as exiling Abu Dharr to ar-Rabatha
(in the desert), beating Abdullah bin Mas’ood until he broke his ribs,
appointing doorkeepers (to prevent people from coming to him), deviating
from the way of Umar in executing the penalties, judging among people,
punishing the transgressors and in being strict to manage the affairs of
the citizens.

“And he ended his bad deeds with his letter to Mo’awiya ordering him to
kill a group of the Muslims and then many people of Medina with the
people who had come from Egypt revolted against him and killed him; yet
they had to depose him from the caliphate and not to hasten in killing
him…Ameerul Mo'mineen (Imam Ali) was the most innocent of killing him.
He had declared that in many of his speeches. He said: “By Allah, I have
not killed Othman and I have not agreed with the people on killing him.”
He had said the truth. Blessing be upon him…”

In short, all the transgressions of Othman had been narrated by the
narrators and mentioned by the historians and the scholars of Hadith.
Many of the scholars had considered them as true and fixed events. Refer
to the resources to see the clear truth. [^5]

The speech of Imam ‘Ali (as), called ash-Shaqshaqiyya, suffices in
showing the reality of this man he said: “…until the third of people (of
the caliphs - Othman) came (become the caliph) struttingly… and his
relatives came with him gnawing the wealth of Allah as camels gnawing
the grass of spring until his weaving turned over him, his deeds
finished him off, his retinue failed him…”

72. His prayer in travel
------------------------

A four *rak’a* prayer is shortened to two *rak’as* in travel whether in
the case of fear or safety according to the *Shari’ah*. The legality of
“*taqseer* or *qasr*” [^6] has been proved by the Qur'an, the Sunna and
the consensus of the umma. Allah has said:

***“And*** ***when you journey in the earth, there is no blame on you if
you shorten the prayer, if you fear that those who disbelieve will cause
you distress” (Qur’an 4:101)***.

Ya’la bin Umayya narrated that he had asked Umar: “Why do we shorten
prayers though we have felt safe?” Umar said: “I have wondered at what
you have wondered at and once I asked the Messenger of Allah about it.
He said: “It is a charity that Allah has endowed you with. Accept His
charity!” [^7]

Ibn Umar said: [^8] “I often accompanied the Messenger of Allah (S) in
travel. He did not offer more than two *rak’as* (in travel) until he
left to the better world. I accompanied Umar (in travel). He did not
offer more than two *rak’as* until he died. I accompanied Othman. He did
not offer more than two *rak’as*.” [^9]

Allah has said:
***“Certainly you have in the Messenger*** ***of Allah an excellent
exemplar” (Qur’an 33:21).***

Ibn Shayba narrated that the Prophet (S) had said: “The best believers
of my umma are they who witness that there is no god but Allah and that
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah and who when doing good they become
pleased, when doing wrong they ask Allah to forgive them and when
traveling they shorten their prayers.”

Anas bin Malik said: “Once we traveled with the Prophet (S) from Medina
to Mecca. He offered two *rak’as* two *rak’as* until we returned.” [^10]

Ibn Abbas said: “The Prophet (S) stayed at Mecca for nineteen days
shortening the prayers…” [^11] The Prophet (S) shortened the prayers
during the nineteen days because he had had no intention of residence.

It has been proved that the Prophet (S), when leading the people of
Mecca in offering the prayers after the hijra, had recited *tasleem*
[^12] after two *rak’as* in the four *rak’as* prayers. He had told the
people (of Mecca) before beginning the prayers to complete their four
*rak’as* prayers apologizing to them that he and his companions were
travelers.

Anas said: “Once I offered Dhuhr prayer with the Prophet (S) in Medina
in four *rak’as* and offered Asr prayer with him in Thil Hulayfa in two
*rak’as*. [^13]

The Qur’anic verse has confirmed the legality of shortening prayers by a
traveler in the state of fear. The true traditions after that have
confirmed the legality of shortening the prayers by a traveler at all
and on this has been the consensus of the umma with no disagreement
except from Aa’isha and Othman. It has been mentioned that both of them
offered full prayers during travel. This was the first thing that the
people began criticizing Othman for as the historians had recorded it
from among the events of the year twenty-three of hijra.[^14]

Al-Bukhari and Muslim mentioned in their *Sahihs* a tradition narrated
by Nafi’ that Ibn Umar had said: “The Messenger of Allah (S) always
offered two *rak’as* (instead of four) in Mina. So did Abu Bakr after
him. Umar did the same after Abu Bakr. Othman offered two *rak’as*
during the first period of his caliphate but then he offered four
*rak’as* (in Mina)…”

They (al-Bukhari and Muslim) also mentioned that Abdurrahman bin Yazeed
had said: “Othman bin Affan led us in offering the prayer in Mina and he
offered four *rak’as*. It was said to Abdullah bin Mas’ood about that.
He sighed and then said: “I offered two *rak’as* with the Prophet (S) in
Mina, two *rak’as* with Abu Bakr and two *rak’as* with Umar. I hope that
two of these four *rak’as* will be accepted!”

They mentioned too that Haritha bin Wahab al-Khuza’iy had said: “Once
the Prophet (S) led us in offering the prayer where the people were so
many. His prayer was two *rak’as*.” [^15]

Muslim mentioned in his *Sahih* a tradition narrated by az-Zuhri from
Urwa that Aa’isha had said: “First the prayer has been legislated as two
*rak’as* and then the prayer in travel has been fixed (as two *rak’as*)
whereas the prayer in residence has become full (four *rak’as*).”
Az-Zuhri said: “I asked Urwa: “Then why does Aa’isha offer full prayers
in travel?” He said: “She has interpreted (the verdict according to her
own opinion) as Othman has done.” [^16]

Al-Fadhil an-Nawawi said when explaining this tradition of Muslim: “The
ulama disagreed on their (Othman and Aa’isha’s) interpretations; it was
said: Othman was Ameerul Mo'mineen (the commander of the believers) and
Aa’isha was Ummul Mo’mineen (the mother of the believers) so as if they
were always at home (in residence and not in travel). He added: “The
scholars have denied this justification saying that the Prophet (S)
would be worthier of this than Othman and Aa’isha and the same would be
with Abu Bakr and Umar.

“It was also said that Othman had got married in Mecca. The scholars
have denied this too saying that the Prophet (S) had traveled with his
wives but he had shortened his prayers. It was also said that Othman and
Aa’isha had done so for the sake of the nomads, who had been with them,
so that they would not think that prayers were two *rak’as* whether in
residence or in travel. The scholars have refuted this too by saying
that this meaning was existing at the time of the Prophet (S).

“In fact the matter of prayer has become more famous at the time of
Othman and Aa’isha than before. It was also said that Othman and Aa’isha
had intended to reside in Mecca after offering the hajj. This has also
been refuted by saying that residing in Mecca for more than three days
was impermissible for the Muhajireen. It was said too that Othman had
had a piece of land in Mina. The scholars have refuted this by saying
that this did not require offering full prayers or residing. They
(Othman and Aa’isha) might think that offering *qasr* prayer was
permissible and offering full prayer was also permissible and so they
followed one of the two.

In fact, their objection to the legal texts was not limited to this act,
which had not led to profaning sanctities, shedding bloods, violating
honors or extorting properties as their other interpretations. This was
simple in comparison with their other interpretations against the legal
verdicts.

[^1]: Othman had violated the legal texts in many occasions for the sake
of his relatives. We cannot cover them all in this book. They may not be
less than the violations of the two previous caliphs together.

[^2]: The Prophet (S) has said: “When the family of al-Aas becomes
thirty men, they will distribute the wealth of the Muslims among
themselves, make people slaves for them and distort the religion of
Allah according to their interests.” It has been mentioned by al-Hakim
in his Mustadrak, vol.4 p.480, from Imam ‘Ali (as), Abu Dharr, and Abu
Sa’eed al-Khidri and mentioned by ath-Thahabi in Talkhees al-Mustadrak.
The prophetic traditions dispraising the family of al-Aas are true and
recurrent. The Prophet (S) has declared the reality of those hypocrite
people and he has cursed them “..that he who would perish might perish
by clear proof, and he who would live might live by clear proof” (8:42).
Al-Hakim mentioned in his Mustadrak many other traditions which sufficed
in this concern. Refer to our book Abu Hurayra, p.118-128.

[^3]: Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol. 1 p.66.

[^4]: Fifth.

[^5]: Among those, who have considered the transgressions of Othman as
true and real with no doubt, was ash-Shahristani in his book al-Milal
wen-Nihal. Othman had committed many other violations such as burning
the copies of the holy Qur'an in order to gather the Muslims on one
reciting of the Qur'an, gifting the warriors from the monies of charity
whereas they were not from among the eight classes that Allah had
limited charity to by saying: “Alms are only for the poor and the needy,
and the officials (appointed) over them, and those whose hearts are made
to incline (to truth) and the (ransoming of) captives and those in debts
and in the way of Allah and the wayfarer” (9:60), beating Ammar bin
Yasir severely, not punishing Ubaydillah bin Umar with the legal penalty
when he had killed al-Hurmuzan, his letter to the people of Egypt to
kill Muhammad bin Abu Bakr and a group of the believers with him and
many other transgressions!

[^6]: Shortening the prayers during travels.

[^7]: Sahih of Muslim, vol.1, p.258.

[^8]: As in Sahih of Muslim, vol.1, p.295.

[^9]: So did Othman during the first six or nine years of his caliphate
but after that he offered full (four rak’as) prayers in travel until he
died. We will mention this soon inshallah.

[^10]: Sahihs of al-Bukhari and Muslim.

[^11]: Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.1 p.131.

[^12]: Saying “peace, mercy of Allah and blessing be upon you” to finish
prayers.

[^13]: Sahih of Muslim, vol.1.

[^14]: Al-Kamil by Ibn al-Atheer, vol.3 p.49, Tareekh of at-Tabari,
vol.3, p.322.

[^15]: Ahmad bin Hanbal mentioned in his Musnad, vol.4 p.94 a tradition
narrated by Abbad bin Abdullah bin az-Zubayr that his father had said:
“Once when Mo’awiya has come (to Mecca) to offer the hajj, we came with
him from Mecca. He led us in offering Dhuhr prayer. He offered two
rak’as. But when Othman came to Mecca as traveler, he offered Dhuhr, Asr
and Isha’ prayer four rak’as and when he came to Mina he also offered
full prayers (in Mina and in Arafat). When Mo’awiya offered Dhuhr prayer
as two rak’as, Marwan bin al-Hakam and Amr bin Othman said to him: “No
one has faulted your cousin (Othman) with worse than you have done!” He
said to them: “How is that?” They said to him: “Have you not known that
he (Othman) has offered full prayer in his travel? Mo’awiya said: “Has
it been other than what I did? I have offered it (the prayer) with the
Messenger of Allah (S), with Abu Bakr and with Umar as qasr (shortened
form).” They said to him: “But your cousin has offered it in full and
your doing so would fault him.” Then Mo’awiya offered Asr prayer four
rak’as after he had offered Dhuhr prayer two rak’as.”

[^16]: Sahih of Muslim, vol.1 p.258.


