Chapter 5: Interpretations of Khalid bin al-Waleed
==================================================

86. On the day of the conquest of Mecca
---------------------------------------

On the day of the conquest of Mecca the Prophet (S) has ordered Khalid
not to fight and not to kill anyone. The Prophet (S) had said to Khalid
and az-Zubayr: “Do not fight except those who will fight you.”
Nevertheless Khalid fought and killed more than twenty persons from
Quraysh and four persons from Huthayl. The Prophet (S) entered Mecca and
saw a woman killed on the way. He asked Handhala the clerk who had
killed her. He said that Khalid bin al-Waleed had killed her. The
Prophet (S) ordered Handhala to follow after Khalid and to forbid him
from killing any woman, child or employee. [^1]

87. His violence to Bani Juthayma
---------------------------------

Once the Prophet (S) had sent Khalid with three hundred men of the
Muhajireen and Ansar after the conquest of Mecca to Bani Juthayma to
invite them to Islam and not to fight them. Bani Juthayma had killed
Khalid’s uncle al-Fakih bin al-Mugheera before in the pre-Islamic time.
When Khalid came to bani Juthayma, he said to them: “Put your arms aside
because all the people have become Muslims.” When they put their arms
aside, he ordered his companions to tie them and then he began to kill
them. He killed a great number of them. [^2]

When the Prophet (S) was informed of that, he raised his hands towards
the heaven and said twice: “O Allah, I am clear of what Khalid bin
al-Waleed has done.” [^3]

Then the Prophet (S) sent Imam ‘Ali (as) to the people of Juthayma and
sent with him a great amount of money and ordered him to pay them blood
money. Imam ‘Ali (as) paid them their shares and some of the money
remained with him. He asked them: “Is there anyone that has not taken
his right?” They said: “No, there is not.” He said: “Then I give you
this remainder of the money as a precaution from the Prophet (S).” When
he came back, he told the Prophet (S) of what he had done. The Prophet
(S) said to him: “You have done well.” [^4]

Abbas Mahmood al-Aqqad has mentioned this event in his book *Abqariyat
Umar*. He has said: “The Prophet (S) sent Khalid to Bani Juthayma to
invite them to Islam and not to fight them. He ordered him not to fight
anyone if he saw a mosque or heard *azan*. Then Bani Juthayma put their
arms aside after argument among them and they gave in. Khalid ordered
them to be tied and then he killed many of them.

One of them, called as-Sumayda’, escaped and came to the Prophet (S). He
told the Prophet (S) of what had happened and complained against Khalid.
The Prophet (S) asked him: “Did anyone deny Khalid’s doing?” The man
said: “Yes, a yellow medium sized man and a red tall man.” Umar, who was
present, said: “O Messenger of Allah, by Allah I know them. The first
one is my son (Abdullah) and the other is Salim the mawla (freed slave)
of Abu Huthayfa.”

After that it appeared that Khalid had ordered everyone to kill the
captives whom he had captured. Abdullah bin Umar and Salim had set free
two captives that they had captured…the Messenger of Allah raised his
hands towards the heaven and said: “O Allah, I am clear of what Khalid
has done.”…then the Prophet (S) sent for Ali bin Abu Talib (S) and
ordered him to go to Bani Juthayma with camels and money. He (Imam Ali)
paid them the blood money.”

The Prophet (S) did not kill anyone for that because the killers were
Muslims and the killed ones did no say: “We have become Muslims” but
they said: “We have apostatized” and this statement was not clear in
showing that they believed in Islam and therefore a Muslim should not be
killed for an unbeliever.

On the day of al-Bitah, Khalid has committed horrible crimes against
Malik bin Nuwayra and his people. We have mentioned the details in
chapter one of this book. Refer to that and ponder on it to know who was
responsible for those horrible crimes when the blood, the monies and the
honors of the Muslims had gone in vain and when the verdicts of Allah
had been annulled, His sanctities had been violated and the revolt of
the revolters against Khalid had been calmed. At the head of those
revolters was Umar who, when becoming the caliph, had despised Khalid
and hastened to depose him immediately as mentioned by Ibnul Atheer and
the other historians.

[^1]: For more details refer to Abqariyat Umar by al-Aqqad, p.266.

[^2]: Here Khalid was not satisfied with contradicting the order of the
Prophet (S) but also he violated many basic principles of Islam. Islam
has forgiven all the sins that had been committed before the advent of
the mission. Allah has said: “And do not kill any one whom Allah has
forbidden, except for a just cause, and whoever is slain unjustly, We
have indeed given to his heir authority, so let him not exceed the just
limits in slaying” (17/33). Khalid has exceeded in shedding the blood of
those people just to revenge his uncle, who was mean and who had
deserved to be killed. Moreover that Khalid was not the heir of his
uncle nor had he the guardianship of his uncle. His crimes on that day,
although he was the Messenger of the Prophet (S) to those people, were
among the worst denied doings and they were not less than his crimes on
the day of al-Bitah that could not be forgotten until the Day of
Resurrection.

[^3]: Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.3 p.48, also mentioned by Ahmad bin
Hanbal in his Musnad.

[^4]: Mentioned by Ibn Jareer in his Tareekh, Ibnul Atheer in his
Tareekh and all the historians and biographers who have recorded the
biography of Khalid. Ibn Abdul Birr said in his book al-Istee’ab after
mentioning this story: “This is a true tradition”.


