Translator’s Note
=================

In undertaking the translation of this booklet, Haqiqatun Nahdhal
Husayniya, The Truth About Al­-Husayn’s Revolt, by Martyr Ayatollah
Murtadha Mutahhari, I have been keen on conveying the meaning to the
English reader in standard English from the Arabic text that was
translated from Farsi by Sadiq al-Baqqal. I hope I have succeeded in
this task. I also hope that this translation will benefit people who are
interested in acquiring knowledge about Islamic topics.

It is noteworthy, however, that the booklet is a transcript of a
sermon/lecture the late author had delivered in gatherings held in
Tehran for the annual commemoration of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn
(a.s.). Thus, the reader may come across some repetitions that are
typical of the style of delivery, although I have done my best to
minimize these to a level that, I think, is acceptable.

Where I thought the meaning of the text would be enhanced or rendered
more intelligible, I have put the additional words, which do not
constitute part of the original text, between square brackets, thus [].
I did the same with other pieces of information I have provided that
are, in my judgement, beneficial to the reader. On certain occasions, I
felt the need to keep the Arabic word, which I enclosed between these (
) brackets, alongside its English equivalent, so as to reinforce the
meaning.

In this translation, I relied on the Arabic edition, published by the
International Relations Division, Organisation for Missions (Bunyad
Bi’that), Tehran, Iran.

Finally, I have thought that the reader might benefit of some other
aspects of the story of Imam Husayn’s martyrdom, especially those
dealing with the universal dimension of his message. Thus, I have chosen
excerpts from the Introduction to “Sunshine at Midnight (The Karbala’
Epic)”, a rhymed version of the story of Karbala’ in English, by the
late S.A. Mahdi, 1985. You will find these passages under the
Introduction.

Najim al-Khafaji,  
 BA, MIL London, UK, July, 2002


