Imam Husayn’s revolt, the causes
================================

As we have already mentioned the invitation of the Kufans to Imam Husayn
(a.s.) to come to Kufa and set up an Islamic government there
represented the third side [of the triangle] of causes of his revolt.
The request of the Umayyad’s from the Imam that he endorsed Yazid’s
appointment to the office of the caliphate epitomized the “defensive
strategy”.

However, as is known, the Imam consequently turned that request down,
and set out to oppose the corrupt ruling establishment with all means at
his disposal out of upholding the religious duty of “enjoining what is
good and forbidding what is evil”. This ingredient, [or the third side
of the triangle], should be dubbed “the attacking strategy” of the
Imam’s revolt.

Let us now dwell a while on those factors to examine which of them
carried more weight than the others. It goes without saying that each of
the three factors is different from the others in its cumulative value
and importance to the revolt. That is, each of the contributory causes
added, in its own right, a unique and significant dimension to the
revolt.

For example, the Imam’s acceptance of the Kufans’ invitation to go to
Kufa is as significant as the other two factors, and yet in accordance
with their importance and impact on the [overall result] of the revolt.
Among the factors is that which enhances the significance of a certain
[reformist] movement. Similarly, the leader of the movement can
influence that particular factor, by way of raising its profile.

The human being, for instance, is well aware of many things that he
attaches importance to. For example, his appearance could be regarded as
an asset; his coveting jewellery could be deemed another valuable
experience. There are as well other material and abstract things which
man would wish to acquire as they are considered exhibits of beauty. And
no doubt, power and high profile, especially divine positions, are
viewed by man as sources of pride, splendour and value. Even the
external material appearances, which denote these added values, confer
on man an added value.

To illustrate this, take a person who has put on the special garb of the
clergy. Although, in itself, the attire is not indicative of the
godliness of the one who wore it, in that it is not a criterion by which
one can measure erudition of the wearer, nor the level of his piety, yet
it can be seen as giving such an impression to the person putting on
such garb.

Likewise, the person who wears such clothes could earn the respect and
regard of others. By the same token, such attire becomes a source of
pride for the person who is dressed up in it. The parable of this is the
jewellery worn by women, in that how items of jewellery can adorn women
and how the latter can derive satisfaction from and pride in wearing
them.

The same comparison can be applied to revolutions, in that there may be
factors that are capable of enhancing their richness and appeal. This is
the result of the theoretical differences between one revolution and the
other. Some are bereft of the moral dimension and characterized by
bigotry, instead; others may be purely materialistic, giving them their
distinctive features. And yet, if a revolution is characterized by the
moral, human, and divine aspects, it should stand head and shoulders
above all other revolutions.

Thus, all the three factors which contributed to the initiation of Imam
Husayn’s revolt, gave it the significance it boasts, especially the
third factor. Sometimes, a particular person with a particular
significance in a particular uprising could add a new value to it, i.e.
a special added value and significance.

In as much as a certain factor adds a new value to the value of the
person, he in return gives a boost to this value. For example, the
attire of a spiritual person (cleric) or a university professor could
exude pride and aesthetic appearance to those who wear those uniforms.
The opposite is also true, in that the person in those garbs is the
source of pride and aestheticism due to their impeccable character,
probity, and knowledge.

Sa’sa’a bin Sawhan was one of Imam Ali’s companions and a renowned and
consummate orator; he was commended by the famous man of letters,
al-Jahidh. When he wanted to congratulate the Imam on his election to
the office of Caliphate, he said something to the Imam that was
different from what all the other people said, thus, “O Ali! You adorned
the caliphate with splendour. You are the source of its pride. It
granted you neither grandeur nor pride. The caliphate was in need of a
person of your calibre, and yet you were not in need of its [allure]. I,
therefore, congratulate the caliphate because your name has become
synonymous with it; I do not applaud you because you have become the
Caliph!”

As a result, it can be said that the factor of “enjoining what is good
and forbidding what is evil” had given Imam Husayn’s revolt an added
significance. And by his, his family’s and companions’ ultimate
sacrifice, the Imam has raised the profile of this institution. There
are many people who might claim the upholding of this religious
obligation.

Imam Husayn (a.s.) demonstrated this on the ground, “I seek to enjoin
what is good and forbid what is evil and follow the traditions of my
grandfather and my father.” This is the parable of Islam that might be a
source of pride for many a man. And yet, there have been Muslims whom
Islam holds dear and feels proud of.

The various titles, which were earned by many luminaries, such as
“Fakhrul Islam – the Pride of Islam”, “Izzuddin – the Glory of
Religion”, and “Sharafuddin – the Honour of Religion”, are indicative of
this meaning. Abdu Thar, Ammar bin Yasir, [among the Companions of the
Prophet (s.a.w.)], and Ibn Sina (Avicenna), [(980 – 1198 CE), the famous
Muslim philosopher and physician], were brought up on the ideals of
Islam and thus have become a source of pride for it.

Islam, in return, feels proud of some of its sons, who had been moulded
in its image, so much so that they have earned an international renown,
not least because they have left their mark on the human civilization.

The world cannot deny the contribution of Khawaja Nasiruddin at-Tusi,
[(597 – 672 AH, 1201 – 1274 CE), the Muslim philosopher, vizier, and
theologian], to the human civilization, because the credit goes to him
for some discoveries relating to the moon.

So, it can be said that Imam Husayn bin Ali (a.s.) has indeed given the
required momentum to the tradition of “enjoining what is good and
forbidding what is evil”. And when it is maintained that this
institution raises the weight of Muslims, this does not come from a
vacuum. The Holy Qur’an has stated this:

***“You are the best of peoples evolved for mankind. Enjoining what is
right, forbidding what is wrong, and believing in Allah..” (3:110).***

Just ponder the couching of this verse, especially with regard to the
quality bestowed on “the best people”. That is, it is merely by virtue
of their upholding the religious duty of “enjoining what is right and
forbidding what is wrong”, they have earned that sublime praise. So, the
worth of this umma (community) is in its upholding this obligation.

However, insofar as Imam Husayn’s revolt is concerned, it is the Imam
who has conferred that sublime honour on this obligation by the
sacrifices he personally made, and those of his family and companions.
However, it is not enough that we, Muslims, are not up to the
responsibility of upholding this religious obligation, we are proving to
be a liability to it. It is regrettable that people have paid much
attention to not so important things, such as growing one’s beard and
prohibiting the wearing of gold [for men], and paid lip service to
significant matters that should be upheld.

In contrast, Imam Husayn (a.s.) revolted to keep the principle of
“enjoining what is right and forbidding what is wrong” live in all
spheres of life. He used to say that Yazid was the epitome of rejection
and that he should be effaced from the world of Islam. He further
affirmed that the Imam of Muslims must be the one who upholds the
injunctions contained in the Book of God, [i.e. the Holy Qur’an],
administer justice, and follow the true religion.

Imam Husayn sacrificed everything in the way of safeguarding this
institution and enforcing it. The Imam gave a more sober meaning to
death in this cause. It has become to imply grandeur and honour. Since
he set out on his journey from Medina to Karbala’, he was always talking
about death in dignity and honour, i.e. the death in the cause of right,
truth, and justice. Such a death is akin to a beautiful necklace that
adorns the neck of a young woman. The Imam often recited a line of
poetry en route in his fateful journey to Karbala’.

The poem read something like this: Despite the fact that this life is
sweet and beautiful, yet, the next life is sweeter and more beautiful.
Since, in the end, man will leave behind, after death, all his worldly
possessions, the good comes out of giving away one’s wealth in good
causes, instead of hoarding it. By the same token, since the human body
would turn to dust after death, why should not man die a sweet and
honourable death? Thus, dying with the sword in the cause of God is much
greater and lovelier.

On the other side of the equation, the example of Abu Salama al-Khallal,
who used to be dubbed “the Minister of the Household of Mohammad” in the
court of the Abbasid Caliph, serves the reverse of the above-mentioned
honourable death.

His story goes like this: When he fell out of favour with the Abbasid
Caliph, an incident which he later paid with his life for, he wrote two
letters, one to Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) and the other to Mohammad
bin Abdullah al-Mahdh, offering them his services and those of Abu
Muslim, [i.e. intending to stage a palace coup]. This was his message to
them: Should you be prepared for this, [i.e. taking over the caliphate],
and accept our offer, we will kill those, [i.e. the Abbasid rulers].

The immediate impression the contents of this letter gives is that the
writer is disloyal because he addressed his letter to two different
people, but only when his relationship with his masters turned sour.

As soon as Imam as-Sadiq received the letter and read it, he burned it
before the eyes of the emissary who carried it to him. When the
messenger asked the Imam as to his reply, the Imam informed him that he
had nothing to add to what the messenger had just seen, [i.e. of burning
the letter].

The Abbasid killed Abu Salama before he could meet with his messenger.
Some people seem to raise the objection as why the Imam did not respond
positively to the invitation of Abu Salama who called on him to rise to
assume power with his help. That is, while the intension of Abu Salama
was known; he was not sincere in his appeal as he wrote his letter
immediately after he had fallen out favour with the Abbasid Caliph, who
was sure that he could not be trusted any more. Thus, he met his violent
death soon after.

Nevertheless, if Imam Husayn (a.s.) turned a blind eye to all those
letters he had received from the Kufans, inviting him to go to them and
set up an Islamic government there, he would have never escaped similar
criticism. In Imam Husayn’s case, he responded positively to the Kufans’
appeals when he realized that they were genuine in their call for him to
come to them. Thus, it became incumbent on him to respond.

Let us examine which of the following two matters came first and
consequently had precedence over the other. Did the Imam’s rejection of
the Umayyad’s call to him to endorse Yazid as Caliph come first, i.e.
prior to the Kufans’ invitation to him to come to Kufa and form an
Islamic government? It goes without saying that the former came first
for demanding Imam Husayn’s swearing of allegiance to Yazid was made
immediately after the demise of his father, Mu’aawiyah.

The messenger, who brought the news of Mu’aawiyah’s death to the
governor of Medina, brought with him a letter containing a demand that
Imam Husayn, and some other personalities, endorsed the succession of
Yazid to the caliphate. It is quite probable that the Kufans did not
know then of the news of the demise of Muaawiyah.

Historical events lend support to this theory. That is, many days had
elapsed on Imam Husayn’s rejection of the demand from him to swear
allegiance to Yazid before he was forced under pressure to leave Medina
and embark on his opposition movement there and then, i.e. 27th Rajab on
the way to Mecca, [in a sort of self-imposed exile]. He arrived in Mecca
on 3rd Sha’ban. He received the letters from the Kufans on 15th
Ramadhan. [In the Islamic Hijri Calendar, those three months run
consecutively, thus, Rajab, Sha’ban, and Ramadha.].

That is, a month and a half after the Umayyad’s made their intention of
demanding the Imam to swear allegiance known, and his subsequent flat
rejection of the demand. Imam Husayn stayed in Mecca for forty days.
Accordingly, he did not reject the Umayyad’s call for him to endorse
Yazid as Caliph because of the Kufans’ appeals to him to head to Kufa to
form the next Islamic government. He made his position manifestly known
that he would not give in to Yazid, even if not a foothold in the entire
globe was left for him. This is the second reason for the rising of
al-Husayn (a.s.).

The third pillar of the Imam’s rising is the upholding of the Islamic
duty of “enjoining what is good and forbidding what is evil”. The Imam
(a.s.) started his dissident movement from Medina determined to shoulder
the responsibility of this duty.

However, even if he was not asked to pay allegiance to Yazid and there
was no invitation for him to go to Kufa to set up a rival caliphate
there, he was resolved that it was his duty to uphold that tradition,
not least because corruption was about to take a stranglehold over the
Islamic world then.

To recap, in each one of the three aspects of his revolt, the Imam
(a.s.) had had a particular issue to address and a duty to discharge. As
regards the first aspect, it was his decision to refuse the Umayyad’s
demand to endorse Yazid’s succession to the caliphate. Regarding the
second facet, he responded positively to the appeal of the Kufans for
him to set up a rival caliphate in Kufa. In relation to the third
aspect, he took the necessary action to take on the corrupt ruling
establishment.

Thus, he can be safely branded a revolutionary. So, when we dub Imam
Husayn’s revolt as multifaceted, this is clearly manifested in the
required positions he took vis-à-vis the three different issues. For
example, the Imam’s duty towards pledging allegiance to Yazid was
downright rejection; and should he have agreed to the proposition of Ibn
Abbas to choose a self-imposed exile in the mountains of Yemen, such
rejection would have materialized.

Thus, his was a personal decision, i.e. it was not incumbent on him to
ask others to team up with him on this point. As for the Kufans’ appeal,
there was no choice left for him but to respond to it, so long as they
remained faithful to their word. If they broke it, the Imam would be
absolved from any undertaking, as the issue of caliphate, [and who the
caliph should be], would be no more, i.e. it would cease to remain a
religious duty.

Yet, why did the Imam continue on that path? This is indicative of the
fact that his religious obligation was not confined to the contentious
issue of caliphate. The Kufans’ appeal proved to be a blip, as the news
of the killing of Muslim bin Aqeel, his cousin and emissary to the
Kufans, reached him while en route to Kufa, Iraq. Another development
was that the Imam met before his arrival al-Hur bin Yazid ar-Riyahi,
[during which it was revealed that the Kufans had changed their mind and
no longer supported him in his bid to become caliph with their help].

So, with the Kufans’ appeal falling through, the Imam had become free
from any obligation. To make it absolutely plain to them, he reminded
them that he would return from where he came, in that he came to them in
response to their appeal. This, though, did not mean that he had changed
his mind regarding the caliphate of Yazid, which he still was adamant
that he did not approve of. As far as he was concerned, his position of
not recognizing Yazid as caliph was irreversible, hence the reference to
not giving in to the ruling establishment’s demand, even if all routes
were closed in his face. What other options did he have? The answer is
his upholding the principle of “enjoining what is right and forbidding
what is wrong”.

Among the mistakes the author of the book, “Ash-Shaheedul Khalid – The
Immortal Martyr” did was that he over-exaggerated the factor of the
“Kufans’ invitation”, so much so that he has given the impression that
it was the overriding stimulant for Imam Husayn’s revolt. In fact, this
factor was not the most important; rather, it was the least important
among the contributory factors that led to the Imam’s revolt. Even if we
assume that it was the principal cause of the revolt, the Imam, after
knowing that the Kufans did not keep their word, could have resigned to
the fact that there was no point in carrying on with his plans,
contemplating swearing allegiance to Yazid and abandoning his bid to
uphold the principle of “enjoining what is right and forbidding what is
wrong”.

The opposite was precisely what had happened, in that the fieriest
sermons by the Imam were those given in the aftermath of the fall of
Kufa to the Umayyad’s. In that, there was a clear message that he was
acting in accordance with the obligation of “enjoining what is right and
forbidding what is wrong”, and that he was under no illusions that that
was his prime motive for launching his revolt. For his part, it was an
action of a revolutionary against the ruling establishment of that time.

On his way to Iraq, he met by chance two men coming from the direction
of Kufa. He asked them to stop in order to have a conversation with
them. The moment they knew it was al-Husayn (a.s.), they took a detour
and disappeared, to avoid talking to him. Meanwhile, a man among the
Imam’s companions, who happened to have met the two men, arrived at the
scene.

He broke to the Imam the news of the killing of Muslim bin Aqeel and
Hani bin Irwah, having received it from the two men he had met earlier.
It was through the same men, although indirectly, that the Imam knew of
the fall of Kufa to the Umayyad’s. His companion also informed al-Husayn
that the two men felt ashamed to let the Imam know of the distressing
news, especially the report about dragging the headless corpse of Muslim
in the streets of Kufa. Upon hearing the news, the Imam’s eyes became
filled with tears, reciting this Qur’anic verse,

***“Among the Believers are men who have been true to their covenant
with God: of them some have completed their vow (to the extreme), and
some (still) wait: but they have never changed (their determination) in
the least.” (33:23).***

The Imam (a.s.) wanted to prove to the people that he did not come for
Kufa alone. So, if that province fell to the enemy, it would not change
anything. He did not launch his movement in response to the Kufans’
appeal per se. That appeal was among the factors that made him march to
Iraq. Imam Husayn made it very clear that he saw himself responsible for
discharging a more important duty.

So, if Muslim bin Aqeel got martyred, he would have honoured his
covenant and passed away in the line of duty. Thus, the Imam must
continue treading the same path he had mapped out for his movement.

Since the Imam had decided to take an attacking position against the
Umayyad rule, and marched on that revolutionary path, his rationale for
doing so was different from a person who was in a defensive position or
that of an acquiescent one. The position of a person who is repelling an
attacker, who has, for example, come to rob him of his possessions,
would be getting what was stolen from him and protect it.

The person who is intent on taking on his rival is in a different
league; he would not accept anything other than annihilating the enemy,
and achieving his goal, even if they got killed in the process. Imam
Husayn’s drive was that of upholding “enjoining what is right and
forbidding what is wrong.” It was the mindset of a martyr and the path
he decided to walk on.

He who wants his appeal to reach his community advocates the logic of
the martyr. This appeal bears a signature made with his blood. Examples
of people who wanted their message to reach others abound. In many a
place all over the world, we come across relics of bygone personalities
who wanted their exploits to be remembered, so much so that some of them
had such accomplishments written as epitaph on their gravestones.
Hundreds of years later such relics are excavated and displayed in
museums to be kept as heritage for future generations.

In contrast, Imam Husayn (a.s.) wrote down with his own blood his epic
on the airwaves of everlasting frequencies. His message is stamped on
people’s hearts because it was laced with blood, thus leaving an
indelible mark there.

The hearts of millions of people, be they Arab or non-Arab, who
understood the message of the Imam, are conscious of the sincerity of
his message, especially when he recited, “I look upon death as felicity
and regard life in the shadows of the oppressors as nothing but
unhappiness.”

That is, living in indignity in the doldrums of injustice and
repression, and barely surviving is not the type of life a free man
would want to live. Thus, “better die with honour than live in shame”
was his motto, i.e. that of martyrs.

Imam Husayn (a.s.) chose the position from which he would attack the
regime; his rationale was that of a person racing to martyrdom. From the
inhospitable terrain of Karbala’, Iraq, he wanted the whole world to
know his rejection of the ruler of his days, [who was not fit to rule].
He did not have the tools to write his call, and yet his message
transcended the barriers of time, place, and race to rest in the hearts
and minds of people.

As is customary each and every year, come Muharram and there the light
of Imam Husayn shines on us like beams of light emanating from the sun.
His message is heard loud and clear, “The similitude of the
inevitability of man’s death is that of necklace worn by a young woman.
I therefore yearn to have reunion with my predecessors in the same way
Jacob was yearning to be reunited with [his son] Joseph”, and this
glaring statement, “The bastard and the son of a bastard has left us but
two choices, either resorting to the sword or capitulating. How
preposterous! Humiliation is not our cup of tea! Allah shall never let
this happen to us; so shall His Messenger, the believers, chaste and
pure laps and proud souls. For the sake of these ideals we would rather
die in honour and not give in to the ignoble.”

There is a reference in this sermon to Ibn Ziyad, who had offered the
Imam one of two choices, either the sword or ignominious surrender.

That was the message the Imam wanted to live on through time and
generations. That is, neither God nor His Messenger and the believers
would let a pious believer experience the bitter taste of disgrace. The
generations and believers would come to know about the resistance of the
Imam when no one would accept the notion of the Imam’s surrendering to
the enemy. It was inconceivable that a person, such as the Imam, who was
purebred, under the wing of Fatima, the Prophet’s daughter, could give
in to indignity.

When he left Medina, armed with his refusal to endorse Yazid’s
succession to the caliphate as a reason for his attack on the repressive
regime, he wrote a will and left it with his brother Mohammad bin
al­Hanfiyah; among its contents was this statement, “I did not set out
driven by arrogance, or recklessness, or a desire for spreading
corruption, or injustice. All what I am intent on is seeking to reform
the community of my grandfather. ”

This was the rationale behind the Imam’s movement.

In the letter he wrote to his brother, Bin al-Hanafiyah, the Imam
mentioned the incident of the Umayyad’s demanding from him to pledge
allegiance to Yazid, but not even a single reference to the call of the
Kufans to him [to come over and form a rival caliphate in Kufa].

That unequivocal rejection underlined the Imam’s determination to walk
the road of martyrdom to the end. Had his logic stemmed from the love
for defending oneself alone, it would have been rational that he would
not have given his companions the choice, on the eve of the tenth of
Muharram, of either parting his company or sticking it out with him.

All along, he was clear in his mind and sincere with them that the army
of Ibn Ziyad was after him alone, i.e. he either gave in and endorsed
Yazid as caliph or got killed on the battlefield. In his judgement, his
position, on not recognizing Yazid’s rule, was dictated by his sense of
religious duty, as he did not think Yazid was fit to rule. Yet, his
companions chose, of their own accord, to stay with him to the end,
preferring to get martyred rather than part his company. For this noble
stance, the Imam turned to his Lord and prayed for his companions,
asking Him to reward them on his behalf.

This is reinforced by the fact that on that same night, the Imam
requested that Habib bin Mudhahir al-Assadi go and ask for the help of
members of his tribe. Suppose that Habib managed to galvanise some fifty
or sixty combatants.

What difference would this number make in comparison to some thirty
thousand soldiers on the other side? Certainly, it would have made no
difference to tilt the impending battle in favour of the Imam’s side.
So, what was the reason for this request?

The Imam wanted to win the ‘media’ war in order that the news of his
revolt travelled far and wide. This is the rationalization of the
revolutionaries and martyrs. That was why he started this move in his
own immediate circle by bringing with him all members of his family for
he wanted them to be messengers for his revolt.


