Introduction
============

The late Ayatollah Murtadha Mutahhari, a scholar of remarkable breadth
and profundity, was one of those central figures who laid the
intellectual foundations of the Islamic Revolution of Iran, years before
its occurrence. In this collection of six essays he demonstrates his
deep understanding of and meticulous research on all the topics he
covers, which include faith, the world-view of *Tawhid*, philosophy,
spirit, matter and life.

In the first essay, “Man and Faith”, the author explains what separates
man from all other animals. Having established that science and faith
are two of the central pillars of man’s humanity, Mutahhari discusses
the relationship between them. Then he explains why man needs religious
faith and why Islam is the only comprehensive teaching.

The second essay is titled “The Worldview of *Tawhid*”. Explaining that
all religions, customs, schools of thought, and philosophies are based
on a foundation, the author describes the three classes of world-views:
scientific, philosophical, and religious. But the only all-encompassing
worldview is that of *Tawhid*; it alone posses the five necessary
characteristics. Both *Tawhid* and its opposite *shirk*, have levels and
degrees, and Mutahhari defines them and delineates the boundary between
them. The author also discusses in this essay the implications of
*Tawhid* for the unity and the uniqueness of the universe, far-reaching
wisdom and divine justice, and the justice in Islamic culture.

The final of the longer essays concerns philosophy. Mutahhari begins by
defining the word “philosophy”, including its Muslim usage. He sketches
the history of philosophy from Aristotle to modern times. The author
divides Islamic philosophers into two groups- illuminationist and
peripateticists- although he suggest that two other methods of thought,
‘irfan (gnosis) and kalam (scholastic theology), both of which are at
variance with the first two methods, have played an important part in
the development of Islamic culture. Mutahhari closes the third essay by
discussing some of the problems studied in Islamic philosophy.

The fourth section of the book consists of three briefer pieces. The
first concerns spiritualism, on which Mutahhari cites the work of a
diverse range of Western thinkers from Aristotle to Freud before
discussing the position of post-Avicennan Islamic philosophers. In the
second, the author explores the Qur’anic view of life to see with what
special logic the Qur’an treats the relation between life and the
supernatural, the will of God. To round out the first two discussions,
Mutahhari next considers the question of *Tawhid* and evolution. He
explains the errors that have led to the belief that there is a
contradiction between the two.

As Mutahhari stresses, Islamic thought on all these topics helps clarify
matters and resolve problems and contradictions as no other system of
thought can. The Qur’an provides all the guidance one needs to solve the
profound problems Mutahhari discusses.

**Hamid Algar**


