Philosophy
==========

What Is Philosophy?
-------------------

### Literal and Semantic Definitions

The logicians say that when one asks about the whatness of a thing, one
is actually asking various things. Sometimes one is asking the
conceptual meaning of a word. That is, when we ask what a thing is, we
are asking about the very word. In asking about its whatness, we seek to
know the lexical or idiomatic meaning of that word. Suppose in reading a
book we run across the word *pupak* (hoopoe) and do not know its
meaning. We ask someone, “What is a *pupak*?” He replies, “*Pupak* is
the name of a bird.”

Or suppose we run across the word *kalima* (word) in the terminology of
the logicians and we ask some one, “What does *kalima* mean in the
terminology of the logicians?” He says, “*Kalima* in the terminology of
the logicians is equivalent to *fi’l* (verb) in the language of the
grammarians.” Plainly, the relation between word and meaning is
conventional and terminological, whether the terminology is restricted
or general.

In answering such a question, one must search out instances of usage or
consult a dictionary. Such a question may have numerous answers, all of
them correct, because it is possible for a single word to have various
meaning in various contexts. For instance, a word may have a special
meaning in the usage of the logicians and the philosophers, and another
in that of the grammarians.

The word *kalima* has one meaning in common usage and in the usage of
grammarians and another meaning in the usage of the logicians. Or, the
word *qiyas* (analogy, syllogism) has one meaning in the usage of the
logicians and another in the usage of the jurists and the legists. When
a word has two or more meanings within a single body of usages, one must
say that it has this meaning in this expression, and that in that.
Answers given to such questions are called verbal definitions.

Sometimes when one inquires into the whatness of a thing, what one seeks
is not the meaning of the word, but the reality of its referent. We do
not ask, “What is the meaning of this word?” We know the meaning of the
word, but not the reality and suchness of its referent. For instance, if
we ask, “What is man?” we do not seek to know what the word “man” has
been coined to mean. We all know that this word is applied to this
bipedal, upright-postured, speaking being. We seek instead to know the
identity and the reality of man. Plainly, in this case there can be only
one correct answer, called the real definition.

The verbal definition is prior to the real definition. That is, one must
ascertain first the conceptual meaning of the word, and then the real
definition of the referent so delineated. Otherwise fallacies and
pointless disputes will arise because a word has numerous lexical and
idiomatic meanings, and this multiplicity of meanings is easily
overlooked. Any party may define a word by a special meaning and
idiomatic usage, heedless of the fact that it is envisioning something
different from what another party has envisioned. So they dispute
pointlessly.

The failure to distinguish the meaning of the word from the reality of
its referent sometimes results in the transformation and evolution that
take place in the meaning of the word being ascribed to the reality of
its referent. For instance, a certain word may at first be applied to a
whole and then, through changes in usage, to a part of that whole. If
one fails to distinguish the meaning of the word from the reality of its
referent, he will suppose that that whole actually has been fragmented,
whereas in fact no change has occurred in the whole, but rather the word
applying to it has been displaced in meaning to apply to a part of that
whole.

Just such an error in regard to the word “philosophy” has overtaken all
of Western philosophy and its imitators in the East. Philosophy is an
idiomatic word and has found numerous and various idiomatic meanings.
Various parties of philosophers have defined philosophy each in a
special way, but this discrepancy in definition does not bear on any
reality. Each party has used this word in a special sense, which it has
defined as its object. What one party calls philosophy, another does not
call philosophy; the latter will completely deny its value, call it
something else, or regard it as part of another science. So neither
party will regard the other as philosophers. I shall take these various
usages into account.

### The Word “Philosophy”

*Falsafa* has a Greek origin. This word is an Arabic verbal noun derived
from the Greek word *philosophia*, which is a compound of *philos* and
*sophia*, the former meaning love, the latter, wisdom. Therefore,
*philosophia* means love of wisdom. Plato called Socrates a
*philosophos* in the sense of his being a lover of wisdom.[^1]
Therefore, the word *falsafa* is an Arabicization, a verbal noun,
meaning the work or pursuit of philosophers.

Before Socrates, a party appeared calling themselves the Sophists,
meaning the scholars. They made human perception the measure of reality
and used fallacious arguments in their deductions. Gradually, “sophist”
(*sophistes*) lost its original meaning and came to mean one who makes
use of fallacious arguments. Thus we have the word “sophistry,” which
has the cognate in Arabic *safsafa*, with the same meaning.

Socrates, out of humility and also perhaps a desire to avoid being
identified with the Sophists, forbade people to call him a *sophistes*,
a scholar.[^2] He therefore called himself a *philosophos*, a lover of
wisdom. Gradually, *philosophos*, with its original sense of lover of
wisdom, displaced *sophistes* as meaning scholar, and the latter was
downgraded to its modern sense of one who uses fallacious reasoning.
*Philosophia* became synonymous with wisdom. Therefore, *philosophos* as
a technical term had been applied to no one before Socrates, and it was
not applied to anyone immediately after him. The term *philosophia*,
too, had no definite meaning in those days; it is said that not even
Aristotle used it. Later, use of the terms *philosophia* and
*philosophos* became widespread.

### Muslim Usage

The Muslims took the word “philosophy” from the Greeks. They gave it an
Arabic form and an Eastern nuance, using it to mean pure rational
knowledge. Philosophy in the common Muslim usage did not refer to a
special discipline or science; it embraced all rational sciences, as
opposed to transmitted sciences, such as etymology, syntax, declension,
rhetoric, stylistics, prosody, exegesis, tradition, and jurisprudence.
Because this word had a generic meaning, only one who comprehended all
the rational sciences of his time, including theology, mathematics, the
natural sciences, politics, ethics, and domestic economy, would be
called a philosopher. Thus it was said, Whoever is a philosopher becomes
a world of knowledge, analogous to the objective world.”

When Muslims sought to reproduce Aristotle's classification of the
sciences, they used the words *falsafa* or *hikma*. They said,
“Philosophy, that is, the rational science, has two divisions: the
theoretical and the practical.”

Theoretical philosophy addresses things as they are; practical
philosophy addresses man's actions as they ought to be. Theoretical
philosophy is threefold: theology or high philosophy, mathematics or
middle philosophy, and natural science or low philosophy. High
philosophy, or theology, in turn comprehends two disciplines, general
phenomenology and theology per se. Mathematics is fourfold, each of its
areas being a science in itself: arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and
music. Natural science has numerous divisions. Practical philosophy is
divisible into ethics, domestic economy, and civics. The complete
philosopher comprehends all these sciences.

### True Philosophy

In the philosophers' view, one area enjoys a special prominence among
the numerous areas of philosophy. It is called first philosophy, high
philosophy, the supreme science, the universal science, theology, or
metaphysics. The ancients believed that one of the features
distinguishing this science from all others is its firmer foundation on
demonstration and certainty. Another is that it presides over all other
sciences; it is in truth the queen of the sciences because the others
depend on it totally, but it has no such dependence on them. A third
distinguishing feature is that it is more general and universal than any
other science.[^3] According to these philosophers, this science is the
true philosophy. Accordingly, sometimes the word “philosophy” is
restricted in application to this science, but this usage is rare.

Therefore, in the view of the ancient philosophers, the word
“philosophy” had two meanings: one, the prevalent meaning of rational
knowledge as such, including all but the transmitted sciences, and the
other the rare meaning of theology, or first philosophy, one of the
three divisions of theoretical philosophy.

Accordingly, there are two possibilities if we choose to define
philosophy according to the usage of the ancients. First, ifwe adopt the
common usage, because here philosophy is a generic term applying to no
special science or discipline, it will have no special definition. It
will mean all nontransmitted science. To be a philosopher will mean to
comprehend all such sciences. It was in accordance with such a
generalised conception of philosophy that it was said, “Philosophy is
the perfection of the soul of man from both a theoretical standpoint and
a practical one.”

Second, if we adopt the rarer usage, defining philosophy as that
activity the ancients called true philosophy, first philosophy, or the
supreme science, this will constitute a special definition for
philosophy. The answer to the question “What is philosophy?” will be
that philosophy consists of a science of the states of being from the
standpoint that is being, not from the standpoint of its having a
special individuation, for instance, of its being body, quantity,
quality, man, vegetable, or what have you.

Our knowledge of things is of two kinds: It may be restricted to a
certain species or genus; it may apply to the special states,
determinations (*ahkam*),[^4] and accidents (*avariz*) of a certain
species or a certain genus, as does, for instance, our knowledge
constituting the science of the determinations of numbers (arithmetic),
of quantities (geometry), of the states and properties of plants
(botany), or of the states, properties, and determinations of the human
body (medicine or physiology). This sort of knowledge embraces the rest
of the sciences, such as meteorology, geology, mineralogy, zoology,
psychology, sociology, and atomics.

Or our knowledge may not be restricted to a certain species; that is, we
may say that being has these determinations, states, and properties not
from the standpoint that it is of a certain species but from the
standpoint that it is being. Sometimes we study the universe from the
standpoint of its plurality and discrete subjects, whereas sometimes we
study it from the standpoint of unity; that is, we regard being from the
standpoint that it is being as a unity, and we pursue our studies with a
regard to this unity that embraces all things.

If we liken the universe to a body, we see that our studies of that body
will be of two kinds. Some of our studies will pertain to the members of
that body (for instance, its head, hands, feet, or eyes); others will
pertain to the whole of that body, as we ask, for instance, “When did
this body come into being, and how long will it persist?”

Or is it at all meaningful to ask when in relation to the body as an
aggregate? Does this body have a real unity, the multiplicity of the
members being an apparent, not a real, multiplicity? Or is its unity
nominal, on the level of a mechanical interrelationship; that is, does
it not exceed the unity of a manufactured device? Has this body a source
member from whom the other members have sprung? For instance, has this
body a head, which is the source for the other members?

Or is it a body without a head? If it has a head, does this head have a
sensible and perceiving mind, or is it hollow and empty? Does the whole
of the body down to the nails and bones enjoy a kind of life, or is the
intelligence and perception of this body confined to some entities that
have appeared by chance, like worms on a corpse - these worms being what
we call the animals, including man?

Does this body as a whole pursue an end, course toward a perfection and
a reality, or is it an aimless being? Are the appearance and decline of
the members an accident, or does the law of causation govern them, no
phenomenon being without cause and every particular effect arising from
a particular cause? Is the system governing this body certain and
inescapable? Or does no necessity or certainty govern this body? Is the
order and priority of the members of this body real or not? How many are
the basic organs of this body?

The portion of our studies that pertains to an organology of the
universe of being is science, and the portion that pertains to a
physiology of the universe as a whole is philosophy. There is thus a
special class of questions that resemble those of none of the world's
sciences, which investigate particular beings, but that compose a class
of their own. When we take up the study of this class of questions as an
exploration of the parts of the sciences, and when we wish to understand
of what subject questions of this class are, technically speaking,
accidents, we see that they are accidents of being *qua* being.

If one of us should ask, “What is philosophy?” before answering we must
state that this word has a special sense in the usage of any given
party. Among Muslims, it is most commonly a generic noun representing
all the rational sciences, not the name of a particular science and less
commonly a name for first philosophy, a science of the most universal
aspects of being, pertaining to no particular subject but to all
subjects. This is a science that investigates all of being as a unified
subject.

### Metaphysics

Aristotle was the first to discern a series of questions that belong to
none of the natural, mathematical, ethical, social, or logical sciences
and must be seen as belonging to a separate science. He may have been
the first to discern the pivot on which all these questions turn as
accidents and states, which is being *qua* being. He may also have been
the first one to discover the factor that interconnects the questions of
any one science and the standard by which they are to be distinguished
from the questions of another science - in other words, what is called
the subject of a science.

The questions of this science, like those of any other, were later to be
greatly expanded and augmented. This fact grows clear through a
comparison of the metaphysics of Aristotle with the metaphysics of
Avicenna, not to mention the metaphysics of Mulla Sadra. But Aristotle
was the first to elaborate this science as an independent field, to give
it a special place among the sciences.

Aristotle gave this science no name. His works were posthumously
compiled into an encyclopedia. The section in question followed that on
natural philosophy in sequence and, having no special name, came to be
known as *metaphysika*, meaning after physics. It was translated into
Arabic as *ma ba'd at-tabi 'a*.

It was eventually forgotten that this name was given this science
because it occurred after natural philosophy in Aristotle's work. It was
supposed that this had occurred because at least some of the questions
this science addresses, such as God and the pure intelligences, are
external to nature. Accordingly, it occurred to some persons, such as
Avicenna, that this science should be called not metaphysics but
prophysics because it includes the subject of God, Who is prior to
nature, not posterior to it.[^5]

This verbal error in translation later led to an error in meaning among
some modern students of philosophy. Many Europeans supposed that
metaphysics is equivalent to hyperphysics and that the subject of this
science consists of phenomena external to nature. In fact, this science
includes the natural and the supernatural, in sum, all that exists. This
group has erroneously defined this science as follows: Metaphysics is
that science which deals solely with God and phenomena separate from
nature.

### Philosophy in Modern Times

The watershed between the modern era (beginning in the sixteenth
Christian century) and the ancient was marked by the displacement of the
syllogistic and rational method of science by the experimental and
empirical method, a change instituted by a group foremost among whom
were the Frenchman, Descartes, and the Englishman, Bacon. The natural
sciences *en bloc* departed the domain of syllogistic reasoning and
entered that of the experimental method. Mathematics took on a
semi-syllogistic, semi-experimental character.

After this course of events, some decided that the syllogistic method is
unreliable. So, if a science is beyond the reach of concrete experiment,
if it calls exclusively for syllogistic reasoning, it is groundless.
Because this is the case with metaphysics, that is, because concrete
experiment has no place in it, this science is groundless. Its questions
are beyond confirmation or refutation through research. These persons
draw a red line through the science that once had stood above all others
and had been called the most noble of sciences and the queen of the
sciences. According to them, the science of metaphysics or first
philosophy did not and could not exist. They took from man the questions
his reason most keenly feels the need to address.

Others maintained that the syllogistic method is not in all cases
unreliable and must be employed in metaphysics and ethics. They created
a new terminology: “What could take the form of research through the
experimental method they called science, and what had to be approached
through the syllogistic method, including metaphysics, ethics, and
logic, they called philosophy. Philosophy consists of those sciences
that consist in research through the syllogistic method only and in
which concrete experiment plays no part.

In this view, as in the view of the ancient scholars, philosophy is
generic, not specific, in meaning: It is not the name of one science,
but comprehends several sciences. But philosophy in this sense
encompasses less than it did according to ancient usage. It includes
metaphysics, ethics, logic, law, and perhaps a few others, but
mathematics and the natural sciences are outside its compass.

Members of the first group totally denied metaphysics and the
syllogistic method, trusting in the empirical and experimental sciences.
In time, they realised that if all that is falls into the domain of the
experimental sciences, and if the questions they address are restricted
to particular subjects, then we are going to be wholly deprived of an
overall understanding of the universe, which philosophy or metaphysics
had undertaken to provide. Thus, they founded a scientific philosophy,
that is, a philosophy resting completely on the sciences.

Through comparative study of the sciences, inquiry into how their
questions connect to other questions, and discovery of the kind of
relationships among the laws and questions of the sciences, the totality
they compose, a range of more general questions would devolve. They
called these more general questions philosophy. The Frenchman Auguste
Comte and the Englishman Herbert Spencer took up this method.

Philosophy was no longer an autonomous science either in its subject
matter or in its sources, since such an autonomous science had for its
subject being *qua* being and had its sources - at least its chief
source - in first axioms. Philosophy had become a science whose function
was to study the products of the other sciences, to interrelate them,
and to derive general questions from their more limited questions.
Auguste Comte's philosophy of positivism and Herbert Spencer's synthetic
philosophy are of this sort. According to this view, philosophy is not a
science apart from the other sciences, but constitutes a broader and
fuller view of things seen and learned through the sciences.

Some others, such as Kant, thought it necessary first to study knowledge
itself, along with the faculty that is its source, that is, reason. They
made a critique of human reason and designated their researches
philosophy as such or critical philosophy. However, this, too, has
nothing but the word in common with what the ancients called philosophy
or with Comte's positivism or Spencer's synthetic philosophy. Kant’s
philosophy has more to do with logic, which is a special form of
ideology in the strict sense (*fikr shinasi*), than with philosophy in
its original meaning, which is cosmology.

In the European cultural sphere, whatever was not science, that is,
whatever did not fit into any of the natural or mathematical sciences
but was a theory of the universe, man, or society, gradually came to be
known as philosophy. If someone were to collect all the “isms” that have
been called philosophy in Europe and America and list all their
definitions, one would see that they have nothing in common except being
not science.

The difference between ancient and modern philosophies is dissimilar in
kind to the difference between ancient and modern sciences. Compare
ancient and modern medicine, geometry, psychology, or botany. Ancient
science is not different in identity from modern science (for example,
the word “medicine” did not refer to one science in ancient times and
another in modern times).

Ancient and modern medicine share a single definition; medicine has
always consisted in knowledge of the states and symptomatic conditions
of the human body. But ancient and modern medicine differ in how they
approach questions. Modern medicine is the more empirical; ancient
medicine is the more deductive and syllogistic. Modern medicine is also
the more developed. This sort of difference holds for all other
sciences.

The term “philosophy,” however, has had various referents, and a
separate definition for each referent, in the course of the ancient and
modern periods. In ancient times, philosophy sometimes designated
rational science as such and sometimes had a specialised meaning
applying to one of the branches of this science (such as metaphysics or
first philosophy). In modern times, the word has been applied to
numerous referents, having a different definition in accordance with
each.

### Divorce of the Sciences from Philosophy

An egregious but prevalent error of our time that arose in the West and
has grown widespread among Eastern imitators of Western thinkers is the
myth of the divorce of the sciences from philosophy.

A linguistic change pertaining to a convention of usage has been
mistaken for a change of meaning pertaining to a real referent. In the
language of the ancients, the words “philosophy” and “*hikma*” generally
were used to mean rational, as opposed to transmitted knowledge. Thus,
these words comprehended all of man's rational and intellectual ideas in
their meanings. In this usage, philosophy was a generic, not a proper,
noun.

In modern times, this word became restricted to metaphysics, logic,
aesthetics, and the like. This change in the name has led some to
suppose that in ancient times philosophy was a single science embracing
theology and the natural, mathematical, and other sciences and that
later the natural and mathematical sciences were divorced from
philosophy and grew independent of it.

It is as if the word “body” once meant the human frame, as opposed to
the spirit, and included the whole human form from head to feet and
later acquired the secondary sense of the trunk and limbs, minus the
head. Suppose some came to imagine that the head of man thus had become
separated from his body. A linguistic change would have been mistaken
for a change in meaning. Consider also the word “Fars,” which once
referred to the whole of Iran but today refers only to one of its
southern provinces. Someone might think the province of Fars had seceded
from Iran.

This is the status of the divorce of the sciences from philosophy. The
sciences were once lumped under the name “philosophy,” but today this
name is applied to only one of the sciences. This change in name has
nothing to do with a divorce of the sciences from philosophy. The
sciences have never been part of philosophy proper; so they could not be
divorced from it.

Illuminationism and Peripateticism
----------------------------------

Islamic philosophers are divisible into two groups: illuminationists and
peripateticists. Foremost among the illuminationist philosophers of
Islam is the sixth century scholar Shaykh Shihab ad-Din Suhravardi
(otherwise known as Shaykh-i Ishraq, but whom I shall refer to as
Suhravardi), and foremost among the peripatetic philosophers of Islam is
Shaykh ar-Ra'is Abu Ali ibn Sina (Avicenna).

The illuminationists are considered to be followers of Plato and the
peripatetics, of Aristotle. The principal and essential difference
between the two methods is that the illuminationists consider deduction
and rational thought insufficient for study of philosophical questions,
especially of divine wisdom (*hikmat-i ilahi*), and the path of the
heart, asceticism, and purification of the soul as incumbent if one is
to realize inner realities. Peripatetics rely solely on deduction.

The word *ishraq*, meaning illumination, aptly conveys a sense of the
illuminationist method, but the word *mashsha'* or peripatetic, which
means ambulant or much ambulant, is purely arbitrary and conveys nothing
of the peripatetic method. Aristotle and his followers were called the
*mashsha* 'in, the peripatetics, because Aristotle held forth while
taking walks. “Deductionist” actually describes the peripatetics'
method. Thus, it is more accurate to label the two kinds of philosophers
illuminationists and deductionists, although I shall continue to use the
more common term, peripatetic.

The major questions over which illuminationists and peripatetics differ
in Islam today generally pertain to Islam and not to Plato or Aristotle.
They include the questions of essentialism (*isalat-i mahiya*) versus
existentialism (*isalat-i vujud*), the unity versus the multiplicity of
being, the question of fabrication (*ja’l*), the question of whether a
body is compounded of matter and form, the question of ideas (*muthul*)
and archetypes (*arbab-i anva'*), and the question of the principle of
the more noble possibility (*imkan-i ashraf*).[^6]

Did Plato and Aristotle actually have two different methods? Did such a
difference in outlook exist between the master, Plato, and the pupil,
Aristotle? Was Suhravardi's method, propounded in the Islamic era,
actually Plato's method? Did Plato follow the way of the Heart,
asceticism and the discipline of the soul, or the illumination and
witness of the heart? Was he an exponent of what Suhravardi later called
experiential wisdom (*hikmat-i dhawqi*)?

Do the questions that illuminationists and peripatetics have been known
to differ over since the time of Suhravardi (questions of essence and
existence, of fabrication, of the compoundedness or simplicity of the
body, of the formula of the more noble possibility, and of the unity or
multiplicity of being) actually date back to differences of opinion
between Plato and Aristotle? Or are the questions, at least some of
them, later developments unknown to Plato or Aristotle? There were
certainly differences of opinion between the two; Aristotle refuted many
of Plato's theories and countered them with different ones.

In the Alexandrian period, which was the watershed between the Hellenic
and Islamic eras, the followers of Plato and Aristotle formed two
opposed ranks. Farabi, in *Al-Jam' Bayn Ra'yay al-Hakimayn* (The
reconciliation of the views of the two sages), discusses the questions
over which the two philosophers disagree and strives to resolve these
disagreements. There are three basic questions on which Plato and
Aristotle differed, questions different from those discussed during the
Islamic era.

It is highly doubtful that Plato advocated a spiritual way, with
asceticism and discipline of the soul, and witness of the heart. Thus,
the notion that Plato and Aristotle had two distinct methods, the
illuminationist and the peripatetic, becomes highly debatable. It is by
no means clear that Plato was recognised as an illuminationist, an
exponent of inner illumination, in his own time or any time soon
thereafter. It is not even clear that the term peripatetic was applied
exclusively to Aristotle and his followers in his own time.

As Shahristani says: “Now the strict peripatetics then are the members
of the Lyceum. Plato, honoured for his wisdom, always taught them while
taking walks. Aristotle followed his example, and accordingly he
[apparently Aristotle] and his followers were called peripatetics.”[^7]
Aristotle and his followers surely were called peripatetics, and this
usage was simply continued in Islamic times. However, it is doubtful and
even deniable that Plato was called an illuminationist.

Prior to Suhravardi, we never find any of the philosophers, such as
Farabi and Avicenna, or any of the historians of philosophy, such as
Shahristani, speaking of Plato as a sage advocating experiential or
illuminationist wisdom.[^8] It was Suhravardi who gave this term
currency, and it was he who, in his *Hikmat al-Ishraq* (Wisdom of
Illumination), called a party among the ancient sages, including
Pythagoras and Plato, exponents of experiential and illuminationist
wisdom and who called Plato chief of the illuminationists.

I believe Suhravardi adopted the illuminationist method under the
influence of the ‘*urafa* 'and the Sufis; the admixture of illumination
and deduction is his own invention. But he - perhaps in order to improve
acceptance of his theory - spoke of a party among the ancient
philosophers as having this same method. Suhravardi offers no sort of
documentation on this subject, just as he offers none on the matter of
the ancient Iranian sages. Certainly, if he possessed such
documentation, he would have presented it and so avoided leaving an idea
to which he was so devoted in ambiguity and doubt.

Some writers on the history of philosophy, in writing on Plato's beliefs
and ideas, have not mentioned his supposed illuminationist method.
Shahristani's *Al-Milal wa'n-Nihal*, Dr. Human's *Tarikh-i Falsafa*,
Will Durant's *History of Philosophy*, and Muhammad Ali Furughi's
*Sayr-i Hikmat dar Urupa* do not mention such a method in the sense
Suhravardi intends. Furughi mentions Platonic love, which is a love of
the beautiful that in Plato's belief - at least as expressed in the
Symposium - is rooted in divinity. It bears no relation to what
Suhravardi has said about the purification of the psyche and the Gnostic
way to God. Plato is said to hold: “Before coming to the world, the
spirit beheld absolute beauty; when in this world it sees outward
beauty, it remembers absolute beauty and feels pain at its exile.
Physical love, like formal beauty, is metaphysical. But true love is
something else; it is the basis for illuminate perception and
realisation of eternal life.”[^9]

In his *History of Western Philosophy*, Bertrand Russell repeatedly
mentions the admixture of ratiocination and illumination in the
philosophy of Plato. However, he offers no documentation or quotations
that would shed light on the question of whether Plato's illumination
arises from discipline and purification of the soul or is just that
experience born of love for the beautiful.[^10] Further investigation of
this question must include direct study of Plato's entire corpus.

Pythagoras may have employed the illuminationist method, apparently
under the inspiration of Oriental teachings. Russell, who regards
Plato's method as illuminationistic, maintains that Plato came under the
influence of Pythagoras in this regard.[^11]

Whether or not we see Plato as an illuminationist in method, there are
pivotal ideas among his beliefs that define his philosophy, all of which
Aristotle opposed. One such concept is the theory of ideas, according to
which all we witness in this world, substances and accidents alike, have
their origin and reality in the other world. The individual beings of
this world amount to shadows or reflections of other-worldly realities.
For instance, all the human individuals who dwell in this world have a
principle and reality in the other world; the real and substantive man
is that man of the other world.

Plato called these realities ideas. In Islamic times, the Greek word for
idea was translated as *mithal* (likeness, idea), and these realities
were called collectively the *muthul-i aflatuni* (Platonic ideas).
Avicenna strenuously opposed the theory of Platonic ideas, and
Suhravardi just as strenuously advocated it. Among later philosophers
holding to the theory of ideas are Mir Damad and Mulla Sadra. However,
these two sages' definitions of idea, especially Mir Damad's, differ
from Plato's and even from Suhravardi's.

Mir Findiriski is another advocate of the theory of ideas from the
Safavid era. He has a well-known *qasida* in Persian in which he
propounds his own views on this theory. Here is how it begins:

*Lo! The star-studded wheel, so beauteous and splendid!*  
*What's above has a form here below correspondent.*  
*Should this lower form scale the ladder of gnosis,*  
*It will ever find union above with its origin.*

*The intelligible form that is endless, eternal,*  
*Is compendious and single with all or without all.*  
*No external prehension will grasp this discussion,*  
*Be it Bu Nasr Farabi or Bu Ali Sina.*[^12]

Another of Plato's pivotal theories concerns the human spirit. He
believes that, prior to being attached to bodies, spirits were created
and dwelt in a world above and beyond this, which is the world of ideas
(or of similitudes, *‘alam-i muthul*), and that they are attached to and
settled in bodies subsequent to the latter's creation.

The third of Plato's theories is based on the first two and amounts to a
corollary of them. It holds that knowledge comes through recollection,
not through actual learning. Everything we learn in this world, although
we suppose it to be something we were previously ignorant of and have
learned for the first time, is in reality a recollection of those things
we knew before in that, prior to being attached to the body in this
world, the spirit dwelt in a higher world in which it witnessed ideas.
Because the realities of all things are the ideas of those things, which
the spirits perceived earlier, these spirits knew realities prior to
coming to this world and finding attachment to bodies. After finding
this attachment, we forgot these things.

For the spirit, the body is like a curtain hung across a mirror that
prevents the transmission of light and the reflection of forms from the
mirror. Through dialectics (discussion, argument, and rational method),
through love, or, as Suhravardi and like-minded people infer, through
asceticism, discipline of the soul, and the spiritual way, the curtain
is lifted, the light shines through, and the forms are revealed.

Aristotle differs with Plato on all three of these ideas. First, he
denies the existence of ideal, abstract, and celestial universals; he
regards the universal, or, more properly speaking, the universality of
the universal, as a purely subjective phenomenon. Second, he believes
that the spirit is created after the body, that is, as the creation of
the body is completed and perfected.

Third, Aristotle considers the body in no way a hindrance or curtain to
the spirit; on the contrary, it is the means and instrument by which the
spirit acquires new learning. The spirit acquires its learning by means
of these senses and bodily instruments; it had no prior existence in
another world in which to have learned anything.

Plato's and Aristotle's differences of opinion over these basic
questions, as well as over some less important ones, were kept alive
after them. They each had their followers in the Alexandrian school.
Plato's followers there became known as neo-Platonists.

This school was founded by the Egyptian Ammonius Saccas. Its most
celebrated and outstanding exponent was the Egyptian of Greek descent,
Plotinus, whom the Islamic historians called the Greek master
(Ash-Shaykh al-Yunani). The neo-Platonists introduced new topics,
perhaps borrowing from ancient Oriental sources. Aristotle's Alexandrian
followers and expositors were numerous. The most famous were Themistius
and Alexander of Aphrodisias.

Islamic Methods of Thought
--------------------------

There have been other methods of thought in the Islamic world, at
variance with the illuminationist and peripatetic methods, that have
played genuine and basic roles in the development of Islamic culture.
Two such methods are *'irfan* (gnosis) and *kalam* (scholastic
theology).

Neither the *'urafa'* nor the *mutakallimin* have regarded themselves as
followers of the philosophers, whether illuminationists or peripatetics.
They have taken stands against the philosophers and clashed with them.
These clashes have had an appreciable effect on the fate of Islamic
philosophy. *Irfan* and *kalam* have both motivated Islamic philosophy
through conflict and clashes and opened up new horizons for philosophy.

### Four Islamic Approaches

Many of the questions Islamic philosophy addresses were first addressed
by the *mutakallimin* or the *'urafa*; although they express themselves
in a way different from that of the philosophers. Islam comprehends four
methods of thought, and Islamic thinkers are of any of four sorts. I am
discussing methods of thought having a philosophical character in the
most general sense, that is, constituting an ontology and a cosmology.

I am treating the universals of philosophy, and not the methods of
thought of jurisprudence, exegesis, tradition, letters, politics, or
ethics, which are another matter entirely. Each of these methods has
taken on a special character under the influence of Islamic teachings
and differs from its counterparts outside the Islamic sphere. The
particular spirit of Islamic culture governs each.

One method is the deductive method of peripatetic philosophy. It has
numerous adherents in history. Most Islamic philosophers, including
Al-Kindi, Farabi, Avicenna, Khwaja Nasir ad-Din Tusi, Mir Damad, Ibn
Rushd of Andalusia, Ibn Baja of Andalusia, and Ibn as-Sa'igh of
Andalusia, have followed this method. The perfect exemplar of this
school is Avicenna. Such philosophical works of his as the *Kitab
ash-Shifa'* (The book of healing [the so called *Sufficientia*]),
*Isharat va Tanbihat* (Allusions and admonitions), *Najat*
(Deliverance), *Danishnama-yi Ala'i* (The book of knowledge, dedicated
to 'Ala ad-Dawla), *Mabda' va Ma 'ad* (The source and the destination),
*Ta'liqat-i Mubahathat* (Annotations to the discussions), and *'Uyun
al-Hikma* (Wellsprings of wisdom) are all works of peripateticism. This
method relies exclusively on rational deduction and demonstration.

A second method is the illuminationist method. This has fewer adherents
than the first method. It was revived by Shihab ad-Din Suhravardi and
followed by Qutb ad-Din Shirazi, Shahrazuri, and a number of others.
Suhravardi is considered the perfect exemplar of this school. He wrote
numerous books) including the *Hikmat al-lshraq* (Wisdom of
illumination), *Talvihar* (Intimations), *Mutarahat* (Conversations),
*Muqavamat* (Oppositions), and *Hayakil an-Nur* (Temples of light). The
best known of them is the *Hikmat al-Ishraq*; only this work is wholly
devoted to the illuminationist method. Suhravardi has written some
treatises in Persian, among them *Avaz-i Par-i Jabra'il* (The song of
Gabriel's wing) and *Aql-i Surkh* (The red intelligence).

The illuminationist method rests on rational deduction and demonstration
and on endeavour and purification of the soul. According to this method,
one cannot discover the underlying realities of the universe through
rational deduction and demonstration alone.

The wayfaring method of *'irfan*, or Sufism, is the third method. It
relies exclusively on a purification of the soul based on a concept of
making one's way to God and drawing near to the Truth. This way is said
to culminate in the attainment of Reality. The method of *'irfan* places
no confidence at all in rational deduction. The *'urafa'* say that the
deductionists stand on wooden legs. According to the method of ‘*irfan*,
the goal is not just to uncover reality, but to reach it.

The method of *'irfan* has numerous adherents, some of whom have grown
famous in the Islamic world, including Bayazid Bistami, Hallaj, Shibli,
Junayd of Baghdad, Dhu'n-Nun Misri, Abu Sa'id-i Abi'l-Khayr, Khwaja
'Abdullah Ansari, Abu Talib Makki, Abu Nasr Sarraj, Abu'l-Qasim
Qushayri, Muhyi 'd-Din Ibn 'Arabi of Andalusia, Ibn Faridh of Egypt, and
Mawlana Rumi. The perfect exemplar of Islamic ‘*irfan*, who codified it
as a science and had a compelling influence on all who followed him, is
Muhyi 'd-Din Ibn 'Arabi.

The wayfaring method of *'irfan* has one feature in common with the
illuminationist method and two features at variance with it. Their
shared feature is reliance on reform, refinement, and purification of
the soul. The distinguishing features of each are as follows:

The *'arif* wholly rejects deduction; the illuminationist upholds it and
uses thought and purification to aid each other. The illuminationist,
like any other philosopher, seeks to discover reality; the ‘*arif* seeks
to attain it.

Fourth is the deductive method of *kalam*. Like the peripatetic, the
*mutakallimin* rely on rational deduction, but with two differences.
First, the principles on which the *mutakallimin* base their reasoning
are different from those on which the philosophers base theirs. The most
important convention used by the *mutakallimin*, especially by the
Mu'tazilites, is that of beauty and ugliness.

However, they differ among themselves as to the meaning of this
convention: the Mu'tazilites regard the concept of beauty and ugliness
as rational, but the Ash'arites regard it as canonical. The Mu'tazilites
have derived a series of principles and formulae from this principle,
such as the formula of grace (*qa’ida-iy lutf*) and the incumbency of
the optimal (*wujub-i aslah*) upon God Most High.

The philosophers, however, regard the principle of beauty and ugliness
as a nominal and human principle, like the pragmatic premises and
intelligibles propounded in logic, which are useful only in polemics,
not in demonstration. Accordingly, the philosophers call *kalam*
“polemical wisdom,” as opposed to “demonstrational wisdom.”

Second, the *mutakallimin*, as opposed to the philosophers, regard
themselves as committed, committed to the defence of the bounds of
Islam. Philosophical discussion is free; that is, the philosopher has
not the predetermined object of defending a particular belief, The
*mutakallim* does have such an object. The method of *kalam* is
subdivided into three methods: the Mu'tazilite, the Ash'arite, and the
Shi'ite.

Mu'tazilites are numerous in history. There are Abu'l Hudhayl 'Allaf,
Nazzam, Jahiz, Abu 'Ubayda, and Mu'ammar ibn Muthanna, all of whom lived
in the second or third centuries of the Hijra. Qazi 'Abd al-Jabbar in
the fourth century and Zamakhshari around the turn of the fifth-sixth
centuries also exemplify this school.

Shaykh Abu'l-Hasan Ash'ari (d. 330) perfectly exemplifies the Ash'arite
school. Qazi Abu Bakr Baqillani, Imam al-Haramayn Juvayni, Ghazali, and
Fakhr ad-Din Razi all followed the Ash'ari method.

Shi'i *mutakallimin* are also numerous. Hisham ibn al-Hikam, a companion
of Imam Ja'far Sadiq (upon whom be peace) was a Shi'i *mutakallim*. The
Nawbakhti family, an Iranian Shi'i family, produced some outstanding
*mutakallims*. Shaykh Mufid and Sayyid Murtadha 'Alam al-Huda are also
ranked among Shi'i *mutakallimin*. The perfect exemplar of Shi'i *kalam*
is Khwaja Nasir ad-Din Tusi. His *Tajrid al-'Aqa 'id* (Refinement of
beliefs) is one of the most famous works of *kalam*. He was also a
philosopher and mathematician. After him, *kalam* took a wholly
different course and assumed a more philosophical character.

Among the Sunnis' works of *kalam*, the most famous is the *Sharh-i
Mavaqif* (Elucidation of the stations), with text by Qazi 'Azud ad-Din
Iji (a contemporary of Hafiz, who praised him in his poetry) and
annotations by Sharif Jurjani. This work was deeply influenced by the
*Tajrid al- Aqa'id*.

### Sublime Wisdom

The four streams of thought continued in the Islamic world until they
reached a point of confluence called “sublime wisdom” (*hikmat-i
muta‘aliya*). The science of sublime wisdom was founded by Sadr
al-Muta'allihin Shirazi (or Mulla Sadra) (d. l050/l640).[^13] The term
“sublime wisdom” occurs in Avicenna's *Isharat*, but Avicenna's
philosophy never became known by this name.

Mulla Sadra formally designated his philosophy sublime wisdom, and it
became so known. His school resembles Suhravardi's in method in seeking
to combine demonstration with mystic vision and direct witness, but it
differs in its principles and conclusions.

In Mulla Sadra's school, many of the points of disagreement between
peripateticism and illuminationism, between philosophy and *'irfan*, or
between philosophy and *kalam* have been definitively resolved. Mulla
Sadra's philosophy is not a syncretism, however, but a unique
philosophical system, that, although the various Islamic methods of
thought had an impact on its formation, one must regard as autonomous.

Mulla Sadra has written numerous works, among them the *Asfar-i Arba’a*
(The four journeys, or books), *Ash-Shavahid ar-Rububiya* (Witnesses to
lordship), *Mabda’ va Ma’ad* (The source and the destination),
*‘Arshiya* (On the Empyrean), *Masha'ir* (The perceptual faculties), and
*Sharh-i Hidaya-yi Athir ad-Din Abhar*i (An elucidation of Athir ad-Din
Abhari's guidance).

Among Mulla Sadra's followers is Hajj Mulla Hadi Sabzavari
(1212/1798-1289/1878), author of the *Kitab-i Manzuma* (The rhymed book)
and the *Sharh-i Manzuma* (The elucidation of the rhymed book). A
typical basic library for study of the ancient sciences might consist of
Sabzavari's *Sharh-i Manzuma*, Mulla Sadra's *Asfar*, Avicenna's
*Isharat* and *Shifa'*, and Suhravardi's *Hikmat al-Ishraq.*

Mulla Sadra organised the philosophical topics concerning the
intellectual and rational way in a manner paralleling the manner in
which the *'urafa'* had propounded the way of the heart and spirit. The
*'urafa’* hold that the wayfarer accomplishes four journeys in carrying
through the method of the ‘*arif*:

1. The journey from creation to God. At this stage, the wayfarer
attempts to transcend nature as well as certain supernatural worlds in
order to reach the Divine Essence, leaving no veil between himself and
God.

2. The journey by God in God. After the wayfarer attains proximate
knowledge of God, with His help the wayfarer journeys through His
phases, perfections, names, and attributes.

3. The journey from God to creation by God. In this journey, the
wayfarer returns to creation and rejoins people, but this return does
not mean separation and remoteness from the Divine Essence. Rather, the
wayfarer sees the Divine Essence with all things and in all things.

4. The journey in Creation by God. In this journey, the wayfarer
undertakes to guide the people and lead them to the Truth.

Mulla Sadra, considering that philosophical questions constitute a
“way,” if a mental one, sorted them into four sets:

1. Topics that constitute a foundation or preliminary to the study of
*Tawhid*. These (the ordinary matter of philosophy) constitute our
mental journey from creation to God.

2. Topics of *Tawhid*, theology, and divine attributes-The journey by
God in God.

3. Topics of the divine acts, the universal worlds of being-the journey
from God to creation by God.

4. Topics of the soul and the Destination (*ma 'ad*)-the journey in
creation by God.

The *Asfar Arba 'a*, which means the Four Journeys, is organised on this
basis. Mulla Sadra, who called his special philosophical system sublime
wisdom, referred to conventional philosophy, whether illuminationist or
peripatetic, as common or conventional philosophy.

### Overview of Philosophies and Wisdoms

Philosophy and wisdom, in the widest sense, are variously classified
from different perspectives; but if we consider them from the standpoint
of method, they fall under four headings: deductive wisdom3 experiential
wisdom, experimental wisdom, and polemical wisdom.

Deductive wisdom rests on syllogism and demonstration. It has to do only
with greater and lesser, result and concomitant, contradictory and
contrary, and the like. Experiential wisdom pertains not only to
deduction but to experience, inspiration, and illumination. It takes its
inspiration more from the heart than from the reason.

Experimental wisdom pertains neither to a priori reasoning and deduction
nor to the heart and its inspirations. It pertains to sense, trial, and
experiment. It takes the products of the sciences, the fruits of trial
and experiment, and, by interrelating them, welds them into wisdom and
philosophy.

Polemical wisdom is deductive, but the premises for its deductions are
what logicians call common knowledge (*mashhurar*) and accepted facts
(*maqbulat*). There are several kinds of premises to deduction,
including first axioms (*badihiyat*) and common knowledge. For instance,
the idea that two things each equal to a third are equal to each other,
which is expressed in the phrase “the equal to the equal are equal,” and
the idea that it is absurd for a proposition and its contradictory to
hold true at once are considered axiomatic. The idea that it is ugly to
yawn in the presence of others is considered common knowledge.

Deduction on the basis of axioms is called demonstration, and deduction
on the basis of common knowledge is considered an element of polemics.
Therefore, polemical wisdom means a wisdom that deduces global and
universal ideas from common knowledge.

The *mutakallimin* generally base their deductions on the beauty or the
ugliness of a thing, on rational beauty and ugliness, so to speak. The
*hukama'* hold that all beauty and ugliness relate to the sphere of
human life; one cannot evaluate God, the universe, and being by these
criteria. Thus, the *hukama'* call *kalam* polemical wisdom.

The *hukama’* believe that the central principles of religion may be
better deduced from the premises of demonstration and in reliance on
first axioms than from the premises of common knowledge and polemics. In
Islamic times, especially among the Shi'a, philosophy, without departing
from its mission of free inquiry and committing itself in advance,
gradually proved the best source of support for Islamic principles.
Accordingly, polemical wisdom, in the hands of such persons as Khwaja
Nasir ad-Din Tusi, gradually took on a demonstrational and
illuminationistic character. Thus, *kalam* came to be overshadowed by
philosophy.

Although experimental wisdom is extraordinarily valuable, it has two
shortcomings. One is that its compass is confined to the experimental
sciences, and the experimental sciences are confined to what is sensible
and palpable. Man's philosophical needs extend beyond what is in the
domain of sense experience. For instance, when we discuss the
possibility of a beginning of time, an end to space, or an origin for
causes, how are we to find what we seek in the laboratory or under the
microscope? Thus, experimental wisdom cannot satiate man's philosophical
instinct and must elect silence on basic philosophical questions.

The other shortcoming lies in the fact that the value of experimental
questions is rendered precarious by their confinement to and dependence
upon nature. Questions of experimental science have a time-bound value
and may grow obsolescent at any moment. A wisdom based on experiment is
naturally precarious and so does not meet a basic human need, the need
for certainty. Certainty arises in questions having mathematical
abstraction or philosophical abstraction, and the meanings of
mathematical and philosophical abstractions can be clarified only by
philosophy.

There remain deductive wisdom and experiential wisdom. The questions
discussed in the following sections should elucidate these two wisdoms
and spell out their value.

### Problems in Philosophy

#### Being

Philosophical questions pivot on being. That which is to philosophy what
the body is to medicine, number is to mathematics, or quantify is to
geometry is being *qua* being. It is the subject of philosophy and all
philosophical topics turn on it. In other words, philosophy has for its
subject existence.

Several kinds of questions turn on being. One is questions pertaining to
being, or existence, and its opposites in the two respective senses:
nonbeing and essence (*mahiya*).[^14] There is nothing but being in the
objective world. Being has no opposite outside the mind. But the
conceptualising mind of man has formed two concepts vis-a-vis being or
existence: nonbeing and essence (of course, essences). A range of
philosophical questions, especially in sublime wisdom, pertains to
existence and essence, and another range pertains to being and nonbeing.

A second group of questions pertains to divisions of being. Being in its
turn has divisions that are regarded as amounting to species of being;
in other words, being is divisible (for instance, into the objective and
the subjective, the necessary and the possible, the eternal and the
created in time, the stable and the changing, the singular and the
plural, the potential and the act, and the substance and the accident).
Of course, these are the primary divisions of being, that is, the
divisions that enter into being by virtue of the fact that it is being.

To illustrate, divisions into black and white, large and small, equal
and unequal, odd and even, or long and short are divisions not in being
*qua* being but in being *qua* body or in being *qua* quantifiable.
Corporeality in being corporeality, or quantity in being quantity,
admits of such division. However, division into singular and plural, or
division into necessary and possible, is division of being *qua* being.

Close research has been done in philosophy as to the criteria for these
divisions, what distinguishes the divisions of being *qua* being from
other divisions. Some philosophers have regarded certain divisions as
applying to body *qua* body and thus falling outside the scope of first
philosophy, but other philosophers for various reasons have regarded
these divisions as applying to being *qua* being and thus falling under
this same domain.

A third group of questions pertains to the universal laws governing
being, such as causality, the correspondence of cause and effect, the
necessity governing the system of cause and effect, and priority versus
synchronism among the levels of being.

A fourth group of questions pertains to demonstration of the planes of
being or worlds of being. Being has particular planes or worlds. The
*hukama'* of Islam believe that there are four general worlds or four
emergences (*nash'a*):

1. The world of nature, or the *nasut*

2. The world of ideas, or the *malakut*

3. The world of [separate] intelligences, or the *jabarut*

4. The world of divinity, or the *lahut*

The world of *nasut* is the world of matter, motion, and space-time. It
is the world of nature and sense objects, this world. The world of
[Platonic] ideas [similitudes], or the *malakut*, is a world superior to
nature, having forms and dimensions, but lacking motion, time, and
change.

The world of *jabarut* is the world of the [separate] intelligences or
the world of the [abstract] idea (*ma'na*), free of forms and images and
thus superior to the world of *malakut*. The world of *lahut* is the
world of divinity and unity.

A fifth group of questions pertains to the relations between the world
of nature and the worlds above it, the descent of being from *lahut* to
nature, and to the ascent from nature to the higher worlds. With special
reference to man, these are called questions of the destination (*ma
'ad*) and figure very prominently in sublime wisdom.

#### Existence and Essence

Is existence substantive, or is essence? We always distinguish two valid
senses in which things may be spoken of: the isness of a thing and the
whatness of a thing. For instance, we know that man is, the tree is,
number is, and quantity is, but number has one whatness, one essence,
and man has another.[^15] If we ask, “What is number?” we receive one
answer. If we ask, “What is man?” we receive another.

Many things have a patent isness; that is, we know that they are. But we
may not know what they are. For instance, we know that life is or that
electricity is, but we may not know what life is or what electricity is.
We know what many things are-for instance, we have a clear definition of
a circle and so know what a circle is-but we do not know whether the
circle exists in objective nature. Thus, isness is something other than
whatness.

This plurality, this dichotomy of essence and existence, is purely
subjective. In extensional reality, no thing is twofold. Therefore, one
of these two is objectively so and substantive, and the other is nominal
and not substantive.

The whole question of existentialism versus essentialism has no ancient
historical antecedents. This topic originated in the Islamic world. None
of the early philosophers, Farabi, Avicenna, Khwaja Nasir ad-Din Tusi,
or even Suhravardi, discussed anything under this heading. The topic
made its debut in philosophy in the time of Mir Damad (the beginning of
the eleventh century of the Hijra.

Mir Damad was an essentialist. However, his famous pupil, Mulla Sadra,
made a compelling case for existentialism, and from then onward, every
philosopher of note has been an existentialist.[^16] In the third volume
of *UsuI-i Falsafa va Ravish-i Ri'alism*, I have discussed the
respective ideas of the *'urafa'*, the *mutakallimin*, and the
philosophers as precursors to this philosophical conception of Mulla
Sadra's.

Another philosophy sometimes known as existentialism has flourished in
our own time. This form of existentialism pertains to man and has
reference to the idea that man, by contrast with all other beings, has
no definite, preassigned essence and no form determined by nature. Man
designs and builds his own whatness.

This idea is largely correct and supported by Islamic philosophy, except
that, what in Islamic philosophy is called existentialism does not apply
to man alone, but to the whole universe, and, second, when we speak of
existentialism or *isalat-i vujud* in an Islamic context, we are using
the term *isalat* (-ism) in its sense of substantive reality or
objective being, as opposed to nominal or mental existence. When we use
it in the Western context of modern existentialism, we are using it in
its sense of primacy or priority. One should by no means conflate the
two senses.

#### The Objective and the Subjective

A thing is either objective or subjective. Objective being means being
external to and independent of man's mind. We know, for instance, that
mountain, sea, and plain have being external to our minds and
independent of them. Whether our minds conceive of them or not, indeed,
whether ourselves and our minds exist or not, mountain, sea, and plain
exist.

But that mountain, sea, and plain have an existence in our minds as
well. When we imagine them, we give them being in our minds. The being
things find in our minds is called subjective being or mental being.

Two questions arise here. One is why the images of things appearing in
our minds should be conceived of as a kind of being for those things in
our minds. If they are, one might say that the image of a thing painted
on a wall or printed on a sheet of paper deserves to be called another
kind of being, a parietal being or a papyraceous being. If we term
mental images a form of being for the thing imagined, to be just, we
have employed a metaphor and not spoken the literal truth, but
philosophy ought to deal with the literal truth.

The relation of a mental form to an external object (for instance, the
relation of a mental mountain or sea to an external mountain or sea) is
far more profound than the relation of the picture of a mountain or a
sea on a sheet of paper or a wall to that external mountain or sea. If
what appears in the mind were only a simple image, it would never give
rise to consciousness, just as the image on the wall does not give rise
to consciousness in the wall. Rather, the mental image is consciousness
itself.

The other question is whether mental being, as a concept actually
relating to man and the human psyche, belongs to the realm of
psychology. Philosophy deals with general questions, and such particular
questions pertain to the sciences.

Philosophers have demonstrated that we are conscious of external objects
because our mental images, far from being simple, are a kind of
realisation of existence in our minds for the essences (*mahiya*) of the
objects. Although from one standpoint, the question of mental images is
a question of the human psyche and so belongs to the field of
psychology, from another standpoint, that man's mind is in fact another
emergence (*nash'a*) of being, resulting in being in its essence taking
two forms, subjective and objective, it is a question for philosophy.

Avicenna and Mulla Sadra have said (the former allusively, near the
beginning of the “Ilahiyat” of his *Shifa’* and the latter explicitly
and at length in his commentary to the same work) that at times a
question may pertain to two different disciplines from two standpoints;
for instance, a question may pertain to philosophy from one standpoint
and to the natural sciences from another.

#### Truth and Error

The question of mental being bas another angle that has been studied: It
has to do with the validity of perceptions, the extent to which our
perceptions, sensations, and conceptions of the external world are
valid. From ancient times, philosophers have asked whether what we
perceive of an object by means of our senses or our reason corresponds
to actuality, the thing in itself.

Some postulate that some of our sense perceptions or rational
perceptions do correspond to actuality, the thing in itself, and some do
not. Those that correspond to actuality are termed “truth,” and those
that do not are termed “error.” Sight, hearing, taste, touch, and smell
are all subject to error. But most of our sense perceptions correspond
fully to reality. Through these same senses, we accurately distinguish
night from day, far from near, large from small in volume, tough from
smooth, and cold from hot.

Our reason is likewise subject to error. Logic was compiled to avert
errors of the reason in its deductions. But most of our rational
deductions are valid. When we add up all the debits and all the credits
in a ledger and subtract the former from the latter, we are performing a
mental and rational procedure that we are perfectly assured will hold
true if we are sufficiently careful and exact.

However, the Sophists of Greece denied the distinction between truth and
error. They said that whatever some person feels and thinks is for that
person the truth. They said that man is the measure of all things. They
radically denied reality and, having denied it, left nothing in
corresponding to which man's perceptions and sensations could be true
and in failing to correspond to which they could be erroneous.

The Sophists were contemporaries of Socrates (Socrates came along near
the close of the Sophist period). Protagoras and Gorgias are two famous
Sophists. Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle rebelled against them.

After Aristotle's time, another group appeared in Alexandria, called the
Skeptics, the most famous of whom is Pyrrho. The Skeptics did not deny
actuality in principle but denied that human perceptions correspond to
it. They said that one perceives an object in a certain way under the
influence of internal states and certain external conditions. Sometimes
two people experiencing different states or viewing from different
angles will see the same event in two different ways. A thing may appear
ugly in one's eyes and beautiful in another's, or single in one's eyes
and double in another's. The air may feel warm to one and cold to
another. A flavor may taste sweet to one and bitter to another. The
Skeptics, like the Sophists, denied the validity of knowledge.

Bishop Berkeley wholly rejects external reality. No one has been able to
refute his reasons for his position, although everyone knows they are
fallacious.

Those who have sought a reply to the ancient Sophists exemplified by
Berkeley have not taken the approach that could resolve the sophism. The
philosophers of Islam have held that the basic approach to resolving
this sophism consists in our perceiving the reality of mental being.
Only thus is the puzzle solved.

In approaching mental being, the *hukama’* of Islam first define
knowledge, or perception, as consisting in a kind of being for the
oblect perceived within the being of the perceiver. They go on to cite
certain demonstrations in support of this position, and then they
recount and reply to certain objections to mental being or allegations
of problems in it.

This topic did not exist in this form early in the Islamic period and *a
fortiori* did not exist in Hellenic times. Nasir ad-Din Tusi was the
first to speak of the objective and the subjective in his works of
philosophy and *kalam*. Thereafter, it came to occupy a major place in
the works of such comparatively recent philosophers as Mulla Sadra and
Mulla Hadi Sabzavari. Farabi, Avicenna, and even Suhravardi, as well as
their followers, never broached the subject of mental being or even used
the term in their works. The term first appeared after Avicenna's time.

However, what Farabi and Avicenna said on other subjects shows that they
believed perception to consist of a simulacrum of the reality of the
object perceived within the being of the perceiver. But they neither
sought to demonstrate this point nor conceived of it as an independent
question of being, an independent division of being.

#### The Created in Time and the Eternal

The Arabic word *hadith* has the lexical and customary meaning of new,
and *qadim* means old. However, these words have other meanings in the
terminologies of philosophy and *kalam*. Like other people, when
philosophers speak of the *hadith* and the *qadim*, they seek to know
what is new and what is old, but in speaking of a thing as new, they
mean that before it was, it was not - that is, that first it was not,
then it was.

In speaking of a thing as old, they mean that it always has been and
never was not. Suppose there is a tree that has lived for billions of
years. In common usage, it would be spoken of as old, quite old indeed,
but according to the terminologies of philosophy and *kalam*, it is
*hadith* (new) because there was a time billions of years ago when it
was not.

Philosophers define createdness in time (*huduth*) as the precedence of
a thing's nonbeing to its being, and they define eternality (*qidam*) as
the nonprecedence of a thing's nonbeing to its being. Therefore, an
entity is created in time whose nonbeing precedes its being, and an
entity is eternal for which no nonbeing prior to its being can be
conceived.

Discussion of the question of the created in time and the eternal turns
on this point: Is everything in the universe created in time and nothing
eternal, such that whatever we consider first was not and then was? Or
is everything eternal and nothing created in time, such that everything
has always been? Or are some things created in time, and some eternal,
such that, for instance, shapes, forms, and externals are created in
time, but matter, subjects, and invisible things are eternal? Or are
individuals and parts created in time, whereas species and wholes are
eternal? Or are natural and material phenomena created in time, whereas
abstract and suprameterial phenomena are eternal? Or is only God, the
Creator of the whole and Cause of causes, eternal, whereas all else is
created in time? Overall, is the universe created in time, or is it
eternal?

The *mutakallimin* of Islam believe that only God is eternal. All else -
matter and form, individuals and species, parts and wholes, abstract and
material - constitutes what is called the world or 'other' (*masiva*)
and is created in time. The philosophers of Islam, however, believe that
createdness in time is a property of the material world, whereas the
supernatural worlds are abstract and eternal. In the world of nature,
too, principles and universals are eternal, whereas the phenomena and
particulars are created in time. Therefore, the universe is created in
time with respect to its phenomena and particulars but eternal with
respect to its principles and universals.

Debate over createdness in time and eternality has excited acrimonious
disputes between the philosophers and the *mutakallimin*. Abu Hamid
Ghazali, who, although leaning to *'irfan* and Sufism in most of his
works, leans to *kalam* in some, declares Avicenna an unbeliever for his
stand on several questions, among them his belief in the eternality of
the world. In his famous *Tahafut al-Falsafa* (The incoherence of the
philosophers), Ghazali has criticised philosophers on twenty points and
exposed what he believed to be the incoherencies in their thought. Ibn
Rushd of Andalusia has rebutted Ghazali in *Tahafut at-Tahafut* (The
incoherence of the “incoherence”).

The *mutakallimin* say that if a thing is not created in time but
eternal - if it has always been and never not been - then that thing has
no need of a creator and cause. Therefore, if we suppose other eternal
things exist than the Essence of the Truth, it follows that they will
have no need of a creator and so in reality be necessary beings in their
essence, like God, and the demonstrations that show the Necessary Being
in Essence to be singular do not permit us to profess more than one such
Necessary Being. Accordingly, no more than one Eternal Being exists, and
all else is created in time. Therefore, the universe is created in time,
including the abstract and the material, principles and phenomena,
species and individuals, wholes and parts, matter and form, visible and
invisible.

The philosophers have rebutted the arguments of the *mutakallimin*
decisively, saying that all the confusion turns on one point, which
consists in supposing that, if a thing has a continuous existence into
the indefinite past, it has no need of a cause, whereas this is not so.
A thing's need or lack of need for a cause pertains to its essence,
which makes it a necessary being or a possible being; it has nothing to
do with its createdness in time or eternality.[^17] By analogy, the
sun's radiance stems from the sun and cannot exist apart from it. Its
existence depends on the sun's existence. It is the sun's luminance and
issues from the sun whether we suppose there was a time this radiance
did not exist or we suppose it has always existed, along with the sun.
If we suppose that the sun's radiance has coexisted with the sun itself
from preeternity to posteternity, this does not entail its having no
need of the sun.

The philosophers maintain that the relation of the universe to God is as
the relation of the radiance to the sun, with this difference: The sun
is not conscious of itself or of its action and does not perform its
function as an act of will; the contrary is true of God.

At times we encounter expressions in the primary texts of Islam that
compare the relation of the universe and God to the relation of radiance
and the sun. The noble verse of the Qur'an states,

***“God is the Light of the heavens and the earth” (24:35)***.

Exegetes have interpreted this verse to mean that God is the light-giver
of the heavens and the earth (that the being of heaven and earth is a
ray of God).

The philosophers do not adduce any evidence for the eternality of the
universe from the universe itself; rather, they approach this argument
from the position that God is the Absolutely Effulgent and the Eternally
Beneficent - we cannot possibly conceive of His effulgence (emanation)
and beneficence as limited, as terminating somewhere. In other words,
the theistic philosophers have arrived at the eternality of the universe
through an a priori demonstration, that is, by making the being and
attributes of God the premise to the eternality of the universe.

Generally, those disbelieving in God advance the position of the
eternality of the universe, but the theistic philosophers say that the
same thing nonbelievers adduce as a reason for God's non-existence in
their view implies God's existence. The eternality of the universe is a
hypothesis to nonbelievers, but it is an established fact to theistic
philosophers.

#### The Mutable and the Constant

Change means transformation and constancy means uniformity. We
continually witness changes in the universe. We ourselves continually
make transitions from state to state, from period to period, beginning
when we are born and ending when we die. The same holds for earth and
sea, for mountains, trees, animals, stars, solar systems, and galaxies.
Are these changes outward, pertaining to the configuration, form, and
accidents of the universe, or are they profound and fundamental, such
that no constant phenomenon exists in the universe? Are the changes that
occur in the universe transient and instantaneous, or are they gradual
and protracted?

These questions, too, date from remote times; they were discussed in
ancient Greece. Democritus, known as the father of the atomic theory and
also as the laughing philosopher, maintained that all change or
transformation is superficial because natural being is based on atomic
particles, which are forever in one state and unchangeable. The changes
we witness are like those in a heap of gravel, massed sometimes in one
shape, sometimes in another, but never changing in identity or real
nature. This is the mechanistic outlook and constitutes a kind of
mechanistic philosophy.

Another Greek philosopher, Heraclitus, maintains that nothing remains in
the same state for two successive instants. As he says, you cannot set
foot twice in the same river because at the second instant you are not
who you were before and that river is not the same river. This
philosophy stands opposite to Democritus's in seeing everything in a
state of flux and inconstancy, but it says nothing contrary to
mechanism; that is, it advances no idea of dynamics.

Aristotle's philosophy has no quarrel with the idea that all the parts
of nature change, but undertakes to determine which changes are gradual
and protracted and which are transient and instantaneous. It terms the
gradual changes “motion” and the transient changes “generation and
corruption” (that is, a transient coming into being is called
generation, and a transient extinction is called corruption). Because
Aristotle and his followers consider the basic changes occurring in this
world, especially those that appear in substances, as transient, they
term this “the world of generation and corruption.”

At other moments, constancy obtains. If we regard changes as transient,
because they occur in an instant, although at other instants or through
time things are constant, such mutable things have a relative mutability
and a relative constancy. Therefore, if change is in the mode of motion,
it is absolute change. If it is in the mode of generation and
corruption, if it is in an instantaneous mode - it is relative.

According to the Aristotelians, although nothing absolutely constant and
uniform exists in nature, but everything is mutable (contrary to the
view of the Democriteans), because substances are basic to nature and
changes in substances are transient, the world has a relative constancy
along with relative change. But constancy governs the world to a greater
extent than does change.

Aristotle and the Aristotelians regard all things as falling under ten
basic generic classes, which they call the ten categories: substance,
quantity, quality, determination in space, position, determination in
time, relation, condition, action, and passion.

Motion occurs only in the categories of quantity, quality, and
determination in space. In all other categories change is transient; in
other words, all other categories enjoy a relative constancy. Even those
three categories in which motion occurs - because the motion is
intermittent - are governed by a relative constancy. Therefore, in
Aristotle's philosophy, one encounters more constancy than change, more
uniformity than transformation.

Avicenna believed that motion occurs in the category of position as
well. He demonstrated that certain motions, such as the rotation of the
earth about its axis, constitute a positional motion, not a motion in
spatial determination. Thus, after Avicenna, motion in spatial
determination was restricted to transferential motion. Avicenna did not
demonstrate the existence of a new sort of motion, but reclassified as
positional what had previously been categorised as a motion in spatial
determination. His reclassification is generally accepted.

Mulla Sadra effected a major transformation in Islamic philosophy by
demonstrating substantial motion. He demonstrated that, even on the
basis of the Aristotelian principles of matter and form, we must accept
that the substances of the world are in continuous motion; there is
never so much as an instant of constancy and uniformity in the
substances of the world. The accidents (that is, the nine other
categories), as functions of the substances, are also in motion.
According to Mulla Sadra, nature equals motion, and motion equals
continuous, uninterrupted creation and extinction.

Through the principle of substantial motion, the visage of the
Aristotelian universe is wholly transformed. According to this
principle, nature, or matter, equals motion. Time consists in the
measure or tensile force of this substantial motion, and constancy
equals supernatural being. What exists consists of, on the one hand,
absolute change (nature) and, on the other, absolute constancy (the
supernatural).

The constancy of nature is the constancy of order, not the constancy of
being; that is, a definite, immutable system governs the universe, and
the contents of the system are all mutable (they are change itself).
Both the being and the system of this universe stem from the supernal.
Were it not for the governance of the other world, this world, which is
wholly flux and mutation, would be cut off from its past and future.
“Many times has the water exchanged in this stream,/Still the moon's and
the stars' reflections remain.”[^18]

Prior to Mulla Sadra, the topic of the mutable and the constant was felt
to belong to the natural sciences, in that any determination or any
division that applies to a body *qua* body belongs to the natural
sciences. It was said that it is such-and-such a body that is either
constant or mutable, or that is either still or in motion. In other
words, motion and stasis are among the accidents of a body. Therefore,
the topic of the constant and the mutable ought to fall wholly within
the domain of the natural sciences.

This all changed with Mulla Sadra's realisation of existentialism (the
substantive reality of being), his realisation of substantial motion,
and his demonstration that the natures of the universe constitute the
mobile *qua* mobile and the mutable *qua* mutable (that is, that a body
is not something to which motion is merely added as an accident, whereby
at times this motion can be annulled, leaving the motionless state we
call stasis). Rather, the natures of the universe are motion itself, and
the contrary of this substantial motion is constancy, not stasis.

Stasis holds for the accidental motions the state of whose absence we
call stasis but is inconceivable in the case of essential, substantial
motion. The contrary of this substantial motion that is the substance
itself consists of substances for which constancy is the very essence.
These are entities beyond space and time, devoid of spatiotemporal
forces, potentialities, or dimensions. Therefore, it is not the body
that is either constant or mutable. Rather, it is being *qua* being that
appears either as constancy itself (as supramaterial beings) or as
continuous flux/becoming/creation itself (the world of nature).
Therefore, just as being is in its essence divisible into necessary and
possible, so is it in its essence divisible into the constant and the
fluid.

Thus, according to Mulla Sadra, only certain kinds of motions - the
accidental motions of a body having stasis is for their opposite - ought
to be studied under the heading of the natural sciences. Other motions,
or indeed these very motions when not regarded from the standpoint of
their being accidents of natural bodies, ought to be discussed and
studied in first philosophy. Mulla Sadra himself brought in his
discussions of motion under “general phenomena” in the *Asfar* in the
course of discussing potentials and acts, although it warranted a
chapter to itself.

Among the key conclusions arising from this great realization -
basically, that being in its essence is divisible into the constant and
the fluid and that constant being is one modality of being, while fluid
being is another - is that becoming is precisely a plane of being.
Although, nominally speaking, we may regard becoming as a synthesis of
being and nonbeing, this synthesis is actually a kind of notion or
metaphor.[^19]

In truth it is the realisation of the substantive reality of being and
of the nominal status of essences (*mahiyat*) that permits us to
perceive this key reality. Without a grasp of the substantive reality of
being, neither a conception of substantial motion nor a conception that
flux and becoming are precisely a plane of being would be possible.

Motion has recovered its proper place in the modern philosophy of Europe
by other avenues. Some philosophers came to believe that motion is the
cornerstone of nature, that nature equals becoming. However, because
this idea was not based on existentialism (the substantive reality of
being) and the primary division of being into the constant and the
fluid, these philosophers supposed that becommg was the same union of
opposites that the ancients had deemed absurd. They likewise supposed
that becoming falsified the principle of identity (*huhuya*), which the
ancients had taken for granted.

These philosophers said that the presiding principle in the thought of
the ancients was the principle of constancy and that, in deeming beings
constant, the ancients had supposed that either being or nonbeing must
hold sway over things. Therefore, one alone of these holds true (the
principle of the impossibility of union and cancellation of opposites).
That is, either there is always being or there is always nonbeing; no
third alternative obtains.

Similarly, because the ancients thought things constant, they supposed
of everything that is itself (the principle of identity). But with the
realisation of the principle of motion and change in nature, the
realisation that nature is continually in a state of becoming, the two
principles are groundless because becoming is a union of being and
nonbeing; where a thing is both being and non-being, becoming has been
demonstrated.

A thing in a state of becoming both is and is not; at every instant, its
self is its not-self; its self is at once its self and not its self; the
self of its self is progressively negated. Therefore, if the principle
governing things were that of being and nonbeing, both the principle of
the impossibility of the union of opposites and the principle of
identity would hold true. Because the principle governing things is the
principle of becoming, neither of these other principles holds true.

The principle of the impossibility of the union of opposites and the
principle of identity, which held unrivalled sway over the minds of the
ancients, arose from a further principle that they also accepted
implicitly: the principle of constancy. As the natural sciences showed
the invalidity of the principle of constancy, these two principles, too,
lost their credibility. This development represents the conception of
many modern philosophers, from Hegel onward.

Mulla Sadra invalidated the principle of constancy by other means.
Motion, according to his realisation, implies that nature equals
inconstancy and constancy equals abstraction. Unlike the modern
philosophers, however, he never concludes that because nature equals
flux and becoming, the principle of the impossibility of the union and
cancellation of opposites is falsified.

Although Mulla Sadra regards becoming as a kind of union of being and
nonbeing, he does not treat this as a union of opposites because he has
realized a more important principle: that being is divisible in its
essence into the constant and the fluid. Constant being is a plane of
being, not a synthesis of being and nonbeing. The synthesis of becoming
from being and nonbeing is not a union of two opposites just as it is
not the negation of the self of a thing.

The modern philosophers' confusion has two roots: their failure to
perceive the division of being into the constant and the fluid and their
inadequate conception of the principles of contradiction and
contrariety.

#### Cause and Effect

The most ancient of philosophical questions is that of cause and effect.
The concept of cause and effect appears in every philosophical system,
unlike such concepts as existentialism and subjective being, which have
a prominent place in some philosophies and pass unnoted in others, the
concept of potential and act, which plays an important role in
Aristotelianism, or the concept of the constant and the mutable, which
has a deservedly prominent position in the philosophy of Mulla Sadra.

Causation is a kind of relation between two things, one of which we call
the cause and the other, the effect. This is the most profound of
relations. The relation of cause and effect consists in the cause's
giving being to the effect. What the effect realises from the cause is
its whole being, its whole reality; therefore, if the cause were not,
the effect would not be. We find such a relation nowhere else.
Therefore, the effect's need of the cause is the keenest of needs, a
need at the root of being. Accordingly, if we would define cause, we
must say, “A cause is that thing an effect needs in its essence and
being.”

Every phenomenon is an effect, and every effect needs a cause;
therefore, every phenomenon needs a cause. That is, if a thing is not
being itself in its essence-if it has appeared as an accident, a
phenomenon-it must have arisen through the intervention of a factor we
call a cause. Therefore, no phenomenon is without a cause. The
hypothesis contrary to this theory is that a phenomenon may appear
without a cause. This hypothesis is called coincidence (*sudfa*) or
chance (*ittifaq*). The philosophy of causality radically rejects this
hypothesis.

Philosophers and *mutakallimin* concur that every phenomenon is *an*
effect and needs a cause, but the *mutakallinun* define such a
phenomenon as created in time (*hadith*), and the philosophers define it
as possible (*mumkin*). That is, the *mutakallimin* say that whatever is
created in time is an effect and needs a cause, and the philosophers say
that whatever is possible is an effect and needs a cause. These two
definitions lead to the different conclusions previously discussed in
“The Created in Time and the Eternal.”

A certain cause produces only a certain effect, and a certain effect
proceeds only from a certain cause. There are special relations of
dependence among the beings of the universe such that any one thing
cannot necessarily give rise to any other thing and any one thing cannot
necessarily arise from any other thing. We rely on this truth in our
everyday experience. For instance, eating is the cause of satiety,
drinking water is the cause of quenching of thirst, and study is the
cause of literacy. Therefore, if we wish to realise any of these
qualities, we have resort to the appropriate cause. For instance, we
never drink water or study for the sake of satiety, nor do we consider
eating sufficient for the attainment of literacy.

Philosophy demonstrates that such a clear relation obtains among all the
processes in the universe. It makes this point through this definition:
A unique correspondence and symmetry govern every single
cause-and-effect relation and appear in no other such relation. This is
the single most important principle in giving order to our thought and
in presenting the universe to our thought not as a chaotic aggregate in
which nothing is conditional upon anything else but as an ordered,
systematic cosmos in which every part has a special place, in which no
one thing can displace another.

There are four kinds of cause in the philosophy of Aristotle: the
efficient cause, the final cause, the material cause, and the formal
cause. These four causes are well illustrated in human industry: If we
build a house, the builder or workman is the efficient cause; to dwell
in that house is the final cause; the building materials are the
material cause; and the configuration of the house, in being appropriate
to a dwelling and not, say, to a granary, a bathhouse, or a mosque, is
the formal cause. In Aristotle's view, every natural phenomenon, whether
a stone, a plant, or a human being, has these same four causes.

Cause as defined by natural scientists differs somewhat from cause as
defined by theologians. In theology, or what we now call philosophy,
cause means giver of existence. Philosophers call what brings something
into existence its cause. Otherwise they do not call it cause, although
they may at times call it contributory (*mu'idd*). The natural
scientists, however, use the word “cause” even where the relation
between two things is simply one of transfer of momentum.

Therefore, in the natural scientists' terminology, the builder is the
cause of the house in being the point of issue for its construction,
through a series of transfers of materials. The theologians, however,
never call the builder the cause of the house, in that he does not bring
the house into being. Rather, the materials for the house existed
beforehand, and the builder's work has been confined to organizing them.
Likewise, according to the natural scientists, the relation of mother
and father to child is causal; but according to philosophy, it is that
of an antecedent, a contributory factor, or a channel, not that of a
cause.

The sequence of causes (causes in the terminology of the philosophers,
not that of the natural scientists, that is, causes of being, not causes
of motion) terminates. It is absurd that it should be interminable. If
the being of a thing proceeds from a cause, arises from a cause, and if
the being of that cause arises from a further cause, and if the being of
that cause arises from a yet further cause, this process could go on
through thousands, millions, billions of causes and more. However, it
must finally terminate in a cause that arises through its own essence
and not through another cause. Philosophers have often demonstrated that
an endless regress of causes is absurd, which phrase they shorten to a
regress of causes is absurd or usually even further to regress is
absurd.

The word *tasalsul* (regress) is derived from the word *silsila*
(sequence, series, range), with the root meaning of chain. Therefore,
*tasalsul* means an endless chain of causes. Philosophers thus liken the
ordered system of causes and effects to a chain whose links interlock in
sequence.

#### The Necessary, the Possible, and the Impossible

Logicians say that if we attribute a predicate to a subject, if, for
instance, we say *a* is *b*, the relation of *b* to *a* will have one of
three qualities. First, it may be necessary, that is, certain,
inevitable, and inviolable; in other words, reason may refuse to accept
anything contrary to it. Second, the opposite may be true. That is, the
relation may be impossible, meaning it is absurd that the predicate
should be an accident of the subject. In other words, reason refuses to
accept that it should be one.

Third, the relation may be such that it may be affirmed or negated; that
is, it is susceptible both to affirmation and to negation. In other
words, reason refuses to accept neither this relation nor its contrary.

For instance, if we consider the relation of the number four to
evenness, we see that it is necessary and certain. Reason refuses to
accept its contrary. Reason says that the number four is certainly and
necessarily even. Therefore, necessity governs this relation.

But if we say that the number five is even, this relation is impossible.
The number five has no possibility of being even, and our reason in
perceiving this relation rejects it. Therefore, impossibility and
inconceivability govern this relation.

But if we say that today the weather is sunny, this is a possible
relation. That is, the nature of the day does not require that the
weather be sunny or that it be cloudy. Either may accord with the nature
of the day. Possibility governs this relation.

It follows that, whatever subject and whatever predicate we consider,
their relation will not be devoid of these three qualities, which at
times from a certain standpoint we term the three modalities. I have
described the logicians' approach.

The philosophers, who study being, say that any idea or concept we
consider, take as a subject, and predicate being of will fall under one
of these three categories. The relation of being to that idea or concept
may be necessary; that is, that thing must necessarily exist. We then
call that thing a necessary being.

God is discussed in philosophy under the heading of proofs for necessary
being. Philosophical demonstrations show that there is a Being for which
nonexistence is absurd and existence is necessary.

If the relation of being to that idea is impossible, that is, if it is
absurd that it should exist, we call it an impossible being. An example
is a body that is at once spherical and cubical.

If the relation of being to that idea is possible, that is, if that idea
is an essence for which reason rejects neither the existence nor the
nonexistence, we call it a possible being. All the beings in the
universe, in appearing and then disappearing according to a sequence of
causes, are possible beings.

Every possible being in itself becomes a necessary being through its
cause, but a being necessary through other, not a being necessary in
itself. That is, whenever all the causes and preconditions for a
possible being exist, it must exist and so becomes a being necessary
through other. If it does not come into existence - if so much as one of
its preconditions or one of the elements of its causal nexus is
lacking - it becomes a being impossible through other.

The philosophers accordingly say that as long as a thing is not
necessary, it does not exist. That is, until the existence of a thing
reaches the stage of necessity, it will not come into being. Therefore,
whatever comes into being does so according to necessity, within a
definite and inviolable system. Thus, the system governing the universe
and all that is in it is a necessary, certain, and inviolable system. In
the language of modern philosophers, it is a determinate system.[^20]

In discussing cause and effect, I said that the principle of
correspondence between cause and effect imparts a special order to our
thought and marks out a special connection between principles and
ramifications, between causes and effects, in our minds. This
principle - that every possible being gains necessity from its cause -
which, from one standpoint, pertains to cause and effect and, from
another, to necessity and possibility, impans a special character to the
system of our cosmology in making it a necessary, certain, and
inviolable system.

Philosophy succinctly terms this point the principle of cause-and effect
necessity. If we accept the principle of the final cause in reference to
nature (if we accept that nature pursues ends in its evolutionary
journey and that all these ends revert to one primary end that is the
end of ends), the system of our cosmology takes on a further special
character.

[^1]: See Muhammad Shahristani, Kitab-i Milal va Nihal (“Nations and
Sects”) vol.2, p.231, and Dr. Human, Tarikh-i Falsafa (“History of
Philosophy”) vol.1, p.20.

[^2]: Human, Tarikh-i Falsafa, vol. 1, p.69.

[^3]: To explicate or demonstrate these three features is beyond the
scope of these brief discussions. See Avicenna, Danishnama-yi A’la’i:
Ilahiyat, the first three chapters, and Mulla Sadra, Al-Asfar al-Arba’a,
the first few sections.

[^4]: Ahkam, the plural of hukm, a term in logic, meaning conformity to
the affirmative or negative relation between subject and predicate.
Trans.

[^5]: See the Ilahiyat of ash-Shifa’ (old edition) p.15.

[^6]: Existentialists are said to hold that what is “fabricated in
itself” (ma’jul bi’dh dhat) is being, but essences are nominal.
Essentialists are said to hold the contrary. That “more base” (i.e.
natural) possible beings should arise directly from the Essence of the
Truth is said to violate the law of correspondence between cause and
effect. Thus, “more noble” possible beings, such as intelligences and
souls, must exist as intermediate causes. Suhravardi is said to have
originated this idea, and Mulla Sadra to have endorsesd it. Trans.

[^7]: Kitab-i Milal va Nihal, vol.2.

[^8]: Henri Corbin believes that this word was used for the first time
in the Islamic wold near the turn of the third-fourth centuries by Ibn
Wahshiya. See Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Three Muslim Sages (Cambridge, Mass.,
1964), pp.63 and 151, n.22. [Nasr cites for his source H.Corbin, Les
Motifs Zoroastriens dans la philosophie de Suhrawardi (Tehran, 1946),
p.18. See also Henri (sic) Corbin, Histoire de la philosophie Islamique
(Paris, 1964), p.285. Trans.] Sayyid Hasan Taqizada, in his “Yad
Dashtha-yi Tarikh-i ‘Ulum dar Islam” (Notes on the History of the
Sciences in Islam), in Majalla-yi Maqalat va Barrasiha (Monographs and
Researches Bulletin), 3 and 4, Tehran, Publications Group of the College
of Theology and Islamic sciences, p.213, after mentioning an unknown
book attributed to this Ibn Wahshiya, says: “Another book by Ibn
Wahshiya the Nabataean has occasioned much discussion, titled Al-Falahat
an-Nabatiya (Nabataean Agriculture), which has also been attributed to a
sage of Babul named Quthami and which quotes older books from Babul,
such as the writings of Zagrith and Yanbu Shad. Even Ibn Khaldun, with
his flair for research, attributed this book to the Nabataean scholars
and saw it as an Arabic translation from the Greek. But finally, through
the researches of the German scholars Gutschmid and Noldeke and
especially of the Italian Nallino it grew clear that this book is a
fabrication and full of balderdash; Nallino goes so far as to hold that
no Ibn Wahshiya ever existed and that Abu Talib Zayyat compiled all
these fantasies and attributed them to an imaginary person. Researchers
believe that such books are works of the Shu’ubiya, who sought to prove
that the sciences belonged to non-Arab peoples and that the Arabs had no
part in them.” It is not unlikely that the source of Suhravardi’s error
was Al-Falahat al-Nabatiya or some similar work of the Shu’ubiya. This
book is not available to us at present so we cannot compare its contents
with what Suhravardi has said on the subject.

[^9]: Muhammad ‘Ali Furughi, Sayr-i Hikmat dar Urupa, 3 vols. in 1
(n.p., n.d.) vol.1, p.20.

[^10]: Bertrand Russell, A History of Western Philosophy (New York,
1945). See especially pp.119-143.

[^11]: For further study of Pythagoras, see ibid., pp. 105, 120, 126,
and Shahristani, Kitab-i Milal va Nihal, vol.2.

[^12]: Tafsir al-Mizan (Arabic text) vol.7, sura An’am, verse 59.

[^13]: For a detailed study of Mulla Sadra’s thought see Fazlur Rahman,
The Philosophy of Mulla Sadra (Albany, N.Y., 1975). Trans.

[^14]: There is no question here of a systematic distinction between
being and existence. I merely have used the two English words to
correspond to the two contexts in which being is discussed here. Mahiya
has appeared throughout this work as identity, but here only essence
serves the context. Trans.

[^15]: Mahiya is an Arabic word, a contraction of ma huwiya. The phrase
ma huwa means “What is it?” With the final letters ya’ and ta’ marbuta,
it becomes the verbal noun mahuwiya, which is contracted to mahiya. Thus
mahiya means “what is it-ness”, or “whatness”.

[^16]: See Rahman, The Philosophy of Mulla Sadra, pp.27-34. Trans.

[^17]: Here is how the hukama’ have expressed this point: “A thing’s
need of cause hinges on possibility, not on createdness in time.” For
detailed discussion of this point, see my ‘Ilal-i Girayish bi Maddigari
(Causes of the Turn to Materialism). Mashhad, 1350 Sh./1971 [also many
subsequent editions. Trans.]

[^18]: Unknown. Trans.

[^19]: See “Asl-i Tazadd dar Falsafa-yi Islami” (The Principle of
Contradiction in Islamic Philosophy) in my Maqalati-Falsafati
(Philosophic Essays)

[^20]: This determinism is not opposed to free will in the case of man,
and should not be confused with the form of determinism that is. The
necessity of the system of the universe is not inimical to man’s free
will.


