Advice
======

Look before You Leap
--------------------

A Muslim once insisted upon receiving a special piece of advice from the
Holy Prophet *(s)*. He *(s)* replied, ‘Do you pledge to act upon it if I
do?’  
 ‘Certainly! Ya Rasool Allah.’

‘Are you sure you will act on it?’  
 ‘Absolutely! Messenger of God.’  
 ‘Do you promise to act on it?’  
 ‘I promise, Ya Rasool Allah.’

After repeating the question three times intentionally to make him
realise the significance of the advice, the Holy Prophet *(s)* said:  
**‘Seriously evaluate the results of your action before performing it.
If its end is good, perform it; if it can lead to deviation and ruin,
abstain from it.’**

Self Esteem
-----------

Mufazzal bin Qais ran into financial problems, debts and consequent
stress. He came to Imam Jafar al-Sadiq *(‘a)* and shared his deplorable
circumstances with him. ‘I am in great debt and can not figure out how
to raise money to cover the daily expenses of my family. I cannot help
myself in any way and have asked almost everyone for a loan, but now,
when people see me coming they close their doors in my face.’ His
condition was pathetic.

‘Please pray that I find some means of earning a living,’ he said. ‘I
came to request you to pray to Almighty Allah to put an end to my
misfortunes and difficulties.’

The Imam *(‘a)* called a maidservant and asked her to bring the pouch
containing money sent by Mansoor. The maidservant complied with his
wishes and brought the pouch.

The Imam (‘a) gave it to Mufazzal and said, ‘Take this. It contains 400
dinars. They will support you for some days.’

Mufazzal, embarrassed but grateful, said, ‘I did not mean to ask you for
money. I only came to ask you to pray for me.’

The Imam *(‘a)* said, ‘I will pray for you. However, **I’d like to add a
word of advice. Never advertise your difficulties and problems. This
will inform people that you are a failure, an unsuccessful person. They
will treat you with such contempt that it will destroy your self esteem
and ruin your personality.’**

Astrology
---------

Imam Ali *(‘a)* was leading his army towards the battle field of
Nehrwan, when a companion stopped him. He pointed towards the stranger
accompanying him, and said, ‘Ya Ameer ul Momineen! This man is an
astrologer and wishes to say something to you.’

The astrologer opined, ‘Ya Ameer ul Momineen! Do not proceed at this
hour towards the battlefield, because the stars foretell that whoever
travels at this hour will meet with failure and great loss. However, if
you travel at the auspicious moment you will meet with splendid
victory.’

Imam Ali *(‘a)* looked at him and asked, ‘Can you foretell at what time
good will befall you and at what time evil?’  
 ‘Yes I can.’

‘You lie. Even the Holy Prophet *(s)* did not claim to know the hidden
realities. How can you? A person who has faith in your knowledge does
not need God.’

He then addressed his army thus: ‘Beware of the trying to foretell the
future or that which is concealed from you. This art is like witchcraft;
witchcraft is like idolatry; idol worship will be punished with hell.’
He then raised his head and looked at the heavens above, offered a
prayer of total reliance on Allah and, looking at the astrologer, said,
‘I will intentionally defy your prophecy and proceed at once.’

The battle of Nehrwan was won with great ease and success, as compared
to the other battles fought in the way of Allah.

An Astrologer’s Plight
----------------------

Abdul Maalik ibn e ‘Ain, the brother of Zarara ibn e ‘Ain, believed in
the influence of stars on man’s life. Despite the confirmed tradition
against it, he collected many books on astrology and was firmly rooted
in the subject. He consulted the books whenever he intended to do
anything or faced taking a decision. He believed that the stars
controlled his destiny and all success or failure depended on their
position in the skies.

Gradually, he became addicted to following the prophecy adduced from his
calculations, so much so, that he lost his power of decision altogether.
He became so superstitious that he dared not do anything without taking
guidance from the stars and their positions.

Soon, he realized that astrology had made him worthless and increased
his superstitiousness manifold. He felt that if he continued to consider
days and moments as good and bad, lucky and unlucky, his whole life
would become chaotic. On the other hand, he did not have the willpower
to deny and defy their influence. He envied those people who
courageously took decisions in their daily life and left the
consequences to the Almighty, having full faith in His Justice and
Mercy.

One day, he went to Imam Jafar e Sadiq *(‘a)* and relating his
predicament, said, ‘I feel that astrology has chained my hands and feet.
I just cannot give it up.’  
 The Imam *(‘a)* looked at him shocked, ‘You mean to say you believe in
all this and act accordingly?’

‘Yes, Ya ibn e Rasool Allah.’  
 ‘I hereby command you to go home and burn all those books at once.’  
 The Imam’s *(‘a)* disgust for his act had a strange effect on him. He
immediately felt stronger, went home and torched all the books. After
doing that, he sat down, relieved and released.

The Greater Duty
----------------

An Ansar of Medina came to the Holy Prophet *(s)* looking perturbed. He
voiced his bewilderment thus: ‘Ya Rasool Allah *(s)*, if there is a
funeral ready for burial and a lecture is being delivered on teaching a
useful skill simultaneously, and I can attend only one, which of the two
has a greater right on my attendance?’

‘If there are people to bury the dead, you must attend the lecture that
increases your knowledge, because the reward of one such lecture is
better than attending 1000 funerals, visiting 1000 patients, 1000 nights
of prayer, 1000 days of fasting, 1000 dirhams given in charity, 1000
non-obligatory Hajj, and 1000 non-obligatory jihad.

**There is a world of difference between all the above and one session
spent in a scholar’s company. Do you not know that only knowledge leads
you to worship God, and only knowledge teaches you how to worship God?
The good of this world and the next is aligned with knowledge, just as
the evil in this world and the next is aligned with ignorance.’**

Only Allah Knows
----------------

Usman ibn e Maz’oon was an immigrant, *Muhajir,* from Mecca. He was
living in the house of a Medinite, *Ansar*. He was treated hospitably as
a member of the family, as that was the basic principle of the fraternal
relations created by the Holy Prophet *(s)* on immigration.  
 He fell ill. Umme ‘Ala Ansari, the woman of the house, was a pious
Muslim. She nursed Usman with care, but his condition worsened and he
died.

When the funeral was ready, the Holy Prophet *(s)* arrived and Umme ‘Ala
pointed towards Usman’s funeral and said, ‘O Usman, may Allah’s
blessings descend upon you. I testify that Allah has granted you
entrance into the realm of His blessings.’

When the Holy Prophet *(s)* heard the statement, he asked her, ‘How did
you know that he had entered the realm of Allah’s blessings?’  
 ‘I just said it. Obviously, I don’t know.’

‘Usman ibn e Maz’oon has entered that realm where all veils are lifted
from ones eyes. I also wish him well, but I’d like to add, that even
though I am a Prophet, I never express such an opinion about myself or
anyone of you.’

Umme ‘Ala never again passed such remarks on anyone’s funeral. She
always said, ‘Only Allah knows,’ when asked for her opinion.

Some time after Usman’s death she dreamt that a stream was flowing for
him. She related the dream to the Holy Prophet *(s)* who said, ‘His
actions flow like a stream.’

The Nightmare
-------------

The man woke up with a start. He was terrified by the nightmare. Various
horrible interpretations increased his terror. He got up in the morning
and went to see Imam Jafar al-Sadiq *(‘a)* for a clearer understanding
of the dream.

‘I have had a nightmare,’ he said. I dreamt of a man made of wood riding
a wooden horse, with a sword in his hand, which he waved with great
might. The dream is driving me crazy. Kindly interpret it, so that I can
get some peace of mind.’

‘You are envious of the wealth of some person and keep thinking of ways
and means to get your hands on it by hook or by crook. Fear God and give
up your bad intentions.’ The Imam *(‘a)* warned him.

The man was shocked by the truth of the interpretation. ‘You are surely
one who knows. There is no doubt that you have been granted knowledge by
the City of knowledge. I must admit that I have been nurturing such a
desire in my heart for some time now. My neighbor owns a huge estate. He
is in dire need of money and wishes to sell his lands. Presently, he
doesn’t have any offer besides mine. I was envisaging buying his
valuable assets for much less than they are worth.’

Mistaken Boost of Ego
---------------------

Ahmad ibn e Muhammad ibn e Abi Nasr Bizanti was one of the eminent
religious scholars of his time. He engaged in discussion through
correspondence with Imam Reza *(‘a)* and received such logically
acceptable answers to all his questions that he was convinced of his
leadership and Imamate.

One day, he requested the Imam *(‘a)* in writing, ‘No traveling
restrictions have been placed on me by the government. I sincerely wish
to come and visit you and further benefit from your knowledge.’

Some days later, the Imam *(‘a)* sent his personal carriage and invited
him over as his guest. Their academic discussion continued until late at
night. Bizanti questioned and the Imam (‘a) responded as expected.
Bizanti felt elated by the thought that he had been invited as a
personal guest by the Imam *(‘a)* and was blessed with a one-to-one
highly enlightening conversation with him.

Soon it was time to sleep. The Imam *(‘a)* ordered his serving man to
settle Bizanti on his personal bed.

Such affectionate treatment had a strange effect on Bizanti. He thought,
‘There is no one more blessed than me today in the whole world. The Imam
*(‘a)* sent his personal carriage for me, has given me sole attention
and answered my questions for hours, and now when its time to rest, has
offered me his own bed. Who can be more blessed than me in this world?’

Lost in his thoughts, Bizanti was shocked into reality when he heard the
Imam *(‘a)* call him by his own name. ‘Ahmed! Don’t mistakenly consider
yourself better or more blessed than other Muslims because of my
courteous treatment. My grandfather, Imam Ali *(‘a)* once went to visit
his close friend Sasaa ibn e Suhaan when he was ill.

He sat by his bedside and calmed him by placing his hand on his head and
patting it for some time. However, before departing, he addressed his
friend and said, ‘Don’t imagine yourself to be better than others
because of this, because it does not signify your nobility or status. I
have only performed what was my duty. My courteous behavior should not
make any individual mistakenly take pride in it.’

Saving a soul
-------------

It was during the Abbasid ruler, Mansoor, that the Muslims were granted
their rights from the Bait ul Maal or State Treasury. The doors were
opened and the needy were taking their share and moving off. One Muslim,
named Suqrani, stood for a long time but could not get his share. One of
his ancestors had been freed from slavery by the Holy Prophet *(s)*
himself, and came to be known as the ‘One liberated by the
Prophet*(s)*’. Suqrani took great pride in his ancestry and associated
himself with the Household of the Holy Prophet *(s)*.

He looked around to see if he recognized somebody who could help him get
his share. Suddenly, he saw Imam Jafar al-Sadiq *(‘a).* He hurried
towards him and explained his reason for being there. The Imam (‘a)
solved his problem.

Before leaving, he *(‘a)* addressed him, saying, ‘A good deed is a good
deed, no matter who performs it. Since you associate yourself with the
Household of the Holy Prophet *(s)*, a good deed will further cement
that association. A bad deed is a bad deed, no matter who performs it.
Since you associate yourself with the Household of The Holy Prophet
*(s)*, your bad deed will be magnified and look worse.’

Suqrani stopped, dumbfounded. He was certain that the Imam *(‘a)* had
referred to his bad habit of drinking alcohol. Despite knowing about it,
he *(‘a)* had not refused helping him, but done him a favour, and then
affectionately jolted his conscience and saved him from a bad prohibited
act.

For You and Me
--------------

On the 20th of Ramadan 40 AH, Imam Ali *(‘a)* dictated this document to
his son, Imam Hasan *(‘a)*.

**In the Name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most MercifulIn the
Name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most MercifulIn the Name of
Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful**

**Ali ibn e Talib, on his deathbed, declares the following as his
will:Ali ibn e Talib, on his deathbed, declares the following as his
will:Ali ibn e Talib, on his deathbed, declares the following as his
will:**

**Ali testifies to the Oneness of Allah Almighty (SWT) and declares that
Muhammad (S) is His Prophet. Allah (SWT) sent him on earth to make His
faith supersede all other faiths and beliefs prevalent on earth.
Certainly, my worship and devotion, my life and death, are from Allah,
and for Allah alone. There is no god but Allah, and He has no partner.
This is my faith and belief and I am among those who submit to His
Will.Ali testifies to the Oneness of Allah Almighty (SWT) and declares
that Muhammad (S) is His Prophet. Allah (SWT) sent him on earth to make
His faith supersede all other faiths and beliefs prevalent on earth.
Certainly, my worship and devotion, my life and death, are from Allah,
and for Allah alone. There is no god but Allah, and He has no partner.
This is my faith and belief and I am among those who submit to His
Will.Ali testifies to the Oneness of Allah Almighty (SWT) and declares
that Muhammad (S) is His Prophet. Allah (SWT) sent him on earth to make
His faith supersede all other faiths and beliefs prevalent on earth.
Certainly, my worship and devotion, my life and death, are from Allah,
and for Allah alone. There is no god but Allah, and He has no partner.
This is my faith and belief and I am among those who submit to His
Will.**

**Hasan, I bequeath unto you, all my sons, and members of my family, the
following deeds:**

1) **Never give up piety and fear of God, and try hard to remain
steadfast in the faith of Allah, until your very last breath.Never give
up piety and fear of God, and try hard to remain steadfast in the faith
of Allah, until your very last breath.Never give up piety and fear of
God, and try hard to remain steadfast in the faith of Allah, until your
very last breath.**

2) **Firmly grasp the cord of Allah. Remain united with amity, and avoid
discord. The Holy Prophet** ***(s)*** **said, “Unity among people on the
basis of peace, accord, and harmony is better than constantly praying
and fasting. Discord and unrest destroy faith.”** **said, “Unity among
people on the basis of peace, accord, and harmony is better than
constantly praying and fasting. Discord and unrest destroy faith.”**
**said, “Unity among people on the basis of peace, accord, and harmony
is better than constantly praying and fasting. Discord and unrest
destroy faith.”**

3) **Do not neglect your women and relatives. Be sympathetic towards
them, because sympathy will help man account for his deeds on the Day of
Judgment.Do not neglect your women and relatives. Be sympathetic towards
them, because sympathy will help man account for his deeds on the Day of
Judgment.Do not neglect your women and relatives. Be sympathetic towards
them, because sympathy will help man account for his deeds on the Day of
Judgment.**

4) **Beware! Beware! Do not ever be neglectful of orphans. I warn you
again, never leave an orphan hungry and unprotected.**

5) **For the sake of Allah, be mindful of your neighbors and fulfill
your duties towards them. The Holy Prophet** ***(s)*** **emphasized the
rights of neighbors so emphatically that we felt he wished to include
them in our inheritance.** **emphasized the rights of neighbors so
emphatically that we felt he wished to include them in our
inheritance.** **emphasized the rights of neighbors so emphatically that
we felt he wished to include them in our inheritance.**

6) **Remember! Remember! Attend to your obligatory prayers with
concentration, because Prayer is a pillar of faith.**

7) **Remember! Remember! Carefully obey the commands revealed in the
Holy Quran. Do not let others supersede you in obeying them.Remember!
Remember! Carefully obey the commands revealed in the Holy Quran. Do not
let others supersede you in obeying them.Remember! Remember! Carefully
obey the commands revealed in the Holy Quran. Do not let others
supersede you in obeying them.**

8) **Remember! Remember! Maintain the K’aaba as your focus of attention.
Ensure the performance of Hajj. Let it not lose its importance, for if
you do, other people will wipe you out without giving you a moment’s
respite.Remember! Remember! Maintain the K’aaba as your focus of
attention. Ensure the performance of Hajj. Let it not lose its
importance, for if you do, other people will wipe you out without giving
you a moment’s respite.Remember! Remember! Maintain the K’aaba as your
focus of attention. Ensure the performance of Hajj. Let it not lose its
importance, for if you do, other people will wipe you out without giving
you a moment’s respite.**

9) **Do not ever consider your life and property more valuable than
fighting in the way of Allah (SWT).Do not ever consider your life and
property more valuable than fighting in the way of Allah (SWT).Do not
ever consider your life and property more valuable than fighting in the
way of Allah (SWT).**

10) **Remember! Remember! Do not neglect paying the poor tax
(*****zak’aat*****), for it saves the giver from the wrath of God.), for
it saves the giver from the wrath of God.), for it saves the giver from
the wrath of God.**

11) **Never neglect the household of the Holy Prophet** ***(s)*****.
Protect them from becoming victims of injustice and oppression.**

12) **Be attentive towards the companions and friends of the Holy
Prophet** ***(s).*** **He himself** ***(s)*** **has requested courteous
and affectionate behavior towards them.** **has requested courteous and
affectionate behavior towards them.** **has requested courteous and
affectionate behavior towards them.**

13) **Beware of indifference towards the poor and needy. Make them a
constant part of your lives.Beware of indifference towards the poor and
needy. Make them a constant part of your lives.Beware of indifference
towards the poor and needy. Make them a constant part of your lives.**

14) **Never be careless regarding slaves. The Holy Prophet’s** ***(s)***
**last request was for them.** **last request was for them.** **last
request was for them.**

15) **Strive to perform an act that pleases Allah (SWT), without
bothering about public opinion.Strive to perform an act that pleases
Allah (SWT), without bothering about public opinion.Strive to perform an
act that pleases Allah (SWT), without bothering about public opinion.**

16) **Urging the lawful and obligatory, and preventing forbidden acts
must be your habitual routine. If you give this up, bad intentioned and
unjust rulers will instate themselves over you and oppress you severely.
Then all the prayers of the pious will prove to be useless.Urging the
lawful and obligatory, and preventing forbidden acts must be your
habitual routine. If you give this up, bad intentioned and unjust rulers
will instate themselves over you and oppress you severely. Then all the
prayers of the pious will prove to be useless.Urging the lawful and
obligatory, and preventing forbidden acts must be your habitual routine.
If you give this up, bad intentioned and unjust rulers will instate
themselves over you and oppress you severely. Then all the prayers of
the pious will prove to be useless.**

17) **Always be courteous towards others, for the Holy Quran has made it
obligatory upon you.Always be courteous towards others, for the Holy
Quran has made it obligatory upon you.Always be courteous towards
others, for the Holy Quran has made it obligatory upon you.**

18) **It is your responsibility to encourage and maintain friendly
relations between yourselves. Be good to each other. Avoid creating
differences, or isolating, separating, alienating, and distancing
yourself from each other.**

19) **Unite in the performance of good deeds. Do not involve yourself in
deeds that are sinful, and cause unpleasantness and hatred leading to
enmity.Unite in the performance of good deeds. Do not involve yourself
in deeds that are sinful, and cause unpleasantness and hatred leading to
enmity.Unite in the performance of good deeds. Do not involve yourself
in deeds that are sinful, and cause unpleasantness and hatred leading to
enmity.**

20) **Remember, God’s punishment is severe, so fear it.Remember, God’s
punishment is severe, so fear it.Remember, God’s punishment is severe,
so fear it.**

**May God keep you safe in His protection, and grant the Holy
Prophet’s** ***(s)*** **followers the capacity and will to protect your
honour and that of their Holy Prophet** ***(s)*****. I give you all in
the protection of Almighty Allah (SWT). Peace be upon you all.. I give
you all in the protection of Almighty Allah (SWT). Peace be upon you
all.. I give you all in the protection of Almighty Allah (SWT). Peace be
upon you all.**


