Preface
=======

Whenever a book arrives on the shelves, one wonders why it was written,
what it contains, and whether it will be worthwhile reading it. I’ll
make it easy for you.

This book is a selected translation of the Urdu version of the Persian
compilation, ‘Daastaan e Raastaan’ by Martyr Murtadha Mutahhari, who
included only those incidents of the Ahl al Bayt (s) that he obtained
from reliable sources, which he cited in the bibliography. For me, his
name is enough for credibility.

The generations of Muslims, whose first language is English, remain
unaware of so many valuable truths available in the oriental languages.
Their need initiated the translations of religious material, beginning
with the Holy Quran, itself. Knowing how to read Arabic without
understanding it, makes it worthless. The Book brought a Divine Message
to ease man’s life on this earth and make it a place worth living.
Unfortunately, after the demise of the Holy Prophet (s) the Muslims
reverted back to the customs and beliefs of the Age of Ignorance, with
only lip service to Islam. Only the chosen ones, though, who Satan
admitted he could not lead astray, remained steadfast.

As time passed, other people read the Quran, guided by the steadfast,
and benefited from the wisdom it contained. They took precedence over
the Muslims in practically applying it to their systems - political,
social, economic, and judicial. They then moved from success to success
and there was no looking back. Today, they rule the world and their
language is the language of power.

The Muslims, on the other hand, moved from disgrace to disgrace and
finally touched rock-bottom. Today, they reap only what they sow,
because

• We profess Islam but do not practice it.

• We read the Quran but do not understand it.

• We are content with our ignorance and do nothing about it.

• We follow the powerful; adopt their culture, customs and way of life;
find ourselves equally successful; find religion unnecessary, so, wish
to discard the already flimsy attachment.

• Like the powerful, we forget the one important truth about life. Life
doesn’t end in the dust, for this universe was not created without
purpose. The immense organizational perfection of every one of the
millions of systems existing in it suffices as proof of a destination.
The powerful while powerful, forget that they must face that
destination.

This book was written to share a vision of greatness, presented by those
who did not transgress because they feared that destination, and despite
trials and tribulations, opted for eternal life rather than eternal
damnation. Their immortality is before you. Today, centuries later, they
survive as symbols of nobility and perfection. Their power to influence
is greater than that of one living amidst us.

The book contains some candid camera clips that need to be watched
carefully, not casually. After each clip, a few minutes should be spent
in asking yourself a few questions.

• Is there something new in it or something I already know?

• Is it practicable?

• Do I already practice it?

• Do I agree with it or disagree with it?

• If I agree, will I make it a part of my future conduct?

• If I disagree, is it because I am habituated to what it condemns?

• If I am a Muslim, must I possess these virtues?

• Do I profess love for these persons, yet cannot face them?

• Do I want to follow them?

• Do I want them to smile at me, or be filled with dismay?

Once you’ve asked yourself these questions for the first few clips, they
will become automatic guidelines for the rest, and you will yourself
admit that reading the book was worthwhile.

I end with the prayer that all of us demonstrate through our actions,
not only our tongues, the Message we profess we possess.

Ameen

Iffat Shah  
 18th Dhul Hijjah, 1429  
 Washington, DC  
**e-mail address:** **<mrs.shah110@yahoo.com>**


