The Importance of Work
======================

Work not- Just Pray
-------------------

An extremely anxious and perplexed man visited Hazrat Imam Jafar
al-Sadiq *(‘a),* and begged him to pray that Allah would increase his
sustenance and relieve him of all financial stress.

The Imam *(‘a)* answered, ‘I shall certainly not pray for you.’  
 The poor man sighed and asked, ‘But why not? What have I done?’  
 The Imam *(‘a)* replied, ‘You know perfectly well that Allah has
devised means and ways of attaining prosperity. He has ordered you to
leave your house and earn a living through hard work. You refuse to obey
the law and foolishly hope praying for you will bring you prosperity.’

You work-I pray
---------------

A number of pilgrims were narrating their experiences of Hajj to Imam
Jafar al- Sadiq *(‘a),* and recounting their views about their fellow
pilgrims. One person was immensely impressed by a fellow pilgrim and
said, ‘He was truly pious and an indefatigable worshipper of Allah.
Whenever we broke journey to rest for the night, he retired to a
secluded place, spread out his prayer mat and got engrossed in the
worship of Allah.’

The Imam *(‘a)* enquired, ‘Who looked after the rest of his affairs? Who
tended his camel?’  
 He replied, ‘Obviously, we performed all those duties for Allah’s
pleasure. He remained absorbed in the holy acts, and had no time for
such menial chores.’  
 The Imam *(‘a)* replied, ‘No wonder you achieved more than he did with
all his piety and worship.

A New Convert
-------------

Two neighbors became good friends. One was a Christian, the other,
Muslim. They often discussed their religions to see what was more
conducive to a civilized way of life, and then they adopted it. The
Muslim presented Islam with all its material and spiritual benefits, so
the Christian, one day, embraced Islam.

A few days later, earlier than dawn, somebody knocked at his door.  
 ‘Whose there?’ asked the new convert, a little apprehensive.

‘I am your neighbour. It will soon be time for the morning obligatory
prayer (Fajr), so wear your clothes, perform ablution and come with me
to the mosque. Today, we will offer our prayers with the congregation.
The new Muslim consented, and they both reached the mosque.

‘Fasting is a means of gaining nearness to God,’ the neighbor said. The
convert declared the intention of fasting for the day.

Since there was some time left for the call for prayer *(Aazaan)*, they
both offered some units of prayer for spiritual satisfaction. Soon it
was time, and they offered their Fajr prayer. After reciting all the
supererogatory prayers advised by religious leaders, the convert got up
to go home.

‘Where are you going?’  
 ‘Home,’ he replied.  
 ‘Hold on. Its now time to read the Holy Quran.’

He placed the Quran before him, and they both read till the bright rays
of the sun fell on them. The convert rose to go home, but the Muslim
stopped him again.  
 This time he stopped him for the Zuhr prayer, as only an hour remained.
After the afternoon prayer and all the supererogatory prayers had been
read, it was almost time for the evening, Asr, prayer. Having completed
that, the man said he was going home to break his fast after sunset. His
neighbor advised him to offer the Maghrib prayer. He agreed. After that,
he stood up to leave.

‘Only the I’sha prayer is left. After that you can go home.’ The
neighbor urged.  
 After offering the night prayer, the new convert went home.  
 There was a knock at his door again, at the time of Sehr.  
 ‘Whose there?’ he asked.  
 ‘Wear your clothes and come, we will offer our prayer in the mosque.’

‘Excuse me. I retuned to my religion after staying with you yesterday.
Go find somebody useless who has nothing to do but pray. I am a family
man, and need to provide for them. I have other duties and
responsibilities to fulfill. I cannot just pray to God all day and
survive on nothing. Get lost!’

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq *(‘a)* related this incident to his followers and
said:

‘Thus, a pious and God fearing Muslim converted a non-believer to Islam.
But, it took the new convert only one day to give it up because of the
rigid and extreme measures adopted by the Muslim. Remember, force and
rigidity lead to unease, frustration, and discontentment. The Ummayads
used force to make people obey them, and received nothing but contempt.
Promote religion affectionately, courteously, mildly, with mutual
consent. Our methods should make people embrace Islam by choice, and
practice it according to the level of their faith and energy- both
physical and mental.’

Just Distribution of Work
-------------------------

The Holy Prophet *(s)* and his companions alighted from their horses and
started unloading their camels to break their journey. Everyone agreed
on slaughtering a goat and cooking its meat for dinner. One of them
offered to slaughter the animal. Another took removing the skin upon
himself. A third volunteered to cook the meat.

The Holy Prophet *(s)* said, ‘I’ll collect the wood for the fire from
the surrounding wilderness.’ All his *(s)* companions cried in unison,
‘Why must you work, with us around? We feel honored to serve you while
you rest. We will complete the task in no time.’

The Holy Prophet *(s)* replied. ‘I know that you can accomplish this in
no time, but God doesn’t befriend anyone who considers himself better
than his friends and worthy of their respect.’

Saying this he walked towards the woods, and returned with a pile of dry
twigs and leaves enough to light the fire while the others finished
their work.

Division of Labour
------------------

After Imam Ali *(‘a)* and Lady Fatimah Zahra *(‘a)* got married, they
began their new life together. They organized their belongings as needed
and went to the Holy Prophet *(s)* for his advice in the division of
domestic chores. ‘Guide us, O Prophet of Allah *(s)*, as to how we
should divide our domestic chores between us,’ requested Imam Ali
*(‘a)*.

The Holy Prophet *(s)* declared, ‘Ali, you will do all the chores
outside the house, while Fatimah will perform all those inside the
house.’

Lady Fatimah *(‘a)* was overjoyed with his division. She said, ‘I am so
relieved to have nothing to do with men.’ Ali *(‘a)* would purchase
wood, grain, groceries and other essential items from the market, while
she would grind the flour, cook the meals, do the laundry and keep the
house clean. Besides, whenever Imam Ali *(‘a)* found extra time he would
help with the chores inside the house.

One day the Holy Prophet *(s)* visited them and found them both working
together. He *(s)* asked, ‘Who is the more exhausted of you two, for me
to assist?’ ‘Fatimah,’ said Ali *(‘a)*.  
 He *(s)* sent her to rest and helped Ali *(‘a)* to complete her chores.

Islam was in its early days and Imam Ali *(‘a)* had to accompany the
Muslim army for Jihad more than often. He provided her with all the
essential items, but, whenever the need arose, Lady Fatimah *(‘a)* went
to the market herself and purchased whatever she needed in those days.

Life went on smoothly until the family grew and the house was echoing
with the innocent joyful laughter of children. However, the burden of
work inside the house had increased manifold. One day Imam Ali *(‘a)*
noticed that grinding, cooking, carrying waterbags from the well,
washing and cleaning, besides feeding, bathing, and babysitting the
children had left Fatimah (‘a) with sore hands, a scarred back and
worn-out clothes. Despite his help, she was busy all the time.

Sorrowful on her condition, he advised her to request her father for a
serving woman. Lady Fatimah *(‘a)* agreed. She went to see her father,
but found him busy conversing with some people. She returned home
without voicing her request.

However, the Holy Prophet *(s)* noticed her coming and going, and
understood that she had come for something important. Next morning, he
went to visit her to find out the reason for her visit the day before.
At the door, he greeted the inmates in a loud, clear voice, ‘Assalam o
Alaikum.’

Both Ali *(‘a)* and Fatimah *(‘a)* were resting. They felt embarrassed
that they were still resting, and did not respond aloud. It was the Holy
Prophet’s *(s)* habit to repeat the greeting thrice and return if he
failed to get a response. Imam Ali *(‘a)* knew his habit, so he quickly
replied, ‘Walaikum Assalam, O Prophet of Allah *(s)*. Do come in.’

The Holy Prophet *(s)* sat at the head side of his daughter’s bed and
asked, ‘You came to see me yesterday, Fatimah, and then returned. I am
sure it was important. What did you come for, my child?’

Imam Ali *(‘a)* replied, ‘If you permit me, I will tell you why Fatimah
went to see you. I sent her to you. The reason was that her chores
within the house have increased manifold. It grieves me to see her sore
hands, scarred back and dusty clothes because of working all day long. I
sent her to request you to provide a woman to assist her.’

The Holy Prophet *(s)* did not want any member of his family to enjoy
facilities that were not available to the poor Muslims, especially the
immigrants, who were in a state of extreme poverty in those days. He
knew the spiritual level of his daughter’s faith, so he said, ‘Would you
prefer it if I give you something better?’  
 ‘We will be pleased to accept, Ya Rasool Allah *(s)*.’  
 ‘Everyday, before going to bed, recite ***Allah o Akbar,*** 34 times,
***Alhamdolillah,*** 33 times and ***Subhanallah,*** 33 times. It will
give you more strength to perform your chores than any helping hand.’

Lady Fatimah *(‘a)* had not uncovered her face until this moment. She
removed the cloth from her face and said, ‘My pleasure lies in what
pleases my Allah (SWT) and His Messenger *(s)*.’

Earn ones living
----------------

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq *(‘a)* was busy working in his garden, wearing
working clothes with spade in hand, when one of his friends, Abu Umro
Shaibani arrived. Seeing him drenched in perspiration because of the
heat and labour, he thought there was need of a labourer, so the Imam
*(‘a)* had opted to work himself.

He stepped forward and said, ‘Let me help you finish this work.’  
 The Imam *(‘a)* said, ‘No. I like working on the farm with my own
hands. It is necessary for man to face the heat of the sun and feel the
exhaustion of earning ones own living.’

Cause and Effect
----------------

Ali ibn e Abi Talib *(‘a)* left his home and, as usual, proceeded
towards the jungle. He was familiar with the untrodden paths of the
jungle. He was carrying something on his back. On the way, a passerby
asked him, ‘Ali, what is that weight you are carrying on your back?’  
 ‘Date-palms, Insha Allah!’ he replied.  
 ‘Date-palms?’ He clearly did not understand what Ali *(‘a)* meant.  
 Some years later, he noticed an orchard of date-palms, stand tall and
elegant where Ali *(‘a)* had planted the saplings he had nurtured with
his own hands. His amazement, then at Ali’s *(‘a)* remark, vanished when
he saw the full-grown trees with his own eyes.


