Human Rights
============

Dealing with Unprovoked Annoyance
---------------------------------

One day a man came to the Holy Prophet *(s)* seeking advice on how to
deal with his neighbour’s unprovoked annoying behaviour. He *(s)* said,
‘Be patient and do not raise any hue and cry. Besides, try changing your
own attitude towards him.’  
 A few days later the man returned more exasperated than before. He
*(s)* repeated, ‘Be patient’.

The third time the man came, he was at the end of his rope. He said,
‘I’m sorry, but I can’t take anymore. He is pestering me and my family
beyond measure.’

The Holy Prophet *(s)* then advised him, ‘Today is Friday. Go home and
place your household baggage on the main street where people can see it.
When they ask you the reason tell them that your neighbour’s behaviour
is unbearable. Thus, everyone will learn about your complaint.’

The man followed the Holy Prophet’s *(s)* advice to the letter. His
neighbor was under the impression that he would continue bearing his
excesses, not realizing that Islam preaches forbearance to a certain
limit. Once that limit is crossed, the oppressor has to face the
consequences. Transgressors do not deserve anyone’s respect.

As soon as he learnt that his neighbour had decided to place his
excesses into the people’s court, and was apprising them of his
behaviour, he got unnerved, and begging forgiveness, requested him to
take his baggage back to his house. He promised never to bother him
again, and maintain good neighbourly relations with him.

Protecting Ones Rights
----------------------

Samra ibn e Jundab planted a date-palm in the orchard of an *Ansar*
(Medinite). The domestic lodgings of the owner were within the precincts
of his orchard. Samra was granted the right to enter the orchard to
water his tree or pick fruit when ripe.

However, Samra abused the right granted by Islamic law. He entered the
orchard nonchalantly, in fact, irresponsibly, without announcing
himself. In the domestic quarters of the owner, his family members were
busy in their chores, sometimes not dressed for strangers’ eyes.

The owner requested him to observe the rules of Islamic etiquette and
enter after gaining permission from his family members. Samra blatantly
refused to comply with his request and walked in without announcing
himself. He also eyed whatever he saw, not lowering his gaze as
commanded by Almighty Allah.

Exasperated with his behaviour, the owner complained to the Holy Prophet
*(s)* about him, requesting him to advise Samra.

The Holy Prophet *(s)* called for him and said, ‘There is a complaint
lodged by the owner of the orchard against you. He is annoyed by your
indecent behaviour. You enter his orchard unannounced and eye his women,
who don’t get a chance to go indoors. You are advised to enter only
after getting permission from his family from this day onward.’ Samra
refused to comply with his *(s)* directive.

The Holy Prophet *(s)* offered another alternative. He *(s)* suggested
he sell his tree. He refused outright. He *(s)* raised the price of the
tree. He still refused. He *(s)* promised a tree in heaven for this one.
He rejected every offer.

The Holy Prophet *(s)* then gave his verdict on the situation. ‘You are
a stubborn  
 and sadistic person. Islam does not permit anyone to harass or harm
anyone.’ He ordered the owner of the orchard to cut down Samra’s tree
and throw it in the street. The people went and did as directed.

The Holy Prophet *(s)* looked at Samra and said, ‘Go hence, and use the
tree in the open fields you see around.’

Honouring the Caliph
--------------------

The people of Anbar, Iran, were overjoyed to learn that their beloved
Caliph Ali ibn e Abi Talib, Ameer ul Momineen *(‘a)* would be passing
through their town on his way to Kufa. At the appointed time, they all
gathered on the sides of the highway that led to Kufa and waited to
catch a glimpse of him.

Soon, they caught sight of their Caliph entering their town. They all
started to run in front of his entourage. Imam Ali *(‘a)* stopped and
asked those people why they were all running, and what purpose it was
serving.

They explained, ‘This is our conventional way of honouring our popular
leaders and honourable personalities, as well as the rich and powerful.
It is an old custom of our region.

Imam Ali *(‘a)* shook his head with disapproval and said, ‘O people!
Your act does not trouble you in this world alone, but will also create
problems in the next. Never abase yourself before anyone in this manner.
Think for a moment: How will this obsequiousness on your part benefit
your master or leader, positively?’

Duties of a Neighbour
---------------------

A Medinite (*Ansar*), once moved into a new house, only to find his
neighbor to be a very unpleasant person.

He went to the Holy Prophet *(s)* and presented his problem, ‘I have
moved into a new locality and found myself living in close quarters with
so-and-so. I am sorry to complain but my neighbour is not only an
unpleasant person but also ill-intentioned and quarrelsome. I am afraid
I will not be able to save myself from his dangerous and damaging
intentions.

The Holy Prophet *(s)* immediately called Imam Ali *(‘a)*, Salman, Abu
Dharr and Miqdad (May Allah be pleased with them). He deputed all four
to go to the mosque and convey the message to all the men and women
present there.

The message: **Any person found guilty of discourteous behaviour or bad
conduct that annoyed or upset his neighbour would not be considered a
believer.**   
 **The Holy Prophet** ***(s)*** **then entered the mosque, and moving
his arms in all four directions, said ‘People occupying forty houses on
each side of your house are your neighbours.’**

Basic Needs
-----------

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq was travelling between Mecca and Medina. Musadaf,
his famous serving man, was accompanying him on this journey. On the
way, they sighted a man lying under a tree. He seemed in bad shape from
a distance. The Imam *(‘a)* said to Musadaf, ‘Let us go and see what’s
wrong with him. It is possible that he has fainted because of thirst and
dehydration.’ said to Musadaf, ‘Let us go and see what’s wrong with him.
It is possible that he has fainted because of thirst and dehydration.’
said to Musadaf, ‘Let us go and see what’s wrong with him. It is
possible that he has fainted because of thirst and dehydration.’

When they reached him, they found him conscious. The Imam *(‘a)* asked,
‘Are you thirsty?’  
 ‘Yes,’ he replied.‘Yes,’ he replied.‘Yes,’ he replied.  
 The Imam *(‘a)* ordered Musadaf to slake his thirst. He got off his
horse and gave the thirsty man enough water to satisfy his thirst. He
noticed from his appearance and dress that he was not a Muslim, but a
Christian. ordered Musadaf to slake his thirst. He got off his horse and
gave the thirsty man enough water to satisfy his thirst. He noticed from
his appearance and dress that he was not a Muslim, but a Christian.
ordered Musadaf to slake his thirst. He got off his horse and gave the
thirsty man enough water to satisfy his thirst. He noticed from his
appearance and dress that he was not a Muslim, but a Christian.  
 They resumed their journey. Musadaf asked the Imam *(‘a)*, ‘Can we give
alms to Christians?’, ‘Can we give alms to Christians?’, ‘Can we give
alms to Christians?’  
 ‘Yes, especially when they are in need, as just now.’‘Yes, especially
when they are in need, as just now.’‘Yes, especially when they are in
need, as just now.’

Social Security
---------------

One day Imam Ali *(‘a)* was passing by a street when his eye fell on a
blind old man begging for alms. He was extremely disturbed by his
condition and asked the people if he had no family to support him. On
investigating, he found that he was a Christian by faith, and had earned
his living through hard labour until he lost his eyesight because of
age. He was on his own and had no one to care for him. He had also not
saved any money because of meager earnings.

When confirmed that he had never begged while he could earn, Imam Ali
*(‘a)* said,  
 ‘It is amazing how you people use a human being for as long as he can
serve you and discard him after he cannot. You all testify that he
served society as long as he could see. It is, therefore, the duty of
the society and government to ensure him a decent life, now that he
cannot fend for himself. I hereby institute a regular allowance to be
paid to him from the State Treasury for as long as he lives.’

Three Duties
------------

Abdul A’ala ibn e A’in of Kufa was preparing to go to Medina to visit
Imam Jafar al-Sadiq *(‘a)*. The followers of the Ahl al Bayt *(‘a)*
thought it was a good opportunity to get answers to the questions that
cropped up every now and then, and confused them. They all wrote down
their questions and handed them to him. However, they added, ‘Ask Imam
Jafar al-Sadiq *(‘a)* to let us know orally, what the duties of a Muslim
are towards his Muslim brethren.’

Ibn e A’in reached Medina and went straight to the Imam *(‘a)*. After
the initial courtesies were over, he presented the written questions to
him and added the one asked orally by the people of Kufa. The Imam
answered all the questions but did not respond to the oral one.. After
the initial courtesies were over, he presented the written questions to
him and added the one asked orally by the people of Kufa. The Imam
answered all the questions but did not respond to the oral one.. After
the initial courtesies were over, he presented the written questions to
him and added the one asked orally by the people of Kufa. The Imam
answered all the questions but did not respond to the oral one.

Many days passed, but no one referred to the question that remained
unanswered. Finally Ibn e A’in decided to return home, so he came to bid
the Imam *(‘a)* farewell. Before leaving, he said, ‘Ya ibn e Rasool
Allah, I have received all the answers but one. Now that I’m leaving,
I’d be grateful if you gave me the answer to that one, so that I might
be able to satisfy the thirst for knowledge of those who asked it.’

‘I intentionally avoided answering it,’ replied the Imam *(‘a)*...  
 ‘Why, I beg of you?’‘Why, I beg of you?’‘Why, I beg of you?’  
 ‘Because if I tell you and you do not act according to the information
you receive, you will be excommunicated from Islam.’‘Because if I tell
you and you do not act according to the information you receive, you
will be excommunicated from Islam.’‘Because if I tell you and you do not
act according to the information you receive, you will be excommunicated
from Islam.’

**He then informed him of three basic duties of a Muslim towards his
brethren-in-faith.He then informed him of three basic duties of a Muslim
towards his brethren-in-faith.He then informed him of three basic duties
of a Muslim towards his brethren-in-faith.**  
**‘Remember, these three divine commands and never treat them
lightly:‘Remember, these three divine commands and never treat them
lightly:‘Remember, these three divine commands and never treat them
lightly:**  
**Firstly, be just in all affairs among yourselves and treat one other
as you would like to be treated yourself by others.Firstly, be just in
all affairs among yourselves and treat one other as you would like to be
treated yourself by others.Firstly, be just in all affairs among
yourselves and treat one other as you would like to be treated yourself
by others.**

**Secondly, never think twice about helping your brother-in need with
your resources; do it at once, lest your self-interest
intervenes.Secondly, never think twice about helping your brother-in
need with your resources; do it at once, lest your self-interest
intervenes.Secondly, never think twice about helping your brother-in
need with your resources; do it at once, lest your self-interest
intervenes.**

**Lastly, following the above two will become easy if you always
remember the Lord under all circumstances. This does not mean repeating
Alhamdolillah, Subhan Allah all the time on the rosary. It means a
constant awareness of His presence, which prevents you from committing a
forbidden act. Society would face fewer problems if everyone was
convinced that he was being watched.’Lastly, following the above two
will become easy if you always remember the Lord under all
circumstances. This does not mean repeating Alhamdolillah, Subhan Allah
all the time on the rosary. It means a constant awareness of His
presence, which prevents you from committing a forbidden act. Society
would face fewer problems if everyone was convinced that he was being
watched.’Lastly, following the above two will become easy if you always
remember the Lord under all circumstances. This does not mean repeating
Alhamdolillah, Subhan Allah all the time on the rosary. It means a
constant awareness of His presence, which prevents you from committing a
forbidden act. Society would face fewer problems if everyone was
convinced that he was being watched.’**

Rights of a Mother
------------------

Zakaria ibn e Ibrahim of Kufa, was born to Christian parents. When he
grew young, he was exposed to Islam, and was very strongly attracted by
it. Islam seemed to stir his soul and urge him to accept it as his
faith. Finally, one day, against the approval of his family, he declared
his conversion to Islam. Thenceforth, he observed the Islamic code of
law and practiced it dutifully.

Soon it was time to perform *Hajj*. He left Kufa and went straight to
Medina to meet Imam Jafar al-Sadiq *(‘a).* He related his entire
experience of being a Christian and then converting to Islam. The Imam
*(‘a)* asked him, ‘What was it about Islam that attracted you the most?’
asked him, ‘What was it about Islam that attracted you the most?’ asked
him, ‘What was it about Islam that attracted you the most?’  
 ‘All I can say is that Verse 52 of Surah Shura in the Holy Quran seems
to describe my situation perfectly. The Almighty addresses His Messenger
*(s)* saying, saying, saying,

**“…You were unaware of the Book and the Faith. We revealed it to you
through Inspiration and made it a light, guiding thereby whom We please
of Our servants…”**  
 The Imam *(‘a)* said, ‘I testify that Almighty Allah has guided you
towards the path of Truth.’ The Imam then repeated this prayer three
times, ‘O Sustainer of all creation, May You always be his guide!’

Then he *(‘a)* said, ‘Do you need to ask any questions, young man?’
said, ‘Do you need to ask any questions, young man?’ said, ‘Do you need
to ask any questions, young man?’  
 ‘I certainly do. My parents and the entire family are Christians and I
am a Muslim. My mother is blind. I live with them and am obliged to eat
with them. What am I supposed to do under the circumstances?’‘I
certainly do. My parents and the entire family are Christians and I am a
Muslim. My mother is blind. I live with them and am obliged to eat with
them. What am I supposed to do under the circumstances?’‘I certainly do.
My parents and the entire family are Christians and I am a Muslim. My
mother is blind. I live with them and am obliged to eat with them. What
am I supposed to do under the circumstances?’  
 ‘Does your family eat pork?’‘Does your family eat pork?’‘Does your
family eat pork?’

‘No, Ya ibn e Rasool Allah, they do not even touch the meat of
swine.’‘No, Ya ibn e Rasool Allah, they do not even touch the meat of
swine.’‘No, Ya ibn e Rasool Allah, they do not even touch the meat of
swine.’  
 ‘Then there is no objection in living and eating with them. Remember
one thing. Do not be lax in serving your mother. Be kind and
affectionate to her until she is alive, and after her death do not
assign the task of burying her to others. Perform all the funeral rites
yourself. Now I take my leave. Do not mention your meeting with me to
anybody here. I am also going to Mina, and Insha Allah, hope to see you
there.’‘Then there is no objection in living and eating with them.
Remember one thing. Do not be lax in serving your mother. Be kind and
affectionate to her until she is alive, and after her death do not
assign the task of burying her to others. Perform all the funeral rites
yourself. Now I take my leave. Do not mention your meeting with me to
anybody here. I am also going to Mina, and Insha Allah, hope to see you
there.’‘Then there is no objection in living and eating with them.
Remember one thing. Do not be lax in serving your mother. Be kind and
affectionate to her until she is alive, and after her death do not
assign the task of burying her to others. Perform all the funeral rites
yourself. Now I take my leave. Do not mention your meeting with me to
anybody here. I am also going to Mina, and Insha Allah, hope to see you
there.’

All the Hajjis gathered in Mina. Zakaria frantically looked for the Imam
*(‘a)*. Finally, he saw him *(‘a)* surrounded by hordes of Hajjis who
were questioning him like children seeking advice from their teacher.
Those standing behind him *(‘a)* would question from afar and get their
answer. would question from afar and get their answer. would question
from afar and get their answer.

After performing Hajj, Zakaria returned to Kufa. He remembered the
Imam’s *(‘a)* advice concerning his mother, and started looking after
her with great care and love. He fed her with his own hands, washed her
clothes and combed her hair. His mother couldn’t help noticing the
difference in his attitude.

One day she asked him, ‘Son, when we all professed the same religion,
you did not behave in the same affectionate manner as you do now, after
becoming a Muslim. What has brought about this visible change in
you?’One day she asked him, ‘Son, when we all professed the same
religion, you did not behave in the same affectionate manner as you do
now, after becoming a Muslim. What has brought about this visible change
in you?’One day she asked him, ‘Son, when we all professed the same
religion, you did not behave in the same affectionate manner as you do
now, after becoming a Muslim. What has brought about this visible change
in you?’  
 ‘Dear Mother! A member of the offspring of the Holy Prophet *(s)*
ordered me to do it.’ ordered me to do it.’ ordered me to do it.’  
 ‘Is he a prophet?’‘Is he a prophet?’‘Is he a prophet?’  
 ‘No. He is a son of the Prophet *(s)*.’.’.’

‘My son, I feel he is also a prophet, because such advice is not given
by others.’‘My son, I feel he is also a prophet, because such advice is
not given by others.’‘My son, I feel he is also a prophet, because such
advice is not given by others.’  
 ‘No Mother, he is not a prophet, because, according to our faith, the
Holy Prophet *(s)* is the last prophet sent by God on earth. There will
be no prophet after him.’ is the last prophet sent by God on earth.
There will be no prophet after him.’ is the last prophet sent by God on
earth. There will be no prophet after him.’  
 ‘My son, your faith is better than all the faiths I know of. Teach me
your faith. I want to accept it.’

The son read the (*shahadah*) statement testifying the Oneness of Allah
and the Prophet-hood of Muhammad *(s)*. His mother repeated it after him
and became a Muslim. After that, he taught her how to perform *wuzu* and
offer the obligatory prayers. She offered the afternoon (*zuhr*) and
evening prayers (*asr*) and then the after-sunset (*maghrib*) and
early-night (*’isha*) prayers.

After midnight, her condition suddenly deteriorated and she asked her
son to repeat the statement and principles of Islam, which he had taught
her that day. She repeated the statement after him and her soul flew out
of her body to meet its Creator.

In the morning, the Muslim women came, bathed her body and wrapped it in
the coffin cloth. The person, who led her funeral prayer and interred
her into the grave, was none other than her son, Zakaria.In the morning,
the Muslim women came, bathed her body and wrapped it in the coffin
cloth. The person, who led her funeral prayer and interred her into the
grave, was none other than her son, Zakaria.In the morning, the Muslim
women came, bathed her body and wrapped it in the coffin cloth. The
person, who led her funeral prayer and interred her into the grave, was
none other than her son, Zakaria.

The Enemy is Also Human
-----------------------

Muawiya was ruling over Syria, as governor, sixteen years before Imam
Ali *(‘a)* was forced by the people to accept the reigns of governing
the Islamic State as caliph. He had entrenched himself firmly and raised
an army to oppose Ali’s *(‘a)* leadership. After the battle of Jamal, he
declared independence from the Islamic State and began concocting
evidence for himself as caliph. Imam Ali *(‘a)* was dragged into another
conflict, with the intention of destabilizing his *(‘a)* rule.rule.rule.

Maalik e Ashter Nikhaee was the commander of the Muslims, while
Muawiya’s army was led by Abul A’ur Salma. The armies stood, facing one
another, on the bank of the Euphrates.

Muawiya’s troops attacked Imam Ali’s *(‘a)* army without forewarning and
captured that corner of the river, called *‘Sharia’,* from which both
sides took water for drinking purposes. They, then, announced that Ali’s
*(’a)* army would not be allowed, henceforth, to collect water to drink.
Meanwhile, Muawiya arrived with more soldiers and encouraged them to
control the water and try to weaken the opposing side by cutting off
their water supply. Maalik e Ashter did not have permission to raise
arms without permission from the Imam *(‘a)*...

Imam Ali *(‘a)* as usual, wrote to Muawiya to avoid bloodshed and solve
differences on the table through talks. He *(‘a)* sent his notable
companion, S’as’ah, with a message. It ran thus: sent his notable
companion, S’as’ah, with a message. It ran thus: sent his notable
companion, S’as’ah, with a message. It ran thus:  
 ‘Our armies are facing each other, but it is our wish to avoid the
unnecessary bloodshed of Muslims through battle. I seek to settle
differences through talks, but you and your commanders have opted to use
arms first. Besides, they have cut off our water supply. Order them to
stop this inhuman behaviour. However, if you are intent on fighting,
then, remember, your opponent is a fearless warrior.’‘Our armies are
facing each other, but it is our wish to avoid the unnecessary bloodshed
of Muslims through battle. I seek to settle differences through talks,
but you and your commanders have opted to use arms first. Besides, they
have cut off our water supply. Order them to stop this inhuman
behaviour. However, if you are intent on fighting, then, remember, your
opponent is a fearless warrior.’‘Our armies are facing each other, but
it is our wish to avoid the unnecessary bloodshed of Muslims through
battle. I seek to settle differences through talks, but you and your
commanders have opted to use arms first. Besides, they have cut off our
water supply. Order them to stop this inhuman behaviour. However, if you
are intent on fighting, then, remember, your opponent is a fearless
warrior.’

Muawiya showed the letter to his advisors. Everyone opted for war except
for Umro ibn e Aas, the most shrewd among them.  
 He said ‘Water or no water, Ali will defeat us outright.’  
 Muawiya thought the lack of water would weaken Ali’s soldiers, so he
did not respond to the invitation to talk over the table. When Sa’s’ah
requested a response to the letter, Muawiya said he would reply later,
so he returned.

Imam Ali *(‘a)* realizing the evil intentions of Muawiya, which were
further enhanced by his renewed orders to ensure that water did not
reach Ali’s men, came to the battleground and addressed the army
thus:realizing the evil intentions of Muawiya, which were further
enhanced by his renewed orders to ensure that water did not reach Ali’s
men, came to the battleground and addressed the army thus:realizing the
evil intentions of Muawiya, which were further enhanced by his renewed
orders to ensure that water did not reach Ali’s men, came to the
battleground and addressed the army thus:

‘The opposing army has transgressed all limits of inhuman behaviour.
They have cut off your water supply to let you die of thirst. Their
thirst for war is as strong as a starving man’s desire for food. There
are only two options before you: either accept humiliation and die of
thirst, or quench the thirst of your swords with their impure blood.

Life has no meaning without victory and control, even if the head is
severed from the body in the process. A life of humiliation and
dishonour is equivalent to death. Let me inform you that Muawiya has
gathered an army of contemptible, deviating individuals, whose folly and
ignorance he has taken advantage of, and prepared those unfortunate ones
to lay down their lives for him.’Life has no meaning without victory and
control, even if the head is severed from the body in the process. A
life of humiliation and dishonour is equivalent to death. Let me inform
you that Muawiya has gathered an army of contemptible, deviating
individuals, whose folly and ignorance he has taken advantage of, and
prepared those unfortunate ones to lay down their lives for him.’Life
has no meaning without victory and control, even if the head is severed
from the body in the process. A life of humiliation and dishonour is
equivalent to death. Let me inform you that Muawiya has gathered an army
of contemptible, deviating individuals, whose folly and ignorance he has
taken advantage of, and prepared those unfortunate ones to lay down
their lives for him.’

Ali’s *(‘a)* army fought valiantly to regain their basic right and drove
the army, controlling *Shari’a,* miles away from the waterfront in no
time.  
 Umro ibn e Aas poked fun at Muawiya, asking him, ‘What will you do now,
if Ali and his companions treat you as you treated them, and cut off
your water? Can you regain the lost waterfront?’

Muawiya replied, smiling knowingly, ‘What do you think, will Ali behave
like us?’ Umro said,  
 ‘Ali will never cut off our water to make us suffer the pangs of
thirst. His nobility of character is unquestionable.’‘Ali will never cut
off our water to make us suffer the pangs of thirst. His nobility of
character is unquestionable.’‘Ali will never cut off our water to make
us suffer the pangs of thirst. His nobility of character is
unquestionable.’

When Ali *(‘a)* was asked for permission ‘to do unto them what they had
done to them’, he *(‘a)* said: ‘We will never stoop as low as the
ignorant ones. We will let them take water and invite them to the right
path in the best manner possible, as commanded in the Holy Quran. If
they respond positively, well and good, but if they don’t, we will fight
them bravely like men, not like cowards, by cutting off their water
supply and making them suffer the pangs of thirst.’ said: ‘We will never
stoop as low as the ignorant ones. We will let them take water and
invite them to the right path in the best manner possible, as commanded
in the Holy Quran. If they respond positively, well and good, but if
they don’t, we will fight them bravely like men, not like cowards, by
cutting off their water supply and making them suffer the pangs of
thirst.’ said: ‘We will never stoop as low as the ignorant ones. We will
let them take water and invite them to the right path in the best manner
possible, as commanded in the Holy Quran. If they respond positively,
well and good, but if they don’t, we will fight them bravely like men,
not like cowards, by cutting off their water supply and making them
suffer the pangs of thirst.’

Before sunset, two sets of human beings were seen filling water from the
river to drink. One set filled with shame, the other, with dignity.

I Divorce You
-------------

There were two interpretations of the rules of divorce, maintained by
the two main groups of Muslims. One followed the ruling Umayyad or
Abbasid class, and the other followed the descendants of the Holy
Prophet *(s)*.

According to the first group, when a man declares, *‘I divorce you’,*
three times in one go, the two are separated and cannot remarry until
the woman marries another man and is divorced or widowed.

The Shi’ah maintain that the three words, *‘I divorce you’* can be
repeated 100 times in one go and still be considered one divorce.
Husband and wife can reunite within a specified term if they wish to. If
this incident is repeated, they can still reunite within the specified
term. However, if it is repeated a third time they lose their chance of
reconciliation. The woman must marry another man, fulfill the duties of
a wife, then, if divorced or widowed, can marry him again.

In Kufa there lived a couple, happily married. They quarreled on a minor
issue and the man declared *‘I divorce you’* thrice. Both were extremely
unhappy after the incident and repented over their act. Those people
that believed in the first interpretation insisted upon their
separation. The Shi’ah scholars pacified them and allowed
reconciliation. But the wife was afraid that if they united, their
future offspring might be declared illegitimate. She insisted upon her
husband to get a ruling from Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (‘a) himself.

The Abbasid ruler had forcefully brought the Imam *(‘a)* from Medina and
isolated him in a house in *Heerah*, a town near Kufa. He was kept under
strict surveillance. Nobody was allowed to meet him.

This man disguised himself as a greengrocer and crying, ‘Cucumbers,
cool, tasty cucumbers,’ managed to gain entrance into the house. He then
greeted the Imam *(‘a)* and quickly acquainted him with his problem. The
Imam *(‘a)* admired his disguise and after learning the reason declared,
‘Go back to your wife, for she is legally yours till you don’t commit
this mistake three times.’

Husband and Wife
----------------

Imam Ali *(‘a)*, as Caliph, sat beside the outer wall of the Dar ul
Ammara in Kufa, in the heat of the afternoon, to be available to anyone
who had a problem and wished to see him. One day a woman came to him and
complained, ‘My husband has beaten me, turned me out of the house, and
threatened to kill me. If I return now he will kill me. I have come for
help.’, as Caliph, sat beside the outer wall of the Dar ul Ammara in
Kufa, in the heat of the afternoon, to be available to anyone who had a
problem and wished to see him. One day a woman came to him and
complained, ‘My husband has beaten me, turned me out of the house, and
threatened to kill me. If I return now he will kill me. I have come for
help.’, as Caliph, sat beside the outer wall of the Dar ul Ammara in
Kufa, in the heat of the afternoon, to be available to anyone who had a
problem and wished to see him. One day a woman came to him and
complained, ‘My husband has beaten me, turned me out of the house, and
threatened to kill me. If I return now he will kill me. I have come for
help.’

Imam Ali *(‘a)* told her to wait until it became cooler. He said he
would go with her to speak to her husband and solve her problem.

She said, ‘If I return late, he will be further infuriated and get more
violent.’She said, ‘If I return late, he will be further infuriated and
get more violent.’She said, ‘If I return late, he will be further
infuriated and get more violent.’  
 Imam Ali *(‘a)* bent his head for a moment of introspection. He then
raised it, saying,

‘By Allah, there should be no delay in ending the suffering of the
oppressed. It is necessary to snatch the rights of the oppressed from
the oppressor, and remove the fear of the oppressor from the heart of
the oppressed, so that the oppressed can demand his/ her rights from the
oppressor without fear.’

He then accompanied her to her home and stood at the door and said,
‘Peace be upon the residents of this house.’He then accompanied her to
her home and stood at the door and said, ‘Peace be upon the residents of
this house.’He then accompanied her to her home and stood at the door
and said, ‘Peace be upon the residents of this house.’

A young man, who was her husband, emerged from within. He did not
recognize Imam Ali *(‘a)*, so he thought his wife had brought a 60 year
old to plead on her behalf., so he thought his wife had brought a 60
year old to plead on her behalf., so he thought his wife had brought a
60 year old to plead on her behalf.

Imam Ali *(‘a)* told him that his wife had complained about his cruel
treatment and threats, so he had come to advise him to be tolerant and
treat her with kindness. told him that his wife had complained about his
cruel treatment and threats, so he had come to advise him to be tolerant
and treat her with kindness. told him that his wife had complained about
his cruel treatment and threats, so he had come to advise him to be
tolerant and treat her with kindness.

The man flew into a rage and said, ‘She is my wife. I will treat her as
I want. Who are you to advise me to be kind to her. Now that she has
brought you, I will definitely throw her into the fire alive.’The man
flew into a rage and said, ‘She is my wife. I will treat her as I want.
Who are you to advise me to be kind to her. Now that she has brought
you, I will definitely throw her into the fire alive.’The man flew into
a rage and said, ‘She is my wife. I will treat her as I want. Who are
you to advise me to be kind to her. Now that she has brought you, I will
definitely throw her into the fire alive.’

Imam Ali *(‘a)* was touched to the quick by the barbaric manner of the
young man. He pulled his sword from its sheath and said, ‘I am trying to
guide you towards goodness and prevent you from committing evil, but you
are responding by threatening to burn her alive. Do you think justice is
dead?’you from committing evil, but you are responding by threatening to
burn her alive. Do you think justice is dead?’you from committing evil,
but you are responding by threatening to burn her alive. Do you think
justice is dead?’

When Imam Ali *(‘a)* spoke loudly, the passersby heard him and
recognized him. They came flocking towards him and greeted him
respectfully, ‘Assalam o Alaikum, Ya Ameer ul Momineen.’

The arrogant young man realized whom he was facing, and came back to his
senses. He pleaded, ‘Please forgive me, Ya Ameer ul Momineen, I am truly
sorry. I admit my mistake and pledge to live in peace with my wife. I
will be kind to her and respect her wishes from this moment onwards.’The
arrogant young man realized whom he was facing, and came back to his
senses. He pleaded, ‘Please forgive me, Ya Ameer ul Momineen, I am truly
sorry. I admit my mistake and pledge to live in peace with my wife. I
will be kind to her and respect her wishes from this moment onwards.’The
arrogant young man realized whom he was facing, and came back to his
senses. He pleaded, ‘Please forgive me, Ya Ameer ul Momineen, I am truly
sorry. I admit my mistake and pledge to live in peace with my wife. I
will be kind to her and respect her wishes from this moment onwards.’

Imam Ali *(‘a)* turned towards the woman and said, ‘Enter your home and
be careful not to do anything that forces him to behave in such a
manner.’


