Financial Matters
=================

Black Marketing
---------------

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq *(‘a)* had a large family. Obviously, his domestic
needs were also proportionately greater. He decided to invest some
capital in trade, so he *(‘a)* called his serving man Musaddaf, and
handing him 1000 dinars, told him to go to Egypt with tradable goods and
sell them there. Musaddaf did as told, and joined a caravan of traders
going to Egypt.

On their way they met a group coming back from Egypt. They told them
that the goods they were carrying to sell were in great demand there,
and would fetch them a good price.

On reaching Egypt they found the information they had received to be
absolutely correct. They held a meeting and decided they would not sell
their goods for less than double its price, a 100% profit. They pledged
not to let each other down, and refused to supply the needs of their
fellow Muslims in Egypt. They emerged successful and sold all they had
with double the amount of capital they had invested in stocks.

On his return, Musaddaf triumphantly placed two pouches of dinars before
the Imam *(‘a)*. The Imam (‘a) said, ‘What is the meaning of these two?’

He replied, all smiles, ‘One contains your capital, the other your
profit. Both amounts are equal.’

‘What?’ said Imam Jafar al-Sadiq *(‘a)*.  
 ‘Yes, I mean it. We made a 100 % profit with your money.’  
 ‘What? You certainly need to explain.’

‘Well, we learnt that the goods we had bought to trade in Egypt were
direly needed by them, so we all joined hands to sell them for double
the price. All of us remained united and the people became helpless and
paid the amount for what they needed badly.’

‘You mean you united together to black market your goods?’ SubhanAllah!
You black market your goods and expect me to enjoy its profit. I’m
afraid, I cannot accept such money.’ He *(‘a)* then picked up one pouch
of 1000 dinars and said,

‘This is my hard earned lawful money. Pick up the other pouch. I refuse
to have anything to do with it.’

He then addressed his serving man thus, ‘Musaddaf! It is much easier to
wield the sword than earn lawful money. In other words, earning lawful
money is much more difficult than wielding the sword.’

Dead Father’s Debts
-------------------

‘Mother, dear Mother!’ The woeful cry of a young man was heard in the
silence of the dark night.

A caravan was travelling from Medina to an outpost. The Holy Prophet
*(s)*, who always followed the caravan to keep an eye on the weak and
feeble members on the journey, in case left behind, heard the voice.
Reaching the spot, he *(s)* found this very anxious young man, standing
atop his camel’s back, wailing aloud for help.

The Holy Prophet *(s)* asked him, ‘What is your name?’

‘Jaber ibn e Abdullah’, he replied.  
 ‘Why are you so afraid and anxious?’  
 ‘O Messenger of Allah! My camel is old and weak. It is exhausted and
refuses to get up. I am afraid of being left behind, while the caravan
is moving with such speed.’

‘Do you have a rod?’  
 ‘Yes, here it is.’

The Holy Prophet *(s)* used the rod to help the camel stand. He (s) then
made it sit down again. He *(s)* then told Jaber to seat himself on its
back. Holding the bridle in his hand he *(s)* made the camel rise. After
that the camel moved slowly but steadily. On the way, The Holy Prophet
*(s)* conversed affectionately with him, begging forgiveness from Allah,
for him, 35 times, Jaber counted.

‘How many brothers and sisters do you have?’  
 ‘I have seven sisters and am the only son.’  
 ‘Have you paid off your father’s debts?’  
 ‘Not all. Some is still due.’  
 ‘Talk to the debtors on your return to Medina, and come to me during
the date-picking season.’  
 ‘I will.’  
 ‘Are you married?’  
 ‘Yes.’  
 ‘Who did you marry?’  
 ‘I married a widow of Medina.’

‘A young virgin would have been more suitable for one as young as
you.’  
 ‘I have young, naive sisters. I thought a sensible, experienced woman
would be more beneficial to the family than another naïve young girl.’  
 ‘That was a very wise decision. How much did you pay for this camel?’  
 ‘Five gold coins.’

‘I have the exact amount. Come and take its price from me in Medina.’

The journey ended and everyone got busy in the day’s work. After some
days they returned to Medina. Jaber brought his camel to hand it over to
the Holy Prophet *(s)*.

On seeing him The Holy Prophet *(s)* called out to Bilal and said, ‘Give
him 5 gold coins for the camel and 3 gold coins to pay his father
Abdullah’s debts. Return the camel to him for his use.’

Turning to Jaber, he (s) asked, ‘Have you spoken to your father’s
debtors?’  
 ‘Not yet.’  
 ‘Are the things left behind by your father not sufficient to pay off
his debts?’  
 ‘No, I’m afraid not.’  
 ‘Remind me during the date-picking season.’

The season soon arrived. The Holy Prophet *(s)* went with Jaber, paid
off his father’s debt, and gave him some extra money to fullfill his
domestic responsibilities.

Decide Wages before Hiring
--------------------------

One day, Imam Reza *(‘a)* went with his friend Suleman ibn e Jafar for
some work out of town. They returned at sunset and the Imam invited
Suleman to stop over for the night. He accepted. As soon as they entered
the exterior of the house, the Imam *(‘a)* saw all his serving men busy
in the garden, planting, weeding, mowing and watering the flower- beds.
The Imam *(‘a)* noticed a stranger working besides them.

He called one of his workers and asked, ‘Who is that person?’  
 The man replied, ‘He is a person we hired for the day to finish all the
work quickly.’  
 ‘Good. What wages did you hire him on?’  
 ‘We thought of paying him his due after the work was done.’

The Imam *(‘a)* suddenly looked very annoyed. Displeasure was written
all over his face.

Sulaiman felt he would severely punish his men. He came closer and
asked,’ What is it that has made you so depressed and angry?’

‘Sulaiman, I have told these people time and again, to hire a person
only after deciding the day’s wages. It is unwise to hire a person
without knowing what he would wish to earn at the end of the day’s work.
If the wages are decided, one can pay him a little more if he has worked
well. That will please him and he will leave your place happy and
grateful, and always be willing to work for you in future. You will both
be pleased with each other. Even if paid what was decided at the
beginning, he will be satisfied. However, if the wages are not mutually
agreed upon, no matter what you give him, he will not be grateful at
all, in fact, he is bound to feel he deserved more than he received.’

Services Offered to Tyrants
---------------------------

Haroon ur Rashid, the Abbasid ruler, was informed that Safwan Jamal had
sold all his camels. The news upset him because he was preparing to go
for Hajj and had hired many camels to carry the womenfolk and supplies.
Safwan had also signed a contract to supply him with a certain number of
camels. Haroon felt there was some special reason for this uncommon
behaviour, because Safwan had offered this service to him for many
years, and not once had he failed him.

He sent for Safwan, and when he arrived, asked him, ‘Is it true that you
have sold all your camels?  
 ‘Yes, O Leader of believers.’  
 ‘Why?’  
 ‘I’m aging and find the job difficult. The children are also not
interested in continuing the business. I realized the best solution lay
in selling the beasts of burden.’  
 ‘Tell me the true reason behind your action.’  
 ‘I just told you.’

‘I think I know who has prompted this action of yours. Musa al Kazim, on
learning about our contract, has forbidden you to offer your services to
me and sell your animals. This is the real reason behind your sudden
decision.’ His voice reflected his rage and he said, ‘Had there been no
previous relationship between us, I would have separated your head from
your body this instant.’

Haroon was right. He considered Safwan to be one of his close friends
and allies and enjoyed a very pleasant relationship with him. But Safwan
was a true believer and sincere follower of the Ahl al Bayt *(‘a)*. One
day, after signing the contract with Haroon, he came to visit Imam Musa
e Kazim *(‘a).*

The Imam *(‘a)* said, ‘Safwan, with the exception of one action all your
deeds are good.’  
 Safwan eagerly asked, ‘Ya ibne Rasool Allah, and what is that one
act?’  
 ‘You giving your camels on hire to Haroon.’

‘Ya ibne Rasool Allah, I’m not giving him my animals for a forbidden
act. He is hiring them to perform Hajj. I shall not even accompany him
on the journey, but send some of my employees with my servants.’

‘Answer me, Safwan, you have given him your camels on hire. He will use
them and you will receive money for them. You will hope that he remains
alive to pay you the money promised in the contract. Am I right?’  
 ‘Yes, of course.’

‘Whoever wishes for the continuance of a tyrant will be party to his
tyrannical actions, and whoever is included in the group of tyrants will
go to hell.’

Safwan did not waste a single moment in deciding to sell his camels and
escape being included in Haroon’s group. He sold his camels to free
himself of the contract even if it meant losing his life. Being a true
believer, taking this decision was easier than displeasing Almighty
Allah.

Money Well Spent
----------------

The Holy Prophet *(s)* gave Imam Ali *(‘a)* 12 dirhams to purchase a
long shirt for him. Imam Ali *(‘a)* bought a shirt and gave it to him
*(s)*.  
 The Holy Prophet *(s)* asked, ‘How much did it cost?’  
 ‘Twelve dirhams.’

‘I am afraid I wouldn’t like to wear something so expensive. If the
shopkeeper agrees could you return it and buy something cheaper?’  
 ‘I’ll see, Ya Rasool Allah.’

Imam Ali *(‘a)* spoke to the shopkeeper and he agreed to return the
money and keep the shirt.  
 Then both *(s)* went towards the market together. On the way, they saw
a young slave-girl sitting in a corner of the street and crying. The
Holy Prophet *(s)* went to her and asked affectionately, ‘Why are you
crying?’

‘My master gave me four dirhams to fetch goods from the market. I have
lost them and can’t find them. I don’t have the courage to go home.’

The Holy Prophet *(s)* gave her four dirhams and told her to buy the
needful and go home.  
 He then went to a shop and bought a shirt for four dirhams, and wore
it. On the way home, a man, totally nude, was seen. Quickly, the Holy
Prophet *(s)* took off his shirt and made him wear it. He (s) then went
back to the shop and bought himself another shirt for four dirhams. On
the way back, he found the slave-girl sitting with all the goods and
nervously looking around.

The Holy Prophet *(s)* asked, ‘Why have you not gone home?’  
 ‘I am afraid to go home because my master will ask me why I took so
long and might beat me.’  
 ‘Give me your address. I shall accompany you so that no one says
anything to you.’  
 They reached the place and the girl stopped, pointing to the house
where she lived.  
 The Holy Prophet *(s)* went close to the door and said loudly, ‘
Assalam o Alaikum, dwellers of this home.’

There was no answer. He *(s)* repeated the greeting again but was met
with silence. The third time, the inmates all replied in unison,
‘Assalam o alaikum wa rahmatullah e wa barakatahu, Ya Rasool Allah.’

‘Why did you not respond the first time? Did you not hear my voice the
first two times?  
 ‘We heard and recognized your voice the very first time.’  
 ‘Then why did you not respond?’  
 ‘Your greetings bring blessings with them, Ya Rasool Allah. We wanted
to gain as many as we could.’

‘I have come to ask you to excuse your slave-girl for being late, and
not punish her.’  
 ‘Your coming is such a blessing for us that I release her from bondage
this instant.’  
 The Holy Prophet *(s)* looked at Imam Ali *(‘a)* and smiled,
‘Alhamdolillah! These 12 dirhams were so blessed, that they clothed two
bodies and freed one slave-girl.’

Credibility ensures Success
---------------------------

Abdur Rahman ibn e Sayaba Kufi was a young man who had recently lost his
father. Besides his father’s death, his family was also a victim of
poverty and unemployment. In short, he was miserably unhappy. One day,
while he sat distraught, somebody knocked at the door. It happened to be
his father’s friend.

After offering his condolence he asked, ‘Did your father leave some
money behind?’  
 ‘No.’  
 ‘Here are 1000 dirhams. Invest them in a business; consider them as
your principal amount. Use only the profit on domestic needs.’ Handing
him the money, he bade farewell and left.

Abdur Rahman was very obliged and relieved. He took the money and
related the entire incident to his mother. Following his patron’s
advice, he converted the money into stock and began to trade his goods
by placing them in a shop in the marketplace. In a short period, his
business brought great profit. He spent the profit with great care and
increased his merchandise. He met with greater success and the profit
money increased, so much so that he decided that Hajj was now obligatory
upon him. He spoke to his mother about his decision. She advised him to
return the 1000 dirhams, that had brought so much prosperity, to their
generous donor.

He went to the gracious friend and after greeting him, placed the pouch
of money before him saying, ‘I came to return your money.’  
 The friend thought the money was being returned because it was not
sufficient. He said, ‘If the money was insufficient I’ll increase the
amount.’  
 ‘They were truly blessed. I wanted to thank you for your help and
return your amount to you. With this money I have expanded my business
and earned so much profit that I am now able to return your amount and
perform Hajj.’

Abdur Rahman returned home and starting making preparations for Hajj.
After performing Hajj, he went to Medina and accompanied the large group
of people going to pay their respects to Imam Jafar al-Sadiq *(‘a)*. He
sat down quietly in a corner and watched people interact with the Imam
*(‘a)*, present questions and receive answers. After the crowd
decreased, the Imam *(‘a)* signaled to him to come near. When he was
close enough, the Imam *(‘a)* asked, ‘Is there something you need?’

Abdur Rahman introduced himself. The Imam knew his father and asked
about his welfare. On learning of his demise he said, ‘Sad, very sad!
May he receive Allah’s blessings.’  
 After that he enquired, ‘Did you inherit money from your father?’

‘No. There was nothing at all.’  
 ‘How have you performed Hajj, then?’  
 ‘A friend of my father gave me 1000 dirhams to invest in some business,
which I did. Thanks to Allah, I made great profit and..’  
 The Imam *(‘a)* interrupted him and asked, ‘What did you do about the
1000 dirhams that you received from a friend?’

‘My mother advised me to return the money before performing Hajj. I went
to return the money to him myself.’  
 ‘Well done! Would you wish me to counsel you here?’  
 ‘It will be my good fortune if you do.’  
 ‘Remember, honesty and integrity is obligatory upon you. A man’s
credibility makes him a shareholder of others’ wealth.

Mine or Ours
------------

The price of grain and bread was rising gradually in Medina. Everyone
was busy trying to gather a whole year’s stock of grain, and he who had
it was preserving it. Among the population were the poor, who earned
their daily bread.

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq *(‘a)* enquired from M’utab, his incharge of
essential items, ‘Do we have grain in the house?’

‘Yes, enough to last a few months, Ya ibn e Rasool Allah.’  
 ‘Take it to the market and sell it to the people.’  
 ‘Ya ibn e Rasool Allah, there is a lack of grain in Medina, if we sell
all our grain we will face difficulty in purchasing more.’

M’utab did as ordered and, after selling all the grain, came and
reported to the Imam *(‘a).*  
 He *(‘a)* instructed him, thus: ‘From today onwards, our bread will be
bought daily from the baking oven. There should be no difference between
my bread and the bread available to others. It must contain 50% grain
and 50% barley. Thanks to Allah, I can afford to eat whole grain bread
for a whole year, but I will not do anything that makes me answerable
for being insensitive to the collective needs of the population.’


