Can ‘nature’ Replace God? Preface
=================================

At this era, mankind lives in what is called the global village.
Technological breakthroughs have brought the different nations closer to
each other. New ventures enabled man to send space shuttles to search
for signs of life on other planets. As a revolt against an authoritative
Church in the Middle Ages, modern scientists opted to think only in the
realm of Physics.

As a result, materialism prevailed, while spirituality receded, in
man's life.. The theory of Evolution was systematically presented,
displacing the ample evidence of a created man as a tiny creature in a
vast universe. Because of dysfunctional man-made laws and
disproportionate exploitation of nature's resources, the human race is
heading towards more anarchy, bloodshed, and suffering. Overcrowded
cities, reduced productivity, prevailing dependency and consumerism have
crippled humanity on a global scale. Unjustifiable wars, unemployment,
and inflation can spread like a powerful lighting to harm the entire
world.

Islam, as a universal faith, gives mankind hope. Abjuring false Gods
and returning to the One True Creator should remove all afflictions from
man's life. Unlike what the Judaic faith claims that God has created and
then abandoned mankind, Islam stresses that the Merciful Creator has
appointed a Vicegerent who leads humanity towards guidance and
felicity.

Eventually, this God's representative will implement the plan of all
other God's envoys. Similar to raising Jesus to Heaven for saving him
from his persecutors, Allah has destined for the Mahdi to be in (a
lengthy) occultation. His presence is felt by those who believe in God.
However, signs for his reappearance, which will proceed Jesus' second
return, are unfolding one after the other. These two heirs of Abraham
will join efforts to implement justice and fairness on this Earth after
being filled with injustice and tyranny. The Mahdi will deliver his
mission on a global scale just before the time ends.

After presenting a unifying theory to better understand the worlds of
Seen and Unseen, the author will present a number of fulfilled
prophecies - proving the Unity of the Creator and the Quran's revealers.
Quotations from other God-revealed religious texts will also be
attached. At turbulent times which have persisted in man's life on this
planet, peoples can always preserve their unity and sanity by adhering
to the appointed Imam.

Pharaoh-like rulers are destined to the abyss of history, as Saddam's
end clearly shows. Not only the Mahdi is supported by Allah's angels,
but also he has inherited the wisdom and experiences of all the
righteous envoys that came before him. Just before the End Times, He
will fulfill the Creator's promise in making the meek the ones who will
inherit the Earth.

**I. Introduction**

Humanity has long yarned for a Saviour. Both scientific and religious
texts indicate that cycles of human races lived on the plant Earth, and
then went distinct. Archaeological studies takes man's existence to
500,000 years in history, whereas the religious texts puts Adam's fall
on Earth some 12,000 years back, indicating to prior existence of humans
here.

The Creator has given man a relatively free will to conduct his life,
on different parcels of land, in various societies. Throughout human
history, God sent very many envoys to guide man towards what is good for
him in this life (and the Hereafter). By bringing laws to regulate man's
life, the Prophets warned against breaking these laws. Religious
legislations have always been harmonious with the natural (existential)
laws, leading to abundance, happiness, and peace in man's life.

Many of the humanity's problems can be attributed to the dysfunction of
man-made laws. Just examine the isms which were recently made so
glamorous and then sharply declined. In the past century, Communism is a
good case for academic interests. When a human society moves in a
direction opposite to the natural course, it inevitably hits the rock of
history. For being based on materialism, Capitalism will soon meet its
prescribed destiny.

Balancing both the spiritual and material needs of man, Islam is
expected to dominate the global arena. The Quran provides a complete
code of life - it is a perfect constitution. After testing all other
man-made laws, the humanity will eventually profess its need for Islam's
equalitarian legislations. Central to these is the concept of Mahdism -
a divine figure who will justly implement the codes of laws and help
mankind to discover the Earth's abundant treasures.

Reviewing the missions of all Allah's envoys, one will find the
implementation of justice is central for all of them. Many prophets
fore-warned their peoples from transgression, but their efforts were to
no avail. Historically, the Jews were known to be notorious in either
belying or killing their prophets. According to the seal of the
Prophets' foretelling, the Muslims will follow their suite towards his
household.

The Mahdi1 is one of them - from his daughter Fatimah and the 9th
descendent of Hussain. Because Allah has willed to protect the Mahdi,
alongside with Prophet Jesus, for the implementation of Allah's decrees,
both will have their roles in establishing God's kingdom on Earth.
Throughout the course of history, many prophets reminded their peoples
of the Days of Allah. Let us first examine these days in sequence.


