Ii. the Days of Allah
=====================

"We verily sent Moses with Our revelations, saying: Bring thy people
forth from darkness unto light. And remind them of the days of Allah.
Lo! therein are revelations for each steadfast, thankful (heart)." Quran
(14:5)

**II.1 Minor Resurrection - The promised day of the Mahdi's
reappearance**

"Wait they for naught else than that Allah should come unto them in the
shadows of the clouds with the angels? Then the case would be already
judged. All cases go back to Allah (for judgment)." Quran (2:210)

Both the Quran and the authenticated Sunnah of the Prophet speak about
this monumental day of Allah. The Quran cites: "And verily We have
written in the Psalms, after the Torah: My righteous servants will
inherit the Earth." Quran (21:105) The Prophet stated: "Even if one day
remains, Allah will stretch that day until the Mahdi comes to fill the
Earth with Fairness and Justice after it has been filled with Tyranny
and Injustice."

In the monotheistic faith of Islam, Allah is neither bound by space nor
by time. In the chapter of sincerity, Allah introduces Himself as
As-Samad, i.e. the Master Creator on Whom all other creatures depend,
the Being that has no inner space (to have an outer shape), â€¦ etc. among
other significant attributes. Space wise, Allah encompasses everything
in the whole wide (and expanding) universe. Yet, nothing looks like
Him.

Just ponder who will be coming then "in the shadows of the clouds with
the angles?"

Time is absolutely irrelevant to the Creator. He is beyond it. He is
not bound with it, the same way He is NOT bound with anything else -
including the clouds. If He ascribes any specific days to His name, it
is only to signify the importance of those days. This is an extra
reminder for the human being - who tends to forget. The same can be
stated about those who are affiliated with Him. The affiliates are the
elites, whom He chose.

Their rank in the sight of Allah is even above than that of the closest
Arch Angel - Gabriel. With Muhammad at the focus, thanks to what he has
experienced on the night of the Israa and Mi'raj, Allah has introduced
these elites to one another even before their births. Similarly, He
foretold the physical coming of a number of his envoys. Such assertion
can be proven from the glad tidings the four angels gave the barren, old
Sara.

This coincidently occurred upon communicating the bad news of
destructing the Sodom and Gomorrah of those who had committed the
indescribable crime. Consequently, the 90-yr old Abraham got his second
son Isaac - who subsequently fathered Israel (Jacob), as the Quran
narrates.

At the dawn of history, some 12,000 years ago, Allah created Adam from
dirt. Later, He made Noah a great Prophet. At other points in time, He
made Abraham as a close friend, spoke to Moses, and miraculously created
Jesus form Virgin Mary. Eventually, He chose the Prophet Muhammad to be
His beloved one, and the seal of the Prophets. Throughout history, human
beings had no say in the selection of any of the very many prophets. As
the Quran states:

"Lo! Allah preferred Adam and Noah and the Family of Abraham and the
Family of \\'Imran above (all His) creatures." Quran (3:33)

"And when a token cometh unto them, they say: We will not believe till
we are given that which Allah\\'s messengers are given. Allah knoweth
best with whom to place His message. Humiliation from Allah and heavy
punishment will smite the guilty for their scheming." Quran (6:124)

The Muslims agree that every Messenger is a prophet, but not vice
versa. Among the Messengers of Allah, five were with Universal missions:
Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus and Muhammad. To Muhammad's contemporaries,
who denied his Messengership, the Quran challenges:

"They who disbelieve say: Thou art no messenger (of Allah). Say: Allah,
and whosoever hath knowledge of the Scripture, is sufficient witness
between me and you." Quran (13:43)

Who other than Imam Ali that had the knowledge of the Book, i.e. the
Quran. If the Quran was a silent book, Imam Ali was the talking one.
When Allah gives such recognition to Imam Ali's testimony for the
Prophet's Messengership, little consideration should be given to those
who institutionalized his dismissal as the immediate Vicegerent for the
Prophet?

In very many Hadiths, the Prophet identified his Twelve vicegerents -
all are from Quraysh. In his life, not only he assigned Imam Ali, but
also he spoke about the Imamate of Al-Hassan and Al-Hussain, and the
nine Imams from the latter's progeny. None but Imam Muhammad bin
Al-Hassan Al-Askari, commonly known as the Mahdi is the awaited Saviour
about whom all prophets spoke. Birth: mid Sha'ban 255 A..H., Samaraa,
Iraq.


