Ii.2 Middle Resurrection - Al-raj'ah Or the Return of Selected Dead Persons To Life
===================================================================================

"Or (bethink thee of) the like of him who, passing by a township which
had fallen into utter ruin, exclaimed: How shall Allah give this
township life after its death? And Allah made him die a hundred years,
then brought him back to life. He said: How long hast thou tarried? (The
man) said: I have tarried a day or part of a day. (He) said: Nay, but
thou hast tarried for a hundred years.

Just look at thy food and drink which have not rotted! Look at thine
ass! And, that We may make thee a token unto mankind, look at the bones,
how We adjust them and then cover them with flesh! And when (the matter)
became clear unto him, he said: I know now that Allah is Able to do all
things."
Quran (2:259)

Again, the Quran speaks in many places about this resurrection and
authenticates the leadership of the designated, rightful Imams. In his
role, the Prophet explained the intended meanings of the Quran's verses.
Take this verse as a starting example:

"And We desired to show favour unto those who were oppressed in the
earth, and to make them examples and to make them the inheritors." Quran
(28:5)

To his daughter Fatimah, the Prophet confided that she will be the
first one who will follow his departure from this temporal world. To his
companions, he stated: "Fatimah is a piece of me. Whoever pleases her,
he pleases me. And, whoever displeases her, he displeases me." Ample
historic evidence exist that Fatimah was martyred only 75 days after the
Prophet's martyrdom. Proof: she was extremely angry at the two sheikhs.
In her will, she even asked Imam Ali to deny them the participation in
her funeral procession. She also asked to make her graveyard
anonymous.

While allowing the two sheikhs to be buried beside the Prophet's tomb
in Madinah, Aeysha denied the burial of Imam Hassan there after he was
poisoned by Mu'aawiyah in 50 A.H.

Thus a bitter commotion rose between Bani Hashim and Marwan's men - who
showered Imam Hassan's corpse with intense arrows. Observing the
sanctity of the place and paying reverence to the burial place his
grandfather, Imam Hussian put an end to that unnecessary, futile
argument by burying his brother somewhere else and he quoted the
Quran:

"O ye who believe! Lift not up your voices above the voice of the
Prophet, nor shout when speaking to him as ye shout one to another, lest
your works be rendered vain while ye perceive not." Quran (49:2)

Ten years before Imam Hassan's martyrdom, in the year 40 A.H., Imam
Hussain eulogized his father: Imam Ali - the first oppressed Imam, when
the Kharijite Abdul Ar-Rahman bin Muljim assassinated him in
collaboration with Mu'aawiyah - Omar's appointed governor over Syria.

In the year 61 A.H., barely 50 years after the Prophet's demise, Imam
Hussain himself was martyred by Mu'aawiyah's son Yazid - the drunkard,
the womanizer, the tyrant. The episode of Karbala is well documented in
Islam's history. With slight factual mistakes2, the late (Egyptian)
Shaikh Abdul Hameed Kushok spoke eloquently on the day of Ashoraa3. What
need to be stressed here is that none but the appointed Twelve Imams who
have suffered that much persecution. Similar to saving Jesus from the
Jewish persecution, Allah ordered Imam Mahdi to go into occultation.

Imam Hussain sacrificed everything in the Path of Allah, including a
newborn child. Upon testing Abraham, Allah ransomed His close friend's
sacrifice with a more significant one. This magnificent ransom must have
been of the same kind as the sacrifice itself. It can not be a lamb
Gabriel brought down - or even a sacrificial animal a pilgrim makes upon
performing Haj.

All evidences are indicative towards that the ransom might have been
the master of the Martyrs - whom Allah will resurrect among others to
reign during His kingdom. Some who were extreme in their cruelty and
injustice will also be resurrected to be punished by their victims in
this life, before tasting the humiliating chastisement in the
Hereafter.

Linage of Prophet Muhammad is connected to Abraham through Ishmael.
Imam Hussain was Prophet Muhammad's grandson - the son of Imam Ali and
Fatimah (a.s.). History records that the Prophet of Islam left only one
daughter from his own seeds. Yet, the Quran, in its shortest chapter,
prophesies that he was given abundant progeny!

It is indeed saddening to see some Muslim doctors of religion who
cannot fathom this fulfilled prophecy. A recent declaration by Dr. Zakir
Naik4 puts him in the category of the Israelite scholar - Bal'am bin
Ba'aoora.. In the chapter of Jum'ah, Allah describes him as being like a
donkey that carries voluminous books on its back. If both Pharaoh and
Moses cannot be right, then Imam Hussain and Yazid should not be viewed
as just Imams (leaders). Hope that this stern message will reach this
memorizer of the Quran before he will be resurrected with whom he
loves.


**II.3 Major Resurrection - The day of Reckoning**

"Nay, I swear by the Day of Resurrection." Quran (75:1)

Believing in this day is one of the foundations of the Islamic faith.
The Noble Quran makes very many references to it. All the prophets of
Allah reminded their peoples about this monumental day. Disbelievers
normally deny the day of resurrection, claming that their existence in
this temporal life is purposeless. It is only the time (age) which turns
a newborn to a young and then to an elder person - who eventually
perishes upon death. No spirit. No life after death. How a dead person
who turns to dust and decayed bones can be brought back to life? They
wonder.

In Islam, this day has many names. The Quran gives a number of
characteristics to it. It comes suddenly, making the disbelievers really
wonder.. A nursing mother will be bewildered from her newborn. On that
day, a man will flee from his brother, wife, and sons. Every body will
be regretful then. The believers would regret for not doing enough good
to shield them from the horrors of that day. The disbelievers will be
regretful for being caught in a surprise.

Some 4000 years ago, Abraham once asked Allah to show him how He
resurrects the dead. Demonstrating His Power to His close friend, Allah
told him to do a little experiment. The Quran cites the story of cutting
four birds into pieces, placing their flesh onto four mountains, then
summoning them back.. All the four birds flew hastily back to Abraham,
by the leave of Allah.

As a prophet, Abraham was naturally a believer. Developing spiritually,
he became a Messenger. The Quran lists him among the five envoys of
Allah who delivered universal messages. By conducting above experiment,
he wanted to elevate his certainty (about Allah's Power in resurrecting
the dead). After completing Allah's trials, Abraham attained the status
of an Imam.

Like Moses and Jesus, Abraham foretold the coming of Muhammad. The
Prophet Muhammad, in turn, foretold about the coming of the Mahdi. This
will occur just before the day of resurrection. The seal of the
Prophet's certainty about the coming of Imam Mahdi was no less than that
of Abraham's certainty about the Judgment day.


