Iii. the Sun and the Moon
=========================

"He it is Who appointed the Sun a splendour and the Moon a light, and
measured for her stages, that ye might know the number of the years, and
the reckoning. Allah created not (all) that save in truth. He detaileth
the revelations for people who have knowledge." Quran (10:5)

"And We appoint the night and the day two portents. Then We make dark
the portent of the night, and We make the portent of the day
sight-giving, that ye may seek bounty from your Lord, and that ye may
know the computation of the years, and the reckoning; and everything
have We expounded with a clear expounding." Quran (17:12)

The Universality of Islam can be established by referring to the Quran,
as it speaks about heavenly bodies. Focusing on the Solar system, the
Creator tells in the Quran that:

"He created the Sun and the Moon, so we learn how to enumerate the
years and reckoning."

Thus, the alteration of the day and the night and the seasons of the
year must all be in conformity with Allah's plan. In nature, the light
that is reflected on the Moon depends on the rays of the Sun's light.
Right. Mathematically, there must be a linear correlation between the
Lunar and the Solar years, or: y = mx + b

where: y: dependent variable - Lunar (Hijri) year, x: independent
variable - Solar (Gregorian) year, and, b, m : constants.

In the chapter of the Cave, Allah gives m = 309/300 = 1.03 (the
slope).

Quran's chapter of the Elephant marked the birthday of the Prophet -
which corresponded to 571 A.D (the intercept).

Knowing that the Prophet migrated from Mecca to Madinah at the age of
53, one can determine b = - 639. Thus:

y = 1.03x - 639

Example: put x = 2008 into this equation to get 1429.

Proof: The author of the Quran is none but Allah - the exalted
Creator.

The Prophet Muhammad could never make such a discovery, given the fact
that illiteracy was prevailing in the Arabia Peninsula at his time. In
the city of Mecca, where he was born, people were either wood cutters,
or shepherd, or merchants. A few were poets. But, none was expert in
Physics or Astrology. It was only in the past century when man put his
step on the Moon, and learned that its mean distance from the planet
Earth is 384,400 Km.

It is pertinent to cite another wondrous revelation that captured the
attention of a number of disbelievers and made them return to Islam.
Here is the verse:

"The hour drew nigh and the moon was rent in twain." Quran (54:1)

Therefore it is important to stress that the Muslims are not Moon
worshippers. Unfortunately, this is a stereotype which is very prevalent
in the Western media to portray Islam with a negative brush. Islam is
the true religion which the Creator has sent to the entire humanity. The
Muslims' motto is: the One Creator Who has sent the One true message to
the One human family.

According to some tradition5, Lunar and Solar eclipses in the month of
Ramadhan may herald the coming of the Mahdi. Leaving aside the birth of
the tailed comet Helley for other studies, the 1981 and 1982 Lunar and
Solar Eclipses in the month Ramadhan have already occurred. But, their
occurrence was in the reverse order of what another more authentic
Hadith stipulates:

The author of \\'eqdud-durar\\' in section one, chapter four narrates
from \\'al-fatan\\' of hafiz abu-abdullah na\\'eem-ibn-hemmad and he,
from yazid-ibn-khalil asadi who said: \\'I was in the presence of Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.). He mentioned two of the signs which would occur
before the emergence of Mahdi and which has not yet been witnessed
(right from the time of fall of Adam till now). One sign is this that
there shall occur an eclipse of the Sun on 15th of Ramadhan and the Moon
too shall be eclipsed at the end of Ramadhan.

A person said: \\'O son of messenger of Allah! It is not as you say.
Rather the Sun will be eclipsed at the end of the month of Ramadhan and
the Moon will be eclipsed during the middle of the month. Imam Baqir
(a.s.) said: the One who says these words is knowing better (than you)
that right from the time of Adam\\'s fall till today these two signs
have not occurred.

The author of es\\'aaf-ul-raghaben\\' too has narrated the same
tradition.


**IV. Light and Darkness**

The Quran declares that we categorically have two worlds: the Seen;
and, the Unseen. When light projects on material objects, man's naked
eyes can see them. It is probably for this reason that Allah breathed
His spirit (or essence which can be construed as an invisible light)
into the clay upon Adam's creation. Reasonably, the Prophet set a
requirement for the Moon sighting: witnessing the Crescent by the naked
eyes. Thus witnessing becomes a source of certainty - not the
speculative computational models.

Distinguishing different kinds of light, the Quran calls the Sun as
Siraj (i.e. a lamp which usually generates the light that is familiar to
us). The Moon, on the other hand, is called Noor - which is a mere
indication of the reflected light on its surface to the planet Earth.
Remember the dependency of the Moon's light on the Sun's.

"And for the moon We have appointed mansions till she return like an
old shrivelled palm-leaf.." Quran (36:39)

In this verse, Allah says that He is the One Who has predestined the
Moon's (monthly) stations, changing it from a full Moon until it looks
like an old arch of a palm-tree leaf. Removing the barrier between the
two worlds and demonstrating His control of everything in existence,
Allah also states that He manages the affairs on Earth from the Heaven,
in a day which is equivalent to 1000 years of that you count
(enumerate).

Ironically, the Quran had spoken about the relativity (theory) some
1200 years before the birth of Albert Einstein. Historically, the Arabs
used to use the units of time to indicate to long distances travelled.
Here, if you substitute the 1000 years by the intended distance
travelled by the Moon as it revolves around the Earth 12,000 times and
divide that distance by 1 day converted to seconds, you get:

Speed of light = distance travelled by the Moon in 1000 years/(24x3600)
= 299748 Km/s.

This speed of light was adopted in a Scientific Conference in Paris, in
1984.

Similar to the concept of minor, middle, and major resurrections, here
I submit: Physics (realm of the Physical world); and, Metaphysics I,
Metaphysics II to refer to two worlds in the Unseen. The Physical world,
for being material in nature, is being experienced by the majority of
the children of Adam. For man's ignorance about the other worlds (which
are spiritual in nature), very many generations of human beings do not
know what they have missed.

Seeing is believing, the adage goes. But with what eyes? True: the
naked eyes only see the material objects. For investigating tiny
particulate matters (or distant heavenly planets), the scientists have
utilized powerful microscopes. High resolution cameras can picture even
the nuclei of living and pathological cells. One is not sure where to
place the lie detectors, when the occupants of the Oval office lie with
impunity.

After the recent technological breakthroughs, we started believing many
things which we can not normally see by our naked eyes. Wireless
communication was a dream a few decades ago. The Quran talks about
Joseph's dream in seeing the Sun, the Moon, and 11 stars bowing down to
him. A dream which came true a few decades later, as the Quran
reports.

Other points in Metaphysics I can be derived from Joseph's chapter and
other chapters in the Quran. Here, I only state the strong sense of
smelling of Israel (Jacob - Joseph's father) and recovering his sight
after throwing Joseph's shirt on his face.

To the materialistic Children of Israel who out of envy threw their
half-brother Joseph in a deep well and caused too much anguish for their
old father, Jacob said:

"I expose my distress and anguish only unto Allah, and I know from
Allah that which ye know not." Quran (12:86)

"Then, when the bearer of glad tidings came, he laid it on his face and
he became a seer once more.. He said: Said I not unto you that I know
from Allah that which ye know not?" Quran (12:96)

The Quran exhorts mankind to believe in the Day of Judgment. This day
is equivalent to 50,000 Earthy years! Once again, Allah's words can be
viewed on three levels: lower (worldly, for the majority to understand);
higher (Metaphysics I, for the prophets to know); and, Superior
(Metaphysics II, for the Imams to relate to).

This categorization is an oversimplification to express spiritual
experiences in layman's language. In other words, a tiny object loses
its gross material nature when it moves at the speed of light. Thus, we
can examine the various kinds of waves, including the electromagnetic
waves which constitute the rays of light. This light is visible to our
eyes.

Examination of subatomic particular reactions leads to the measurement
of: Alpha particles; Beta particles; and, Gamma Rays - which are
invisible electromagnetic waves. Mass-energy balance leads to other
emissions. Co-60 has been used for sterilization by Gamma radiation.
Dentists normally use X-Ray machines for diagnoses.. Hospitals utilize
Ultrasound detectors to discover the foetus's gender. Lately, with the
heightened security concerns, new detectors were developed for detecting
explosives from 25m distance.

Why then the majority of the human beings do not believe in the Creator
Who describes Himself in such a lower, worldly vocabulary:

"Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The similitude of His
light is as a niche wherein is a lamp. The lamp is in a glass. The glass
is as it were a shining star. (This lamp is) kindled from a blessed
tree, an olive neither of the East nor of the West, whose oil would
almost glow forth (of itself) though no fire touched it. Light upon
light. Allah guideth unto His light whom He will. And Allah speaketh to
mankind in allegories, for Allah is Knower of all things." Quran
(24:35)

In the physical world, darkness occurs when layers of material prevent
the penetration of rays of light. A good example is what marine
biologists experience in deep seas. When Yonus (Joanna) angrily left his
town, he suddenly found himself in three layers of darkness: the night;
the deep sea; and, the whale's belly.

The Quran presents another interesting case, which is indicative
towards Allah as the Creator:

He created you from one being, then from that (being) He made its mate;
and He hath provided for you of cattle eight kinds. He created you in
the wombs of your mothers, creation after creation, in a threefold
gloom. Such is Allah, your Lord. His is the Sovereignty. There is no
Allah save Him. How then are ye turned away? Quran (39:6)

In the spiritual world, it is man's heart which receives the rays of
guidance from Allah. Upon sinning, this heart will be covered with
layers of what looks like "rusts" - which are impermeable to any
spiritual enlightenment. The Quran calls the hearts of those who
insistently indulge in sins, without considering repentance, as being
"sealed." According to the Prophet, only constant, sincere repentance
can remove such rusts.

In the first chapter of the Quran, there is an interesting analogy
between the physical darkness and the spiritual one.

As discussed somewhere else6, the (written) Quran is the lower word of
Allah - it is only a silent book. Recitation of Allah's words brings
humility to the believers' hearts and makes them ready to receive the
guidance. The rightful Imam is the light of Allah who guides the pious
towards the straight path. For knowing the intended meanings of Allah's
final revelation, the Imam's light pierces through every darkness to
dispel it.

The Quran encourages every Muslim to become a Mo'min - a true believer.
Then by responding to the call "Oh you who believe," the believers are
perhaps moved to become pious - Mutaqeen. Only the latter group can find
guidance from the Quran. Believing in the Unseen constitutes an integral
part of the belief of the latter group, as the Quran declares in its
very first chapter. Imam Mahdi is part of the Unseen. His path is
therefore the Straight Path.

The interconnection between the Quran and the Imam is inseparable. One
leads to the other. Without being an infallible, already-guided, the
Mahdi can not provide any guidance to others. His occultation is just
part of the Unseen world. His presence in the hearts of the pious looks
like the shinning Sun which is being obscured by little clouds.


