V. the Mahdi in Muslim Traditions
=================================

With the exception of a small Salafi group, both the Caliphate and
Imamte schools of thought believe in the coming of the Mahdi before End
times. The Hadiths from the Prophet in this respect are too numerous and
authenticated enough to defy. A slight difference however exits
regarding whether the Mahdi was born or he will be born in the future.

Without being able to justify/identify the twelve rightful Caliphs, the
Caliphate school followers sometimes raise feeble objections concerning
the Imam's long life, the purpose of his occultation, and the like. Such
objections cannot withstand any critiquing in the light of the Quran and
the authentic Sunnah. A number of scholars thoroughly debated this
matter7,8,9. I trust some speakers in this conference will address it,
too.

**VI. The Messiah in the Judo-Christian Texts**

When Jesus started his mission, some Jews believed in him as being the
Messiah. The original Old Testament must have spoken about this
important prophecy. It is well known that Jesus did not come to change
the Laws of Torah. Jesus' native language was Aramaic. Neither he nor
any of his disciples wrote a book in this language. The New Testament
was later written in Creek.

The Jews, who rejected Jesus, accused him of blasphemy. That was a
sufficient accusation to justify the spilling of his blood. God in the
Heaven raised him to protect him. Of course the Christians contend that
he was crucified for the atonement of children of Adam's sins. Similar
to the contemporary afore-mentioned stance towards the Mahdi, the
Children of Israel were divided into two main groups. The Jews have long
been waiting for the Messiah for their redemption. The Christians expect
the (second) coming of Jesus.

In mid February 2008, I spoke at a Conference held in Qum on the
contributions of (the late) Allamah Muhammad Jawad Al-Balaghi and
highlighted the fact that he mastered the Hebrew and English languages
to delineate a number of Islamic perspectives in the (present) Old and
New Testaments - prophecies about Imam Mahdi was one of them.

Similar to the late Al-Balaghi who composed poetry on the Mahdi,
millions send their daily salutation to him10,11. Here, I refer the
researcher to a number of short clips12 on this subject, developed by
the Turkish Muslim scholar - Harun Yahya. As a herald for a humanity
that is preparing to greet its Saviour, my only hope is that this
research paper will spin further interests.

**VII. Concluding Remarks**

1. The Book of Allah in its written form makes the universal message of
Islam fairly known to the Muslims/non-Muslims who can read Arabic with
understanding. Exhorting the believers to reach a higher understanding,
Allah expects them to ponder at the deeper meaning of His last message
to mankind. At this higher level, Muslim scholars have put excellent
efforts to elucidate the deeper meanings of the Quran's verses.

Voluminous books were written for what is called Tafseer, i.e.
interpretation. When it comes to the meanings intended by Allah, they
are inaccessible except to the chosen Imams. Both the Quran and the
practice of previous messengers naturally lead to the belief in Imamate.
None but the purified can comprehend the Quran that is in the sight of
Allah. Therefore, at this highest level of understanding Ta'weel becomes
necessary.

2. True, neither the name of the first nor the last, nor any other Imam
is being mentioned in the Quran. But, the Quran infers that Imam Ali is
the one who possesses the knowledge of the Book. It also refers the
Muslims to those who know the Ta'weel - i.e. the actual meanings of the
revelation as intended by Allah. The Muslims contemporary to the Prophet
Muhammad unanimously agreed that Ahlul Bait, i.e. the household of the
Prophet as being introduced in the verses of Tatheer and Mubahalah, are
the ones whom Allah entrusted with His knowledge - especially as it
pertains to the implementation of justice in man's life.

It has become Mutawatar in the science of Hadith that the Prophet, not
only appointed Imam Ali as a Vicegerent, but also declared the Imamate
of his grandsons Hassan and Hussain, and the 9 Imams from Hussain's
progeny. It was only the will of Allah on which the Prophet acted. This
was very similar to giving his only daughter Fatimah in marriage to his
cousin. Thus, the appointed 12th Imam (Muhammad bin Al-Hassan) was being
introduced by the Prophet himself long before his birth in 255 AH.

3. Similar to the persecuted Israelite prophets, the Prophet of Islam's
household have endured unimaginable suffering. The same way the mother
of Moses had to put her newborn in a box (see Ark of the Covenant below)
and throw him in the Nile River, Imam Mahdi's father had to hide his son
from the henchmen of the ruling Caliph. But, the Imam was properly
introduced to a close circle of 40 disciples.

After the poisoning of his father in 260 AH, the Imam executed his
duties through four special representatives for 69 years. Since 329 AH,
the Imam has been in occultation waiting for Allah's permission to
appear for the eventual implementation of justice. His mission is
undoubtedly universal.

As a minor resurrection, the Imam's appearance represents Islam's
revival. For the divine knowledge he inherited, he is a true partner of
the Quran. Only he knows the Ta'weel of the confuted (Mutashabahat)
verses. The Muhkamat verses are self explanatory for the learned.

Quoting the Quran on the resurrection of a prophet 100 years after his
death, and bringing back to life the youths of the Cave after 300 years,
are proofs that the Middle resurrection is not a Shi'ah invention (as
some ignorant call it). Raj'ah simply means the coming of specific
persons back to life - by the leave of Allah.

Some of these are pious (like the above examples) and others could be
ordinary witnesses (like the dead whom Moses smite by the tail of a
slaughtered cow).

The ultimate judge is always Allah. The majority of the wrongdoers will
undoubtedly be sentenced on the day of reckoning. However, the Quran
declares that the ones who have persistently committed heinous crimes
will have two deaths and two resurrections.

Imam Mahdi will bring such to the book, especially if they were the
ones who laid the foundation of persecution of Ahlul Bait and
subsequently caused the tragedy of Karbala.


