Injustice of World's Economy
============================

To understand which dimension of injustice the world's economy today
has reached, the example of fuel is typical. Usually one can think, that
oil comes from Iran and several other countries and these countries
should be rich due to selling this oil to the western world. And the
western world cannot earn money with oil, because they buy it. But this
way of thinking is absolutely wrong in this world full of oppression.

Here the calculation for Germany can be given as an example. Germany
earns much more money with the oil coming from Iran, that Iran does. The
price for fuel in Germany is around 1,40 EUR per liter. But the product
price is only 40 Cent. Iran gets about 10 Cent from this 40 Cent. The
rest goes to transport, refining and some other production processes.
But 1 EUR of the price, Germans pay are taxes, which the German state
earns.

Remember: Iran gets 10 CENT for this 1 liter while Germany gets 1 EUR,
although the oil comes from Iran. Within this simple example one can
imagine, how the injustice in distribution concerns several parts of
economy. All these injustices will loose its relevance, if he system of
money is overcome. But is an economy without money possible?

**Economy without money?**

As we know from prophetic words, one day will come, when people will
meet all their needs by speaking out a "Salawat". Based on today's
predatory capitalism, which forces its pressure into the whole world,
the question may be raised, how a system without any money ever can
work? The answer is very simple: The predatory capitalism itself shows,
that it is possible! If one recognises,

that the USA only work with money they do not possess, if one
considers, that most of money transfers in the world is virtual and has
nothing to do with real existing values, it can be seen, that a system
without money could be imagined. But the preconditions to realize such a
system in a real existing society are not easy to fulfil. The reason for
this is, that the goals of economy in a real existing capitalism is only
to increase money.

Thanks God - alhamdulillah - we live in the time of the existing
Islamic Republic of Iran and in the preamble of the constitution we read
following words in the Chapter: "The Economy is a Means, Not an End":

"In strengthening the foundations of the economy, the fundamental
consideration will be fulfilment of the material needs of man in the
course of his overall growth and development. This principle contrasts
with other economic systems, where the aim is concentration and
accumulation of wealth and maximization of profit. In materialist
schools of thought, the economy represents an end in itself, so that it
comes to be a subversive and corrupting factor in the course of man\\'s
development. In Islam, the economy is a means, and all that is required
of a means is that it should be an efficient factor contributing to the
attainment of the ultimate goal.

From this viewpoint, the economic program of Islam consists of
providing the means needed for the emergence of the various creative
capacities of the human being. Accordingly, it is the duty of the
Islamic government to furnish all citizens with equal and appropriate
opportunities, to provide them with work, and to satisfy their essential
needs, so that the course of their progress may be assured."

If one reads in addition "Article 43" about the economy of the Islamic
Republic of Iran and all the other articles, it can be ascertained that
the word "money" does not exist in the constitution.

To overcome the monetary system it has to be understood that the work
done in an Islamic country is enough to supply all citizens. The wealth
of some few people is the reason for the poverty of many others, and an
Islamic way should be found to correct this asymmetrical distribution.
From Islamic history we know, that Imam Ali (a.) had to defend the
Islamic system during the short time of his caliphate against those who
wanted privileges for themselves. If we understand that the work done by
the citizen is enough to supply all citizens, and is even more than
enough, then we can think about using the existing capacity of work for
valuable services like educating children and developing the knowledge
of adults.

A just distribution of wealth will be only possible, if wealth and
power will be separated from each other. And this is in the hand of
those, who take part in elections. Imam Khamenei's -hafizahuallah, may
Allah protect him - way of life as an ideal, and we have to teach it
also as an ideal, to prepare the country's wealth as a living example
for the whole oppressed mankind.

Those who take part at elections have this responsibility to vote for
those, who live humbly and who are not interested in this world's
wealth. If someone lives a live of material affluence in his private
boundaries, he will not be able to protect a just distribution of wealth
in the country.

**Preparing the return of the 12th Imam from the viewpoint of
economy**

If we want o prepare the return of the 12th Imam also in economical
fields, we have to understand the system of Imam Mahdi (a.), and we have
to treat his real representative as he would be the 12th Imam himself.
The realized system of Welayet-e-Faqih in the only existing Islamic
System, the hope, that this system will increase Islamic values inside
the country and being a model for all other Muslims is unique since 1400
years. Never before we had a system, in which the hope of the awaited
return is as high as in our time. So let us have a short look at Imam
Khamene'is words about the economical system and situation.

In a news about the situation of teachers IRNA wrote:

"Economic improvement is the key to the problems of all labourers,
teachers and people, said the Supreme leader adding that control of
inflation, boosting national currency, preventing unnecessary expenses,
administering justice and removal of discrimination can help improve
people\\'s living conditions." (30th April 2003)

And here some further words.

"Thus it has managed to prove to Muslim nations that a system based on
Islamic principles is practical. Besides, in view of its daily progress
in various political, cultural, scientific, social and economic fields
it has attracted the attention of the educational elite, youth and the
world Muslims," (21st September 2004)

"Imam KhameneÂ´i said that campaign against economic corruption and
injustice is a difficult job, but full of blessing because if people
feel campaign against discrimination and injustice they will tolerate
all problems and hardships."(10th September 2004)

And on 28th August 2006, exactly one year ago, Imam Khamene'i held a
speech about economics. Imam Khamene'i said the government is expected
to take maximum advantage of the exceptional political and economic
situation to attain its goals especially the action plan in line with
Article 44 of the Constitution. He has forwarded an action plan to the
legislature, the executive branch and the judiciary to enforce Article
44 of the Constitution which calls for major privatization program and
ceding shares of the state-run enterprises to people through the Stock
Exchange.

Some of Imam Khamen'is advice has been applied already, others will be
implemented in future inshaallah. To remember Article 44:

"The economy of the Islamic Republic of Iran is to consist of three
sectors: state, cooperative, and private, and is to be based on
systematic and sound planning. The state sector is to include all
large-scale and mother industries, foreign trade, major minerals,
banking, insurance, power generation, dams and large-scale irrigation
networks, radio and television, post, telegraph and telephone services,
aviation, shipping, roads, railroads and the like; all these will be
publicly owned and administered by the State.

The cooperative sector is to include cooperative companies and
enterprises concerned with production and distribution, in urban and
rural areas, in accordance with Islamic criteria. The private sector
consists of those activities concerned with agriculture, animal
husbandry, industry, trade, and services that supplement the economic
activities of the state and cooperative sectors.

Ownership in each of these three sectors is protected by the laws of
the Islamic Republic, in so far as this ownership is in conformity with
the other articles of this chapter, does not go beyond the bounds of
Islamic law, contributes to the economic growth and progress of the
country, and does not harm society. The [precise] scope of each of these
sectors, as well as the regulations and conditions governing their
operation, will be specified by law."

Every step on the way to realize these ideals means a step on the way
for preparing the return of the 12th Imam - may he come soon. If we
treat Imam Khamene'i as the real representative of the 12th Imam, if we
understand, that His Eminence is the Holiness of our time, we can
accelerate the awaited return. But as long, as we do not apply his
advices also in economical fields, we have to wait. And it will be in
our responsibility that the waiting time increases.

**Bright future**

The economical system of the western world seams to be strong and
insuperable. But this is only the appearance. In reality their
economical system based on insures and debts has reached its limits and
even western intellectuals discuss about an awaited crash. The so called
"clash of cultures" and the "war against terrorism" are only measures to
extend the live period of the western economical system.

But are we ready to start with an alternative? How ready is our Islamic
banking system? Muslims all over the world ask for Islamic funds and
Islamic accounts. Are we ready to fulfil these requirements? Have we
already started with the Islamic banking system inside the country and
have build branches outside to bind Muslims all over the world to the
Islamic system? Will it not be an ideal implementation of the recent
years motto: "National unity and Islamic solidaritiy", which Imam
Khamene'i has announced. Are we not bound to fulfil the announced motto
of the year also in the field of economy? And is this great work not a
work of us all, and not only of the government?

And what about other fields of halal economy? Has Iran implemented a
system to test all imported food according to its halal ingredients? If
so, how can that system be internationalized? If not, what can we do to
realize this?

Based on a halal economy, based on the Islamic alternative, which the
intellectuals of the Islamic state and all Muslim thinkers all over the
world have to prepare a bright future can be introduced, and accelerate
the return of the 12th Imam inshaallah.

The western world has shown, how they are able to develop the whole
world into a chaos of injustice with money they do not passes. Muslims
should be able to bring justice into the world with own values, with own
material possibilities and with the idealistically active youth. And
preparing such a system will inshaallah lead to the awaited return of
the 12th Imam, who will establish the Salawat-Economy. And this will
lead to lots of Salawat among all believers, and all mankind will
benefit from it and will love to say Salawat: Allahumma salli ala
Muhammad wa aali Muhammad.


