One Creator
===========

**Wilson**: You have previously stated that the oneness of God (Inquiry
2) is the most emphasized theme in the Holy Qur'an; that Islam, for this
reason, is called “Deen Al-Tawhid” (the religion of the belief in the
oneness of God); and that professing His oneness is the first phrase in
the Declaration of the Faith:

*“I bear witness that there is no god but the Almighty God and that
Muhammad is a messenger of God.”*

Does Islam offer any evidence on this important principle?

**Chirri**: The Holy Qur'an cites the relationship among the sections of
the universe as evidence on the unity of its Creator. It advises us to
look at the order which exists in the universe, and the fact that such
an order could not exist if there were more than One Creator. More than
one administration for the universe is like more than one administration
for one city, state, or country. It produces confusion and disorder .

In the Holy Qur’an:

***“If there were in them (the heavens and the Earth) gods besides the
Almighty God, they would have been in a state of disorder. Glory be to
Him. He is above what they describe. ” 21 :22***

*“And know, my son,”* the Imam Ali, son of Abu Talib, said to his son
Al-Hasan, *“that if your Lord has a partner, the messengers of His
partner would have come to you. But He is only One God, alone without
partner. ”*[^1]

**Wilson**: What is the view of Islam on the doctrine of the Trinity?

**Chirri**: Islam emphatically denies this doctrine. The Holy Qur'an
declares:

***“Say: God is One on Whom all depend. He did not beget, nor was He
begotten, and none is equal to Him.” 112:1-4***

***“And they say the Beneficent has taken to Himself a son. Certainly
you make an abominable assertion. The heavens may almost burst, and the
Earth cleave asunder, and the mountains fall down in pieces, that they
ascribe a son to the Beneficent. And it is not worthy of the Beneficent
that He should take to Himself a son.” 19:88-92***

**Wilson**: Why does Islam deny so emphatically the doctrine of the
Trinity?

**Chirri**: Islam denies Trinity because parenthood of God to any living
or non-living being is inconceivable in bodily terms and degrading to
the concept of God. He is neither limited nor a body, and He encompasses
the whole universe. He does not have a mate in order to have a child as
any other living being does.

His spiritual parenthood to any soul or spirit is also inconceivable if
it means other than being the Creator of that soul or spirit. There is
no conceivable relation between God and any other being other than the
relation between the Creator and His creature. *Otherwise, the other
being will be independent from God, and he will be His partner.*

Now, if the ascribed son is united with God, the case will be as if I
state that my son and I are one. If such a statement were true, I would
be the father of myself, because I am my own son. And my son would be
the son of himself, because he is I. Thus, God would be the father of
Himself, and His son would be the son of himself.

God is not, and cannot be, the father of any living or non-living being
if fatherhood is used for its true meaning. If the word is used in its
figurative sense, to mean that God is as compassionate to His living
creature as a father, then He will not only be the father of one person
but the father of all mankind. And this is what can be understood from
the Christian prayer, *“Our father, Thou art in* *Heaven…”* But even
this figurative usage of the word is repugnant to Islam because it is
misleading and confusing to the people. Muslims, therefore, do not use
it.

**Wilson**: Your statement indicates that the Muslims do not believe in
the divinity of Jesus. Do you have any clear evidence against his
divinity?

**Chirri**: You do not need to disprove the divinity of Jesus or
Muhammad or any other human being. But if you claim the divinity of
anyone besides God, you need to prove your claim. If someone claims that
you are an angel, he has to prove it. I do not need to prove that you
are a man because you appear as a man and have all the attributes of a
man. The one who claims that you are an angel is supposed to prove what
he claims, because his claim is contrary to the common sense and to what
appears as the actual fact.

When a person says that Jesus or Muhammad is a man, and not a God, he
agrees with the accepted definition. Jesus lived like a man, looked like
a man, slept as a man, ate as a man, and was persecuted like one. None
of these facts need proof. This is not the case with the one who claims
his divinity. His claim is opposed to the common knowledge. Therefore,
he, and no one else, has to provide the evidence for his claim.

Although the Muslims are not supposed to provide any evidence for the
denial of the divinity of Jesus, they can present more than one
evidence:

1. Jesus was a worshipper. Of course, he worshipped God, not himself.
This proves that he was not a god but a very humble servant of God.

2. According to three of the gospels, the last words Jesus uttered were:
“My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken me?” A person who has a God is
not a God.

3. God is Ever-Living, but Jesus is mortal; God is the Almighty, but
Jesus was persecuted.

**Wilson**: Why cannot we view Jesus as a god from his spiritual side
and a mortal human from his bodily side?

**Chirri**: Having two sides, spirit and body, is not the exclusive
property of Jesus, because every human being has these two sides. You
have both spirit and body, and so do I. And neither of our spirits is
mortal, since our spirits will continue to live after our death. But
this does not make either of us a god, and so is the case with Jesus.

**Wilson**: But Jesus is not like us. He, according to the Qur'an and
the Bible, was born from a virgin mother without a father. Does not this
mean that he is more than a human being?

**Chirri**: Being born from a mother without a father does not make
Jesus more than a human being. Adam was created without father and
mother, and that did not make him more than a human. From the Holy
Qur'an:

***“Certainly the status of Jesus in the eyes of God is like the status
of Adam. He created him from dust. He said to him: ‘Be’, and so he was.”
3:59***

Neither Jesus nor Adam is a god because neither of them is the Creator
of the universe.

**Wilson**: How do we know that he was not the Creator of the universe?

**Chirri**: The scientists say that the stars are more than four billion
years old, and Jesus was born less than two thousand years ago. How can
such an old universe be created by such a young creator?

**Wilson**: You are entirely right, and I think you have made the fact
clear enough to convince any fair-minded person. Actually, the facts
which you have mentioned are well known to everyone. It is amazing how
people lose sight of them. I think that they do so because they are
taught the divinity of Jesus since childhood. This teaching is repeated
so much at home and in church that it remains in the children's minds;
and when they grow up, it grows as a part of their thinking. They do not
question it because it is taken for granted.

From what has been advanced, it has become clear to me that the
uncompromising view of Islam on the oneness of God is the most
reasonable. Therefore, I bear witness that there is no God but the
Almighty God, alone without a partner, associate, or son.

[^1]: Nahjul Balagha, Part 3, p. 44


