A Light on the History of the Prophethood
=========================================

**Wilson**: The history of the monotheistic religions shows that all
their prophets came from the Semitic race and that most of them came
from the descendants of the Prophet Abraham, either from the children of
Isaac or from the children of Ishmael. This might be construed as a
privilege by which the Israelites and the Ishmaelites were distinguished
from the rest of mankind. But it is very difficult to believe that God
would present only these two communities with the heavenly message. God
is the Lord of all nations and His message should have been revealed to
other nations as well. If the history of religion is correct, there must
be some reason for confining the prophethood to these two communities.

**Chirri**: The history of the human race shows us that the human
understanding, in the early times, was incapable of rising above the
sensuous surroundings, or of conceiving the high and universal ideas. As
for human interactions, the individual was limited to love of family and
friendship of relatives. All other tribes were strange or gentile to
him. National and humane concepts rarely took place in his thinking.

However, some gifted individuals had lived among those people and were
capable of profound understanding and rising above the sensuous
limitation and ready to take the responsibility of guiding and teaching.
Knowing their unusual capacities, the Most Benevolent revealed to them
the truth and commissioned them with the hardest task, the guidance of
humanity.

These individuals were chosen for their own merits, not for their
relation to a particular race or community. As expected, these
individuals were confronted with insurmountable difficulties. People
were not ready to follow or accept their teachings, and most of them
were either like Noah who gained a very small number of followers, or
like Abraham, who lived almost as a prophet without followers.

As society refused to change, it is presumed that a prophet like Abraham
was required to try to secure the continuity of his religion through his
children, Ishmael and Isaac, who faithfully followed the faith of their
father and conveyed it to their children. The religious teaching
continued to spread narrowly through a tribal line. Centuries elapsed,
and the faith neither gained followers from outside, nor was it believed
by all the descendants of Abraham.

The heavenly purpose, however, was not to confine the faith within
tribal or national borders. The Most Merciful and Compassionate planned
to spread the faith throughout the world and to show all mankind the
right path. The Almighty administers the universe through the usual and
natural courses and subjects all the events of the world to the law of
cause and effect. He preserved the revealed faith and kept it alive,
though at a standstill, through a small community, which was blessed by
inheriting that faith from its holy father. He caused that faith to
inflame and spread when that community grew and acquired a power
adequate to the great task of spreading the faith.

That small community was destined to grow through two lines, the
Ishmaelite and the Israelite. Both of them were blessed and both were
tested and commissioned with the great task of preserving and spreading
the faith, but the two tests were not simultaneous. Though Ishmael was
the first son of Abraham and acquired a heritage of faith and blessing
like that of his brother Isaac, God put off the test of his descendants
for many centuries. He was preparing them to continue the mission which
the descendants of Isaac had started.

To begin with the line of Isaac, the Almighty God established a covenant
with him. From the Old Testament:

**“As for Ishmael, I have heard you; behold, I will bless him and make
him fruitful and multiply him exceedingly; he shall be the father of
twelve princes, and I will make him a great nation. But, I will
establish my covenant with Isaac, whom Sarah shall bear to you at this
season next year.” Genesis, Chapter 21.**

**Wilson**: According to your statement, the heavenly purpose was not to
confine the faith to one or two communities or nations but to spread the
true faith throughout the world and to introduce the heavenly principles
to all nations. This, however, does not seem to be the case. The Old
Testament repeatedly calls the Israelites God's chosen people. It calls
the other people gentiles. This shows that the Israelites were the main
concern of the heavenly message.

**Chirri**: With the covenant which was established between God and
Isaac, the children of Israel were supposed to embrace and follow
sincerely the heavenly instructions and to lead the rest of the nations
to the path of God. But the Israelites did not live up to this
expectation. Only a small minority adhered to the heavenly teaching and
that minority was incapable of conceiving the faith as universal or
humane. As a result, the successive prophets of Israel spoke to their
people according to their understanding. Under the circumstances, the
faith was characterized as tribal or national; God is God of Israel, and
the Israelites are His chosen people. The prophets had endeavored to
make the Hebrew community adhere to the faith sincerely. All the
prophets of Israel were concerned mainly with that community, and none
of the gentile nations concerned them. Even the great Jesus, according
to Matthew, had the same attitude:

“Then Jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon.
And, behold, a woman of Cana-an came out of the same coasts. And cried
unto him, saying, have mercy on me, O Lord, thou the son of David; my
daughter is grievously vexed with a devil… But he answered and said, I
am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Then came
she and worshipped him, saying, Lord, help me. But he answered and said,
it is not meet to take the children's bread and to cast it to dogs.”
Matthew, Chapter 15

**Wilson**: The Bible informs us that God had ordered Abraham to harken
to Sarah, his wife, and to cast Ishmael in the desert of Paran, where
there was neither food nor water. This does not only seem to be
unmerciful, but also suggests that God did not have any purpose in
Ishmael and his children.

**Chirri**: The preparation of the Ishmaelites had been started since
God advised His obedient servant Abraham to hearken to his wife, Sarah,
by taking Ishmael and his mother Hagar away to the wilderness of Paran.
The readers of the Old Testament are entitled to wonder about the wisdom
of such advice which seems to be very merciless and ruthless. But when
we ponder on the subsequent events which took place in history, we may
understand the wisdom.

The task of spreading a true religion is the task of transforming the
characters of the individuals and changing the lives of the nations. The
first thing this task encounters is a disagreement between the teacher
of the new ideology and those whom he attempts to influence. Such an
attempt usually meets resistance, and it is not unusual for this
resistance to lead to an armed conflict. In such a case, the freedom to
believe, preach, and practice is threatened, and can be secured and
protected only when the camp of the new ideology is ready to accept the
challenge and meet violence with violence. The mission, then, needs a
heavenly leader supported by a strong, brave and obedient community
which is ready to make any sacrifice without hesitation.

From all nations of the Middle East, the Arab nation, for many
centuries, had been distinguished and, therefore, qualified for such a
performance. The Arabian Peninsula had remained inaccessible to invaders
and unsubdued by any foreign power. The individual Arab had enjoyed a
freedom rarely checked by rulers. He became self-confident, ready to
protect himself and his freedom by his own power and to translate his
will into action. A nation composed of such individuals is qualified to
carry a great mission; and when it is inspired by a heavenly leader, it
would be capable of performing wonders.

To impart the religion of Abraham to that strong and brave nation and to
prepare that nation for its great destiny, the Almighty advised His
servant Abraham to hearken to his wife, Sarah, by sending his son
Ishmael away so he may dwell among the Arabs. Through intermarriage, the
descendants of Ishmael were to be united with the Arabs and become a
great nation that was destined to bear the great mission in the future .

**“And God heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of God called to
Hagar out of heaven, and said unto her: What aileth thee, Hagar? Fear
not; for God hath heard the voice of the lad where he is. Arise, lift up
the lad, and hold him into thine hand; for I will make him a great
nation. And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water; and she
went, and filled the bottle with water, and gave the lad drink. And God
was with the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the wilderness…and he dwelt
in the wilderness of Paran.” Genesis, Chapter 21.**

By placing Ishmael in the Arabian Peninsula, Abraham had planted the
seed of his faith in the Arabian soil. To make the seed grow and the
faith continue, he laid the foundation of the future by raising the
foundation of the Sacred House, the Kaabah, in the midst of Arabia, as
the first temple of God in the world. As God foretold Abraham and as
Abraham expected, the House attracted the dwellers of Arabia and became
the holy center of the country. The holy city of Mecca later was
established around it, and since then the call of Abraham is annually
responded to by a large number of pilgrims who visit the Sacred House
and worship God at His temple. From the Holy Qur'an:

***“And when We pointed to Abraham the place of the House, saying:***
***‘Associate naught with Me, and purify My House for those who make
circuits and stand to pray and bow and prostrate themselves.’*** ***And
proclaim to men the pilgrimage; they will come to thee on foot and every
lean camel, coming from every remote path; that they may witness
benefits (provided) for them, and mention the name of God on appointed
days over what He has given them of the cattle quadrupeds; then eat of
them and feed the distressed one, the needy.” 22:26-28***

It was heart-rending to Abraham, to settle his first son in the desert
of Arabia where there is neither fruit nor water nor town. But he had
two goals to accomplish, and each was great enough to make Abraham
willing to offer such a sacrifice and to do his utmost.

The first of the two goals was immediate, namely: to establish the
Sacred House and to assign to that mosque his son as a guardian who
would worship God, conduct the service according to the true religion of
God, and teach his children and the people of the country the right
principles. By this, Abraham not only widened the scope of his faith but
also assured the continuity of that faith. Should the line of Isaac fail
in its religious task, the faith may continue through the children of
Ishmael in Arabia. From the Holy Qur'an:

***“My Lord, I have settled a part of my offspring in a valley
unproductive of fruit near Thy Sacred House, Our Lord, that they may
keep up prayer; so make the hearts of some people yearn towards them,
and provide them with fruits; haply they may be grateful.” 14:37***

We do not know the extent of growth of Abraham's faith on the soil of
Arabia. History does not inform us clearly on the religious situation in
Arabia during the long period which extends from the time of Abraham to
the end of the fifth century of the Christian era. In the sixth century
we find the majority of the Arabs idolaters. But in spite of this, we
find, at the same time, some rites and practices which could be
attributed only to the teaching of Abraham. Among these are the
pilgrimage to the Sacred House in Mecca and the circumcision which was
performed and practiced by all the non-Christian tribes of Arabia. Along
with these rites and practices, we find a small minority among the
Arabs, believing in God, worshipping Him, and rejecting idols.

The second goal for Abraham was to prepare the children of Ishmael and
the nation with which they were united, for the distant and glorious
future – when the Arabic-speaking people would be privileged and honored
to have the Final Prophet among them; when they would be ready to
receive his great message and spread the word of God throughout the
world. From the Qur'an:

***“And when Abraham and Ishmael raised the foundations of the House
(with this prayer):*** ***‘Our Lord, accept (this service) from us;
surely Thou art the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing. Our Lord, and make us
both submissive to Thee, and (raise) from our offspring, a nation
submissive to Thee, and show us our way of devotion and turn to us
(mercifully); surely Thou art the oft-returning (to mercy) the Merciful.
Our Lord, and raise up in them a messenger from among them who shall
recite to them Thy messages and teach them the Book and the Wisdom, and
purify them. Surely Thou art the Mighty, the Wise.’” 2:127-129***

The prayer of the Prophet Abraham was graciously answered in the seventh
century AD. The anticipated Prophet had arrived with an unprecedented
method of presentation which is capable of supporting the truth,
securing the needed freedoms and opening the way for the heavenly
doctrines. It is the method of using logic as the main means for
convincing and displaying strength in the face of anyone who threatened
the sacred freedoms.

Yes, in the seventh century, the world was blessed by the advent of the
Final and Universal Prophet Muhammad, who rose from Mecca, the center of
Arabia, to shine over the East and the West.


