More Evidence on His Prophethood: Predictions Dealing with the Future of the Qur'an
===================================================================================

**Wilson**: With the appreciation of the Arabic-speaking people and
their respect for the Qur'an, I am inclined to believe in its
superiority. As a matter of fact, history does not record any successful
attempt by any individual or group to match the Qur'an. We know that the
Arabic-speaking people were not all Muslims at any time. We know also
that the Arabs at the time of Muhammad were very skillful in oratory,
and we know that the majority of them were violently opposed to Islam.
The Qur'an challenged them and the future generations to match it, but
it seems that the opponents of Islam did not accept that challenge at
any time.

The superiority of the Qur'an is a fact and beyond any reasonable doubt.
But I would like to know if the Qur'an has anything, besides its
superiority and beautiful style, that supports its being a true
revelation of God and that Muhammad is truly His prophet.

**Chirri**: There are in the contents of the Qur'an more than one
prediction dealing with the future, and those predictions are fulfilled.
Knowledge of the future is possible only to God and unavailable to any
human being.

Man has advanced so far in science and technology to a stage undreamed
of before. With all his advancements in knowledge, he is still unable to
foresee the future. The most civilized nations wage wars against each
other, and none of them is assured of victory. Should the knowledge of
the future be available to them, they would have avoided destructive
wars. A nation that foresees its defeat would refrain from entering any
war that will be concluded by its defeat .

To recognize the human inability of foreseeing the future, we need only
to remember our election campaigns. In spite of all the information
which is obtained through our modern media and scientific methods, none
of the candidates is sure of his victory or defeat until the votes are
counted .  
 There is a great deal of information contained in the Holy Qur'an
dealing with the future which could not be humanly predicted. Those
predictions were fulfilled, and their fulfillment indicates that the
Qur'an is a true Divine revelation and that Muhammad is a true messenger
of God.

Some of those prophecies deal with the future of the Holy Qur'an itself.
Of these prophecies are the following:

1. ***“Certainly We have revealed the Reminder (the Qur'an), and we
shall preserve it.” 15:9***

This verse informs us that the Qur'an shall not perish. It shall not
disappear from this world, and it will last and continue forever.  
 This prediction was actually the opposite of what was humanly expected.
The Qur'an was introduced by a prophet who was unschooled and unable to
read or write. He introduced it in a language of an illiterate nation.
The Arabs at the time of the Prophet did not have a hundred readers in a
million. In addition to this, the overwhelming majority of that nation
was standing against the Prophet and his book, and so was the rest of
the world. Under these circumstances, such a book was expected to perish
and disappear. The chances of its continuity for so many generations
were very slim.

2. The following verse explains:

***“It (the Qur'an) is an invincible book. Falsehood does not invade it
neither from before it nor from behind it, a revelation from a Mighty,
Praised One.” 41:41-42***

This verse informs the world that the Qur'an will not be interpolated by
words that had been said before the time of its revelation nor by words
that will be said after the time of its revelation. It will be pure and
will continue so forever.

This, also, was a prediction contrary to what was humanly expected. A
book, introduced under the circumstances which we advanced, could not be
humanly expected to stay pure without any interpolation.

There was no printing-machine at the time of revelation, nor such a
machine was invented until several centuries after Muhammad.

History shows us that no holy book had remained pure without
interpolation. The holy books had undergone many changes in many
centuries. The Qur'an was expected not to be exceptional.

The two prophecies had been entirely fulfilled. The fulfillment of the
first is self-evident: The Holy Qur'an did not perish. It lived and
remains a highly living book. Actually the life of the Qur'an is so rich
that it may be the most recited book in the world. Every Muslim is
expected to pray five times a day, and each prayer includes a recital
from the Holy Qur'an. Hundreds of millions of Muslims perform their
daily prayers, and hundreds of millions of times the Qur'an is daily
recited.

The fulfillment of the second prophecy is quite obvious. The Holy Qur'an
remained unchanged. No human word was inserted into it. Even the critics
of Islam testify for the remarkable purity of the text of this great
book. The words of the Qur'an which we read now are exactly the same
words which were recited by the Prophet Muhammad himself, without
subtraction or addition.

3. The Holy Qur'an contains many statements by which the opponents of
Islam were invited to produce any Arabic discourse that would compare to
the Qur'anic discourse. One of these statements is the following:

***“Say: If all men…. will unanimously determine to challenge the
Qur'an, they will not produce its equal, even if they combine their
efforts.” 17:88***

This statement not only challenges mankind to compose speeches and
discourses comparable to the Qur'an, but also predicts clearly that any
such attempt will fail, and the Holy Qur'an will remain superior to all
other Arabic discourses.

This statement is very far reaching. It tells that the Holy Qur'an will
not be equalled, neither at the present nor in the future. Such a
statement is a prediction in a very unexpected direction. We know that
the human talent and skill are always evolving and improving. This is
true in any field. A scientific invention, regardless of its
remarkability, is always expected to evolve and improve through
additional knowledge and technology. The first plane that took off the
ground, no doubt, was very remarkable, but it cannot compare to any of
the planes of today.

Let us assume that the inventor of that first aircraft had predicted
that his plane will not be equalled in the future. Such a prediction
would be very absurd and will be disproved within one decade because it
is opposed to the natural course. Muhammad recited this statement which
is contrary to the natural course. He uttered these words about fourteen
centuries ago, but his statement is still standing, and the events of
the world could not disprove it. On the contrary, the statement now
appears to be more meaningful than ever before. The older the prophecy
becomes, the more truthful it will appear.

There is another amazing point in this prophecy. It is conceivable to
challenge a certain class of people in a field which is not accessible
to everyone, such as a special scientific field. We may conceive a
gifted scientist, discovering a scientific secret not accessible to any
other expert in that field. If such a scientist claims a permanent
superiority in his invention, he would be challenging just a limited
number of scientists.

With the Qur'an the case is different: There is nothing special in it;
its discourse is composed of words and sentences with orders known, not
only to a limited number of experts, but to all Arabic-speaking people.
There isn't any secret that is hidden from the rest of the people. All
of it is known. The challenge, therefore, is not directed to a limited
number of people; it is directed to the millions in every generation.
With such a universal challenge, in no field of specialization, the
failure to produce a match to it is much more remarkable than the
failure of a few experts in a field of specialization.

This would be more amazing when we remember that no scientific secret or
discovery has remained unmatchable. The highest secret in this century
was the secret of the atomic bomb. It was the most important discovery
or invention in this century. In spite of its great importance, it could
not be kept exclusive for the country which produced it. Other countries
tried to produce the same and succeeded.

Why did the Holy Qur'an remain superior and beyond any other Arabic
discourse? How did mankind refuse to accept the challenge? Either the
Qur'an is truly superior and beyond the reach of any talented individual
or group in any generation (and this means that it is a miraculous
book), or it is within the reach of the people, but God miraculously
prevented mankind from producing a similar discourse. In either case,
the prophecy has been fulfilled, and the Qur'an is still standing
unequalled.


