More Evidence: Forecasting the Future of Islam
==============================================

**Wilson**: From reading the history of Islam, it seems that the future
of the new faith and of its followers was very doubtful at the time of
the revelation. The success of Islam afterwards and the growth of the
numbers of its followers were unexpected. I often wondered if the
unexpected success and rapid growth of Islam were foreseen by the
Prophet and forecast by the Qur'an.
The forecast of this would be an impressive evidence on the
truthfulness of Muhammad, because the future of the whole faith and its
followers seemed to be very dark at the time of revelation.

**Chirri**: The Holy Qur'an contains definite prophecies dealing with
the future of Islam and its followers.

One of those prophecies deals with the future of the Muslims. It assures
the Muslims of a future religious freedom and promises them a mighty
state:

***“God has promised those of you who believe (in Islam) and do good
that He will surely make them rulers in the Earth, as He made those
before them rulers, and that He will surely establish for them their
religion, which He has chosen for them, and that He will surely give
them the feeling of security in exchange of their fear, so they will
worship Me, not associating aught with Me; and whoever is ungrateful
after this, they are the transgressors.” 24:55***

When this prophecy was revealed, the followers of Islam were a very
small minority of the inhabitants of Al-Hijaz. It was revealed,
approximately, in the fifth year after the Hijrah when the Muslims were
a few thousands, bitterly antagonized by all the inhabitants of Hijaz
and the rest of the Arabian Peninsula. None of the Muslims at that time
had a feeling of security, nor were they able to practice their religion
freely. There was nothing indicating that such a hated and bitterly
fought minority would survive, nor was the future of this new religion
humanly predictable.

In spite of all these facts, the prophecy was revealed in a definite and
unconditional form.

More prophecies are contained in the following verses which predict the
triumph of Islam and the defeat of its opponents.

***“They desire to put out the light of God with their mouths, but God
will perfect His light, though the disbelievers may be averse.” 9:32;
61:8***

***“He is the One Who sent His Messenger with the guidance and the true
religion, to make it outweigh all other religions though the polytheists
may be averse.” 9:33; 61:9 and 48:28.***

The first verse predicts that the opponents of Islam will not succeed in
putting out the light of God, nor will their attacks hinder its growth.
God will make His light, Islam, perfect, though its opponents will
oppose it strongly. They may argue, fight, assail and mobilize all their
intellectual and material forces, determining to revoke Islam, but all
that will not extinguish its light, nor will that prevent it from
becoming full.

Both verses predict definitely and unconditionally the victory of Islam
over its opponents.

When this prophecy was revealed, the small Muslim community was
defending itself against the Polytheists and other hostile elements in
Arabia. Afterwards it had to defend itself against the Persian and
Byzantine Empires.

Each of these powers was incomparably greater and richer than the Muslim
state. The Persian and Byzantine Empires were the outstanding forces in
the world. To defeat them both is to defeat all considerable forces in
the world and to become the world's superior power. This would fulfill
completely the meaning of the prophecy, but this was seemingly
impossible. We always expect the defeat of any single and relatively
weak army when forced to combat on more than one field more than one
superior power. This becomes clear when we remember that the mighty
German army had been defeated twice in the twentieth century, only
because it was fought by stronger allies on more than one front.

It may be the most remarkable military event in history, that the
inhabitants of Madina and Mecca, whose number did not exceed a few
thousands, could defend themselves, after the death of the great
Prophet, against the attacks of the apostate Arabs. With the exception
of the Muslims of these two cities, almost all the Arab nation had
apostatized after the death of the Prophet.

The Muslim state was compelled, afterwards, to fight against the
Byzantine and Persian Empires. These two great empires fought the
Muslims simultaneously on two different fronts. The scanty Muslim forces
were forced to divide themselves in order to maintain the defense. The
result was a wondrous military phenomenon.

The two great powers were vanquished and Persia was completely defeated.
Within one hundred years, the vast area extending from the Atlantic
Ocean to India, came under the rule of Islam. Those poor and helpless
people, at the time of the revelation of this prophecy, suddenly became
the superior power of the world. The Prophet, relying on the heavenly
information, had forecast this triumph which took place after his death.
Speaking to Odey, son of Hatam (a Christian chief who joined the new
faith afterwards), the Prophet Muhammad uttered the following:

***“…Thou dost not incline to Islamism,” continued Muhammad, “because
thou seest we are poor. The time is at hand when true believers will
have more wealth than they know how to manage. Perhaps thou art deterred
by seeing the small number of the Muslims in comparison to the number of
their enemies. By God, in a little while, a Muslim woman will be able to
make a pilgrimage on her camel, alone and fearless, from Kadesia (Iraqi
area) to God's temple at Mecca. Thou thinkest, probably, that the might
is in the hands of the unbelievers; know that the time is not far off
when we will plant our standard on the white castles of Babylon.”***[^1]

[^1]: Life of Muhammad by Washington Irving, chapter 32.


