Prediction of a Christian Triumph
=================================

**Wilson**: I often wondered about some Qur'anic verses which are
contained in chapter 30. The verses deal with the future of the Romans
and predict their triumph over their opponents:

***“The Romans are vanquished in the nearby land, and they, after their
defeat, will gain victory within nine years. God's is the command before
and after. And on that day, the believers will rejoice for God's help.
He helps whom He pleases, and He is the Mighty, the Merciful. (It is)
God's promise. God will not fail in His promise, but most people know
not.” 30:1-6***

I like to hear your comment on these verses which seem to contain a very
definite prophecy, as I would like to know if that prophecy has been
fulfilled.

**Chirri**: In the first decade of the seventh century, a war between
the two great powers of the time, the Persian and Byzantine Empires was
started. The war continued for more than twenty years, and the Persians
were mostly victorious. The *Encyclopaedia Britannica* describes the
situation:

“The Persian armies plundered Syria and Asia Minor, and in 608 advanced
to Chaledon. In 613 and 614, Damascus and Jerusalem were taken by the
General Shahaboraz, and the Holy Cross was carried away in the triumph.
Soon after, even Egypt was conquered. The Romans (the people of the
Byzantine Empire) could offer but little resistance, as they were torn
by internal dissensions and pressed by the Avars and Slavs. ”

The verses from the Qur'an cited were revealed in the sixth or seventh
year after the first revelation came to Muhammad. (This means that these
verses were revealed in 615 or 616.) The prophecy contained therein is
definite and unconditional. It states that the vanquished Romans will
obtain a decisive triumph over the victorious Persians within nine years
from this revelation.

Once again the prophecy was made in a direction contrary to the expected
outcome of the conflict. It was to be expected that the Romans would be
defeated completely, since the Persian forces had already reached the
very gates of Constantinople. At that time even the Roman leaders had
little hope of eventual victory.

The Roman leaders, with all their military skill and information about
that war, could not anticipate their victory. Clear information was
unavailable to Muhammad because radio, television, press and efficient
postal system did not yet exist. Muhammad, living in Mecca and very far
from Constantinople, made the prediction of triumph within a stated
time.

The prophecy was fulfilled within nine years after it had been made.
Heraclius, the Roman Emperor, advanced to Northern Media, where he
destroyed the great fire temple of Gondzak; then in 623 he recaptured
all of the lost ground.

**Wilson**: The above quoted verses indicate that the Muslims were very
concerned for the defeat of the Romans at the hand of the Persians. The
prophecy seems to have been revealed as a condolence to the Muslims,
since it states that the believers in Islam will rejoice for the victory
of the Romans.  
 This actually announces a true love on the part of the Muslims towards
the Christians.

**Chirri**: Your statement is true. The Muslims actually were very
saddened by the news of the defeat of the Christians at that time. The
Christians are followers of the scriptures, and the Muslims are
followers of the new scripture, the Qur'an. Both share many beliefs. The
Muslims, therefore, felt that there is a close bond between them and the
Christians. They felt that the Christians are their brothers in
religion.

The news of the defeat of the Romans was a good tiding to the
idol-worshippers. They rejoiced at the defeat of the Christians and
classed them with the Muslims, their enemies, because both Muslims and
Christians are followers of the scriptures and opposed to
idol-worshipping.

This relation between the Muslims and the Christians was only natural.
Had the Christians accepted Muhammad and received his truth with open
hearts, as the Muslims accepted the truth of Jesus, the brotherly
relation could have continued between the followers of the two faiths.
Unfortunately, the Christians refused to recognize the prophethood of
Muhammad and to accept his truth. This and the subsequent events which
took place after the death of the Prophet changed the natural atmosphere
between the Muslims and Christians.


