More Evidence: Revealing Unknown Facts
======================================

**Wilson**: Does the Holy Qur'an contain any information dealing with
facts known to our scientific age but unknown to the world at the time
of Muhammad? The existence of this type of information, if any, would be
additional evidence on the prophethood of Muhammad. It is impossible for
an unschooled person such as Muhammad, who lived in the seventh century,
to know what would be discovered by modern scientists. Any information
of this sort would be very convincing evidence on the soundness of the
message of Islam.

**Chirri**: The reader of the Qur'an may find more than one reference
dealing with certain facts, some of them have been discovered recently,
and some of them are still in the stage of anticipation.
Modern science is looking now, though without certainty, for the time
when we will find living beings on some other planets. The scientists of
today are not sure of the existence of any biological life on planets
other than ours, but to them this is highly probable.

As a matter of fact, one of the Russian scientists claimed that he
received signals from outer space, and he thought that the source of
those signals is some living being located on a different planet. The
scientist may be able in the near or remote future to find and meet
other living beings on planets other than ours.

What we are hoping to discover in our scientific age was forecast over
thirteen centuries ago in the Holy Qur'an:

***“And of His signs is the creation of the Heavens and the Earth and
what He has spread forth in both of them of walking biological beings,
and He is All-Powerful to gather them together, when He wills.” 42:29***

The verse informs us of the existence of biological living beings who
walk on their feet in the heavens and the earth, and that it is possible
for the living beings who are stationed on our planet to join the ones
who are stationed in the heavens.

One of the scientific discoveries of our modern age is the existence of
sex in the plants as well as in the animal kingdom. The entire pollen
grain, the scientists say, is composed of cells which have the reduced
number of chromosomes. Two of these cells are male cells. To function in
reproduction, the pollen must fall on the stigma of some flower and
develop a tube down through the stigma and other tissues until it
reaches the egg. The two male cells pass down through this tube, usually
near its growing tip. One of them fertilizes the egg, and from the
combined cells, an embryo develops. The other male cell unites usually
with two other cells near the egg, in the middle of the embryo sac, and
the triple product forms the nutritive part of the seed.

The existence of male and female in plants was entirely unknown before
the advance of modern science. But the Holy Qur'an clearly states the
existence of sex in the plant kingdom:

***“Glory be to the One Who created all pairs of males and females of
what the Earth grows and of themselves and of what they know not.”
36:36***

At the time of the Prophet Muhammad, no one had any knowledge about the
conditions of outer space. People used to think that the more man
ascends to the sky, the more he may find air and the more he would be
able to breathe. Now we know that outer space does not contain air, and
that if a person ascends into the sky, he may suffocate through lack of
oxygen.

The Holy Qur'an, however, has a clear indication of this fact:

***“So whomsoever God chooses to guide, He opens his heart for Islam,
and whomsoever He chooses to leave in error, He makes his chest close
and narrow as if he is ascending in the sky. Thus, does God lay penalty
on those who do not believe.” 6:125***

The narrowness of the chest of a person who ascends in the sky means his
incapability of breathing which was contrary to the prevalent concept
about outer space at the time of Muhammad.


