The Bible Testifies for Muhammad
================================

**Wilson**: The evidence which has been discussed is very convincing and
offers a great support to the prophethood of Muhammad. The superiority
of the Qur'an itself is primary evidence of this truth and so are the
many quoted prophecies. I wonder if the Old and the New Testaments
contain any prophecy foretelling the advent of the Prophet Muhammad.

**Chirri**: There is in the Bible more than one statement which indicate
the expectation of the Prophet Muhammad. He is not mentioned by name,
but the descriptions seem to fit only Muhammad.
We find in the Deuteronomy book the following statement:

**“I will raise up for them (the Israelites) a prophet like you from
among their brethren; and I will put My words in his mouth, and he shall
speak to them all that I command him. And whoever will not give heed to
My words which he shall speak in My name, I, Myself, will require it of
him.” 18:18-19**

This statement promises that God will raise up a prophet from among the
brethren of the Israelites; that that prophet will be like Moses
himself; that God will put His own words in the mouth of that prophet;
and that that prophet will speak those words in the name of God Who put
them in his mouth.

Thus, the expected prophet has three descriptions, none of them is
applicable but to the Prophet Muhammad:

1. The promised prophet will be from the brethren of the Israelites. The
Israelites are related only to the Arabs. There are no people in the
world that may be called the brethren of the Israelites except the
Arabs, because the Israelites are the descendants of Isaac, and the
Arabs are the descendants of Ishmael, the older brother of Isaac.

2. That prophet will be like Moses. Moses was a prophet of a new
dispensation, and he was a secular as well as a spiritual leader to his
people. This description fits only Muhammad among all the prophets who
came after Moses. None of those prophets, including Jesus, was sent with
new rules and dispensations. Jesus followed the dispensations of Moses
and did not introduce new religious laws. Nor was he a secular leader to
the Israelites. In addition to this, all those prophets, except
Muhammad, came from the Israelites themselves and not from their
brethren.

3. The statement described the promised prophet as a prophet who will
not speak of his own. The very words of God will be put in his mouth.

No prophet except Muhammad has claimed that his book contains the very
words of God. Moses himself received the revelation, but he conveyed the
heavenly message by his own words. What we read in the five books of
Moses is considered to be the words of Moses, not the very words of God.

All the books of which the Old Testament is composed were written and
worded by human writers, and so are the four gospels. Jesus spoke the
truth which he received, but he spoke in his own words. The Bible, at
best, is considered a dialogue between God and man.

Only the Qur'an contains the words which Muhammad recited as the very
direct words of God. Muhammad never claimed any word in the Qur'an. He
recited the Qur'anic words as the words of God who put them in the mouth
of Muhammad.

Thus, the descriptions seem to fit only Muhammad, and no one else.

Another statement, indicating the anticipation of Muhammad, is found in
the same Deuteronomy book:

**“This is the blessing with which Moses the man of God blessed the
children of Israel before his death. He said: The Lord came from Sinai,
and dawned from Seir upon us; He shone forth from Mount Paran, He came
from the ten thousands of holy ones with flaming fire at His right
hand.” Deuteronomy 33**

The Lord's coming means the coming of His revelation. Moses spoke of
God's manifestation to three prophets at three places: The manifestation
in Sinai which represents the prophethood of Moses himself.

The other manifestation is the revelation which was received at Seir.
This represents the revelation which was received by Jesus because Seir
is located in the land of Jordan.

The third manifestation is the light of God which shone from the Mount
of Paran. This represents the prophethood of Muhammad. The Mount of
Paran is located in the country of Hijaz, the country in which Muhammad
was born and lived. The following words give more indications to this
fact:

**“He came from the ten thousands of holy ones, with flaming fire at His
right hand. ” Deuteronomy 33,2**

Muhammad is the Prophet who entered Mecca, the capital of Hijaz, heading
an army of ten thousand Muslims by which he subdued the idol-worshippers
of Mecca.

The New Testament, also, contains some clear anticipation of the advent
of Muhammad:

**“Jesus said unto them (the Israelites), did ye never read in the
scriptures, the stone which the builders rejected, the same is become
the head of the corner: This is the Lord's doing, and it is marvelous in
our eyes. Therefore say I unto you, the kingdom of God shall be taken
from you and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. And
whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken; but on whomsoever it
shall fall, it will grind him to powder.” Matthew 21:42-44**

The statement is a prophecy informing the Jews that the kingdom of God
shall be taken from them, and that it will be given to another nation.
No other nation after Jesus had claimed a heavenly message except the
Arab nation which conveyed to the world the message of Islam which was
revealed to Muhammad. Jesus called the nation which will supersede the
Israelites “the stone which was rejected by the builders.” This is a
reference to the covenant which was made between God and Isaac, at the
time of Abraham, of which Ishmael was excluded. From the Old Testament:

**“As for Ishmael, I have heard you; behold, I will bless him and make
him fruitful and multiply him exceedingly: he shall be the father of
twelve princes and I will make him a great nation. But I will establish
my covenant with Isaac, whom Sarah shall bear to you at this season next
year.” 1:17:20-21**

Ishmael and his children, according to this statement, have been
excluded, at the time of Abraham, from the covenant, and for this, Jesus
called them the stone which was rejected by the builders. Now Jesus was
informing the Israelites that the same stone which was rejected will
become the head of the corner.

Muhammad and the Arabs are descendants of Ishmael, and these are the
nation which Jesus expected to supersede the Israelite nation.

Jesus described the superseding nation as a crushing stone; whoever
falls on it will be broken, and on whom it may fall, it will grind him
to powder. This means that that nation which will receive the kingdom of
God will be a brave nation, capable of defeating any enemy that may
attack it and crushing any enemy it may attack. This description is
applicable only to the Arab nation which was distinguished from among
all nations by carrying a spiritual message and by being brave enough to
defend itself and to defeat its enemies. History, after Jesus, had
witnessed many brave nations, but none of them were motivated by a
heavenly revelation except the nation of Muhammad.


