The Hereafter
=============

**Wilson**: Now it is about time to discuss the important issue of
Immortality. The Old Testament is not clear on the subject of the
Hereafter. The Jews, therefore, do not emphasize life after death. The
New Testament has dealt with the subject and spoken clearly of the
Hereafter; consequently, the Christians, in general, subscribe to the
belief in the Hereafter. I know that the Holy Qur'an confirms this
doctrine, but I would like to know if it is considered one of the
articles of the faith of Islam.

**Chirri**: The Doctrine of Resurrection is an important article of the
Islamic faith. The book of Islam declares that the human race shall
cease to exist on this planet, and that on a certain day, appointed by
God and known only to Him, every human being will be brought back to
life again and required to give an account for what he had done during
his lifetime. Every individual will receive on that day a reward or
punishment according to his good or bad deed:

***“Everyone on it (the Earth) passes away, and there endures forever
the might of your Lord, the Lord of Glory and Honor.” 55:26-27***

***“And they used to say: When we die and become dust and bones, shall
we then be raised? Say: The ancients and those of later times will
surely be gathered together for the appointed hour of a known day.”
56:47-50***

**Wilson**: The concept of the Hereafter is very remote from the area of
our human experience. It is not easy to conceive that a person who died
physically will continue to live spiritually or that he will live later,
long after he died. Science, though not able to disprove the possibility
of life after death, is not able to give any support to such a concept.

**Chirri**: Although the concept of the Hereafter is beyond the area of
our human experience, it does seem to be logical. To be consistent, we
have to subscribe to this doctrine. We believe in God and His justice.
The Just God, Who is All-Powerful, is not expected to leave a good doer
without a reward, nor should we expect Him to leave an oppressor
unpunished. Millions and millions of good doers, oppressed and
persecuted, lived and died without being compensated. Millions and
millions of wrong doers, persecutors, murderers, and tyrants lived and
died without being penalized in this world. The Just God Who is
All-Powerful, should not let such wrong doers escape His punishment, nor
should He leave the good doers uncompensated. There must be another
world in which there will be an ample time for implementing the heavenly
justice.

The Holy Qur'an bases the necessity of the Hereafter on the concept of
the heavenly justice:

***“On that day (the Day of Judgment) men will come forth as scattered
individuals, so that they may be shown their works.So whoever does an
atom's weight of good will see it, and whoever does an atom's weight of
evil will see it.” 99:6-8***

**Wilson**: Your argument in support of the doctrine of the Hereafter
falls short of its ultimate goal. It is a good argument, but all it
amounts to is that we should expect a future world in which God rewards
the good doer and penalizes the wrong doer; but it does not prove that
our expectation will materialize. There is a great difference between
what ought to be and what will be. Our purpose is not only to show the
need for a future world, but to prove, also, that that world will become
a reality.

**Chirri**: The existence of the future world cannot be proven by a
direct and tangible evidence. It is beyond the area of our perception
and experience. It is a future unrelated naturally to our present, nor
is it linked with it through a familiar cause. Tangible and direct
evidence on such a future is absent, but indirect evidence on that
future is available.

The prophets of God had forecast the future world, and we may rely on
their information. The evidence of the truthfulness of those prophets is
the indirect evidence on the Hereafter. We may rely on the statements of
a prophet such as Muhammad, because his prophethood is supported by a
tangible evidence. A prophet does not mislead the people, nor would he
misinform them. We have to accept his statements on the future as well
as on the present. To accept his prophethood and doubt his information
is inconsistent.

**Wilson**: How important is this article of the faith in Islam from the
Qur'anic point of view?

**Chirri**: In many passages from the Holy Qur'an, the belief in the
Hereafter is placed next to the belief in God. This shows that the
belief in the Hereafter is more important than any other article of the
Islamic faith after the belief in God:

***“Surely those who believe (in Islam) and those who are Jews, and the
Christians . . ., whoever believes in God and the Hereafter and does
good, they have their reward from their Lord, and there is no fear for
them nor shall they grieve.” 2:62***

***“They believe in God and the Hereafter, and they enjoin good and
forbid evil and vie one with another in the good deeds. And those are
among the righteous. ” 3:114***

**Wilson**: Muhammad has informed mankind of the Hereafter. His
information is clear and positive. Jesus, before him, advanced some
information on the subject. Moses seems to have been completely silent
on the issue. This raises a question: The absence of information on the
subject in the books of Moses is puzzling. If the doctrine of
Resurrection is so important, it should have been revealed to Moses, as
well as to Muhammad and Jesus.

**Chirri**: The absence of any statement on the subject in the books of
Moses does not mean that God did not reveal to him any information on
the Hereafter, nor should it prove that Moses never informed his people
of a future life. The five books of Moses probably had undergone some
changes and deletions. The Holy Qur'an informs us that Moses had spoken
of the Hereafter:

***“And he who believed (in the message of Moses) said: (addressing the
opponents of Moses) O My*** ***people, follow me. I will guide you to
the right way. O My people, the life of this world is but a (passing)
enjoyment, and the Hereafter, that is the abode to settle.”***
***40:38-39***

***“And Moses chose of his people seventy men for Our appointed time,
and when they were seized*** ***with violent quaking, he said: My Lord!
If Thou hadst willed, Thou hadst destroyed them long before, and me with
them. Wilt Thou destroy us for that which the ignorant among us did? It
is but Thy trial (of us)…Thou art our Protecting Guardian, therefore,
forgive us and have mercy on us, Thou art the Best of all who show
forgiveness, and ordain for us in this world that which is good, and in
the Hereafter (that which is good), Lo! We have turned unto Thee.”***
***7:155-156***

The Holy Qur'an informs us also that the Prophet Abraham had spoken
clearly of the Hereafter, and that he prayed to God to show him how He
revives the dead:

“***And when Abraham said: My Lord, show me how Thou givest life to the
dead, He said: Dost thou not believe? He said: Yes, but that my heart
may be at ease.”*** ***2:260***

**Wilson**: You have stated that Islam teaches that every human being,
on an appointed day known only to God, will be brought back to life.
That day is the Day of Judgment. Now, may I ask about the long time
which separates our life in this world from the Hereafter? Does man
continue to live, in some form, after he dies until the Day of Judgment
or does his life come to a complete extinction by death? Is there a
clear Qur'anic statement on our life or extinction, subsequent to our
death and prior to our resurrection?

**Chirri**: The human soul, according to the Islamic teaching, will not
be extinguished by death. It shall continue to live throughout the long
period which separates our physical death from our resurrection, and
such a life is required for resurrection.

We cannot conceive man's resurrection if his life is entirely terminated
by death. Resurrection means bringing the dead person back to life. If
life entirely ceases to exist after death, there will be no way to bring
back to life the same person. There would be two existences: one before
death, and the other on the Day of Judgment. The two existences would be
separated by a complete non-existence. The second existence could not be
the same as the first one. There would be two persons, not one. The
second one, at best, would be similar to the first, and never the same.

Resurrection of the same person, therefore, cannot be realized unless
the life of the human being continues in some form after his death.
Otherwise, the newly created one on the Day of Judgment would be other
than the person whose life came to extinction by death. And the very
purpose of resurrection will not be served if human life will not
continue after death.

The purpose of the Hereafter is to reward the good doer and to punish
the wrong doer. If man will cease entirely to exist after his death, he
will not be able to receive any reward or punishment. The newly created
person on the Day of Judgment will not be the same person who lived
before. He will deserve neither a reward nor a punishment, because he is
not the same one who lived before, nor did he do any good or bad.

Thus, we ought to understand from all the Qur'anic passages, pertaining
to the Hereafter, that man will continue to live a spiritual life until
the Day of Judgment. The Holy Qur'an, however, is explicit on this
point:

***“And speak not of those who are slain in the way of God as dead. Nay,
(they are) alive, but you perceive not.”*** ***2:154.***

***“And think not of those who are killed in the way of God as dead.
Nay, they are alive being provided sustenance from their Lord. Rejoicing
in what God has given them out of His grace, and they rejoice for the
sake of those who (being left) behind them, have not yet joined them,
that*** ***they have no fear, nor shall they grieve. They rejoice for
the favor of God and His grace, and that God wastes not the reward of
the believers.”*** ***3:168-170.***

**Wilson**: Those who subscribe to the doctrine of the Hereafter differ
on an important point: some of them believe that life in the Hereafter
would be only spiritual, while others believe that human life on the Day
of Resurrection will be physical as well as spiritual. What does Islam
teach in regard to this matter?

**Chirri**: The teaching of Islam is very clear on this point. Man will
be brought back to life on the Day of Judgment physically as well as
spiritually. A human being is not only a spiritual being. Re-creation of
a real man requires both body and soul; otherwise, he would be a sort of
an angel rather than a human being.

There is another reason to expect both physical and spiritual
resurrection:

The very concept of resurrection cannot be realized without
reconstruction of the human body. Since man will continue to live
spiritually after his death, his resurrection cannot mean re-creation of
his spirit because his spirit did not die. Thus, the spiritual life
alone in the Hereafter cannot be called resurrection because it does not
add anything to the life of the individual which has continued in its
spiritual form. Resurrection can only be realized by re-creation. This
means reconstruction of the disintegrated body and reuniting it with the
soul which still exists. The language of the Qur'an is very clear on
this point and does not accept any different interpretation:

***“And the call is issued, then lo ! from their graves they will hasten
on to their Lord. They will say: O woe to us! Who has raised us up from
our sleeping place? This is what the Beneficent promised, and the
messengers told the truth. It is but a single cry, then lo! They are all
brought forth.”*** ***36:51-53***

***“So turn away from them. On the day when the Inviter invites them to
a hard task—their eyes cast down, they will go forth from their graves
as if they were scattered locusts, hastening to the Inviter. The
disbelievers will say: This is a hard day.”*** ***54:6-8***

**Wilson**: The concept of the physical resurrection has its own
difficulties: Suppose a cannibal ate a human body. The eaten body would
be integrated with the body of its eater. If the body is resurrected on
the Day of Judgment, it would not be possible to judge whether the body
belongs to the eater or the eaten. Suppose a human body were eaten by a
bird or an animal. The eaten body would be integrated with the body of
its eater. What will be resurrected on the Day of Judgment? Is it the
bird and the animal or the human body?

**Chirri**: No food would be entirely integrated with the body of its
eater, and resurrection does not require the existence of all the
elements of the body. As long as the substance or some of the substance
of the body remains unintegrated with the body of the eater, the
reconstruction of the respective body would be possible.

Furthermore, God Who has power over everything can distinguish between
the original parts of the body of the eater and what was integrated with
it from the other body. He is able to separate them and to reconstruct
two separate bodies.

Suppose the separation is impossible, God is able to create a body from
different elements other than the lost one and unite the newly created
body with the human soul on the Day of Judgment.

**Wilson**: Some religions teach that the human soul is simple and
indivisible, and some philosophers subscribe to these ideas. Does Islam
teach the same or does it have a different teaching in regard to this?

**Chirri**: The Qur'an is silent on these points. It does not confirm
nor deny the simplicity or the indivisibility or the immutability of the
human soul. Nor does it state that the human soul is a substance or that
it is non-physical or physical. It is completely silent on all of these
aspects, and it actually dismisses all these questions. They are beyond
the human knowledge, and the answer to any of these questions will not
serve a religious purpose. From the Holy Qur'an:

***“And they ask thee about the (human) soul. Say: The soul proceeds
from my Lord's command, and of knowledge you are given but little.”***
***17:85***

**Wilson**: Some religions teach that the human soul after death may
occupy a body of a newly born child or it may occupy a living body of
some animal. Does Islam subscribe to any concept of reincarnation or
transmigration?

**Chirri**: The Holy Qur'an clearly denies the concepts of reincarnation
and transmigration. The human soul, leaving the body at the time of
death, will not be allowed to re-live in this world in any form. From
the Holy Qur'an:

***“Until death overtakes one of them, he says: My Lord, send me back,
that I may do good with that which I left. By no means! It is but a word
that he speaks. And behind them is a barrier, until the day they will be
raised.”*** ***23:99-100***

Thus, the Holy Qur'an states that the human soul will not live twice on
this Earth, so it will not be allowed to occupy another living body,
human or non-human.

The observable facts support this teaching. If the human souls are to
occupy new human bodies, there would be no increase in population,
because a human soul can occupy only one body. The population of the
world was about one billion in the last century. Now we have about five
billions. How can we account for the increase of four billions if no new
souls are created?

As a matter of fact, if the concept of reincarnation is a reality, the
number of the population should not go above two persons, because at the
beginning there were only the two human souls of Adam and Eve.


