Difference Among Muslims
========================

**Wilson**: The teaching of Islam seems to be very clear in most of its
aspects. None of its doctrines is ambiguous enough to cause a split or
dispute among the Muslims. Nevertheless, the Muslims are divided into
more than one group. There are the two well-known groups: the Sunni and
the Shi’a, and each of the two divisions contains a number of
subdivisions. I know that division among the Muslims is not as acute as
it is among the Christians. I understand that both Sunni and Shi’a often
pray together in one Mosque and that there are no marital barriers
between them. No Muslim is required to change his (her) affiliation with
his respective group in order to marry a person from another group. But
the fact remains that there is division and that there is more than one
group.

The split does not seem to be justifiable. However, it took place, and I
would like to know the reasons which led to that split.

**Chirri**: The split among the Muslims may not be characterized as
religious. There is some difference on the details of some of the
Islamic rules, and this is only a difference in interpretation of some
of the Qur'anic words or the Prophet's statements. This has led to the
establishment of various schools of thought. Fundamentally, the
difference is political, and the germ of it began immediately after the
death of the Prophet.

It is a well-known fact that Islam concerns itself with both spiritual
and worldly aspects of man's life. The Prophet founded a Muslim state of
which he was the head. He administered all religious, political and
social affairs. He never showed his companions any sign of separation
between religion and state. The well-being of the community and the
prevalence of justice among its members are, in his teaching, as
important as the devotional work which is required of the individual.

The integration of secular and spiritual affairs in the Muslim state at
the time of the Prophet was so crystal clear that no Muslim at the time
of the Prophet doubted the need for the establishment and continuity of
a Muslim government. Thus, when the Prophet died, in 632, no question
was raised about the need for a succeeding ruler. They all agreed on
this, but they disagreed on who is to rule.

While Ali, the cousin of the Prophet, and some of the Hashimites (clan
of the Prophet) were busy with the holy funeral, some of the Muslims
were gathering at a place, called "Saqifat Bani-Sa’idah" to select a new
leader.

The Muslim community of Madina, the capital of the Muslim state, was
comprised of the natives of Madina and those who immigrated to Madina.
Most of those immigrants (who are called Muhajireen) were from Mecca.
The natives of Madina were composed of two tribes, namely "Khazraj" and
"Ous". These natives were called "Al-Ansar" (the Helpers). There was
some rivalry between the immigrants and the natives of Madina. There
was, also, a rivalry between the two Madinite tribes.

The conferees who were gathering to select a successor were mostly
Madinites, and they were aiming at choosing one of them for the high
office. Sa'ad Ben Abadah, the chief of the Khazrajites was the hopeful
one.

The news of the conference reached Abu-Bakr, Omar, and others from the
immigrants. They hurriedly went to the conference to prevent the
Madinites from implementing their scheme. In debating with the
Madinites, they offered the following argument:

The Prophet was a Meccan, and the Meccans are his relatives. Therefore,
only a Meccan should succeed him.

By virtue of the mutual jealousy among the Madinites, the Ousites
deserted Sa'ad Ben Abadah and leaned towards the Meccans. Abu-Bakr was
nominated immediately and the majority of the conferees pledged to him
their loyalty. And so did most of the Muslims, immigrants and Madinites.
Thus, Abu-Bakr became the first "Khalif" (successor) in the history of
Islam.

By this, the issue between the Madinites and the immigrants was settled
forever; and since then no one from the Madinites ever contended for the
right of succession. But the issue was far from being settled among the
Meccans themselves.

Ali, as we advanced, was preoccupied with the funeral of the Prophet. He
was not consulted in this important matter. He and many others believed
that he was not only the proper one to succeed the Prophet, but also the
Prophet's nominee and appointee. He thought that they made a fast deal
and manipulated the election. Abu-Bakr and his group had defeated the
Madinites by arguing that the Meccans are the relatives of the Prophet.
If relationship to the Prophet should entitle any Meccan to succeed him,
Ali should be the first one to be offered the job. He is the Prophet's
first cousin and son-in-law.

Ali refused to join the supporters of Abu-Bakr and held out for several
months. He finally joined the majority and pledged his loyalty to the
new government. The situation of the Muslim State was too serious to
allow a man, such as Ali, to cause any division in the Muslim community.
Most of the Muslims outside Madina and Mecca rose in rebellion against
the Madinite government, and a good portion of them disjoined themselves
from Islam. The very existence of Islam was in danger. Ali is too pious
to take advantage of the difficulty of the Muslim government and too
intellectual to worry about some Islamic instructions when the very
existence of Islam is at stake. He, therefore, not only joined the
supporters of Abu-Bakr but also took an active part in defending the
state against the attacks of the rebellious elements.

When Ali gave up his claim and supported the government, the division
among the Muslims disappeared. It remained in a dormant state for two
decades during which Abu-Bakr, Omar and Uthman consecutively ruled the
Muslim state. Ali was elected after the death of Uthman; and by his rise
to power the issue of his rightfulness to be the first Khalif of the
Prophet was awakened.

Ali was the most controversial personality among the companions of the
Prophet. He was so magnanimous in the eyes of many pious Muslims that
they believed that the succession to the Prophet was his exclusive
right. He, at the same time, was bitterly opposed by many elements, and
he had to fight three bloody rebellions during his short reign.

The reign of Ali continued for less than five years, and it ended by his
assassination. Subsequently, his most ambitious adversary, Mu’awiyah,
rose to power. This man ruled the Muslims in a manner entirely different
from that by which the four good Khalifs administered the Muslim State.
He continued in power about two decades, ruling the people by sword and
bribery, and the followers of Ali were subjected to humiliation and
persecution during his reign. He transformed the Muslim government from
a republic form to a rule of dynasty. His dynasty, the Umayyads,
continued in government for seventy years after his death.

The political sympathizers of Ali during this period acquired the title
of Shi’a which means, follower (of Ali).

The Umayyad reign was ended in 750 AD by the rise of the Abbasides
(descendants of Abbas, one of the uncles of the Prophet and Ali) to
power. The Abbasides became the new dynasty which ruled the Muslim state
for several hundred years during which the majority of the Muslims were
named Sunni to distinguish them from the Shi’a. Thus, the Muslims were
divided into Sunnites and Shi’ites.

**Wilson**: What are the opinions which are maintained by the Sunnites
and the Shi’ites in regard to the issue of succession?

**Chirri**: The Sunnites maintain that Abu-Bakr was a legal Khalif; that
the three good Khalifs who ruled consecutively after him, namely: Omar,
Uthman and Ali were also legal Khalifs; that the Prophet never nominated
anyone to succeed him; and that he left the matter of succession to his
companions to exercise their right in choosing their own ruler.

The four Khalifs, however, were chosen by various methods: Abu-Bakr was
elected by the Muslims of Madina. Omar was appointed by Abu-Bakr. Uthman
was elected by the majority of only six persons whom Omar, before he
died, had chosen as qualified for the high office: Ali, Uthman, Sa'ad,
Zubayr, Talhah, and Abdul-Rahman. No one besides them was allowed to
elect or to be elected. The majority of these six had the right to
choose the Khalif. The hopeful ones among these six were only two: Ali
and Uthman. Ali did not have the support of any of the five except
Zubayr, and Uthman won the election.

Ali, however, was elected after the death of Uthman by the overwhelming
majority of the Muslims.

The Shi’ites maintain that Ali was not only the most proper person to
succeed the Prophet, but was also his nominee for the high office. They
believe that the Prophet actually appointed Ali as his successor, and
that Ali himself had the right to appoint his own successor.

Both views command respect, and both have arguments that command
respect.

**Wilson**: Since the views of each party have been outlined, now I
would like you to state clearly the best arguments for each side. And
let us start with the Sunnite argument.

**Chirri**: The first argument for the Sunnites was introduced, as you
may recall, by the immigrants against the Madinites at the conference
which was concluded by selecting Abu-Bakr as Khalif. The argument states
that the Meccans are the relatives of the Prophet, and that the
successor of the Prophet should be one of his relatives.

**Wilson**: The same argument can be, and actually was, used against the
Sunnis in favor of the Shi’is. If blood-relation is to be taken as a
foundation for the establishment of a Muslim government, Ali should be
the successor, because he was by far closer than Abu-Bakr to the
Prophet. He was his first cousin and his son-in-law.

**Chirri**: In addition to this, relationship to the Prophet cannot be a
suitable base for the legality of a Muslim government. We know that
Islam stands firmly and clearly against aristocracy and all inherited
social privileges. The Muslims pride themselves upon the fact that there
are no classes in Islam, and that all people from any nation or family
are equal in the eyes of God. The Holy Qur'an declares the following:

***“O mankind, certainly We created you from a male and a female and
made you nations and clans, that you may recognize one another. Surely
the Most noble among you in the eyes of God is the most righteous of
you.”*** ***49:13***

The Prophet himself declared:

***“…Certainly God has done away with the boastfulness of pre-Islamic
society and its pride upon the ancestors. There is no superiority for an
Arab over a non-Arab. (Nor is there any superiority for a non-Arab over
an Arab.) Certainly the most noble of you in the eyes of God is the most
pious of you.”***

The very concept of preference of a "Qurayshite" (Meccan) or a Hashimite
over the rest of the people is in contrast with the spirit of equality
upon which the Muslims pride themselves. It means that God discriminates
and favors certain families or clans above the rest of mankind. We,
therefore, have no choice but to disregard any concept of discrimination
and favoritism of this sort and consider it entirely alien to Islam. For
this, the argument of relationship should be entirely disregarded.

The second argument for the Sunnis can be stated as follows: Islam
respects and sanctifies the natural rights of every individual. The
political freedom is one of these sacred rights. Every individual has
the right to share in administering public affairs of his community,
either directly or indirectly by authorizing and electing someone to
represent him in such an administration. No one can be legally ruled
against his will, and no man's freedom should be curtailed without his
own permission. The establishment of any legal government can be
achieved through the authorization of the individuals and by their own
selection.

Abu-Bakr was elected by the majority of the companions of the Prophet.
They elected him by their own choice and through the exercise of their
natural right. His government, therefore, was legal and democratic.

**Wilson**: This argument seems to be very sound and based on the
recognition of what we now call "inalienable rights." Now let us turn to
the arguments of the Shi’ites.

**Chirri**: The Shi’ite as well as the Sunnite agree that a legal
government can be established through election of the populace. The
political freedom and the right of the individual in choosing his own
government are recognized by all Muslims, including the Shi’ite. The
Shi’ite, however, views (and the Sunnite does not deny) that election by
populace is not the only way through which a legal government can be
established. Omar was appointed by Abu-Bakr as his successor, and Uthman
was elected by the majority of only six persons, and both are regarded
by the Sunnites as legal Khalifs.

A respectable argument for the Shi’ite can be introduced by stating the
following points:

1. Man's freedom can be legally curtailed and restricted by one of the
two following ways:

a) It may be restricted by his own permission and authorizing his
elected government to enact rules that may limit his freedom or lead him
to give up some of his rights.

b) It may be restricted and curtailed by the Creator of the individual
Who gave him his freedom and natural rights. He may impose on His
servants rules which could curtail their freedom for their own interest.
No one knows exactly what is good for him, but God knows what is good
for us at present and in the future. We owe our freedom, our rights and
our very existence to His generosity. If He chooses for us any type of
government, that government will be legal.

2. A government established by a Divine appointment was possible at the
time of the Prophet:

The Prophet, according to the Holy Qur'an, has the jurisdiction to
appoint and select for the Muslims a succeeding government. The Holy
Qur'an vests in him the authority to choose for the Muslims whatever is
in their interests. He is the guardian of the Muslims, and he has the
right to administer their public affairs more than they have the right
to do it on their own:

***“The Prophet has the right over the believers more than they have the
right over their own selves…”*** ***33:6***

The decision of the Prophet in all affairs of the Muslim State is
binding on all Muslims. They have no right to reverse it or change it.
From the Holy Qur'an:

***“And it becometh not a believing man or a believing woman, when God
and His Messenger have decided an affair (for them), that they should
(after that) claim any say in their affairs; and whoever is rebellious
to God and His Messenger, he verily goeth astray in error manifest.”***
***33:36***

Thus, when the Prophet appoints or nominates a successor to rule the
Muslim State after him, his choice is to be followed and his decision is
binding.

3. Since there were two legitimate ways to establish a succeeding
government, the Prophet, the Shi’ite may contend, was expected to choose
and appoint his successor and not to leave such an important matter to
the Muslim community. Leaving it to the Muslim community in such an
early stage of development could have been fraught with dangers.

The Muslim government was based on a set of reformatory principles aimed
at changing people's belief and their way of life by introducing a new
ideology which was accepted reluctantly by their majority.

To explain this: The government may be based on certain concepts and
principles prevalent in the society and desirable to the majority of the
people. The establishment of such a government should be left to the
people and their choice. Such a government may have plans and programs,
but none of its plans or programs would be legal unless it meets the
approval of the majority. The people themselves are the highest
authority to judge those plans and programs. Such a government can exist
and remain in office legally only by the support of the majority, and it
may legally fall when it is deprived of that support.

The Reformatory Principles
--------------------------

There is another type of government which is based on a set of
reformatory principles aiming at changing the condition of the people
and reforming their beliefs and characters.

Such principles are usually unpopular and undesirable to the people. The
principles are usually introduced by an individual or a minority of
people who are dissatisfied with the old ideology to which the majority
subscribes. To apply the new ideology and make it work, a government
based on the same principles must be established. The duty of such a
government is to put the new ideology at work and to try to guard it
against any possible danger.

Such a government is actually a government of minority, and it usually
rises to power without being accepted by the majority. If such a
government is to leave office, it is expected to appoint its successor
and not to leave the establishment of the succeeding government to a
free election.

To illustrate this: Suppose that a Capitalistic minority succeeds in
taking over the government in a country where the Communistic system is
established and genuinely accepted. When such a government replaces the
old system by its own, it would be expected to try to perpetuate its
ideology. What would be the duty of such a minority government when it
is about to leave office?

Under the circumstances, the government would not be expected to leave
the establishment of the next government to a free election. Since the
new system is imposed on, or reluctantly accepted by the majority, a
free election may lead to the destruction of the new system. When people
are allowed to choose freely the government they desire, they would
elect only the admirers of the old system. (The same will be true if a
Communistic minority takes over the government of a Capitalistic
country.)

The duty of the government, therefore, is to guard the new system and to
trust and appoint only the most sincere supporter of its ideology as a
head of the succeeding government.

The appointment of successors should continue until the new ideology is
genuinely accepted by the people and its continuity is reasonably
secured. The continuity of the new ideology can be secured only when it
becomes a natural way of life to the community. This may not be
accomplished until the ideology is received by the following generations
as a part of their heritage.

Suppose the new system is seemingly adopted by the community in general
and that the people have been converted to the new ideology. The duty of
the government is still to be cautious and to take no risk that may
jeopardize its achievement. The government will be duty-bound to trust
in the administration of the state only those whose sincerity and
efficiency are beyond any doubt. To leave the matter of establishment of
a new government to the choice of the majority is to take a risk. A free
election may bring to office the best or the worst. A wise guardian of a
new ideology does not take such a risk at an early stage of development.

Islam is a Reformatory Ideology
-------------------------------

4. The religion of Islam introduced a new ideology which was unpopular
in the Arabian society. The new ideology aimed at changing people's
belief and way of life. The idols which were endeared and worshipped by
the people were to be destroyed. Only the One God, the Creator of the
universe, is to be worshipped. The stubborn and the proud Arabs are to
kneel and prostrate for God many times a day. The low desires of
adultery, murder, plunder, gambling and drinking are no longer
legitimate ways of life.

Lawlessness and anarchy are to be replaced by discipline and order.
Selfishness and hatred are to be replaced by the hard and unselfish work
and sacrifice for the welfare of the community. A portion of every man's
wealth is to be paid for supporting the poor and the programs which the
government undertakes for improvement of the people's condition. The
right side is to be supported and followed against the wrong side, even
if it is your own relatives.

None of these reformatory principles were desirable to the society to
which Islam was introduced. These principles were vehemently opposed by
the overwhelming majority. The struggle was finally won by Islam only
after a great deal of tears and blood.

We can hardly expect the Prophet who won the struggle after twenty-three
years full of sacrifice, misery, and trouble, to depart from this world
leaving the ideology of Islam unguarded by not appointing for
administration the best fitting person among his followers.

5. The risk which would be taken in leaving the establishment of the
succeeding government to the choice of the people can be underscored by
stating the following facts: From among the masses of inhabitants of the
Arabian peninsula, there were only a few scores of individuals who were
capable of reading or writing. The masses of the people were totally
uneducated. They joined Islam after the new faith had prevailed. As soon
as they heard the news of the death of the Prophet, most of them rose in
rebellion, and a great portion of the nation deserted the faith. The
future of Islam was extremely darkened, and the true Muslims faced
uncertainty.

The Prophet himself had foreseen this condition, and shortly before his
death he declared:

***“The faith-testing crises are closing in like pieces of a dark
night…”***

It is inconceivable that the Prophet, under such circumstances, would
not try to secure the best possible leadership for his young Muslim
State before he departs from this world.

**Wilson**: Granted that all these points are right, they do not
necessarily lead to the drawn conclusion. It is true that the majority
of the Muslims outside Madina were not dependable and sincere in their
adoption of Islam. But the companions of the Prophet who supported the
cause of Islam and offered so many sacrifices for its promotion were
dependable and sincere. They accompanied the Prophet for years and
became well-educated in the faith of Islam. The Prophet may have left
the establishment of the succeeding government to these people. They
belonged to the new ideology. They were its genuine supporters. There
was no risk in trusting them.

**Chirri**: The sincerity of many of the companions of the Prophet is
beyond any reasonable doubt. It would only be fair to assume that men
like Ali, Abu-Bakr, Omar, Uthman, Salman the Persian, Abu-Dharr and so
many others from the immigrants and Madinites were genuine supporters of
the cause of Islam. They had offered for its promotion many sacrifices
for a long period of time. They were also well educated in the Islamic
teaching, and they were good students and disciples of the Prophet. The
fact remained, the Shi’ites say, that the majority of the companions
were not purified completely from their old clannish attachments.

Islam aimed at replacing the narrow bond of blood relation by a general
brotherhood and feeling of equality among the Muslims. But the period
was too short for these people to forget the past and live up to the
ideal teaching of their faith. The influence of tribal ties on their
thinking was obvious. The conference which was held by the Madinites has
shown a great deal of tribal prejudice. Their aim was to select one of
the Madinites as a ruler and to prevent the Meccans from assuming the
leadership. The Meccans, on the other hand, were determined to keep the
leadership of the state in their hand.

Both sides overlooked the principle of equality and universal
brotherhood which the Prophet endeavored to establish. None of them was
looking for the fittest person in the Muslim community for the
leadership in such a critical period. Had all of them been true
adherents to the Islamic teaching, they would have searched their
conscience and looked for the best possible leader, disregarding all
regional and tribal ties. This important aspect was entirely forgotten
or overlooked. Merely being a Meccan companion was good enough for the
Meccans, and merely being a Madinite companion was good enough for the
Madinites.

Suppose that they all were free of clannish prejudice. This does not
mean that those companions were equally knowledgeable in Islam. Nor
would it mean that the majority of them were wise enough to select the
proper leadership for that critical period. There were many outstanding
persons in the community, and probably the majority of the companions
considered them all potential leaders. Their knowledge about these
persons was limited, and none of them knew enough about them to select
their best. Only the Prophet was able to classify them and choose the
most fitting for leadership in that period.

The Muslims, however, were fortunate enough to select a man like
Abu-Bakr. What would have happened if they had chosen a good companion
but unfitting leader such as Uthman? It may have led to the destruction
of the Muslim State. Foreseeing the forthcoming crises, the Prophet was
expected to avoid the Muslims any such consequences by selecting the
best leader to succeed him in the dangerous period.

**Wilson**: Granted that all the advanced points are logical, this may
only prove the need for the appointment of a leader on the part of the
Prophet. This, however, does not prove that the Prophet had actually
appointed a successor. The argument is telling us that the Prophet was
expected to provide the proper leadership for all the Muslims, and that
he ought to have done what was expected. It does not tell us that he
actually did so. There is a clear difference between what ought to be
done and what actually was done.

Furthermore, if the argument is entirely sound, it does not tell us who
was appointed by the Prophet. It might have been Ali or Abu-Bakr or
anyone else.

**Chirri**: The Shi’ites say that the Prophet had actually appointed Ali
to the high post, by declaring him the "Moula" (guardian) of the
believers. While returning from his Valedictory Pilgrimage, the Prophet,
according to many authentic hadiths (related statements), called the
multitude of pilgrims who were accompanying him, to hear an important
declaration. (This declaration was delivered at a place called "Ghadir
Khumm."):

*“O People,”* *the Prophet exclaimed,* *“The time is drawing nigh when I
receive a Divine call to* *which I will respond (by departing from this
world); I shall be questioned, and ye will be questioned. What will be
your answer?”* *The multitude replied: We bear witness that you have
conveyed the message (of God) and endeavored (in His way) and that your
endeavor was sincere, unselfish. The Prophet said:* *“Is it not true
that you bear witness that there is no god but the* *Almighty; that
Muhammad is His servant and messenger; that His paradise is a reality;
that His hell is reality; that death is right; that resurrection after
death is truth; that the Day of Judgment is truth; and that God shall
bring back to life those who are in the graves?”*

*The multitude replied:* *“Yea, we bear witness unto that.”*

*The Prophet said:* *“O God, bear witness.”*

Following this, the Prophet announced the appointment of Ali for the
high office. Such an appointment on his part requires a constitutional
authority. Therefore, he reminded them of the fact that the Holy Qur'an
vested in him this authority by declaring him the guardian of the
believers:

*“O people,”* *he said,* *“God is my* *‘Moula’* *(guardian), and I am
the Moula of the believers, and I have the right over the believers more
than they have the right over their own selves.*

*Whoever I am his Moula, this Ali (He was holding Ali's hand) is his
Moula.*

*O God, befriend his friend and cast out of Thy favor his enemy.”*

**Wilson**: If the Prophet had actually selected Ali for the leadership
of the Muslims, he should have tried to prepare the Muslims, not only by
words, but also by deeds for the acceptance of his decision. He should
have made the atmosphere suitable for implementing such an important
plan. Had the Prophet done anything of this sort?

**Chirri**: The Prophet, say the Shi’ites, not only appointed Ali by
words but also tried to secure this position for him by deed.

The Muslim historians agree that when the Prophet was seriously ill, he
sensed the approach of his death. At that time he ordered the Muslim
army to leave Madina to the borders of Syria under the leadership of
Usama, the son of Zayd. Abu-Bakr and Omar were ordered to leave with the
army. Of the outstanding companions, only Ali was to stay in Madina.

While his condition was growing critical, the Prophet repeatedly urged
the army to leave Madina. But Abu-Bakr, Omar, and many other companions
remained in Madina, saying that they hate to leave while the Prophet is
so ill. As a result, the whole army remained camping in the vicinity of
the city until Abu-Bakr was elected after the death of the Prophet. To
sum up:

The Prophet knew the approach of his death. He ordered the ambitious
companions to take a long journey, and wanted Ali to stay beside him.
Putting these together makes it obvious that the Prophet wanted Ali to
take over after him, unchallenged .

**Wilson**: The plan, however, did not materialize. Ali did not rule,
Abu-Bakr did. He not only ruled, but also appointed Omar as his
successor. Omar, in turn, indirectly appointed Uthman to succeed him.
Shall we infer from this that the companions of the Prophet ignored the
Prophet's order and disobeyed him deliberately?

**Chirri**: The answer is "no." If the will of the Prophet were to
secure the leadership for Ali, and if he had made it clear to his
companions, we ought to assume that the companions had unwittingly
underestimated the seriousness of the matter. They thought that the
leadership is only a temporal issue, in which they have the choice to
follow the Prophet's recommendation or to make their own decision. As a
result, they chose to decide for themselves.

To think that they deliberately chose to disobey the Prophet in such an
important matter does not seem to be logical. We owe it to the
companions of the Prophet to think good of them and not to doubt their
good intentions when they make a wrong decision. They were good Muslims,
and the Holy Qur'an recommends that we pray God to forgive our brothers
who preceded us in embracing the faith, let alone the companions who
were the first Muslim community that ever existed in the world.

Our attitude now towards the issue ought to be far from being emotional.
We ought not to weep over the spilled milk. Nothing can be retrieved by
taking sides on the issue. Both Ali and Abu-Bakr died and met the Lord,
and the time of the caliphate has entirely elapsed. Any discussion about
it should be no more than a discussion of a certain period of the
Islamic history. Such a discussion can be conducted by non-Muslims as
well as by Muslims. The purpose of such a discussion is not to support a
particular side, but to reach or form an impartial conclusion or
opinion.

Holding a negative attitude towards either side would only generate
hatred and division among the Muslims. This, no doubt, is a displeasure
to Ali who gave up his claim and supported Abu-Bakr to avoid any
division among the Muslims. To cause a division for the sake of Ali is
to be kingly more than the king himself.

The Sunnis, on the other hand, have no right to be disturbed by the
attitude of the Shi’ites towards the first three Khalifs. Nothing in the
Islamic teaching prohibits a negative attitude towards any of the three.
The legality of their rule is not an article of the faith, and their
rightfulness is a political, and not a religious, issue. In such a
political issue, every Muslim has the right to form his own opinion
without violating any Islamic instruction.

To have an unfriendly attitude towards scores of millions of Muslims
because of their negative attitude towards three outstanding Muslims
does not seem to be logical. Nor is it warranted by the teaching of
Islam.

**Wilson**: The issue of the succession in ruling the Muslim State may
have caused a good deal of dispute among the Muslims throughout the
centuries, but it does not seem to be important enough to divide the
Muslims into sects today. The whole issue seems to be political rather
than religious. It may become religious when it causes the Muslims to
dispute in the areas of the articles of the faith or the Islamic laws.
Do the Sunnis and the Shi’ites disagree with each other in these
religious areas? And is their disagreement in these areas related to
their political views?

**Chirri**: There is no disagreement between the Shi’ites and the Sunnis
on the articles of the faith. They all agree on the truthfulness of the
Qur'an and the statements of the Prophet without any exception. Both
sides derive their views and conclusions in the religious matters from
these two important sources.

There are, however, disagreements on some of the details of the Islamic
laws. These disagreements are due, partly, to the difference in
understanding and interpreting some of the verses of the Holy Qur'an and
some of the statements of the Prophet.

Some of the disagreements on the details of the Islamic rules are due to
the following reasons:

1. Absence of specific instructions in both the Qur'an and the
statements of the Prophet.

2. Lack of clarity in some of these statements and the capability of
being interpreted in more than one way.

3. The existence of two opposite statements, both attributed to the
Prophet.

One of the examples of disagreement caused by difference in
interpretation of the Holy Qur'an is the following:

All Muslims agree that ablution is a requirement for a sound prayer, and
that ablution would be undone by intercourse. They disagree on whether
mere physical contact between man and woman, such as shaking hands,
would undo the ablution of both of them. The reason is the difference in
interpreting the following verse:

***“And if ye be ill, or on a journey, or one of you cometh from the
toilet, or ye have touched women, and ye find no water, then go to high
clean soil and rub your faces…”*** ***4:43***

Some schools take the word "touch" literally and think that touch in any
way would undo the ablution. Other schools understand from the word
touch the intercourse.

Disagreements on the details of the Islamic rules exist not only between
the Shi’ites and the Sunnis; they exist among the Sunnis themselves and
among the Shi’ites themselves. With little exceptions, there is not any
Shi’a’s view or verdict that disagrees with all the Sunnis' views, and
there is not any Sunni's view that is opposed to all Shi’ites' views.
You can almost pick up any Sunni's verdict or interpretation, and you
are bound to find the same view shared by some Shi’ites; and vice versa.

Disagreement on the details of some of the Islamic rules did not cause
the Muslims to be divided into sects. It, however, caused the formation
of many schools of thoughts which are called "Madhhabs." (Madhhab is a
set of opinions or verdicts attributed to an outstanding imam who is
considered, at least by his followers, as the prime authority in
jurisprudence and Islamic law). Among these Madhhabs are the following
living schools: Maliki, Hanafi, Shafi’i, Hanbali, Ja’fari, and Zaydi.

All these schools rely, and draw on, the Qur'an and the hadiths of the
Prophet. But the first four are called Sunni, and the last two are
called Shi’i.

The difference between the Shi’ite and the Sunnite schools is not
greater than the difference among the Sunnite schools themselves. The
political affiliation, however, made the followers of the Sunni schools
frown upon the Shi’ite schools, and vice versa.

**Wilson**: Your explanation shows that the difference between the two
sides is very small and negligible. Some efforts should have been made
by some scholars to bring the two sides together and to bring about a
good understanding and reconciliation .

**Chirri**: Many efforts had been made throughout the history of Islam
to heal the rift, but they did not meet a tangible success. The failure
may be attributed to many factors. Among them are: the intolerant spirit
of the ages; the presence of tyrant khalifs who sought the support of
one side by persecution of another side which holds unfavorable opinion
towards them; and the wrong approach to the issue.

Our age has a different spirit, and the caliphate was buried at the
beginning of this century. What we need is to have a solemn thinking and
a new evaluation of the whole matter.

The Endeavor of the Author for Islamic Unity
--------------------------------------------

**Wilson**: I heard that you travelled to the Middle East and met the
late Sheikh El-Azhar in 1959 and tried to iron out the difference
between the two sides. I would like you to tell me more about this
important event.

**Chirri**: On the first of July, 1959, I met the late Sheikh Al-Azhar,
Sheikh Mahmoud Shaltute (may God bless his soul). The purpose of the
meeting was to discuss the problem of division between the followers of
the various Islamic schools whose difference, until that time, was
conceived as an outstanding problem in the Muslim world. I wanted to
know his opinion about the Ja’fari Madhhab to which he does not belong.
I thought that a favorable attitude on his part toward this Madhhab
might be a uniting point between the two sides, since most of the
Shi’ites belong to the Ja’fari school.

I asked him if he believes in the soundness of the Ja’fari teaching and
its equality to his own Madhhab. His answer was in the affirmative. Upon
this, I requested him to state to the Muslim World his view on the
important issue, in a clear verdict. A declaration of equality between
the Ja’fari and the Sunni Madhhabs from Sheikh Al-Azhar would, to my
estimation, be a sound solution to the problem, at least in theory. Such
a declaration, I told him, would bring the Sunni side to moderation
because you are their highest authority. And the Shi’ites will rejoice
at such a declaration. The Shi’ites do not seek privilege or
superiority. All what they seek is equality.

The declaration was the first of its kind in the history of Islam. It
was issued as an answer to a question submitted to him, and announced on
the sixth of July, 1959. The declaration was joyfully received in many
Muslim countries.

The following is a translation of the declaration which was published in
the Egyptian and Lebanese press:[^1]

His eminence (Sheikh Al-Azhar, Sheikh Mahmoud Shaltute) was asked: Some
people view that in order to have religiously sound devotions and
transactions, the Muslim has to follow one of the four known (Islamic)
Madhhabs: Hanafi, Shafi’i, Hanbali, and Maliki. This excludes the two
Shi’i Madhhabs: Imami (Ja’fari) and Zaydi. Do you agree with this view
without qualification and advise the Muslims not to follow the
Ithna-Ashari Imami (Ja’fari) school for example?

His eminence answered (by setting forth the following points as an
introduction to his verdict which is the last part of his answer):

1. It is permissible to the "non-Mujtahid" (the one who is not qualified
to give his own opinion or verdict in the Islamic law) to follow the
opinion of any of the "Ulama" (Muslim scholars), whose knowledge and
piety are believed, provided such an opinion reaches its follower in a
correct and nearly certain way, directly or indirectly. We should not be
concerned with a view expressed in some books which claims that the four
Madhhabs are the only ones to follow or that it is not permissible for a
person to change from one Madhhab to another.

Sheikh Izzuddeen, the son of Abdulsalam said: The Muslims used to seek
information about the Islamic laws, from any "alim" (Muslim Scholar)
they happened to meet, regardless of the school to which he belonged.
And such a way of obtaining information never was disapproved (by the
Muslim Scholars) until these schools (the four appeared with their
followers who became so bigoted that the follower of a Madhhab would
follow his "imam" (leader) even if his opinion was supportable by no
evidence. He followed him as if he were a messenger prophet. This is a
shyness from the truth and soundness; it should not be accepted by the
people of understanding.

2. The word "Shi’a," by which the followers of Ali (the son of
Abu-Talib) are known, is derived from the word "Mushaya’ah" which means
to follow. So the Shi’a of a person are his companions and followers.
The name (Shi’a) has been given to many groups who disagree with Islam
in many basic beliefs and laws. It is not permissible to follow the
teaching of such groups because they are out of the circle of Islam.

3. There are other groups related to "Ali, " and they are his
well-guided Shi’a who oppose and condemn the misguided ones. Of these
good Shi’a is the group which is known by the name of "Ja’fari" or
"Imami Ithna-Ashari. "

4. This well-known group follows principles that are taken from the Book
of God and the teaching of His Messenger which reached them through
their imams in both fundamental belief and Islamic law. The difference
between the Ja’fari and Sunni schools is not greater than the difference
among the Sunni schools themselves. They (the Ja’faris) believe in the
fundamental principles of Islam as they are stated in the Glorious
Qur'an and the certain teaching of the Prophet. They also believe in all
the rules whose inclusion in the religion of Islam is self-evident and
whose recognition is required for being a Muslim and the denial of which
excludes the person from Islam .

5. The Madhhab of these Ja’fari Shi’ites in the Islamic laws is
completely recorded and well-known. It has its own books, conveyers (who
related the statements of the Prophet and the imams) and the supporting
evidence. The authors of these books and those from whom these authors
had received the (hadiths) are well-known, and their scholarly and
jurisprudential ranks are respected among the Muslim scholars.

The Declaration
---------------

From this explanation, it becomes evident that:

1. Islam does not command any of its followers to follow a particular
Islamic Madhhab. On the contrary, it establishes for every Muslim the
right to follow, at the beginning, any one of the correctly conveyed
Madhhabs, whose verdicts are recorded in their respective books. It is
permissible also for any one that follows one of these schools to change
to another one - any other school - and he is not sinning by doing that.

2. The Ja’fari school which is known as ''the Madhhab of the
Ithna-Ashari, Imami Shi’i" is a sound Madhhab. It is permissible to
worship God according to its teaching, like the rest of the Sunni
Madhhabs.

3. The Muslims ought to know this and get rid of their undue bigotry for
particular Madhhabs. The religion of God and His law do not follow, nor
are they bound to, a particular Madhhab. All (the founders of these
Madhhabs) are Mujtahid (qualified to give verdict), reward-deserving
from God, and acceptable to Him. It is permissible to the "non-Mujtahid"
to follow them and to accord with their teaching, whether in devotions
or transactions.

[^1]: This is the translation of what appeared in Al-Kifah (a Lebanese
newspaper), issue of July 8, 1959.


