Foreword
========

Centuries ago when the nobles in the service of the Catholic Church
drove the Muslims out of Europe, the message of Muhammad also was
expurgated from the Western world. Had this power struggle never
occurred, there would have been less need for Arab scholars and teachers
like Imam Mohamad Jawad Chirri to bring God's Message to the Western
world. These rare men leave family and friends because they see the
centuries of unfulfilled need in America for theological clarification
of the requirements God makes upon mankind.

I am one of the many who have benefited from Imam Mohamad Chirri's
teaching. I was his first “convert”; but never having been a believing
Christian, it would be more exact to say that I came to believe in God
for the first time through the path of Islam, patiently guided by my
imam.

If you are a Muslim, read this book out of the obligation to acquire
knowledge. If you are a Jew or Christian, read it for the same devout
motive. Comparative study of religions may be unsettling if your belief
in God is based upon non-rational grounds but can only have the
ultimately desired result of strengthening your belief. The pervasive
belief in God as represented in our motives must be the goal which our
religious educators work toward, with gains in sectarian support
becoming quite secondary.

If you are unable to say that you believe in God, you can still find
value in the study of religion. In the following pages of dialogue, you
will be pursuing some of the most important concerns of mankind that can
be traced back to the beginning of recorded history. The thoughts and
historical events are important in their own right, and perhaps you
will, as I have, find the way to a belief in God through them.

Colonial Britain has been more fortunate than we in America in having
the history and teachings of Islam accessible. It is no accident that
while no really great American has expressed his recognition of the
value of Islam, three of the most famous British writers fully
acknowledge the importance and value of Islam. They are: Arnold Toynbee,
historian; Bertrand Russell, philosopher; and George Bernard Shaw,
playwright. Out of respect for these figures, we will want to know more
about that which they value so highly.

*Wilson H. Guertin, Ph.D.*  
*University of Florida*


