Why Is Islam Popular?
=====================

**Wilson**: History indicates that Islam spread in its early times
through Asia, Africa, and Europe very rapidly. Probably no other
religion spread throughout the world as fast as Islam did. There must be
some distinguishing features in Islam that caused its rapid growth and
made it so phenomenal. I would like to know those factors which
contributed to its rapid growth.

**Chirri**: There are many factors which contributed, and are still
contributing, to the spread of Islam. Among them are the following
factors:

1. The Holy Qur'an
------------------

It is an undeniable fact that the Qur'an is a living book that has
influenced millions of people through its beauty and style. The
superiority of the Qur'anic discourse was, and still is, challenging.
The Qur'an itself called upon its opponents to try to produce a
discourse that measures up to it.

The Qur'an repeatedly states that if the opponents will produce at any
time a comparable discourse, they will automatically disprove the whole
faith of Islam. The Qur'an has remained standing above and beyond any
comparison in the whole Arabic literature ever since its revelation in
the 7th century. The Holy Qur'an, therefore, has remained since the time
of its introduction until now a great source of attraction for the
Islamic faith.

2. The Personality of The Prophet of Islam
------------------------------------------

Muhammad was born under the shining light of history. No cloud has
shrouded his birth, his existence or his life among his people. If any
other prophet is considered a part of the religious history, Muhammad is
a part of both the religious and the world history.

Muhammad was born in Mecca from a well-known father and mother and lived
with his people forty years before he was commissioned as a prophet of
God. He was observed by the people during his childhood and manhood. He
was noticed by all his associates as an example of honesty and
integrity. People never found in him a fault. They called him the
Truthful, the Trustworthy.

Muhammad did not live as an isolated person. On the contrary, he
associated with the people constantly. As a businessman, Muhammad
travelled and associated with people from all walks of life, but he was
never affected by their low desires or worldly ambitions. He lived in a
pagan society, dominated by idol-worshippers, but he never subscribed to
their ideas, nor did he join them in their faith. He lived in that world
as a world to himself. He was respected by his enemies and admired by
his friends, and no prophet in history received as much as Muhammad did
of spontaneous obedience from his companions.

3 . The Strong Faith of the Early Muslims
-----------------------------------------

Due to the complete honesty and the influence of the appealing
personality of Muhammad, the faith of his companions in him was
unusually strong. It was based on their first-hand acquaintance with his
exemplary life.

We are told that the followers of Moses refused to enter Jerusalem when
commanded to do so and told him that he and his Lord should go to fight
the enemies. We are told that the multitudes who had gathered around
Jesus deserted him when the crisis came. Even his disciples deserted
him. His chief disciple denied him three times before dawn on that
fateful night. Similar situations happened to most of the prophets. None
of them enjoyed a true support from their followers when they
encountered a crisis.

The companions of Muhammad, however, were different. When Muhammad was
in Mecca, he and the hundreds of his followers were powerless and
without any legal protection. All of them stood the test of the crisis,
and none of them abandoned the faith or the Prophet. The actions of
those Muslims proved their faith in Islam and the Prophet. All of them
preached Islam and practiced what they preached, and every genuine
Muslim gave his faith a genuine support in word and in deed.

4. The Principles of Islam were a Great Source of Attraction Because they Were, and are, Logical and Clear
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Upon serious thought, one can easily accept a religious teaching which
declares the following: There is no God but the Almighty Who created the
whole universe; none is worthy of worship but He; He is the Lord alone,
without partner, associate, or son; He did not beget nor was He
begotten, and nothing is like Him; He is the Just, the Merciful, and the
Powerful, neither anthropomorphic nor physical; and His power
encompasses the whole universe.

Such a simple and uncompromising monotheism is readily acceptable to the
human mind which seeks an explanation to the existence of the world. It
does not confuse the human mind by stating that God is One and that He,
at the same time, is more than one. Nor does it represent God as a human
being born out of another human being.

5. The Principles of Islam are Consistent and Cohesive
------------------------------------------------------

They do not contradict each other, nor do they contradict any other
established truth. Christianity, Judaism, and Islam all advocate the
justice of God and His fairness. Islam, however, takes this fundamental
concept and follows it thoroughly. It builds on it many other religious
concepts which follow the concept of justice inseparably. When God is
just and fair, He does not impose on any soul to do what is beyond its
ability. Islam tells us also that the Most Just does not hold an
individual responsible except for what he does by his own choice. He
does not hold a person responsible for the sins of his father or
forefathers because he had no control over their actions.

Islam tells us also that because God does not hold a person responsible
for what his father did, He does not condemn the whole human race for a
sin that was committed before the existence of any human generation.
Such a condemnation is contradictory to the concept of the justice of
God. Instead of burdening mankind with the original sin, Islam tells us
that every human being is born pure and free of any sin, and will stay
so, until he commits a sin as an adult.

6. The Principles of Islam have a Positive Attitude towards all Aspects of the Human Life
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Islam, unlike many other religions, stresses the importance of both the
spiritual and material aspects of the human life. God, according to
Islam, does not want man to neglect his biological needs, nor is there
an intrinsical conflict between our response to these needs and our
spiritual development. On the contrary, the two sides are
interdependent. They merge in each other and can be united in most of
the human activities. A man who lacks the necessary food, warmth, and
shelter, can hardly meditate, perform a devotional duty, or do good for
other human beings. But when such necessities are satisfied, man can
easily direct himself to his Lord.

Therefore, the well-intended work for meeting the bodily needs ought to
be a portion of our religious duty. Religion, according to the Islamic
teaching, does not aim at suppression of the biological desires; it aims
at cultivating them and preventing the individual from becoming
excessive and harmful to himself or to society.

7. The Principles of Islam are Universal
----------------------------------------

The universality of the Islamic teaching can be shown in its
non-discriminatory teaching in regard to the human race, and in the
recognition of all the previous prophets.

Since the time of its birth, Islam has carried the brand of
universality. It addressed itself to the whole human race,
discriminating neither among nations nor among ethnic groups. Every
human being is a member of a huge family. No individual or nation is
God's chosen or favorite creation because of birth, nationality, or
belief in a particular dogma. People are equal in the sight of God, and
everyone may have an access to the kingdom of God, if he (she) is
righteous.

A truth never contradicts another truth. Therefore, Islam proclaims that
there is only one heavenly religion which has been revealed at different
times to the prophets whom the Almighty had commissioned to convey His
messages to mankind. It is inconceivable that the Almighty would reveal
a certain doctrine to one messenger and then reveal to another messenger
a doctrine that contradicts the first one. The Almighty has revealed his
heavenly principles, commandments and laws at different stages of the
human civilization according to the capacity of the human understanding.
The subsequent revelation supplements, and never contradicts, the
previous ones. Therefore, Islam says that it is a duty for every Muslim
to recognize and respect Jesus, Moses, and all true prophets and their
true teachings. This is repeatedly recorded in the Holy Qur'an:

***“Say: We believe in God and (in) that which has been revealed to us,
and to Abraham, …and that which was given to Moses and Jesus, and that
which was given to the prophets from their Lord. We do not make any
distinction between any of them, and to Him do we submit.” 2:136***

The Christians who were in contact with the Muslims in the early days of
Islam observed the great respect the Muslims had for Jesus. As a result,
millions of them embraced Islam, not because they wanted to abandon the
teaching of Jesus, but because they wanted to continue their adherence
to his true teaching within the coherent teaching of Islam.

**Wilson**: Does Islam advocate sending missionaries to convert
non-Muslims in a manner similar to that which has been practiced in
Christianity?

**Chirri**: Islam, like Christianity, invites people to its principles
and calls upon the non-Muslims to join its followers. However, Islam has
never organized missions such as those of Christianity. Whenever a
non-Muslim shows an interest in learning about Islam, it is the duty of
every Muslim to inform him. Such work, however, is far from being
organized missions.

The absence of clergy in Islam was one of the reasons for the absence of
organized missions parallel to those of Christianity. Another factor is
that a great number of Muslims incline to believe that Islam would
spread without missionaries. This inclination was a result of many
spectacular gains for Islam through no great efforts on the part of the
Muslims.

Millions of people in many countries embraced Islam, not through
organized missions, but through their contact with some Muslims who
impressed them with their integrity and sound principles. Those Muslims
imparted the ideas of their faith to the others, not because they were
sent by some authorities as missionaries, but because they believed that
Islam is every Muslim's business.

I have been in West Africa several times. I found numerous Christian
missionaries in that part of the world, but I failed to see any
organized Muslim missions. In spite of this, the consensus of the
opinions of the informed circles in this field is that Islam is
spreading more rapidly than Christianity in that area.

**Wilson**: Do you have any information about the number of Christian
missionaries throughout the world?

**Chirri**: The number of Christian missionaries throughout the world
(according to the Detroit News of Sunday, April 2, 1961) is 212,250.
This figure includes 170,000 Catholic missionaries and 42,250
Protestant. This huge army of missionaries is supported by thousands of
religious organizations who are spending billions of dollars every year
on these missions. Compared to this, the Muslims have some information
centers whose number throughout the world does not reach one thousand.
These centers do not enjoy any of the financial support which the
Christian missionaries receive, nor do they aim at converting others.
Their work is only to inform, within their limitation, those who seek
information about Islam.

**Wilson**: Some people attribute the spread of Islam to its leniency.
They think that Islam is less demanding of its followers than other
religions such as Christianity. What is your comment?

**Chirri**: I think that this opinion is not sound. Islam demands from
its followers more than many other religions do. It demands from the
Muslims to pray five times a day: before sunrise, at noon, in the
afternoon, at sunset, and in the evening.

It requires Muslims to fast thirty consecutive days every year during
the month of Ramadan. A fasting person is required to refrain from
eating, taking any liquid, and smoking from dawn to sunset. Islam
requires every physically and financially capable adult to make a
pilgrimage to Mecca and all the holy places in it and its vicinity,
where men are to renounce all luxuries and materials including sewn
clothes for a considerable time.

Islam also requires every Muslim to give a portion of his wealth every
year to charity. It prohibits liquor and pork. None of these things are
easy, and none of them show a leniency on the part of Islam. Nor is
there any leniency in its demanding from its followers to treat others
in a brotherly manner, protecting their reputation and refraining from
saying anything that may expose them, even those who do them harm.

**Wilson**: Some critics say that Islam promises the good Muslims a
paradise in which they will enjoy everything they may desire. These
critics think that Islam out-promises Christianity, and therefore, it is
attracting people through its promises.

**Chirri**: A promise is attractive only if it comes from a reliable
source. If a reputable company offers an individual a well-paying job,
he is likely to accept the position. On the other hand, if the same
individual is offered a position by an unreliable or a bankrupt firm, he
is expected to refuse the offer because he will not have any confidence
in the firm's financial reliability.

Similarly, I do not think that a convert would be willing to perform so
many duties and renounce so many desirable things for the sake of
promises if he does not have the confidence in Islam. No promise is
attractive if it is made by an unreliable source. Attractiveness of a
promise is a result of confidence. Faith in Islam, therefore, precedes
the attractiveness of its promise, not vice versa.

**Wilson**: History shows that the early Muslims were militant and
warriors. Many armed conflicts between Muslims and non-Muslims took
place in Syria, Egypt, North Africa, Spain, and many other places. Some
critics think that Islam was spread by force, and not by preaching and
discussion.

**Chirri**: Force may conquer the body, but it cannot conquer the
spirit. You may subdue an individual or community by the use of force,
but you cannot make them believe that you are right. The Algerians were
dominated by colonial France for about a hundred years, but that did not
make them love their rulers. As soon as they had the opportunity, they
rose in arms against their masters and broke their yoke.

It is illogical to believe that Islam had spread itself by force.
Muhammad, as one person, could not force thousands or hundreds to
embrace his faith. History testifies that Muhammad lived thirteen years
in Mecca after he proclaimed his faith, under a constant threat from his
opponents who were the overwhelming majority of the Meccans. Anyone that
desired to join Islam was denounced, threatened, and persecuted by the
Meccans; and, in spite of this, the number of Muslims steadily
increased. Can we conceive that Muhammad under these circumstances could
convert people by force when he himself was a subject of persecution?

At a later stage, the Muslims had become powerful enough to fight their
opponents; and history shows that they did fight for Islam. But this
does not mean that Islam had converted people by force. There are now
over 100 million Muslims in Indonesia and scores of millions in West
Africa. All these millions were converted through peaceful contacts with
Muslims who came to these areas as merchants or educators.

There is, however, no reason to deny that Muslims were militant. The
Muslims actually were good defenders of their freedom. We know that no
ideology would spread or live in an unfree society. Freedom of belief,
practice, and speech, are necessary for the growth of any ideology. In
the absence of a constitutional protection of freedom, it would be the
duty of the people of the ideology to secure their freedom on their own.
If this does not justify the military might of the early Muslims, there
will be no way to justify the military might of any modern nation that
rises in arms to defend its freedom when it is threatened by its
adversaries.


