The Creator of the Universe
===========================

**Wilson**: I know that the belief in God, the Creator of the Universe,
is the first article in the Islamic faith, and that the denial of His
existence puts a person outside the religion of Islam. But I do not know
whether Islam offers any concrete evidence on the existence of the
Supreme Being or whether it advises its followers to rely on the
authoritative words of the Qur'an and the statements of the Prophet.

**Chirri**: Islam demands from its followers to believe in God, the
Creator of the Universe, but it does not advise them to base such a
belief on the statement of any religious book or any authoritative
words, not even the word of the Holy Qur'an or of the holy Prophet. Our
belief in a holy book, such as the Qur'an, or in a holy prophet, such as
Muhammad, must be preceded by our belief in God.

A religious book is holy because it is introduced by a man whom we
consider a prophet. Prophethood is conceivable only if there is God,
because a prophet is a messenger of God. Our belief in God, therefore,
must come before our belief in a religious book or a prophet, not vice
versa. No religious book is believed by all people, and no prophet is
universally recognized. Therefore, it would be futile to rely on an
authoritative statement of a prophet or a holy book when dealing with an
atheist who disclaims all heavenly revelations and denies the whole
concept of God.

**Wilson**: Should I understand from your statement that Islam offers
for substantiating the existence of God some universal evidence which
may be considered even by those who are not committed to any religion,
such as the atheists and the agnostics? If this is what you mean, what
is that evidence?

**Chirri**: When our belief in God precedes any other religious belief,
the evidence which produces such a belief must be universal and
available to every rational being, whether committed or uncommitted to a
particular religion.

The Holy Qur'an offers the universe as evidence on the existence of its
Creator. The material world, its celestial bodies, the earth, and the
other planets, are viewed by Islam to be the main evidence of the
Creator of matter and energy. The material world is observable by the
atheist as well as by the believer, by the illiterate as well as by the
philosopher. One may reflect on the formation of the heavenly bodies and
the existence of the matter and energy without being committed to any
particular religion or recognizing any religious book.

**Wilson**: But why should a person consider the existence of the
material world as evidence of the existence of the creator of matter? Is
it not probable that matter existed without a creator? Suppose someone
views that matter or energy is infinitely old, and that it never was
preceded by non-existence. Would you be able to disprove his views?

**Chirri**: It is very hard to accept the idea that matter is infinitely
old.

When one says that matter or energy is infinitely old, one assumes that
the material out of which the billions of stars were built, existed
simultaneously. When we are aware that each star contains billions of
tons of materials, and that the balance of the raw material is much more
than the material which is contained in the stars and planets, we
realize the improbability of such an idea. We cannot conceive that all
these quantities of materials existed at once and that nothing of it was
preceded by non-existence.

To say that only a portion of the material is infinitely old, and that
the other portions came to existence at a later stage, is to admit the
need of a creator, because the inanimate material does not increase by
self-reproduction. Only living beings are capable of multiplying by
self-reproduction. To allow any gradual increase in the material
quantity is to admit the need of a creator.

**Wilson**: I may agree with you that matter and energy must have been
preceded by non-existence. But this is not very obvious to every human
being. Does the teaching of Islam suggest the consideration of anything
in the nature that was undoubtedly preceded by non-existence?

**Chirri**: Yes, there is something which we all know, and it was born
after the existence of the earth, namely: life. Our scientists state
that earth was too hot (and some of them say it was too cold) for any
kind of life to exist on it. It took the earth millions of years to
become a suitable place for life. Life, therefore, is, undoubtedly, a
newborn.

Science, however, tells us that life does not originate from non-living
being. Pasteur’s experiment, which took place in the 19th century, is
still standing. Through his sterilized soup, he proved beyond any doubt
that life does not originate from inanimate material. The scientists of
today are still unable to disprove his conclusion.

The earth, along with its atmosphere, at the time of its formation was
sterile and unproductive. Transforming the inanimate materials, such as
carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, calcium, and iron into a living being could
not, therefore, be done through a natural process. It must have been
done miraculously. This means that the existence of life on this planet
is a shining evidence on the existence of an Intelligent, Supernatural
Designer.

**Wilson**: You have made it very clear. As a matter of fact, the
scientists for several decades have tried ceaselessly to unseal the
secret of life and to explain its commencement on this planet. But their
intensified efforts so far did not produce any substantial knowledge in
this field. The presence of life on this planet is, no doubt, a great
wonder that could not happen without a supernatural cause. Man has
unsealed many secrets in the universe, advanced in his scientific and
technical knowledge, and even landed on the moon; but in spite of all
this, he is still unable to produce a leaf of a plant or a seed of an
apple.

**Wilson**: Now I would like to ask you if the Qur'an cites the
existence of life on our planet in substantiating the existence of God?

**Chirri**: Yes, the Holy Qur'an does cite the transformation of the
inanimate earth elements into living being as a sign of God's existence:

***“…and a sign to them is the dead earth: We made it alive and brought
forth from it grain so they eat of it and We made therein gardens of
date-palms and grapes, and We made springs to flow forth therein.”
36:33-34***

**Wilson**: So far, you have answered many important questions about the
existence of God, but there is one more important question you have not
dealt with: Why can we not see God?

**Chirri**: From our previous discussions, it became clear that the
Creator of the universe must be Absolute and Unlimited. He encompasses
the whole universe. He is Omnipresent and never absent from anywhere.
With His Omnipresence, His visibility is not going to make us believe in
Him or know Him. His visibility would be very destructive to us. Before
we know Him with His Omnipresence, we would perish. His visibility would
be blinding to every human being.

Suppose that the air (which exists only in a very limited space) is
visible. It would have a color, and we would not be able to see anything
but the air because it fills the atmosphere. Should this be the case, we
would not be able to acquire our food or water, nor would we be able to
find roads or shelters. If the visibility of the air which exists only
in the atmosphere of our little planet would be so blinding and
destructive, what would be the case of the visibility of the Creator who
encompasses the universe? When we think of this, we realize how
fortunate we are not to be able to see God, our Creator.

**Wilson**: If the Almighty is Invisible, how can we be sure of His
existence? How would an atheist believe in a God whom he cannot see?

**Chirri**: In order to believe in something, you do not necessarily
have to see it. You believe in electricity, yet you cannot see it. You
believe in it only because you see its products such as light, heat,
etc. If this is sufficient to make you a believer in the existence of
electricity, the great universe should be sufficient to every human
being to believe in the existence of its Creator.

**Wilson**: Give me an example other than electricity.

**Chirri**: Your very existence is a great evidence on the existence of
Adam and Eve, or let us say the first two human beings. You did not see
Adam and Eve, but you believe that they existed.

To make it more clear: You came through your parents. Your parents came
through their parents, and your grandparents came through their parents,
and so on. You may continue going back until you reach Adam and Eve. If
you deny the existence of the first two human beings, you would be
eliminating the first generation of their children. By eliminating the
first generation, you eliminate the second and what is beyond it.
Finally, you have to eliminate your own parents. Then you have to
eliminate yourself. But you say to yourself: I cannot do that because I
am here. Then you have to say: Adam and Eve were there.

**Wilson**: You have made the matter clear. We have to believe in God.
But how can we believe that He had no beginning while everything other
than Him had a beginning?

**Chirri**: The Creator of the universe cannot be preceded by
non-existence; otherwise, He would need another god to create Him; and
that god, if he is preceded by non-existence, would need another god and
so on. Thus, we would have an endless chain of gods without reaching a
causeless cause to be the source of the existence of the universe. Then
we have to deny the existence of the universe. We would also have to
deny ourselves because we are a part of the universe.


