Battles and events between Khandaq and Hudaibiyah
=================================================

Shaykh Tabarsi and Shaykh Mufeed etc. have narrated that the people of
Bani Mustaliq lived near a well called Marisi. Their leader was Harith
bin Zarar. He assembled others to march against the Prophet. When the
Holy Prophet (S) came to know about it he turned his attention to him.
At that time he was having 30 riders and his forces included some
hypocrites like Abdullah bin Ubayy. He took along Ayesha with him.

He set out from there on 2nd Shaban of the 5th year and some say it was
6th Hijri. When they came to know that most Arab tribes were present
with Harith they ran away in fear. And the Holy Prophet (S) faced them
in Marisi and after some skirmishing between the archers, the Muslims
charged and killed ten of the enemy, who where completely routed.

Some descendants of Abdul Muttalib were also martyred that day. Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) killed Malik and his son and the Muslims got victory.
The fruits of this victory were that two hundred families taken
prisoners, together with two thousand camel and five thousand sheep, all
of which plunder the Prophet divided among his followers after taking a
fifth to himself.

Ali brought him Juwairiya, daughter of chief, Harith bin Abi Zarar, and
he retained her. After her father became a Muslim, he waited on the
Prophet and represented that as his daughter was of noble birth, it was
not proper she should be held as a slave. The Prophet replied, “Go and
tell her to go wherever she pleases,” which permission was applauded by
Harith.

But when he urged his daughter not to disgrace her kindred by remaining
in a servile condition, she replied that she has chosen God and his
Prophet for her portion. Her father reproached her, but she remained
firm to her purpose. Juwairiya says that when “the Prophet’s army
attacked us in Marisia, I heard my father say: An army has attacked us
which we cannot face.

And I saw so many men, horses and weapons that cannot be calculated.
After I became a Muslim and the Holy Prophet (S) married me and I went
there, I saw that there were not as many Muslims as I had noticed. Then
I realized that it was an awe that the Almighty Allah had put into the
hearts of people. She says: “Three days before that I dreamt that the
moon has moved from Medina and come into my lap. I didn’t narrate this
dream to anyone. When I was taken a prisoner, I was hoping well because
of this dream. At last its effect became apparent.

Thus when people came to know that the Holy Prophet (S) has married
Juwairiya, they said: “This tribe has become in-laws of the Prophet, so
all the women received in booty must be freed.” In that battle, the
slogan of the Muslims was: “O helper of the Ummah!”

Shaykh Mufeed and Shaykh Tabarsi etc. have narrated that when the Holy
Prophet (S) went for the Battle of Bani Mustaliq, he camped in a
dreadful valley. When it was night, Jibraeel descended and said that
some infidel jinns were hiding there who planned to attack the
companions of the Prophet. The Holy Prophet (S) called for Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) and ordered him to drive out those jinns through the
exclusive power that the Almighty Allah has bestowed him with.

And he sent a hundred men with him and ordered them to remain with Ali
(a.s.) and do as he says. Amirul Momineen (a.s.) set out for that valley
and on reaching there instructed his men to halt at a place and not to
move from here until the Imam tells them and marched forward, seeking
the refuge of Allah from the mischief of enemies. He recited the great
names of Allah and entered the valley.

As soon as he entered a terrible storm ensued and the Imam’s men were
about to fall down. Amirul Momineen (a.s.) shouted: I am Ali Ibn Abi
Talib (a.s.), legatee and cousin of the Messenger of Allah (S); if you
have any courage, you should confront me. The Jinns assumed visible
forms and they appeared to be dark and black skinned, carrying blazing
flames.

They crowded into valley and Amirul Momineen (a.s.) was moving forward
reciting the Holy Qur’an slashing his sword to his right and left. When
they reached to them they disappeared like smoke. Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
recited the Takbir and came out of the valley and then stood with his
forces. When their signs disappeared, companions asked what he had seen.
“We were about to die of fright and we were also worried about you.”

Imam Ali (a.s.) said: “When they appeared, I challenged them in the name
of Allah and they became degraded and weak. I attacked them without any
restraint. If they had stuck to their stance, I would have killed all of
them. The Almighty Allah saved the Muslims from their mischief. Those
who had survived the attack came to the Messenger of Allah (S) and
embraced faith and prayed for security. When Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
returned to the Messenger of Allah (S), His Eminence said: Those Jinns
came here before you, in whose hearts the Almighty Allah had created
your fear. And they have become Muslims and I have accepted their
Islam.”

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that Surah Munafiqun was revealed in the
Battle of Bani Mustaliq which occurred in 5th Hijri. It was because
after the return from that battle, the Holy Prophet (S) had halted at a
well which had less water and Anas bin Siyar, a confederate of Ansar and
Jahja bin Saeed Ghiffari who was a neighbor of Umar came to the well and
both lowered their buckets into the well.

By chance their buckets hit each other and this developed into a
dispute. Jahja slapped Siyar and he began to bleed. Siyar called Khazraj
and Jajha called Quraish and a great mischief was about to occur.
Abdullah bin Ubayy heard the commotion and asked about it and when
people explained the matter, he became infuriated and said: “I never
wanted to join this trip.” Now we are most degraded among the Arabs and
I don’t think we will survive.

I am helpless to hear such things and unable to prevent them. Then he
said to his companions: “These are the fruits of your acceptance and
kindness that you gave them accommodation in your houses and helped them
through your wealth; protected them and gave them refuge. Your women
were widowed in their defense and your children were orphaned. If you
had driven them out of Medina they would have been in need of others.

If we reach Medina, our respectable folks will drive out the
down-trodden ones.” At that time Zaid bin Arqam who was just entering
puberty was present there. At that time the climate was very hot and the
Holy Prophet (S) was seated under a tree with Muhajireen and Ansar. Zaid
reported about Ibn Ubayy and the Prophet said: “Son, perhaps you heard
wrongly.” “No,” he said. “Perhaps you are saying this in anger.

He said, “No, by Allah.” “Perhaps he has tried to fool you.” “No. by
Allah, it is not so.” The Prophet told Saqaran, his slave to put the
litter on the camel, after which he mounted and set off from there
followed by his army, marched till the next morning, halting only for
prayers. Abdullah swore that he did not say what had been alleged, but
on the next march the Prophet received Surah Munafiqun, convincing
Abdullah.

This divine communication made the Prophet so heavy that his camel was
near lying down under him. It is narrated by Aban bin Uthman that his
object in this extraordinary march was to prevent dissension and strife
among the people. About this time Ubaidullah Ibn Abdullah bin Ubayy came
and said to the Prophet: “O Messenger of Allah (S), please let me know
if you intend to kill my father, I will get his severed head to you,
because the Aws and Khazraj know that no son is more kind to his father
than me.

I fear that if you order anyone else to kill him, and he does it, I
might not be able to see the killer of my father and I may lose control
and kill a believer for the sake of a disbeliever. The Holy Prophet (S)
said: “No, I will not kill him, and you continue to behave nicely to him
till he is with us till his enmity does not become clear.”

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that when those accursed
ones were exposed, their relatives came to them and said: “Woe be unto
you, you have become degraded, come to the Holy Prophet (S) so that he
may seek forgiveness on your behalf.” But they refused. At that
juncture, the Almighty Allah revealed the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ تَعَالَوْا يَسْتَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ
لَوَّوْا رُءُوسَهُمْ وَرَأَيْتَهُمْ يَصُدُّونَ وَهُمْ مُسْتَكْبِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when it is said to them: Come, the Apostle of Allah will ask
forgiveness for you, they turn back their heads and you may see them
turning away while they are big with pride.”***[^1]  
 Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated that during this journey, the Prophet
halted at a spring near Baqi, which was known as Baqa. During the halt
there was a terrible sandstorm which troubled the people and the
Prophet’s camel was also lost. The Prophet said that this storm was due
to the fact that a great hypocrite, Rafa-a, has died at Medina.

Another hypocrite in his party scoffingly said, “He pretends to describe
unseen matters, but does not know where to find his own camel.” Jibraeel
hereupon appeared and informed him that her bridle had caught by a
certain tree to which she had wandered. On arriving at Medina, Abdullah
bin Ubayy was prohibited by his own son from entering, till at last the
Prophet gave him permission. A few days afterwards he fell sick, died,
and went to Hell.

Kulaini has narrated through good chains from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that when Abdullah bin Ubayy died; for the sake of Abdullah’s son the
Prophet attended the funeral, for which he was reproached by Umar, who
said, “Why did you go to the burial of that hypocrite, since Allah has
prohibited you from attending on such occasion?”

“Woe to you!” retorted the Prophet; “do you know what prayers I said
over him? I prayed, “O Lord, fill his stomach with fire, and his grave
with fire, and bring him to the fire of Hell.” The Prophet was obliged
to disclose this in self defense since Umar wrangled with him to such a
degree.

Shaykh Tabarsi etc. have narrated that in every military expedition the
Prophet made, he selected by lot one of his wives to accompany him. When
he marched against Bani Mustaliq the lot fell on Ayesha, who
consequently went with him. At a certain stage, while the camels were
loading for the march, she went aside to reveal herself, and on
returning drew her hand across her bosom, and perceived that her
necklace of Yemen onyx was gone, the string having broken.

She went back to hunt for her necklace, and the army marched, it being
supposed by those concerned, that she was seated safely in the litter,
which was carried off as usual on her camel. Finding all were gone, she
sat down on the camp-ground, presuming she should soon be sent for and
fell sleep.

When she awoke Safwan bin Matal Aslami arrived at the spot and
recognizing the Prophet’s wife caused his camel to lie down and turned
aside till Ayesha had mounted. He then led his camel till he overtook
the Prophet’s army, that had halted for mid-day repose. This accident
gave Abdul Ibn Abi Salul and some hypocrites occasion for slanderous
reports.

On returning to Medina, Ayesha fell sick, and meanwhile found the
Prophet very cool towards her. On recovering her health, she went by
permission, to visit her father and mother, the latter of whom informed
her what ill surmises were afloat. She then understood the cause of the
Prophet’s coolness, and returning home wept the whole night.

The injurious reports led the Prophet at length to send for Usamah bin
Zaid and Amirul Momineen (a.s.), in order to consult them about
divorcing Ayesha. Usamah, who understood the Prophet’s affection for her
on account of her youth and beauty, recommended him to keep her, as
there as no evidence that she had behaved improperly.

But Ali remarked, “Allah is not rigid with you in such matters. Women
are plenty; if you are offended with Ayesha, divorce her and take
another; or if you prefer, make an investigation in the case by
demanding the testimony of her maidservant.” The maid was accordingly
called and testified to Ayesha’s perfect innocence At the same time, the
Almighty Allah sent his communication repelling the breath of slanderer:
In *Tafsir Nomani* it is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that
these verses were revealed about Abdullah Ibn Abi Salul, Hassan bin
Thabit and Mastah bin Athatha, because they had made slanderous remarks
against Ayesha.

And Ali bin Ibrahim has said in the interpretation of these verses that
according to Imams, these verses are about Ayesha and what occurred
during the Bani Mustaliq expedition. According to Shia scholars, these
verses are revealed as condemnation of Ayesha, because she had made
false accusations about Mariya, the Copt, and mother of the Prophet’s
son, Ibrahim. as will be described after this, Insha Allah Taala.

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that when the Holy Prophet (S) was in the
expedition of Badre-e-Sughra, he was passing through the localities of
Bani Ashja and Bani Zumrah. The Prophet had previously made peace with
Bani Zumrah. Companions said: “O Messenger of Allah (S), Bani Zumrah
reside near to us and we fear they might attack Medina or help the
Quraish against us. So please fight against them.”

The Prophet said: “It is not like this. Among the Arabs they are most
kind to parents and behaved nicely to the relatives and fulfill their
pledges.” And Ashja who were from Bani Kanana, lived near the locality
of Bani Zumrah, with whom they had a pact. Pastures in Ashja areas had
dried up and Bani Zumrah had sufficient grasslands and water. Therefore
Ashja set out to settle in Bani Zumrah area and the Prophet learnt that
they were proceeding to them, so the Holy Prophet (S) prepared for the
battle. At that juncture, the Almighty Allah revealed the following
verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنْ تَوَلَّوْا فَخُذُوهُمْ وَاقْتُلُوهُمْ حَيْثُ وَجَدْتُمُوهُمْ ۖ
وَلَا تَتَّخِذُوا مِنْهُمْ وَلِيًّا وَلَا نَصِيرًا. إِلَّا الَّذِينَ
يَصِلُونَ إِلٰى قَوْمٍ بَيْنَكُمْ وَبَيْنَهُمْ مِيثَاقٌ أَوْ
جَاءُوكُمْ حَصِرَتْ صُدُورُهُمْ أَنْ يُقَاتِلُوكُمْ أَوْ يُقَاتِلُوا
قَوْمَهُمْ ۚ وَلَوْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ لَسَلَّطَهُمْ عَلَيْكُمْ
فَلَقَاتَلُوكُمْ ۚ فَإِنِ اعْتَزَلُوكُمْ فَلَمْ يُقَاتِلُوكُمْ
وَأَلْقَوْا إِلَيْكُمُ السَّلَمَ فَمَا جَعَلَ اللَّهُ لَكُمْ
عَلَيْهِمْ سَبِيلًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…but if they turn back, then seize them and kill them wherever you
find them, and take not from among them a friend or a helper. Except
those who reach a people between whom and*** ***you there is an
alliance, or who come to you, their hearts shrinking from fighting you
or fighting their own people; and if Allah had pleased, He would have
given them power over you, so that they should have certainly fought
you; therefore if they withdraw from you and do not fight you and offer
you peace, then Allah has not given you a way against them.”***[^2]

Ali bin Ibrahim has said that Baida, Hull and Mustabah were Ashja
localities and they were near the Prophet and they feared that they may
be attacked by him and the Prophet was also wary of them, so he had been
planning to face them in battle. Meanwhile they came to know that 700
men of Ashja have come with their leader, Masud bin Rohela and are
camping at Sala pass. This incident took place in Rabius Thani of 6th
Hijri. The Holy Prophet (S) called for Usaid bin Hazir and said: “Go to
them with some persons and find out what they have come for.” Usaid went
to them with three men and made inquiries.

Masud bin Rohela stood up and saluted Usaid and his companions and said
that they had come to make peace with the Prophet. Usaid returned and
reported to the Prophet who said that they are frightened that I have
come to fight them, so they have come to make peace. Then he sent to
them ten loads of dates as gift and then went to them and asked why they
have come.

They said that they lived in neighborhood and due to their less numbers
they did not dare to take up arms and hence they were asking for peace.
The Prophet accepted their request and made peace with them and the next
day they returned to their areas and the Almighty Allah revealed these
verses about them. And it is narrated that in the 5th year Hijri the
Holy Prophet (S) married Zainab binte Jahash who was previously married
to Zaid, who had later divorced her. The same year Hajj became
obligatory.

Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated that in the 6th year of Hijri in the month
of Rabiul Awwal, the Holy Prophet (S) sent Akasha bin Mohsin on Umrah
with 40 men and they reached to the infidels of Mecca in the morning who
fled upon their arrival. They seized 200 camels and brought them to
Medina. The same year Ubaidah bin Jarrah was sent to a province to
destroy it. The people ran away from there but one was taken a prisoner
and he became a Muslim.

The same year, he sent Zaid bin Haritha with a battalion to Hamum which
was a town of Bani Sulaym. They brought a large number of sheep and
prisoners from there. That same year he was sent with 15 men to fight
Thalaba. All of them ran away. Forty camels were received as booty. That
same year Amirul Momineen (a.s.) was sent to fight Abdullah bin Saad in
Fadak because the Holy Prophet (S) had learnt that they intended to help
the Jews of Khyber.

That same year Abdur Rahman bin Auf was sent during the month of Shaban
to Domatul Jundal and was told that if those people submit, he should
marry the daughter of their king. They embraced Islam and Abdur Rahman
married Tamadhan binte Asba, the daughter of their ruler. That same year
the Battle of Arniya occurred.

It was because eight persons of Arniya tribe met the Prophet and
embraced Islam and said that they didn’t find the climate of Medina
suitable so they had fallen sick. Prophet sent them to his pasture land
in the desert to stay there and drink camel milk in order to regain
health. When they became healthy, they tortured to death the Prophet’s
shepherd and took away the camels.

When the Prophet was informed about this, he sent 20 men with Jabir
Fehri who caught all of them. The Holy Prophet (S) ordered that their
limbs be severed and that they should be crucified. Except for one camel
which they had killed, all the camels were recovered. Jabir reports that
the Holy Prophet (S) had prayed: O Lord, make them lose their way.

The Prophet’s prayer was accepted and they lost their way and were
finally arrested. That same year the Prophet’s army had plundered the
merchandise of Abil Aas, who was going to Shaam on business. He ran away
from there and his goods were brought to the Prophet, which he
distributed. Abil Aas entered into the security of Zainab, his wife. The
Prophet summoned the army men and said: “You know that Abil Aas is after
all, my son-in-law.

If you find it proper, restore his goods to him.” The people obliged. He
went to Mecca and returning the goods of people said: “By Allah, nothing
retrained me from embracing Islam except that you will say that I became
a Muslim because I didn’t wish to return your goods. After that, he
recited the Kalimah and became a Muslim. It is narrated that the same
year the Holy Prophet (S) recited prayer for rain and it rained and the
Prophet’s miracle was displayed as mentioned in the chapters of
miracles.

Some have said that the same year, Abd bin Ateek and Salam bin Abi Haqiq
were killed as was previously mentioned. Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated
that the Holy Prophet (S) that same year sent Muhammad bin Muslima with
some men to Hawazin who were in ambush for him and Muhammad bin Muslima
reached there all of a sudden and they killed him with his men. Ibn
Muslima somehow escaped with his life. And it is narrated that the same
year the Holy Prophet (S) set out for the Battle of Ghaba.

[^1]: Surah Munafiqun 63:5

[^2]: Surah Nisa 4:89-90


