Hudaibiyah and Rizwan
=====================

It is famous that the Battle of Hudaibiya occurred in the 6th year of
Hijri and some say that it was in the 5th year. Ali bin Ibrahim through
good chains, on the contrary through correct chains has narrated from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) in the exegesis of the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا فَتَحْنَا لَكَ فَتْحًا مُّبِينًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely We have given to you a clear victory…”***[^1]

…that this Surah was revealed and the great victory is that the Almighty
Allah commanded the Holy Prophet (S) in dream to enter the Masjidul
Haraam with Muslims, perform the Tawaf and shave their heads. The Holy
Prophet (S) narrated his dream to the companions and told them to come
with him till they reached Zil Halifah. They had brought with them
camels of sacrifice.

The Holy Prophet (S) had taken 63 camels and at the time of putting on
the Ihram, he marked each of them for sacrifice. And all of them tied
the Ihram for Umrah from Masjid Shajarah and set out reciting the
Thalbiya. And one who had brought an animal of sacrifice set out with
it. Some animals were naked and some were covered with horse cloth.

When Quraish learnt about it, they secretly sent Khalid bin Walid with
200 riders to stop the Holy Prophet (S) to lie in ambush and attack them
on the first opportunity. He followed the Holy Prophet (S) through the
mountains. On the way when it was time for prayer, Bilal recited the
Azan and the Prophet prayed with the people.

Khalid decided to attack at this time, because he knew that Muslims
never discontinued their prayers half-way and that it was the most
precious thing of their lives. But his plans were thwarted by Jibraeel
who instructed the Holy Prophet (S) to perform the prayer of fear:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا كُنتَ فِيهِمْ فَأَقَمْتَ لَهُمُ الصَّلاَةَ فَلْتَقُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when you are among them and keep up the prayer for them…”***[^2]

So the Holy Prophet (S) acted according to that command and the
idolaters were not able to attack. Thus on the following day, the
Prophet camped at Hudaibiya, which is near to the Holy Sanctuary. And
the Prophet on the way invited the desert Arabs to join Jihad and they
continued to decline saying: “Muhammad and his companions want to enter
the Holy Sanctuary although Quraish went to their town, fought with them
and killed them.

Now Muhammad and his followers will not return to Medina alive. When the
Holy Prophet (S) camped at Hudaibiya, the Quraish set out from Mecca
after swearing by Laat and Uzza that they will not allow Muhammad and
his companions to enter their town as long as they were alive. The
Prophet sent an envoy to them that he has not come to fight them; and
that he only wants to perform the Umrah and sacrifice the animals and
that he will leave their meat for them and go back.

They sent Urwah bin Masud, an intelligent man to the Prophet who said
that it was very difficult and almost impossible for the Prophet to
enter the Haram and said: O Muhammad, all the men, women and children,
young and old are camping outside Mecca and have sworn that as long as
they are alive, they will not allow you to enter the Haram.

Do you want to cast your people to perdition? The Holy Prophet (S) said:
“I have not come to fight them. I want to perform pilgrimage rituals. I
will also leave the sacrificial meat for you and go back to Medina.”
Urwah said: “By Allah, I have never seen anyone being stopped for having
such an intention.” Then he went to Quraish and conveyed the Prophet’s
message. They said: “By Allah, if Muhammad enters Mecca and Arabs come
to know about it, we would be degraded and Arabs will be emboldened
against us.

Then they sent Hafasa bin Ahnaf and Suhail bin Amr. When Prophet saw
them, he said: “It’s a pity that battles have made the Quraish useless
and weak. Why don’t they leave me for the Arabs so that if I am
truthful, I will be victorious with respect and honor and the rulership
of Quraish will be on Arabs. And if I am a liar, refuge of Allah, the
wolves of Arabs and bandits will remove my harm from Quraish. I will
definitely accept whatever the Quraish wants from me if there is no
displeasure of Allah. “Thus when those two came to the Prophet, they
said: “You go back this year. So that we may see how your matter
progresses, because Arabs have come to know that you have come to Mecca.

If you enter forcibly, they will think that we are cowards and they will
be emboldened against us. Next year, in the same month, for three days,
we will vacate the Holy Kaaba for you so that you may perform your
sacrifices and go back. The Holy Prophet (S) accepted this proposal.
They said: “There is also doubt that whoever from us goes to you, you
must return him to us and if anyone from you joins us, we would not be
obliged to return him to you.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “If anyone of us joins you, I am aloof
from him and we don’t need him. But the condition is that Muslims should
remain free in Mecca and no one should harass them in expression of
their faith and they must not be compelled to disbelief. They accepted
this condition even though companions of the Prophet were not prepared
to accept that and more than all, Umar was opposed to it.

He came to the Prophet and said: “O Messenger of Allah (S), are we not
on the right?” “Yes, we are.” “Then why should we accept such
humiliation?” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “The Almighty Allah has
promised victory to me and He never goes back on His words.” Umar said:
“If 40 men had supported me, I would have rebelled against Muhammad.”

Suhail and Hafas returned to Quraish and conveyed the good news. Umar
began to argue with the Prophet, “Did you not say that we will enter the
Masjidul Haram and shave our heads?” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “I
didn’t say that it will occur this year. I had said that the Almighty
Allah has promised me that I will conquer Mecca and perform the
pilgrimage rituals and shave my head.

When other hypocrites began murmuring among themselves, the Prophet
said, “If you don’t like the treaty, you should go and fight the
Quraish.” So they went to Quraish who were ready to fight, but when they
launched an attack, the companions fled from there in humiliation and
passed by the Holy Prophet (S) who smiled and told Imam Ali (a.s.): “O
Ali, pull out your sword and ‘welcome’ Quraish.”

When Imam Ali (a.s.) took out the sword and moved towards Quraish they
returned saying: “O Ali, is Muhammad regretful for making peace with
us?” “No, he is firm on his agreement.” At last, the companions came
back to the Messenger of Allah (S) and excused themselves. The Holy
Prophet (S) said: “Perhaps you think that I don’t recognize you.”[^3]

The rest of the report of Ali bin Ibrahim is as follows:  
 Hafas and Suhail on the part of Quraish reported that the Prophet
agreed to a truce with them on condition that Muslims might profess
Islam at Mecca free from molestation and the envoys were sent back to
conclude the treaty. The Prophet called Ali and ordered him to write the
articles. He accordingly began by writing, In the name of Allah, the
Beneficent, the Merciful, Suhail observed, “Write as our ancestors did:
In the Your name O Allah.”

“Do so,” replied the Prophet, “for that also contains the divine name.”
Ali then proceeded: “This is the decree and treaty of peace concluded
between Muhammad, Messenger of Allah (S) and the chiefs of the Quraish.”
Suhail again interrupted, saying, “If we had acknowledged you to be a
Prophet, we had not waged war against you. Write Muhammad bin Abdullah;
do you blush at your own lineage, that you assume such a style?” The
Prophet replied, “I am the Messenger of Allah (S), although you deny
it;” then addressing Ali he said, “Obliterate that expression, and
substitute Muhammad bin Abdullah.”

Ali replied, “I will never destroy your title as Prophet. He therefore
did it himself with his own blessed hand.” Amirul Momineen (a.s.) then
wrote: This is the treaty by which Muhammad bin Abdullah and the chiefs
of the Quraish make peace and established a truce for ten year, during
which period there shall be no war between the contracting parties, but
they shall let each other alone, shall not plunder each other, nor
practice fraud against each other, but shall lock up enmity and strike
in a box not to be opened: on condition that all who please may enter
into alliance with the Prophet and enjoy his protection, and all who
please may form alliances with the Quraish and enjoy their protection;
with this proviso, that whoever without permission from his chief may
resort to the Prophet, shall be delivered up but if any of his party
desert him they shall not be restored.

Moreover it is stipulated that Islam may be professed at Mecca, and no
one shall be disgraced annoyed or persecuted on account of his religion.
Furthermore, the Prophet and his companions shall return this year, yet
may come the next year and remain three days at Mecca but shall not
enter the city armed, except with such weapons as travelers require, and
swords shall not be drawn during their stay.

This treaty was witnessed by Ali bin Abi Talib and the Muhajireen and
Ansaris. The Prophet afterwards said to Ali, “You refused to expunge my
name, but verily, you will be obliged yourself to yield in a similar
instance to their children;” which came to pass when Ali concluded a
treaty with Muawiyah at Siffeen, where his title of Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) was denied him. two copies of the treaty with the Quraish were
written, one of which as kept by each of the contracting parties. After
this truce, the tribe of Khaza formed a league with the Prophet, and the
Bani Bakr with the Quraish.

The Prophet now ordered his companions to slaughter their sacrifices,
and shave their heads, but they refused, saying: “How can we do so
inasmuch as we have not performed the circuits round the Kaaba nor run
the courses between Safa and Marwah?” The prophet was sad at this
refusal and mentioned the matter to his wife, Umm Salma.

That mother of believers advised him to sacrifice his own camels and
shave his own head assuring him that the Muslims would follow his
example. The sacrifices were then offered although with doubts and heavy
hearts. The Prophet then exclaimed, God be merciful to those that shave
their heads. Some who had not brought camels to sacrifice, besought him
to implore mercy for the faulty, which he did, saying, God be merciful
to those that shave their heads and to those that err.

When the ceremonies were concluded, the Prophet and his people started
for Medina. At Tanaeem where the Prophet encamped under a tree those
that had opposed his truce with the Quraish, came humbly to confess
their faults, and begged the Prophet to implore forgiveness for them.

> إِنَّا فَتَحْنَا لَكَ فَتْحًا مُبِينًا ﴿١﴾ لِيَغْفِرَ لَكَ اللَّهُ مَا
> تَقَدَّمَ مِنْ ذَنْبِكَ وَمَا تَأَخَّرَ وَيُتِمَّ نِعْمَتَهُ عَلَيْكَ
> وَيَهْدِيَكَ صِرَاطًا مُسْتَقِيمًا ﴿٢﴾ وَيَنْصُرَكَ اللَّهُ نَصْرًا
> عَزِيزًا (3)

***“Surely We have given to you a clear victory, That Allah may forgive
your community their past faults and those to follow and complete His
favor to you and keep you on a right way, And that Allah might help you
with a mighty help.”***[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي أَنْزَلَ السَّكِينَةَ فِي قُلُوبِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
لِيَزْدَادُوا إِيمَانًا مَعَ إِيمَانِهِمْ ۗ وَلِلَّهِ جُنُودُ
السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۚ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ عَلِيمًا حَكِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He it is Who sent down tranquility into the hearts of the believers
that they might have more of faith added to their faith- and Allah’s are
the hosts of the heavens and the earth, and Allah is Knowing,
Wise.”***[^5]

Ali bin Ibrahim says that it is about those who did not oppose the
treaty of the Prophet with the idolaters.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيُدْخِلَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ
تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا وَيُكَفِّرَ عَنْهُمْ
سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ ۚ وَكَانَ ذَٰلِكَ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ فَوْزًا عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“That He may cause the believing men and the believing women to enter
gardens beneath which rivers flow to abide therein and remove from them
their evil; and that is a grand achievement with Allah.”***[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيُعَذِّبَ الْمُنَافِقِينَ وَالْمُنَافِقَاتِ وَالْمُشْرِكِينَ
وَالْمُشْرِكَاتِ الظَّانِّينَ بِاللَّهِ ظَنَّ السَّوْءِ ۚ عَلَيْهِمْ
دَائِرَةُ السَّوْءِ ۖ وَغَضِبَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلَعَنَهُمْ
وَأَعَدَّ لَهُمْ جَهَنَّمَ ۖ وَسَاءَتْ مَصِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And (that) He may punish the hypocritical men and the hypocritical
women, and the polytheistic men and the polytheistic women, the
entertainers of evil thoughts about Allah. On them is the evil turn, and
Allah is wroth with them and has cursed them and prepared hell for them,
and evil is the resort.”***[^7]

Ali bin Ibrahim says that it is about those who opposed the treaty and
laid allegations against the Messenger of Allah (S) regarding it. Some
commentators have said that these verses are about those whose help the
Holy Prophet (S) sought at the time of departing to Mecca and they had
said that the Prophet will not return from that journey as was mentioned
before.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ رَضِيَ اللَّهُ عَنِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ إِذْ يُبَايِعُونَكَ تَحْتَ
الشَّجَرَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly Allah was well pleased with the believers when they swore
allegiance to you under the tree…”***[^8]

…on the condition that after that they will never oppose whatever the
Prophet says or does in future. After that the Almighty Allah revealed
the following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُبَايِعُونَكَ إِنَّمَا يُبَايِعُونَ اللَّهَ يَدُ
اللَّهِ فَوْقَ أَيْدِيهِمْ ۚ فَمَنْ نَكَثَ فَإِنَّمَا يَنْكُثُ عَلَىٰ
نَفْسِهِ ۖ وَمَنْ أَوْفَىٰ بِمَا عَاهَدَ عَلَيْهُ اللَّهَ
فَسَيُؤْتِيهِ أَجْرًا عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely those who swear allegiance to you do but swear allegiance to
Allah; the hand of Allah is above their hands. Therefore whoever breaks
(his faith), he breaks it only to the injury of his own soul, and
whoever fulfills what he has covenanted with Allah, He will grant him a
mighty reward.”***[^9]

Ali bin Ibrahim says that the Almighty Allah was not satisfied with them
except on the condition that after that they will fulfill the divine
covenant and never break it. Since the sequence of the Qur’an is changed
it means this only, that the Almighty Allah will be satisfied with them
only on these conditions. After that the Almighty Allah has condemned
those Arabs who failed to attend the expedition of Hudaibiyah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَيَقُولُ لَكَ الْمُخَلَّفُونَ مِنَ الْأَعْرَابِ شَغَلَتْنَا
أَمْوَالُنَا وَأَهْلُونَا فَاسْتَغْفِرْ لَنَا ۚ يَقُولُونَ
بِأَلْسِنَتِهِمْ مَا لَيْسَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ ۚ قُلْ فَمَنْ يَمْلِكُ
لَكُمْ مِنَ اللَّهِ شَيْئًا إِنْ أَرَادَ بِكُمْ ضَرًّا أَوْ أَرَادَ
بِكُمْ نَفْعًا ۚ بَلْ كَانَ اللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ خَبِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those of the dwellers of the desert who were left behind will say to
you: Our property and our families kept us busy, so ask forgiveness for
us. They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say: Then
who can control anything for you from Allah if He intends to do you harm
or if He intends to do you good; nay, Allah is Aware of what you
do.”***[^10]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ ظَنَنْتُمْ أَنْ لَنْ يَنْقَلِبَ الرَّسُولُ وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ
إِلَىٰ أَهْلِيهِمْ أَبَدًا وَزُيِّنَ ذَٰلِكَ فِي قُلُوبِكُمْ
وَظَنَنْتُمْ ظَنَّ السَّوْءِ وَكُنْتُمْ قَوْمًا بُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nay! you rather thought that the Apostle and the believers would not
return to their families ever, and that was made fairseeming to your
hearts and you thought an evil thought and you were a people doomed to
perish.”***[^11]

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that when the Messenger of Allah (S)
returned from Hudaibiyah to Medina and set out for Khyber, those who had
not attended the Battle of Hudaibiyah sought permission to attend this
battle, so the Almighty Allah revealed the following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَيَقُولُ الْمُخَلَّفُونَ إِذَا انْطَلَقْتُمْ إِلٰى مَغَانِمَ
لِتَأْخُذُوهَا ذَرُونَا نَتَّبِعْكُمْ ۖ يُرِيدُونَ أَنْ يُبَدِّلُوا
كَلَامَ اللَّهِ ۚ قُلْ لَنْ تَتَّبِعُونَا كَذٰلِكُمْ قَالَ اللَّهُ
مِنْ قَبْلُ ۖ فَسَيَقُولُونَ بَلْ تَحْسُدُونَنَا ۚ بَلْ كَانُوا لَا
يَفْقَهُونَ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those who are left behind will say when you set forth for the
gaining of acquisitions: Allow us (that) we may follow you. They desire
to change the word of Allah. Say: By no means shall you follow us; thus
did Allah say before. But they will say: Nay! you are jealous of us.
Nay! they do not understand but a little.”***[^12]

Then the Almighty Allah said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَدَكُمُ اللَّهُ مَغَانِمَ كَثِيرَةً تَأْخُذُونَهَا فَعَجَّلَ لَكُمْ
هَٰذِهِ وَكَفَّ أَيْدِيَ النَّاسِ عَنْكُمْ وَلِتَكُونَ آيَةً
لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَيَهْدِيَكُمْ صِرَاطًا مُسْتَقِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah promised you many acquisitions which you will take, then He
hastened on this one for you and held back the hands of men from you,
and that it may be a sign for the believers and that He may guide you on
a right path.”***[^13]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِي كَفَّ أَيْدِيَهُمْ عَنْكُمْ وَأَيْدِيَكُمْ عَنْهُمْ
بِبَطْنِ مَكَّةَ مِنْ بَعْدِ أَنْ أَظْفَرَكُمْ عَلَيْهِمْ ۚ وَكَانَ
اللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And He it is Who held back their hands from you and your hands from
them in the valley of Mecca after He had given you victory over them;
and Allah is Seeing what you do.”***[^14]

Ali bin Ibrahim says that the Almighty Allah has reiterated His favor on
Muslims that they intended to fight and went to the Kaaba but the
Almighty Allah caused armistice between them and idolaters “even though
before that they had attacked Medina and you wanted peace but they did
not agree.” Shaykh Tabarsi says that after the victory of Muslims, the
implication of keeping them away from fighting the idolaters is that in
spite of the fact that during the year of Hudaibiyah the idolaters had
sent 40 persons to fight the Muslims and all of them were taken
prisoners and the Messenger of Allah (S) had released all of them.

Some say that they were eighty, who had come to Hudaibiyah in the early
morning to slay the Muslims. The Prophet had them arrested but later he
released them. And some say that the Prophet was sitting under a tree
and Amirul Momineen (a.s.) was writing the document of treaty. Suddenly
thirty armed youths attacked but were rendered blind through the prayer
of the Prophet and the Muslims arrested them. After that they were
released. After that is the remaining part of the report of Ali bin
Ibrahim that after the Almighty Allah mentions about the advantages of
the treaty, He said in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُمُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَصَدُّوكُمْ عَنِ الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ
وَالْهَدْيَ مَعْكُوفًا أَنْ يَبْلُغَ مَحِلَّهُ ۚ وَلَوْلَا رِجَالٌ
مُؤْمِنُونَ وَنِسَاءٌ مُؤْمِنَاتٌ لَمْ تَعْلَمُوهُمْ أَنْ تَطَئُوهُمْ
فَتُصِيبَكُمْ مِنْهُمْ مَعَرَّةٌ بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ ۖ لِيُدْخِلَ اللَّهُ
فِي رَحْمَتِهِ مَنْ يَشَاءُ ۚ لَوْ تَزَيَّلُوا لَعَذَّبْنَا الَّذِينَ
كَفَرُوا مِنْهُمْ عَذَابًا أَلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is they who disbelieved and turned you away from the Sacred
Mosque and (turned off) the offering withheld from arriving at its
destined place; and were it not for the believing men and the believing
women, whom, not having known, you might have trodden down, and thus
something hateful might have afflicted you on their account without
knowledge- so that Allah may cause to enter into His mercy whomsoever He
pleases; had they been widely separated one from another, We would
surely have punished those who disbelieved from among them with a
painful punishment.”***[^15]

Ali bin Ibrahim says that the Almighty Allah has announced that this
treaty was only effected, because if it had not taken place, all Muslim
men and women in Mecca would have been killed. After that they began to
express their faith openly. And the treaty was more beneficial to the
Muslims than war would have been.

Kulaini has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that when the Holy
Prophet (S) during Zilqad went to Hudaibiya, he reached the place of
Ihram and all followed his example and armed themselves. The Messenger
of Allah (S) came to know that the idolaters had sent Khalid bin Walid
to turn him back. The Prophet summoned a guide who can take him via
another route. A man from Maznia of Jahina tribe was brought for this
purpose.

The Holy Prophet (S) interviewed him and sent him back. Then he called
for someone else. He was also chosen from those two tribes. The Holy
Prophet (S) took him and set out from there till he came to the Aqbah
Hudaibiya. Danger was lurking there. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “The
Almighty Allah will forgive the sins of one who climbs from this valley.
Like the gates of Ariha from Bani Israel that whosoever entered it, and
does Sajdah and seeks forgiveness, will have his sins forgiven.”

One thousand eight hundred Ansar stepped forward and climbed the cliff.
When they reached the other side, they saw a woman and her son at a
well. The son began to run away in fear but his mother said that there
was no need to run away as the people who had crossed the cliff were
Muslims. The Prophet came to her and asked for some water, from which he
drank, washed his face and threw back the remaining water into the well.

By the auspiciousness of the Prophet that well is still full of water.
The Holy Prophet (S) came back with his army. After that Quraish sent
Aban bin Saeed with a number of mounted men to pursue the Prophet but
when he saw the sacrificial animals, he went to Abu Sufyan and said:
“Didn’t I adjure you to let the sacrifices proceed to Kaaba? But you
said: “Keep quiet you are a villager ignorant of the depth of the
matter.”

Aban said: “It would better to allow Muhammad to present his sacrifices
in Mecca. Otherwise I will stop all the Arab tribes who are in alliance
with you from helping you.” Abu Sufyan said: “Shut up, we will sign a
treaty with Muhammad.” Then he sent Urwah bin Masud who had previously
negotiated a matter related to a person killed by Mughira bin Shoba.

His story is that Mughira went with 13 persons of Bani Malik tribe to
the kingdom of Maquqas in Alexandria with trade goods but Maquqas
accorded more respect to Bani Malik. On the return journey, when Bani
Malik had been over intoxicated by drinks, Mughira slew them all and
fled with their goods and went to the Prophet. Although the Prophet
accepted his Islam, he refused to accept the goods as they were obtained
fraudulently.

And this matter flared up to a serious level but was diffused by Urwah
bin Masud. When the Holy Prophet (S) saw him approach, he said: “Place
the camels of sacrifice in the front.” Urwah asked: “Why have you come
here?” “To go around the Kaaba and perform the rituals of pilgrimage.”
Urwah said: “By Laat and Uzza, I have never seen a gentleman like you
being refrained from such intention.”

Then he said: “Your people adjure you in the name of God and for the
sake of relationship, not to enter their town without their permission.
And that you must not break off relations from them and not to embolden
their enemies against them.” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “I will not
return till I have fulfilled my duty.” Urwah returned to Quraish and
reported the matter and they now sent Suhail bin Amr and Khwaith bin
Abdul Uzza.

The Prophet told his men to put the camels of sacrifice forward. When
they came, they asked the Prophet the reason of his arrival to which he
replied that he has come to perform the Umrah and to sacrifice the
animals. Then the Holy Prophet (S) wanted Umar to go and meet the
Quraish but he excused himself on the pretext that no relative of his
remained in Mecca.

He suggested Uthman’s name for this. The Holy Prophet (S) sent Uthman to
Mecca and gave glad tidings that the Almighty Allah had given. Uthman
set out from there and on the way he met Aban bin Saeed who dismounted
and made Uthman sit in the front and in this way, they entered Mecca and
delivered the message of the Prophet. They were ready for a battle.
Suhail was negotiating with the Prophet and Uthman was with Quraish. At
that time the Holy Prophet (S) took the allegiance of Rizwan from the
Muslims.

Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated that idolaters took Uthman as captive and
the Holy Prophet (S) was informed that he has been killed. He said: “I
will not move from here until I have fought them. I call you all to
pledge allegiance to me,” and he sat reclining on a tree trunk.
Companions pledged allegiance that they will fight the idolaters and not
run away from there.

Kulaini has narrated that the Prophet placed one hand over another and
took allegiance on behalf of Uthman and said that if he breaks this
pledge he will be liable for a great chastisement. At that time, Muslims
said: “What to say of Uthman. He has performed the pilgrimage to its
end.” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “He will not do that.” When Uthman came
back, the Prophet asked if he had performed the Tawaf to which he
replied: “Since you have not performed it, I also have not performed it
and all that which was mentioned in the previous report is mentioned
here.

Till the treaty was finalized. The Holy Prophet (S) told Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) to write “In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful” “We
don’t know who Rahman is, except a person in Yemen who is named such,”
Suhail observed, “Write as our ancestors did, Bismeka Allahumma. “Do
so,” replied the Prophet, “for that form also contains the divine name.”

Ali then proceeded: This is the decree and treaty of peace concluded
between Muhammad, Messenger of Allah (S) and the chiefs of the Quraish.
Suhail again interrupted, saying, “If we had acknowledged you to be a
Prophet, we had not then waged war against you. Write Muhammad bin
Abdullah; do you blush at your own lineage, that you assume such a
style?”

The Prophet replied, “I am the Messenger of Allah (S), although you deny
it;” then addressing Ali he said, “Erase that expression, and substitute
Muhammad bin Abdullah.” Ali replied, “I will never destroy your title as
Prophet.” He therefore did it himself with his own blessed hand. Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) then wrote: This is the treaty by which Muhammad bin
Abdullah and the chiefs of the Quraish make peace and established a
truce for ten year, during which period there shall be no war between
the contracting parties, but they shall let each other alone, shall not
plunder each other, nor practice fraud against each other, but shall
lock up enmity and strike in a box not to be opened: on condition that
all who please may enter into alliance with the Prophet and enjoy his
protection, and all who please may form alliances with the Quraish and
enjoy their protection; with this proviso, that whoever without
permission from his chief may resort to the Prophet, shall be delivered
up but if any of his party desert him they shall not be restored.

Moreover it is stipulated that Islam may be professed at Mecca, and no
one shall be disgraced, annoyed or persecuted on account of his
religion.  
 Islam now began to flourish at Mecca. Among other converts, Abu Jundal,
the son of Suhail bin Amr became a Muslim and being ill treated by his
father when the truce was negotiating at Hudaibiyah, he broke from his
confinement and with his chains on him rushed and threw himself among
the Muslims claiming their protection which they were forward enough to
offer; but the Prophet as it was being stipulated in the treaty,
surrendered him to his father saying if he be a true Muslim, God will
deliver him.

Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated that the Holy Prophet (S) set out for Umrah
with 1400 men. When his she-camel reached Hudaibiyah, it stopped
automatically. All efforts failed to drive her on and the Holy Prophet
(S) said: “The God, Who stopped the elephant has also stopped my camel.”
Then he said: “By Allah, I will accept whatever the Quraish demand from
me if it is not against religion.” Then he halted at a well which had
scanty water. Companions complained of thirst. The Holy Prophet (S) gave
an arrow and asked them to put it at the bottom of the well. Water
gushed out in large quantities and all drank from it.

Budail bin Waraqa Khuzai, an earnest supporter of Meccans came to the
Holy Prophet (S) and said: “Kaab bin Royee and Amr bin Loee have agreed
with Meccans not to allow you to enter Mecca.” The Holy Prophet (S)
said: “I have not come to fight them. I have come for Umrah. If anyone
stops me, I will fight him to the end of my life.” Budail informed
Quraish about it and Urwah bin Masud arose and suggested: “Accept
whatever he says and don’t stop him.

I will go and talk to him.” When he came to the Prophet, he saw to what
extent the companions obeyed and respected him. How they competed with
each other in carrying out his orders. When the Prophet washed his hands
or performed ablution, how they fought with each other to get that
water. When they spoke to each other they never raised their voices as a
mark of respect. They never looked upon the Holy Prophet (S) with a
sharp glance.

When this conversation took place between him and the Prophet, he came
back to his people and said: “I have many times visited the Kings of
Iran and Rum but I have never seen such obedience and respect. Indeed
you should agree to his proposal and not engage in a battle with him.”
After that a man from Kanana said: “I will go and talk to him.” He came
to the Prophet and heard the slogans of Thalbiya raised and saw the
camels of sacrifice; he returned and told his companions: “They should
not be restrained from Tawaf of Kaaba.”

Makaz bin Hafas stepped forward and spoke some nonsense. After him came
Suhail bin Amr and the terms of treaty were finalized and it was
stipulated that if a person from Mecca goes to the Prophet, he would
send him back, but if someone from Muslims came to Mecca they will not
be obliged to return them. Muslims protested that it was unfair. The
Messenger of Allah (S) said: “If any of you goes to them, the Almighty
Allah and His Messenger is immune from him.

If someone from them comes to us, we will return him and if the Almighty
Allah sees Islam in him, He will give him deliverance. Meanwhile Abu
Jundal, the son of Suhail bin Amr became a Muslim and being ill treated
by his father when the truce was negotiating at Hudaibiyah, he broke
from his confinement and with his chains on him rushed and threw himself
among the Muslims claiming their protection which they were forward
enough to offer; but the Prophet as it was being stipulated in the
treaty, surrendered him to his father saying if he be a true Muslim,
Allah will deliver him.

The Prophet said that there was no danger for him, because he was going
to his parents. Shia and Sunni tradition scholars have narrated that
Umar bin Khattab said: “I never doubted the prophethood of the Prophet
except on the day of Hudaibiya. Although it was wrong and he had always
doubted in prophethood. Then he objected to the Prophet and said: “Are
you not a prophet?” “Why not?” “Are we not on the right?” “We are.”
“Then why do we have to accept such humiliation?” The Messenger of Allah
(S) said: “I am a Prophet and I do whatever the Almighty says, and only
He is my helper.”

Umar said: “Did you not say that we will perform the Tawaf and shave our
heads?” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “I didn’t say that we will do it this
year; if Allah wills, we shall do so in the following year.” Thus after
the treaty was concluded, the Holy Prophet (S) sacrificed the camels and
took off the Ihram and returned from there.

Abu Basir, a man from Quraish embraced Islam and came to join the
Muslims. Quraish sent two persons in his pursuit and reminded the terms
of the treaty. The Holy Prophet (S) gave Abu Basir into their custody.
On their return, they stopped with their prisoner two farsakhs from
Medina. He observed to one of his keepers, “That is a very fine sword of
yours.” “Yes, said the man, and it has several times been well proved.”

“Let me examine it,” said the captive. The man gave it to him, and he
instantly struck off its owner’s head and assaulted the man, who fled
for his life to Medina and entering the Masjid, had hardly told what had
happened when the crafty Muslim came up in pursuit. “This is a fine
occurrence to kindle war,” said the Prophet, “in case we should now
protect the man.”

Accordingly he said to him, “Take the clothes, arms, and horse of the
man you have slain, and go where you please.” Five other fugitive
Muslims joined him and they went to the seacoast between Ays and
Zilmarwah in the land of Jahina, and betook themselves to plundering the
Quraish. This party was joined by Abu Jundal and seventy Muslims that
fled with him from Mecca, and the band continued to receive
reinforcements till they numbered three hundred strong.

They were now composed of Bani Aslam, Bani Ghiffar and Bani Jahina and
all had converted to Islam. Every Quraish caravan they met, they
plundered killing all the men. The Quraish now sent Abu Sufyan to
beseech the Prophet to call in the band of robbers offering to give up
the stipulated condition of his surrendering fugitive. It does not
appear, however, that Abu Sufyan succeeded in his mission, and the band
continued their plunders.

Now those who had previously opposed the Prophet’s decision to return
Abu Jundal confessed that the Messenger of Allah (S) had acted with
wisdom and exigency. That same group had also looted the goods of Abul
Aas bin Rabi, who was a nephew of Lady Khadija (s.a.) and had sought
refuge with Zainab and then Muslims returned his goods and he embraced
Islam as was mentioned before.

Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated from Ibn Abbas that when the treaty of
Hudaibiya was concluded, a woman, Sabiya binte Harith Aslamia fled to
the Prophet professing Islam and she was demanded by her husband, a
disbeliever, Musafir from Bani Makhzum. So the Almighty Allah revealed
the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِذَا جَاءَكُمُ الْمُؤْمِنَاتُ
مُهَاجِرَاتٍ فَامْتَحِنُوهُنَّ ۖ اللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ بِإِيمَانِهِنَّ ۖ
فَإِنْ عَلِمْتُمُوهُنَّ مُؤْمِنَاتٍ فَلَا تَرْجِعُوهُنَّ إِلَى
الْكُفَّارِ ۖ لَا هُنَّ حِلٌّ لَهُمْ وَلَا هُمْ يَحِلُّونَ لَهُنَّ ۖ
وَآتُوهُمْ مَا أَنْفَقُوا ۚ وَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ أَنْ
تَنْكِحُوهُنَّ إِذَا آتَيْتُمُوهُنَّ أُجُورَهُنَّ ۚ وَلَا تُمْسِكُوا
بِعِصَمِ الْكَوَافِرِ وَاسْأَلُوا مَا أَنْفَقْتُمْ وَلْيَسْأَلُوا مَا
أَنْفَقُوا ۚ ذَٰلِكُمْ حُكْمُ اللَّهِ ۖ يَحْكُمُ بَيْنَكُمْ ۚ
وَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! when believing women come to you flying, then
examine them; Allah knows best their faith; then if you find them to be
believing women, do not send them back to the unbelievers, neither are
these (women) lawful for them, nor are those (men) lawful for them, and
give them what they have spent; and no blame attaches to you in marrying
them when you give them their dowries; and hold not to the ties of
marriage of unbelieving women, and ask for what you have spent, and let
them ask for what they have spent. That is Allah’s judgment; He judges
between you, and Allah is Knowing, Wise.”***[^16]  
 Ibn Abbas says that when this verse was revealed, the Holy Prophet (S)
asked Sabiya under oath if she has migrated for seeking the pleasure of
Allah or due to the dislike of her husband, or she wanted a new husband,
a new place or material wealth? She swore she had done all this for
seeking divine pleasure.

The Prophet declared that the stipulation in the treaty applied only to
men and that women who were true believers might remain under the
protection of the Muslims provided the dower they had received was
repaid to their infidel husbands. After this, whenever a man came he
turned him back and if a woman joined them, he used to examine their
faith and retain her after paying back the amount of dower to her
husband.

Shaykh Tabarsi, Qutub Rawandi and Shaykh Mufeed etc. Shia scholars and
the author of *Jamiul Usul* and most Sunni tradition scholars have
narrated that Suhail bin Amr came to the Prophet with a group of
idolaters and said that “a group of our sons, brothers and slaves have
come to you, who are ignorant of faith.

And they have ran away from their duties in our fields and pastures; so
you please return them to us.” The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “O
people, give up such claims, or I will send to you one who will strike
off your heads. Whose heart has been examined for faith.” Companions
asked: “Is it Abu Bakr?” “No.” “Is it Umar?” “No.” “Then who is it?” The
Holy Prophet (S) said: “One who is repairing my sandals.”

All ran out to see and found that it was Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.).” It
is narrated in *Jamiul Usul* that Abu Bakr and Umar asked: “Who is it, O
Messenger of Allah (S).” the Holy Prophet (S) replied: “One who is
stitching my sandals.”

Shia and Sunni tradition scholars have narrated that when the Holy
Prophet (S) set out for Hudaibiyah, he halted at Johfa, but there was no
water there. The Holy Prophet (S) gave water skins to Saad bin Malik to
bring water but he came after having gone for some distance and said
that he was scared to go ahead.

The Messenger of Allah (S) sent another man but he also returned empty
handed. At last he called for Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and gave the skins
to him. He went out and returned after sometime with the skins full of
water. The Holy Prophet (S) was much pleased at this and he prayed for
him.

Among other miracles displayed in that expedition was one narrated by
Shia and Sunni scholars through Baraa bin Azib that he said: “You think
that the conquest of Mecca is the greatest victory but we consider this
status to be held by Allegiance of Rizwan and the treaty of Hudaibiyah.
We were 1400 men and there was a well at Hudaibiyah which soon became
empty.

The Holy Prophet (S) was informed and he came to the well, and gargled
some water and threw it in the well and water began to gush out from the
bottom of the well which was sufficient for our men and beasts.
According to another report, the Holy Prophet (S) cast his saliva in the
well and one more report says that he took out an arrow from his quiver
and dropped it in the well.

It is narrated from Salam bin Abil Jaad etc. by Shia and Sunni scholars
that he said: We were 1500 persons on the day of the allegiance of the
tree and all of us were extremely thirsty. So the Messenger of Allah (S)
called for water in a vessel and put his hand in it. Streams of water
gushed forth from his blessed fingertips which was sufficient for all of
us. Even if we had been a hundred thousand men, it would have sufficed
us.

Kulaini has narrated through good chains for Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) in
the exegesis of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آمَنُوا لَيَبْلُوَنَّكُمُ اللَّهُ بِشَيْءٍ مِنَ الصَّيْدِ تَنَالُهُ
أَيْدِيكُمْ وَرِمَاحُكُمْ لِيَعْلَمَ اللَّهُ مَنْ يَخَافُهُ
بِالْغَيْبِ فَمَنِ اعْتَدٰى بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ فَلَهُ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah will certainly try you in respect of some game which your
hands and your lances can reach, that Allah might know who fears Him in
secret; but whoever exceeds the limit after this, he shall have a
painful punishment.”***[^17]

The Almighty Allah tested the Muslims during the Umrah of Hudaibiya
through wild animals and they used to enter their tents, so close that
they could be caught by bare hands or hunted by spears, like Bani Israel
was tested with excess of fish on Saturday.

Qutub Rawandi has narrated that during the Battle of Hudaibiya, Muslims
were struck by hunger and food was scarce, because they had to halt
there for more than 10 days. When they complained about it to the
Messenger of Allah (S) he told them to spread a sheet and bring whatever
eatables they had. Some flour and a few date fruits were brought. The
Holy Prophet (S) stood up and prayed for increase in the food. Then he
called for their respective vessels, which the companions soon brought
there. They filled their vessels with the food and took them away.

[^1]: Surah Fath 48:1

[^2]: Surah Nisa 4:102

[^3]: The author says: The Prophet spoke in this sharp tone with Umar
when he criticized that the Prophet has gone back on his words. And Ibn
Abil Hadid has by this derived that Umar ran away from Battle of Uhud
also.

[^4]: Surah Fath 48:1-3

[^5]: Surah Fath 48:4

[^6]: Surah Fath 48:5

[^7]: Surah Fath 48:6

[^8]: Surah Fath 48:18

[^9]: Surah Fath 48:10

[^10]: Surah Fath 48:11

[^11]: Surah Fath 48:12

[^12]: Surah Fath 48:15

[^13]: Surah Fath 48:20

[^14]: Surah Fath 48:24

[^15]: Surah Fath 48:25

[^16]: Surah Mumtahina 60:10

[^17]: Surah Maidah 5:94


