Expedition of Umratul Qaza – letters inviting Kings to embrace Islam – events upto the Battle of Mutah
======================================================================================================

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that when the Prophet returned from the
conquest of Khyber, he sent Usamah bin Zaid against some Jew town in the
vicinity of Fadak. In one of these places was a Jew, Marwas bin Namaik
Fadaki, who fled from the Muslims with his family to the mountain where
being overtaken he repeated the creed of Islam, but Usamah not crediting
his conversion put him to death When the detachment returned and
reported their success, the Prophet blamed Usamah for slaying the
confessing Jew but he said he was repeating the Kalimah merely through
fear.

“Did you remove the veil of heart and learn that?” demanded the Prophet,
“What have you to do with his heart?” Immediately the Almighty Allah
sent down this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَقُولُوا لِمَنْ أَلْقٰى إِلَيْكُمُ السَّلَامَ لَسْتَ مُؤْمِنًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and do not say to any one who offers you peace: You are not a
believer.”***[^1]

So Usamah vowed that he would never fight one who recites the Kalimah
and he didn’t even accompany Imam Ali (a.s.) in his wars. Thus the
latter sin of Usamah was worse than his previous mistake.

Shaykh Tabarsi and other scholars have narrated that in the seventh year
of the Hijrat, and a year after the treaty concluded at Hudaibiyah, the
Prophet and his companions set out on a pilgrimage to Mecca, where
according to the stipulation of the treaty, they remained there for
three days. The idolaters cleared the city for him, and ascended the
surrounding mountains, from whence they watched the ceremonies of the
Muslims.

The Prophet ordered his followers to exhibit agility and strength in the
courses between Marwah and Safa in order to inspire the infidels with
awe of their prowess. Abdullah bin Rawaha was reciting a Rajaz before
the Prophet and was carrying a sword.

It is related from Zuhri that previous to this pilgrimage, the Prophet
had sent Ja’far bin Abu Talib to Mecca to solicit for him in marriage
Maimoona, daughter of Harith and sister of Umm Fazl, the wife of Abbas.
Maimoona constituted Abbas her agent and he settled the condition of her
marriage with the Prophet.

Kulaini has narrated through reliable chains from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that the Holy Prophet (S) laid a condition on Quraish that they
should clear all idols from Safa, so that Muslims can perform the Tawaf.
There was a Muslim man who was so occupied that he didn’t perform the
Tawaf. So the Quraish brought their idols back and people told the
Prophet that so and so has not performed the Sayy and Quraish have
brought back their idols. At that juncture, the following verse was
revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الصَّفَا وَالْمَرْوَةَ مِنْ شَعَائِرِ اللَّهِ ۖ فَمَنْ حَجَّ
الْبَيْتَ أَوِ اعْتَمَرَ فَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْهِ أَنْ يَطَّوَّفَ
بِهِمَا ۚ وَمَنْ تَطَوَّعَ خَيْرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely the Safa and the Marwah are among the signs appointed by
Allah; so whoever makes a pilgrimage to the House or pays a visit (to
it), there is no blame on him if he goes round them both; and whoever
does good spontaneously…”***[^2]

After three days, when the Holy Prophet (S) set out from Mecca, Hamza’s
daughter asked him not to leave her at Mecca. Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
brought her to Fatima and told her to take her cousin along.

It is mentioned in some reliable books that in the sixth year of Hijri,
the Holy Prophet (S) wrote to kings inviting them to Islam. In the same
year, the Prophet set the example to Muslim of wearing a ring on his
finger. About this epoch he sent six men with letters to as many kings,
summoning them to embrace Islam; namely Khatib bin Abu Baltah to
Maquqas; Dahyah bin Khalifa to emperor of Rum; Abdullah bin Huzaifa to
Kisra, emperor of Iran; Amr bin Umayyah to Najjashi; Shujan bin Wahab to
Harith bin Abu Shimr; and Saleet bin Amr to Hozet bin Ali. Maquqas
honored the letter he received, kissed it, and wrote in reply, that he
had known another prophet was to appear, and that he respected the
claims of the Prophet, to whom he sent four girls, one of whom was
Mariya, afterwards the mother of Ibrahim and another, her sister Sireen.

He likewise sent an ass named Afeer or Yafur, and a mule called Duldul.
Maquqas did not became a Muslim. yet the Prophet accepted his present
observing He has by this adorned his reign, but his kingdom shall not
endure The Prophet kept Mariya for himself, and gave her sister, Sireen
to Hassan bin Wahab.

Kaiser, whose proper name was Harqal, appearing dejected one morning his
courtiers asked him the reason, that he had dreamed that king of the
circumcised had arisen. His scholars answered that they knew of no
people but the Jews who practiced that rite as to these they are under
your authority and if you please you can order them all to be slain and
thus remove all ground of fear on this account.

While this conservation was going on, a messenger from the governor of
Busra arrived. bringing with him an Arab whom he presented before the
monarch with the explanation that the man brought news of several
wonderful things which had occurred. Harqal then commanded his
interpreters to question the Arab about the events alluded to. On being
interrogated, the man said, “A person has arisen among us claiming to be
a Prophet some believing in and obey him while others oppose him and
consequently the flame of war and slaughter blazes among us.”

Harqal demanded if this Arab was circumcised and finding that he was
exclaimed, “Now the interpretation of my dream is apparent.” The emperor
immediately summoned his general and ordered him to search the whole
kingdom of Shaam for some relative of the Prophet and if he found such a
man to bring him to royal court.

The commander-in-chief soon found Abu Sufyan, who visited Shaam for
trade, and brought him to Harqal, Abu Sufyan’s account of this matter as
related by Ibn Abbas is that after he had concluded the truce with the
Prophet, he went with a company of Quraish on a mercantile expedition to
Shaam where he was met by a party of mounted men, who, understanding his
relationship to the Prophet, carried him and his companions to Harqal.

Abu Sufyan was presented before the monarch who was surrounded by all
the great men of Rum. Harqal then demanded through an interpreter, which
of the Arab party was most nearly related to the man of their country
claiming to be a Prophet. Abu Sufyan answering that he was the nearest
related to the Prophet, the emperor ordered him to be brought near and
the rest of the party to listen to what he said and confirm it if true,
and confute it if false.

In relating the story Abu Sufyan observed, “Had it not been that I was
ashamed to be convicted of lying before the king verily I had told him
nothing but lies.” Harqal first demanded what was the family rank of the
man claiming to be a Prophet. Abu Sufyan replied that his lineage was
the most noble among the Arabs. “Has any one of your people ever before
claimed to be a Prophet?” “No.” “Has any of this man’s ancestor been
king?” “No.” “Do the chief and principle men follow him or the poor and
needy?” “The latter class are his followers.”

“Do his adherents increase or diminish?” “They increase.” “Are any who
embrace his religion afterwards ashamed of it?” “No.” “Before claiming
to be a Prophet was he considered a liar among you?” “No.” “Did you ever
witness anything like fraud in him?” “No we have formed a truce with him
for a period and cannot tell if he will attempt stratagems against us in
this matter; which,” added Abu Sufyan “was all I could say on that
subject.”

Harqal continued: “Have you ever fought against him?” “Yes.” “What was
the result?” “Our wars have been attended with alternate success.” “What
does he enjoin on his followers?” “He required the worship of god and
forbids associating anything with the Deity, and commands us to forsake
the precepts of our fathers, to perform prayers, to bestow charity, and
to be chaste and benevolent.” Harqal then said to Abu Sufyan through the
interpreter: “If what you have stated is true, the Prophet will soon be
master of this place. If it were possible I would go to him and would
wash his feet.”

Harqal then called for the letter addressed to him by the Prophet which
was as follows: In the name of God the compassionate the merciful: This
is a letter from Muhammad bin Abdullah, the apostle and servant of God
to Harqal chief of Rum. The peace of God be on him that follows the true
direction in religion. Now know you, I call on you to embrace Islam.
Become a Muslim that you may be secure, punishment both in this world
and the next.

Obey, that God may double your reward. If you do not accept the offer
made you on you, will be responsible for the sin of your subjects who in
consequence of your example do not believe. The letter concluded with
this passage from the Qur’an: “O you who have received the scripture
come to a just determination between us and you that we worship not any
except God and associate no creature with Him; and that the one of us
take not the other for lords beside God But if they turn back say, Bear
witness that we are true believers.”

Disputation and confusion now arose in the court and the Arabs were sent
away. It is related by Qutub Rawandi that Harqal after reading the
letter, summoned his chief scholar, whose name was Askaf, who examined
the epistle, and declared that its author was Muhammad of whom Isa had
announced the glad news.

“I acknowledge his truth,” said Askaf, “and yield him obedience.”
“Should I do so,” said Harqal, “My royalty would be forfeited.” Kaiser
indeed, wished to profess Islam. The Christian assembled to kill Askaf,
who called Dahyah, the bearer of the letter and charged him to tell his
master that he had acknowledged the unity of Muhammad, but the
Christians did not regard his words. He came out and was martyred by the
Christians.

It is related by Qutub Rawandi that Harqal sent a Ghassani man to the
Prophet and charged him to observe what he sat upon who sat on his right
and to get if possible, a view of the seal of prophethood. On his
return, he reported to the king that he found the Prophet seated on the
ground water boiling up under his feet, and his cousin, Ali sitting on
his right.

I had forgotten the seal, said the man but he reminded me of it, and
allowed me to see it between his shoulders. Harqal replied: “He is the
Prophet predicted by Isa.” Then he told them to go and tell the Prophet
that he should come and share his rulership as he cannot leave his
kingdom.

Kisra, the King of Iran, on reading the Prophet’s letter tore it to
pieces. The Prophet therefore pronounced the curse on him that his
sovereignty should soon pass away, which was verified. The letter which
was sent through Abdullah bin Hazafah, was as follows: In the name of
Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful:

This is a letter from Muhammad the Messenger of Allah (S) to Kisra chief
of Fars: peace be to him that follows religious direction and believes
in God and the Prophet and testifies to the unity of God who has no
associate, and that Muhammad is His servant and apostle. I summon you in
God’s stead, for I am Messenger of Allah (S) to all people to inspire
fear in all that live and to show divine signs to infidels. Become,
then, a Muslim, that you may be secure from the wrath of God. If you
refuse, all the sins of the Majoosis will rest upon you.

Kisra was so enraged he tore the letter to pieces, exclaiming, “Does my
slave write me thus and put his own name before mine!” The Prophet
cursed him that his kingdom will also be torn thus. According to another
traditional report he sent a handful of dust. The Holy Prophet (S) said:
Very soon my community will take over his lands as he has sent a handful
of dust to me.

He then sent an order to Bazan, his governor in Yemen, to dispatch two
strong men to seize the fellow in Hijaz that claimed to be a Prophet and
had the audacity to write such a letter to the great king, and bring him
prisoner to his presence.

Bazan accordingly sent Banuba and another man, Kharkasak or Firoz or
according to another report, he told the Prophet to give up his claim or
face dire consequences. He wrote saying, “The command of the king of
Non-Arab is that you go with these men to his presence.” On their
arrival at Medina, they waited on the Prophet and said, “Kisra has
commanded Bazan to summon you to appear before his Majesty.

If you go with me, I will intercede for you with the king so that no
harm shall befall you if you refuse to go why then you know he will
destroy you and your people and desolate the country.” It is related
that they appeared with their beards shorn and their mustaches hanging
over their mouths.

The Prophet was disgusted at this fashion and said, “Who ordered you to
appear in such a style?” They replied, “Our lord, Kisra.” He replied,
“But my Lord has commanded me to wear a long beard, and to trim the
mustaches even with the upper lip.” He then ordered them to withdraw,
and visit him the next day.

When they waited on him as directed, he said, “My Lord has informed me
that last night Kisra was slain. God has incited his own son Shiruyahs
to kill him. Carry this answer to Bazan: that my kingdom will extend
throughout the earth and the empires of Kaiser and Kisra will be
conquered by my seat and tell him if he became a Muslim, I will leave
him in the enjoyment of his present possessions.”

The messengers returned to Bazan and reported the Prophet’s answer and
declared they never witnessed such power of inspiring awe as he
possessed in any king notwithstanding he lived like a poor and humble
man. Bazan said, “This report does not denote a king a king but a
Prophet I will wait till his truth or falsehood is manifest.

After some days a letter from Shiruyah reached Bazan saying, “I have
killed Kisra because he killed the chief of Fars. Take oath of
allegiance to me and do not molest the man Kisra ordered you to punish,
till you receive further commands from me.” Bazan and a party of Farsis
who were with him now became Muslims. It is said that Firoz was one of
the two men sent to the Prophet and that he became a Muslim and when Isa
the false Prophet arose, the Prophet ordered Firoz to put him to death.

Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that an angel appeared three successive
years to Kisra, with a staff, saying, “Become a Muslim or I will break
this.” Kisra replied: “Wait for sometime.” Then he summoned his guard
and scolded them for having allowed that man to enter his bedroom. Next
year the angel came to him again and he again told him to wait for
sometime. They third time the angel broke the staff and that night Kisra
was slain by his son.

The Prophet sent Amr bin Umayyah to Najjashi, with a letter respecting
Ja’far bin Abu Talib and his companions. the king honored the letter,
kissed it, and raised it to his eyes. He humbled himself at the message
of the Prophet so as to descend from his throne and sit upon the ground,
and he became a Muslim.

It is related that he sent his son and sixty Habashis to meet the
Prophet, but the vessel in which they embarked, floundered at sea, and
all perished. Some affirm that this Najjashi was not the same individual
to whom Ja’far went, but we shall not debate it as much has already been
said about Najjashi. Harith bin Shimr Ghasani, to whom the Prophet
addressed a letter did not believe, and his power soon passed away and
he died in the year of the conquest of Mecca.

Hozet bin Ali honored the letter he received, and proposed to share his
kingdom with the Prophet, who foretold that he would soon lose his
dominions, and in the year Mecca was taken, he went to Hell. Qutub
Rawandi has narrated from Jurair bin Abdullah Bajali that the Prophet
gave him a letter and sent him to Zilakalah of Himyar and it had a
better effect, for he embraced Islam and marched to Medina with a large
army to join the Prophet.

On his way he passed a recluse’s cell who, understanding his object,
said it is probable that the Prophet has departed to the eternal world,
for I was just now reading the book of Danyal and perused the account
there given of the Prophet and of period of his life, and when I made a
calculation, I found he must have departed this very hour. At this news,
Zilkala returned home, and the bearer of the letter to him, Jurair bin
Abdullah, proceeding on to Medina, found the recluse’s calculation had
been perfectly correct.

It is narrated that in the 6th year of Hijri, Khawla binte Thalaba came
to the Prophet and complained about her husband, Aws bin Thabit that he
had done Zihar with her. In the same year, the Prophet sent Alau bin
Khazramy to Manzar bin Shazy, governor to Bahrain, to summon him to
embrace Islam or pay tribute.

The country of Bahrain was under the dominion of the emperor of
Non-Arab. Manzar with the Arabs embraced Islam, but the Jews and the
Christian of that country agreed to pay tribute. Thus Bahrain was
conquered without war. Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated from Zuhri that the
Holy Prophet (S) after the conquest of Khyber sent Abdullah bin Rawaha
with 30 riders including Abdullah bin Anis to Bashir bin Wazam, the Jew,
because it was learnt that he was mobilizing Ghatfan tribe to fight the
Prophet.

When they arrived there, they said: “Prophet is calling you to appoint
us as his governor in Khyber.” He agreed after much discussion and set
out with 30 men. Each Muslim accompanied one Jew. After traveling for
two farsakhs, Bashir regretted his decision and decided to slay
Abdullah. Abdullah was a very sharp character; he at once understood and
slashed his leg severing it.

He landed a blow with a stick on Abdullah’s head and it started
bleeding. Muslims killed all the Jews, except one who escaped with his
life. No one was killed from the Muslims. When they returned to the
Prophet, he applied his saliva on Abdullah’s head and he was immediately
cured. Then the Holy Prophet (S) sent Abdullah to Bani Marra and he
killed some of them and arrested some and presented to the Prophet. The
Holy Prophet (S) sent Uyyana bin Hasan to Bani Ambar. He also killed
some of them and took some prisoners.

It is mentioned in some reliable Sunni books in the events of the
seventh year that when the Holy Prophet (S) returned from Khyber, he
camped near Masjid Shajara and asked Bilal to remain awake but he was
overcome by sleep and all awoke after sunrise. That Prophet recited Qaza
prayers with the companions.

Discussion about this in connection with mistakes has passed before. It
is related that in this same year, the sun after setting, was brought
back at the prayer of the Prophet, for Ali to perform worship, he having
been prevented from doing so at the appointed hour by the Prophet laying
his head in Ali’s lap and being detained there by a divine
communication. Tahawi, a celebrated Sunni scholar, has narrated in
*Mushkilus Hadith* from Asma binte Umais through two chains of narrators
that the head of the Holy Prophet (S) was in Ali’s lap when descent of
revelation began.

Imam Ali (a.s.) had not prayed the Asr prayer but the sun set. After the
revelation was complete, the Prophet asked: “O Ali, have you offered the
prayers?” “No,” said the Imam. The Prophet prayed and the sun returned
from the west after it had set. This incident took place at Sahba, near
Khyber. Tahawi says that it is an authentic report testified by reliable
authorities.

It is narrated that in the same year, Najjashi proposed to Umm Habib,
daughter of Abu Sufyan on behalf of the Prophet and sent her to him. It
was in this year that Shiruyah killed his father on the tenth of
Jamadius Thani on Monday night, seven hours after sunset. In the seventh
year, also Maquqas sent Mariya and his other presents to the Prophet.
That same year the Prophet married Maimoona, daughter of Harith.

In the eight year of the Hijrat, the Prophet married Fatima, the
daughter of Zahak. She manifested dislike for him, being prejudiced by
Ayesha and Hafasa. The Prophet therefore divorced her and sent her back
to her family. In the eighth year, a pulpit was built in the Masjid for
the Prophet, previous to which he had leaned against a date-tree post in
addressing the people. Some say it was in the seventh year.

A woman’s son worked as a carpenter, she asked him the Prophet if he
would mind if he prepares a pulpit for him. The new pulpit had three
legs. When the Prophet mounted the pulpit on Friday, the date-tree post
began to wail in separation of the Prophet till it split. The Prophet
descended from the pulpit and consoled it. Then he returned to the
pulpit and completed the sermon.

[^1]: Surah Nisa 4:94

[^2]: Surah Baqarah 2:158


