Translators Foreword
====================

In the Name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful. Praise to Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime and benedic­tions on His Chosen Messenger, Muhammad
al-Mustafa (S) and his Progeny, the Ahlul Bayt – who were created from
the same *Noor* as that of the Messenger of Allah (S).

Praise be to Allah and a million thanks to Him for the strength and
endurance that He bestowed on this lowly servant to enable him to
complete the task of translating the second volume of *Hayat al-Qulub*
by Allamah Majlisi (r.a.).

Most people are unaware that the previous translation of this volume by
Rev. James Merrick was in an abridged form. The actual book contains
sixty-five chapters but they were condensed into twenty-two chapters;
according to some, the language is also disrespectful.

So when Jafari Propagation Centre decided to republish the complete set
of *Hayat al-Qulub*, I suggested them to have this volume translated
anew. This suggestion was accepted and the book in your hands is a fresh
translation of the second volume of *Hayat al-Qulub* by Allamah Majlisi
(r.a.).  
 My special thanks to **Janab Syed Fayyaz Husain Abedi** who made it a
point to assure that the transla­tion work is done with regularity and
punctuality.

It is also worth noting that the translation of a book on the biography
of the Messenger of Allah (S) was completed on 17th Rabiul Awwal; which
is the birthday of our Holy Prophet (S).  
 May Allah give us the Taufeeq to strive on the path of Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) and under the guidance of the last successor of Prophet Muhammad
(S).  
*Wassalaam*

17th Rabiul Awwal 1431 A.H./4th March 2010

Syed Athar Husain S. H. Rizvi  
**Al-Qalam Translators & Writers Bureau**  
 Email: <sayedathar@hotmail.com>  
 Ata-e-Hussain Complex, H. No. 22-2-440 & 441  
 Noor Khan Bazar, Hyderabad – 500 024, India.


