Battle of Zatul Salasil
=======================

Ali bin Ibrahim, Shaykh Tusi, Shaykh Tabarsi and Qutub Rawandi etc. and
all Shia and Sunni tradition scholars and commentators have narrated
from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and Ibn Abbas that twelve thousand mounted
men, of the valley of Yabis, assembled and covenanted upon oath, that
they would not separate till they had slain Muhammad and Ali (a.s.).

Jibraeel informed the Prophet of the danger which threatened him, and
ordered that Abu Bakr and four thousand Muhajireen and Ansaris should be
sent against the army of Yabis. The Prophet accordingly ascended the
pulpit, and announced the communication made to him, and exhorted the
people to engage in the expedition with vigor on Monday.

Muslims made the necessary preparation and the Holy Prophet (S) gave Abu
Bakr order to summon the enemy to embrace Islam, and if they would not
accept it, to kill their fighting men, take their women and children
prisoners, plunder their property, and destroy their houses and fields.
Abu Bakr advanced by easy marches till he came up with the enemy, who
send a detachment of two hundred armed men, demanding who the Muslims
were, and what was their object, and furthermore, to have a parley with
their chief.

Abu Bakr, with a party of his men, appeared to parley with the infidels,
whom he advised to embrace Islam, but they swore by Laat and Uzza that
were it not for some relationship between them they would kill him. “Go
back,” said they “and reckon it a great favor that we have nothing to do
with you, though we will slay Muhammad and his brother, Ali.”

Abu Bakr hereupon represented to his army the vastly superior power and
advantages of the enemy, and ordered a retreat. The army replied, “You
act contrary to the commands of the Prophet, fear Allah and fight with
them.” He replied, “I know what you are ignorant of,” and marched his
men back to Medina.

The Prophet rebuked him for his disobedience and cowardice, and then
announced to the people, that he was divinely commanded to send Umar
with four thousand mounted men on this expedition. Umar’s fortune was
precisely like that of Abu Bakr, and he received the same rebuke.

The Prophet now sent Ali with an army of Muhajireen and Ansaris against
the formidable foe. Ali made such forced marches through unusual route
that his men feared their horses would be quite exhausted, and
themselves left behind through fatigue. He encouraged his army by saying
that the Prophet had commanded him victory.

Ali encamped on approaching the enemy, and they send out their
detachment of two hundred men, to demand who he was, and what was his
object. He replied: “I am Ali bin Abi Talib, the cousin and brother of
the Prophet, and his messenger to summon you to testify to the divine
Unity, and to the prophethood of the Prophet; therefore, embrace Islam
and share the prosperity and adversity of Muslims.”

The infidels replied: “You are just the man we wanted to encounter; get
ready for battle, and be assured we shall slay you and your army. Let
the only treaty between us be to meet in deadly onset tomorrow, at
breakfast time.” “Woe to you!” retorted Ali; “Do you think you can
frighten me by your superior numbers?

I look to the aid of Allah, angels and Muslims, and verily, there is no
might or power, but in the Almighty Allah.” The parley ended, and both
parties retired to their respective camps. Ali ordered the horses to be
attended to, barley to be given them, to have them saddled and remain in
readiness.

At earliest dawn the Muslims performed prayers, and it was yet dark when
Ali attacked the enemy, whom he utterly routed. According to the command
of the Prophet, he slew their fighting men, took their women and
children prisoners, plundered their goods, destroyed their houses, and
then returned to Medina.

On the morning of the victory, Jibraeel came to the Prophet and informed
about the victory of Imam Ali (a.s.) and the Prophet mounted the pulpit
and announced Ali’s triumph, and that only two Muslims were slain in the
engagement. The Prophet and people of Medina went out several miles to
meet Ali and his victorious army on their return.

The Prophet and Ali dismounted from their horses, the Prophet embraced
the hero, and kissed him between his eyes. According to Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) the Muslims had never before taken such valuable spoils,
except at Khyber. Thus the Almighty Allah revealed Surah Adiyat:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْعَادِيَاتِ ضَبْحًا ﴿١﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I swear by the runners breathing pantingly…”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَالْمُورِيَاتِ قَدْحًا ﴿٢﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then those that produce fire striking…”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَالْمُغِيرَاتِ صُبْحًا ﴿٣﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then those that make raids at morning…”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَثَرْنَ بِهِ نَقْعًا ﴿٤﴾ فَوَسَطْنَ بِهِ جَمْعًا ﴿٥﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then thereby raise dust. Then rush thereby upon an assembly…”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْإِنْسَانَ لِرَبِّهِ لَكَنُودٌ ﴿٦﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Most surely man is ungrateful to his Lord.”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّهُ عَلَىٰ ذَٰلِكَ لَشَهِيدٌ ﴿٧﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And most surely he is a witness of that***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّهُ لِحُبِّ الْخَيْرِ لَشَدِيدٌ ﴿٨﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And most surely he is tenacious in the love of wealth.”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَلَا يَعْلَمُ إِذَا بُعْثِرَ مَا فِي الْقُبُورِ ﴿٩﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Does he not then know when what is in the graves is raised…”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَحُصِّلَ مَا فِي الصُّدُورِ ﴿١٠﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And what is in the breasts is made apparent?”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ رَبَّهُمْ بِهِمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ لَخَبِيرٌ ﴿١١﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Most surely their Lord that day shall be fully aware of them.”***

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: “These verses were revealed about the
hypocrisy of Abu Bakr and Umar who denied the bounties of the Almighty
Allah and when they reached the Yabis valley they found the love of
world opposing the command of God and His Prophet, so at the end of the
Surah, the Almighty Allah informed that He is aware their infidelity and
hypocrisy and that He will expose them on Judgment Day and recompense
them.

Shaykh Mufeed has narrated with regard to the expedition of Zatul
Salasil that one day a desert Arab came to the Prophet and reported that
a party of Arabs had gathered in Ramal Valley and made an agreement to
attack Medina. The Holy Prophet (S) collected the Muslims and told them
that a party of disbelievers has plotted to attack them and they must be
prepared to defend themselves. Ashab Suffa volunteered in sincerity.

The Holy Prophet (S) drew lots from the eighty persons and appointed Abu
Bakr as their chief and gave him the standard, instructing him to punish
the Bani Sulaym. Idolaters had appointed watches on mountain peaks.
Since Abu Bakr traveled by the highway he was at once detected and they
armed themselves. When Abu Bakr reached the heavily wooded and rocky
land and the infidels lived in a valley that was difficult to enter.

When Abu Bakr attempted to enter it, the disbelievers came out and slain
many Muslims. At last Abu Bakr had to return unsuccessful from there.
Then the Messenger of Allah (S) gave the standard to Umar and sent him
on the same expedition. He also followed the usual route and was soon
detected by the disbeliever who hid beneath the trees and rocks. When
Umar stepped into their valley, they came out and drove him away.

When he also returned unsuccessful; the Holy Prophet (S) was extremely
aggrieved. Amr Aas said: “O Messenger of Allah (S), please send me as
the result of a battle depends on trickery, perhaps I can overcome them
through my cunning.” He was also sent and he also followed the usual
road and he also returned defeated. According to another report, Khalid
bin Walid was sent instead of Amr.

Thus the Holy Prophet (S) was aggrieved for many days and he continued
to condemn them. Then he called Imam Ali (a.s.) and gave him the Islamic
standard and said: O Lord, now I have appointed one who is a fighter and
he never flees from the battle. O Lord, You know that I am Your
Messenger.

So help him for the sake of my sanctity and make him victorious.
According to another report, Amirul Momineen (a.s.) came to Lady Fatima
(s.a.) and asked for his special headwear and she asked where he was
being sent to by her father. “Ramal Valley,” said the Imam. Lady Fatima
(s.a.) was worried for the difficult expedition.

Meanwhile the Messenger of Allah (S) arrived and asked her why she was
crying. He asked: “Do you think that your husband will be killed? Insha
Allah it will not be so.” Imam Ali (a.s.) said: “Do you not want me to
be killed and be rewarded with Paradise?” Thus he set out for the
expedition and the Holy Prophet (S) accompanied him upto Masjid Ahzab.
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) was astride a red horse and had a Yemeni sheet
over his shoulders. He held the Khati spear aloft.

The Messenger of Allah (S) prayed for their success and returned and
also sent Abu Bakr, Umar, Amr Aas or Khalid bin Walid with him. Imam Ali
(a.s.) took the Iraq route leaving the usual highway. Companions thought
that he was heading somewhere else. Amirul Momineen (a.s.) took them
through a secret route.

They traveled during the nights and hid themselves in mountain passes
during daytime. Amr Aas saw that the Imam was following an appropriate
procedure which was sure to yield victory, so he was overcome with
jealousy. He told Umar, Abu Bakr and other men that Ali is ignorant of
these paths, while we are experts of this terrain, “which is infested by
wild beasts, which are more dangerous for our forces, so you must stop
him from taking this route.”

People reported this talk to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) who said: “One who
obeys Allah and His Prophet should follow me and one who intends to
oppose Allah and His Prophet may go by any road he likes. All fell
silent and followed the Imam. They passed mountain passes during the
nights and concealed themselves during the day.

The Almighty Allah made the wild beasts obedient to the Imam and they
did not harm the Muslims. Till the Imam reached upto the enemy
territory. Ali (a.s.) told his men to tie up the snouts of the horses so
that they may not make noises. So Muslims were stopped and he proceeded.
When Umar saw that victory was near, he said: “There are many wolves,
lions and wild beasts in this valley. Ask Ali to permit us to scale the
mountain face.”

Abu Bakr tried to discuss the matter with Imam Ali (a.s.) but he paid no
attention to him. Umar said: “Why should we kill ourselves? Come, let us
climb up from this valley. Muslims said: “The Holy Prophet (S) ordered
us to obey Ali. We will not disobey him and follow your ideas. This went
on till the morning. Amirul Momineen (a.s.) launched a surprise attack
and killed the men, took their women and children as prisoners.

Tied their remaining men in chains and ropes; that is why this battle is
known as the Battle of Zatul Salasil. The field of battle was five
marches from Medina. That same morning, the Holy Prophet (S) came out
and prayed the Morning Prayer with the people. In the first rakat he
recited Surah Adiyat. He said: “It is a chapter just revealed on me and
the Almighty Allah has informed me that Ali has overcome the enemies,”
and he explained the jealousy of Amr Aas as jealousy to him.

And *Qunud* is in the meaning of *Husud* and that is the love of world
which was very strong in one who feared the animals. And in another
report instead of Amr, Khalid bin Walid is mentioned. And according to
the report of Ali bin Ibrahim the one who is jealous is a denier of
bounty and they are Abu Bakr, Umar and Amr Aas who said that there are
many wild beasts and they should take the usual road.

Thus Shaykh Mufeed has narrated that the Holy Prophet (S) informed the
companions about the victory of Imam Ali (a.s.) and with them came out
to welcome them outside Medina. Companions stood in two rows. When Imam
Ali (a.s.) looked at the Holy Prophet (S), he jumped from his mount and
ran to meet the Messenger of Allah (S) and kissed the feet and stirrups
of the Prophet. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Ali, get mounted as Allah
and His Messenger are pleased with you.”

Imam Ali (a.s.) was moved to tears and they returned happily from there.
War booty was distributed among Muslims. The Prophet asked some of the
army what they had observed in their chief during the expedition. They
replied, “We saw nothing bad in him, but his conduct was strange in one
particular way; in every prayer we performed with him, he recited the
Surah: Say, God is one God; the eternal God, he begets not, neither is
he begotten: and there is not any one like unto Him.”

The Prophet inquired of Ali for what reason he did this. He said it was
because he had a very great affection for that chapter: “and Allah loves
you with a like warmth,” replied the Prophet. “Verily, were it not that
I fear a community of my followers will say of you, what the Christians
affirm of Isa, I would this day declare some things in your praise, so
that you would pass no company that would not gather the dust on which
you tread, for the blessing it confers.”

Furat bin Ibrahim in his *Tafsir*, has narrated from Salman Farsi that
one day the elder companions except for Imam Ali (a.s.) were present in
the house of the Prophet. Suddenly a desert Arab came and said: “O
Messenger of Allah (S), I am from Bani Lakham and people of Bani Khatham
tribe have formed an army under the command of Harith bin Makida.

They have, along with 500 fighters, sworn by Laat and Uzza that they
will attack Medina and slay you with your companions.” The Prophet was
extremely worried and he asked his companions who will volunteer for
this expedition to remove their evil, “I will guarantee Paradise for
him.” No one replied. The second time he offered them twelve palaces in
Paradise. But no one responded. Meanwhile Ali (a.s.) arrived and he
asked why the Prophet was so disconcerted. He told him that he had
offered twelve palaces for one who will take up this task. Imam Ali
(a.s.) said: “Please describe those palaces.”

Another tradition says that the Prophet promised twelve palaces in
Paradise to any one who would defeat the people of Yabis, and Ali
accepting the offer, desired to hear a description of the palaces. The
Prophet said they were of gold and silver bricks, with a cement of musk
and amber. The pebbles around them are pearls and rubies, the earth
saffron, its hillocks camphor, and through the court of each palace,
flow rivers of honey, wine, milk and water; the banks are adorned with
various trees, and with pearls and coral.

On the margin of those celestial streams are bowers consisting each of
one entire, hollow, transparent pearls. In each of those bowers is a
throne with emerald feet, and adorned with ruby. On each throne sits a
Hourie arrayed in seventy green robes and seventy yellow robes of so
fine a texture, and she is herself so transparent, that the marrow of
her ankle, notwithstanding her robes and flesh and bone, is as
distinctly visible as a flame in a glass vessel, Each Hourie has seventy
lock of hair, every one under the care of the maid who perfumes the lock
with the censer which Allah has created to smoke with perfume without
the presence of fire.

No mortal olfactory has ever breathed such incense as is there exhaled.
“My father and mother be your sacrifice!” exclaimed Ali, “I will
undertake the expedition”. The Prophet said: “O Ali, all this has been
promised to you. Get up and march forward,” One hundred and fifty men
were asked to accompany the Imam. Abbas said: “O Messenger of Allah (S),
you are giving him only 150 men while the enemy force comprises of 500
fighters?”

And one of them is Harith bin Makida who is alone equal to 500 men?” The
Messenger of Allah (S) said: “By Allah, even if they had been as
numerous as particles of dust, Ali would have gone alone to fight them
and without any doubt had been victorious over them and would have
brought their prisoners to me.

After that the Holy Prophet (S) arranged the forces and said: “Go, the
Almighty Allah would protect you from all sides. And He is my Caliph on
you. That instead of me, He is with you.” So Amirul Momineen (a.s.) set
out from there.

Thus Imam Ali (a.s.) set out from there and when they reached till
Zanhashib which is at one Farsakh from Medina, night fell and the army
lost its way. Amirul Momineen (a.s.) looked at the sky and prayed:  
 “O guide of all those who are lost and savior of all those who drown
and the deliverer of all the aggrieved, do not make injustice overpower
us and do not make the enemies victorious over us and guide us to the
path of righteousness.”

The Almighty Allah made their horses’ feet strike against the stones in
such a manner that it created so much sparking that their way became
clear. At that juncture, the Almighty Allah revealed Surah Adiyat. In
the morning, Amirul Momineen (a.s.) recited the Azan and when the
enemies heard it, they said: “Perhaps some shepherd is remembering Allah
on the mountains.

When they heard: I witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, they
said: “This shepherd seems to be a followers of that magician liar
(refuge of Allah!).” Among the principles of Ali (a.s.) was that he
never began the battle till the complete morning had dawned and the
angels of the day had not come down. Thus when he concluded his prayer
and the day dawned, the standard was raised and the disbelievers saw and
remarked to themselves: “The one you had been waiting for is here. It is
Muhammad, who has come with his followers.”

A daring youth, who was most heretical and inimical came out from them
and challenged: “O followers of magicians and liars, which of is
Muhammad? Come out, so that I can fight you.” Imam Ali (a.s.) came to
confront him and said: “May your mother mourn for you, you are a liar
and a magician and Muhammad (S) is sent from the Almighty Allah with
truth?”

“Who are you?” asked that shameless infidel. He replied: “I am Ali Ibn
Abi Talib (a.s.), cousin and son-in-law of the Messenger of Allah (S).
“So you are his close kin, so it is same whether I kill him or slay
you,” said the accursed man and he launched an attack reciting a Rajaz.
The Imam also recited a Rajaz and attacked. They exchanged a couple of
blows and in the third blow Imam Ali (a.s.) dispatched him to Hell.

Then he called for another contestant. That accursed man’s brother came
out and Imam Ali (a.s.) slew him in one blow and again asked for a
competitor. Chief of the army, Harith bin Makida who was considered
equal to 500 men, emerged and the Almighty Allah had remarked about him
that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْإِنسَانَ لِرَبِّهٖ لَكَنُودٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Most surely man is ungrateful to his Lord.”***[^1]

He recited a Rajaz and attacked Imam Ali (a.s.). The Imam repelled his
blow and gave him a slash which split him into two and then again asked
for a contestant. His cousin, Amr bin Fatak came out and reciting the
Rajaz, attacked the Imam. Ali (a.s.) dispatched him to his brother in
the first blow. After that he asked for another contestant but no one
came out to confront him. So the valiant Imam attacked those deviated
wolves and fell their fighters, took their children captives and
plundered their wealth and took all of them to Medina.

When the Holy Prophet (S) received the good news of victory, he came out
with companions to welcome the victors and met them at a distance of one
Farsakh. The Holy Prophet (S) cleaned the dust from the face of Imam Ali
(a.s.) and kissed his forehead and wept and said: “O Ali, I thank Allah,
Who strengthened by arms with you and supported me. O Ali, like Musa
(a.s.) prayed to Allah, to strengthen his arms by his brother and make
him share his prophethood, I also asked the same from the Almighty Allah
and He approved it.”

Then he turned to the companions and said: “Do not ridicule me about the
love of Ali, because I love him by the command of Allah. O Ali, one who
has befriended you has befriended me and one who has loved me has loved
the Almighty Allah and one who loves the Almighty Allah is loved by Him
and accommodates them in Paradise. O Ali, one who is inimical to you,
has been inimical to me. And one who is inimical to me, is inimical to
the Almighty Allah. And the Almighty Allah hates and curses one who
hates Him. And He will not accept any deed of the enemies of Ali (a.s.).
It is mentioned in another report that Imam Ali (a.s.) killed a hundred
and twenty men from them.

[^1]: Surah Adiyat 100:6


