Expedition of Hunain and events upto the Battle of Tabuk
========================================================

Shaykh Mufeed, Shaykh Tabarsi and other historians and tradition
scholars have narrated that after the conquest of Mecca, the Prophet
sent out detachments to various areas in the vicinity, summoning the
Arab tribes to embrace Islam, but giving no orders to fight. Ghalib bin
Abdullah was sent to Madlaj tribe; they said: “Neither do we rely on you
nor live in your neighborhood.”

The people urged the Prophet to declare a war against them. The Holy
Prophet (S) said: “They are led by a wise and intelligent man and many
people of that tribe will be martyred on the way of Allah.” Amr bin
Umayyah was sent to Bani Dail tribe to invite them to Islam but they
also flatly refused.

Companions advised war against them also but the Prophet said that they
will soon embrace Islam. Abdullah bin Suhail was sent to Maharib tribe
and they embraced Islam. Some of them also visited the Messenger of
Allah (S). Ibn Babawayh and Shaykh Tusi have narrated from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that Khalid bin Walid was sent to Bani Mustaliq, a branch
of Bani Khuzaimah against whom in his youth he was hostile, and to
gratify that old enmity he killed many of them by trickery and took much
of spoils, although they claimed to be Muslims.

The survivors came to the Prophet along with the letter of amnesty to
the Prophet and complained about Khalid. The Prophet was highly offended
at this. Khalid arrived with a lot of gold and other booty. The Holy
Prophet (S) gave it all to Ali to make all possible reparations to the
tribes. And raising his foot said, “Trample the method of Jahiliyya like
this,” that is judge according to the law of Islam.

When Imam Ali (a.s.) reached there, he decided the matter according to
divine law and after satisfying them, returned from there and the Holy
Prophet (S) asked how did he fare. He replied: “First I paid the blood
money for each deceased and in place of a fetus which was aborted, gave
them a male or female slave. And I paid up all their damages.

Then I gave the remaining amount in lieu of their utensils in which
their dogs drank water and in exchange of the ropes that their shepherds
used. After that I gave something in lieu of the terror caused to their
women and children and in lieu of unknown things. After that I divided
the balance amount among them so that they may be sincerely pleased with
you.

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Since you paid them to make them pleased
with me, I pray that the Almighty Allah be pleased with you. You are to
me like Harun was to Musa except that there will no prophet after me.
According to another tradition, he said: “O Ali, you have pleased me,
may Allah be pleased with you. O Ali, you are the guide of my Ummah. O
Ali, successful is one who loves you and who follows your practice and
the worst enemy till Judgment Day is one who opposes you and who detests
your practice.

Among the events of eighth Hijri it is narrated that Akrama, the son of
Abu Jahl, became a Muslim and after the conquest of Mecca apostasied and
ran away to Yemen. His wife took amnesty of the Prophet on his behalf.
He returned and reconverted to Islam. It is narrated that the same year,
the eighth of Hijrat, the Prophet sent Khalid to break Uzza, the
greatest idols of the Quraish, and Amr bin Aas was ordered to break
Sawa, the idol of Huzail and Saad bin Zaid was commanded to demolish
Manat.

Battle of Hunain
----------------

Shaykh Mufeed, Shaykh Tabarsi and Ali bin Ibrahim etc. have narrated
that the cause of the Battle of Hunain was that when the Prophet set out
for Mecca he had on the basis of exigency said that he was going to
attack Hawazins, who made great preparations for defense, and having
made Malik bin Auf Nazari, their general, advanced, with all their
families, cattle, and property, to the valley of Autas, where they
encamped and engaged in festivities in anticipation of victory.

Among these was a blind old chief named, Warid bin Alsamah Hashmi, the
chief of Hasham, who drew his hand over the ground where they had
encamped, and asked what valley it was, and being told, he said it was a
fine place to maneuver cavalry, as the ground was neither too rough nor
soft. He than inquired why he heard the cry of horses, cows, sheep and
children. They replied that Malik bin Auf had brought the families and
property as an inducement for the men to fight bravely.

He than swore by the Lord of the Kaaba, that Malik was a mere sheep
feeder and knew nothing of war. He called for him and endeavored to
persuade him to send back the families and cattle, admonishing him that
he was to contend with a powerful enemy, demanding if he ever knew a
flying army stop for wives, children, and property? Malik rejected this
wholesome counsel, telling the chief that he was very old and his
understanding was impaired.

Warid, the old chief, then inquired for Kaab and Kalab tribes, their
allies, and finding they had not joined the army, sighed at the ill
fortune that brooded over them. He asked who had come from Hawazin
tribes and was told that Amr bin Aamir and Auf Aamir have arrived. He
said neither they can benefit or harm and wished he were young again, to
engage in the ensuing battle and pay the debt of heroism.

When the Messenger of Allah (S) heard that the clans of Hawazins were
assembled in the valley of Autas, he collected the tribes of Islam,
incited them to sacred war, and gave them assurance of victory and help
from the Almighty Allah, who would cause them to triumph over their
enemies, whose property and children and women should fall into their
hands.

The people were now eager for the contest, and preparation for the march
were quickly made. The Prophet gave the great standard to Ali, and
ordered all battalions entering Mecca to join their respective colors.
The Prophet then marched with the ten thousand men he had led to Mecca,
and a division of two thousand who had joined him at the city.

According to the report of Abil Jarud from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.),
one thousand men belonged to Bani Sulaym tribe under the leadership of
Abbas bin Mardas bin Salma, and the other half of the tribes of Mazniah.
The Prophet’s army encamped on approaching the position of Hawazin.

Their commander in chief, Malik bin Auf, hearing of the Prophet’s
advance, ordered his men to station themselves in front of their
families and property, break their scabbards, and secreting themselves
in ravines and behind the trees, await the Prophet’s advance and attack
him on all sides while the morning was very dark, and put him to rout.
This order was followed by the declaration that the Prophet never had
encountered any who understood the art of war.

After the Morning Prayers the Prophet commenced his march down the
valley of Hunain, which abounded in defiles and declivities. The Bani
Sulaym who composed the vanguard of the Prophet army being
simultaneously attacked on all sides by division of the Hawazins, gave
way and fled, throwing the whole army, into disorder and flight, with
the exception of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and the few companions of the
Prophet, before whom the fugitives rushed without paying any regard to
him.

Abbas held the bridle of the Prophet mule’s on the right, and Abu Sufyan
bin Harith bin Abdul Muttalib on the left. The Prophet cried to the
fugitives, “O company of Ansaris, where are you going! Come to me; I am
Messenger of Allah (S)!” But no one turned back. Nasiba, the daughter of
Mazinah, cast dust at the faces of the fugitives, saying, “From God and
the Prophet whither do you flee!”

At length Umar passed her, to whom she said, “What is this which you
do?” He replied, “Such is the providence of God.” The Prophet than ran
his mule to Amirul Momineen (a.s.), who with drawn sword was bravely
defending the Muslims standard that he held. As Abbas was a tall man
with a powerful voice, the Prophet ordered him to ascend an adjacent
hill and shout to the people, “Where are you going? O companions of
Baqarah and companions of the allegiance of the tree!

The Messenger of Allah (S) is here!” The Prophet raised his hand towards
heaven and said, “O Lord, to You belongs praise and intercession, and
You are help.” At this juncture, Jibraeel descended and assured the
Prophet that he had offered the prayer at which the sea was parted for
Musa to save him from Firon. The Prophet ordered Abu Sufyan[^1] to give
him a handful of sand, which he cast at the idolaters, saying, “Ugly be
your faces!”

He then raised his head towards heaven and said, “O Lord, if this
company should be destroyed, no one will serve You hereafter.” The
Ansaris hearing the call of Abbas, returned, broke their scabbards, and
crying, “Here we are!” passed the Prophet, but from shame did not
approach him, and joined the standard of Ali. The Prophet asked Abbas
who they were, and being told they were the Ansaris, the Prophet
replied, “Now the furnace of war is hot!”

At that moment, angels descended to give the Muslims victory, and the
Hawazins were routed and fled in all direction. The Muslims heard the
clang of angelic arms in the air, but saw no one. Thus the Prophet
triumphed over the idolaters, whose property, women and children fell
into his hands. The Almighty Allah describes this battle in the
following manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ نَصَرَكُمُ اللَّهُ فِي مَوَاطِنَ كَثِيرَةٍ ۙ وَيَوْمَ
حُنَيْنٍ ۙ إِذْ أَعْجَبَتْكُمْ كَثْرَتُكُمْ فَلَمْ تُغْنِ عَنْكُمْ
شَيْئًا وَضَاقَتْ عَلَيْكُمُ الْأَرْضُ بِمَا رَحُبَتْ ثُمَّ
وَلَّيْتُمْ مُدْبِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly Allah helped you in many battlefields and on the day of
(battle of) Hunain, when your great numbers made you vain, but they
availed you nothing and the earth became strait to you notwithstanding
its spaciousness, then you turned back retreating.”***[^2]

According to traditions “many battlefields” imply that the Almighty
Allah helped the Prophet on eighty occasions. Then the Almighty Allah
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ سَكِينَتَهُ عَلَىٰ رَسُولِهِ وَعَلَى
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَأَنْزَلَ جُنُودًا لَمْ تَرَوْهَا وَعَذَّبَ الَّذِينَ
كَفَرُوا ۚ وَذَٰلِكَ جَزَاءُ الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then Allah sent down His tranquility upon His Apostle and upon the
believers, and sent down hosts which you did not see, and chastised
those who disbelieved, and that is the reward of the
unbelievers.”***[^3]  
 Regarding the word Sakina in the above passage, the Imam Reza (a.s.)
observes that it is the name of a fragrant and agreeable wind of
Paradise, which has a human form and attends to prophets.  
 Ali bin Ibrahim narrates that a man from Bani Nazar bin Muawiyah,
called Shajra bin Rabia who became a prisoner of Muslims asked the
Muslims where have the white-clad youths riding pie-bald horses gone and
by whom the Hawazin were routed and slain, and in comparison with whom
the Muslims were nothing. They replied, “Those were angels whom Allah
sent to our aid.” All this was according to the report of Ali bin
Ibrahim.

Shaykh Tabarsi relates that before the Prophet marched to Hunain,
hearing that Safwan bin Umayyah had a hundred coats of mail, he sent to
borrow them on the condition of paying their value if they were damaged.
According to traditions from this instance, a pledge given for borrowed
articles was made binding in Islamic law. The Prophet divided these
coats of mail among his companions, and marched against Hawazin at the
close of Ramadan, or beginning of Shawwal, in the eighth year of Hijrat.

Shaykh Mufeed has narrated that the Holy Prophet (S) set out with ten
thousand men for the Battle of Hunain and as the Muslims were so
numerous, they had no doubt of being victorious. Abu Bakr remarked,
“This is a wonderful army, and we shall now triumph.” The Holy Prophet
(S) said: “Our army has been struck with an evil eye. But the Almighty
Allah willed them to know that victory did not depend on their numbers
and arms, but on His own aid.

When therefore they engaged the enemy, they all fled with the exception
of ten men, nine of whom were from Bani Hashim; the tenth, Ayman, son of
Umm Ayman who fell a martyr. The Almighty Allah said regarding the
unplaced remark of Abu Bakr:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ أَعْجَبَتْكُمْ كَثْرَتُكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…when your great numbers made you vain…”***[^4]

And the believers that the Almighty Allah mentioned with the Prophet
that He sent tranquility on them were Amirul Momineen (a.s.) eight
persons from Bani Hashim. One was Abbas, who was to the right of the
Prophet and Fazl bin Abbas was to the left; Abu Sufyan bin Harith, the
cousin of the Prophet was not Muawiyah’s father Abu Sufyan, he was
holding the mule’s saddle when it was disturbed; and Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) was in front of the Prophet slashing the idolaters and driving
them away. Rabia bin Harith bin Abdul Muttalib, Abdullah bin Zubair bin
Abdul Muttalib, Atba and Motab, sons of Abu Lahab were around the
Prophet and all Ansar and Muhajireen had fled from there.

Shaykh Tusi has narrated through authentic chains from Naufal bin Harith
bin Abdul Muttalib that on the day of the Battle of Hunain, all fled
except seven sons of Abdul Muttalib: Abbas and his son, Fazl, Ali and
his brother Aqil, Abu Sufyan, Rabia and Naufal, sons of Harith bin Abdul
Muttalib. The Holy Prophet (S) had the sword drawn and mounted on Duldul
was attacking the idolaters, reciting the following Rajaz:

“I am the Messenger of Allah (S) without any doubt. I am the son of
Abdul Muttalib.”

Harith bin Naufal said: “I heard from Fazl bin Abbas that when my father
saw that all had fled and Imam Ali (a.s.) was also not visible, he said:
“The son of Abu Talib has also deserted the Prophet in spite of all the
feats he had shown in previous battles.” I said: “Don’t pass such
remarks about your nephew.” He asked: “Is Ali present here?” I said:
“Look ahead in the front row, how he is fighting with his sword, in that
flying dust, his Zulfiqar flashing, scorching the idolaters.” My father
said: “He is righteous and son of a noble, may his uncles be sacrificed
on him.”

Fazl says: “That day Ali clove forty of the enemy exactly into two, each
at a blow.” And Kulaini has narrated through authentic chains of
narrators from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that on the day of Battle of
Hunain Imam Ali (a.s.) eliminated forty daring men of the infidels.

Shaykh Tabarsi declares that when the Muslims fled, and the Prophet was
left with only nine men about him, Malik bin Auf, the commander-in-chief
of the Hawazin, rushed forward, shouting, “Show me Muhammad,” and seeing
him, made a furious charge, and was met by Ayman Ibn Umm Ayman, whom he
slew, but he could not force his horse against the asylum of prophecy.
At that perilous junction, Kalah, the brother of Safwan bin Umayyah,
shouted, “Now the sorcery of the Prophet is destroyed!” Safwan, who had
not yet become a Muslim, ordered his brother to be silent, saying, “God
break your jaws! It is better that a Quraishi should be our king than a
Hawazini.”

Shaykh Tusi has narrated that when the Muslim army fled the battlefield
it was yet dark; idolaters came out from ravines and bushes with weapons
and the Prophet turned his luminous face towards the fugitives, beaming
like the full moon, so that all saw him while he demanded what had
become of the covenant they had made with Allah.

At this appeal they turned on the infields who were led on by a man
mounted on a red camel and bearing a black flag on a spear. They slew
every Muslim they overcome. The enemy advanced with great impetuosity,
but black standard bearer, whose name was Abu Jardal, was met by Ali,
who at one blow brought his camel to the ground, and with the next
stroke clove him in two.

This put the Hawazin to rout, and the Muslims in turn pursued, led on by
Ali, making great slaughter and taking many prisoners. Imam Ali (a.s.)
went on fighting till he had killed forty infidels. After the sun had
risen high, the Prophet ordered it to be proclaimed that no more of the
enemy should be slain, nor any of the prisoners be put to death.

Ibn Alaku, a spy of Huzail tribe was taken a prisoner who had come to
the Prophet on the day of the conquest of Mecca. Umar recognized him as
a spy and had him killed; but when the Prophet learnt about it, he was
very indignant at this disobedience. After that Humail bin Mamar was
also killed while being a prisoner and the Prophet condemned Umar’s act.
At last Umair bin Wahab came and asked the Prophet for forgiveness on
behalf of the Ansar. Abu Bakr had displeased the Prophet at the
beginning of the battle and in the end, Umar infuriated him.

Shaykh Tabarsi and Qutub Rawandi etc. have narrated that Shaibah bin
Uthman bin Abi Talha Abdari was extremely inimical to the Prophet
because Ali had killed eight standard bearers of his tribe in the Battle
of Uhud. So he was always waiting for an opportunity to take revenge.
But he was despaired on the day of the conquest of Mecca.

He joined the Battle of Hunain hoping to get a chance. He says: When
Muslims fled, I came to the right side of the Prophet and saw Abbas and
observed that he will not be deficient in defending his nephew. I came
to the left and saw Abu Sufyan bin Harith and observed that he will not
be deficient in helping his cousin. I came behind the Prophet and
launched a blow but a flame came in between and was about to scorch me
to death when I put my hand on my eyes.

But the Prophet called me, placed his hand on my chest and said: “O
Lord, remove the Satan from him.” Now when I glanced at the Prophet deep
love developed in my heart for him and I began to love him more than
myself.” The Messenger of Allah (S) then said: “Shaibah, go and fight
the idolaters.” He says: “I began to fight with such sincerity that even
if my father had confronted me, I would have slain him too.”

After the battle, I came to the Prophet and he said: “Whatever the
Almighty Allah intended about you was better than what you intended
about yourself.” And whatever passed in my heart was known to none but
me and the Holy Prophet (S) told me all about it and I embraced Islam as
a result of it.

Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated from Saad bin Musayyab that a man from the
infidel army told me: “When we confronted the Muslims they fled in a few
minutes and we pursued them, till we reached the Messenger of Allah (S)
who was astride the mule, Ashab. Some white-faced men addressed us and
said: “Ugly be thy faces. Go away from here.” We turned back and the
Muslims came out in our pursuit and we realized that they were angels.

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) through trustworthy chains
on the day of the Battle of Hunain four thousands prisoners, and twelve
thousands camels fell into the hands of Muslims besides other property.
The Holy Prophet (S) sent the booty and captives to Jaranah under Budail
bin Waraqa, while himself, with his army pursued the infidels, one
hundred of whom are said to have been slain in the battle. And it is
narrated from Zuhri that six thousand became prisoners and an unlimited
number of properties and sheep, which Allah alone knows.

Shaykh Mufeed and Shaykh Tabarsi have narrated when the idolaters were
defeated at Hunain they broke into two divisions and Arabs fled to Autas
and Bani Thaqif to Taif, against both of which places the Prophet sent
detachments. Malik bin Auf also went with them and they took refuge in
the Taif fort.

The divisions under Abu Aamir Ashari and Abu Musa Ashari against Autas
were successful after a sharp action in which Abu Aamir was killed. But
the other, under Abu Sufyan bin Harb the accursed came back, saying that
he was sent with those who could not even draw a bucket of water from
the well. Upon this the Prophet himself immediately marched on Taif in
Shawwal, which he took after a siege of more than ten days.

He sent some men with Imam Ali (a.s.) to destroy whatever he could lay
his hands on and to destroy all the idols. Khatham tribe came with a
huge army and attacked early in the morning and a stalwart Shahab from
them challenged the Muslim army. Imam Ali (a.s.) set out to fight him
but Abul Aas bin Rabi volunteered to get rid of him, but was restrained
by Ali (a.s.) who said: “If I am killed you take over the command.” The
people of Taif, on being conquered, become Muslims. The Holy Prophet (S)
recited the Takbir and spoke at length with Amirul Momineen (a.s.) in
isolation.

Shia and Sunni have through many channels narrated from Jabir bin
Abdullah Ansari that when the Messenger of Allah (S) was conferring with
Amirul Momineen (a.s.), Umar came and said: “You talk secretly to him
and keep us aloof?” the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “I am not telling
him the secrets, the Almighty Allah is.” Umar returned infuriated
saying: “This is also like he said on the day of Hudaibiya that we will
enter Masjidul Haram, but we returned from there without it.” The Holy
Prophet (S) said: “I never said that we will enter it the same year.”

Thus Nafih bin Ghilan came out from the Taif fort with some people of
Thaqif. The Messenger of Allah (S) sent Amirul Momineen (a.s.) to fight
them. They met at the Valley of Dajj and Nafih was killed. Idolaters
fled from there and some persons housed in the fort were overawed and
they came out to embrace Islam.

Shaykh Tabarsi etc. have narrated that during the siege, a group of
slaves came out of the fort and converted to Islam, one of them being
Abu Bakra, slave of Harith Kaldah. Another was Mambas, whose real name
was Masjah. The Holy Prophet (S) named him Mambas. There was one named
Darzan, slave of Abdullah bin Rabi. When at last the people of Taif
embraced Islam, they requested the Prophet to return their slaves. The
Holy Prophet (S) said: “No, it is not possible, because they have been
freed by the Almighty Allah.”

Shaykh Mufeed has narrated from Abdur Rahman bin Auf that the Messenger
of Allah (S) laid siege to Taif for ten or seventeen days; then one day
the Holy Prophet (S) mounted a horse when it was very hot climate, and
said: O people, I am your intercessor and your chief. Our promised place
is Kauthar. I advise you to be nice to my progeny and my Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.).

By the one in whose hands is my life, it is obligatory on you to
establish prayer and pay the Zakat or I will send on you one who is from
me and is like my soul, who will kill you and make your children
captives. Some thought that he implied Abu Bakr and some expected him to
be Umar, but the Messenger of Allah (S) held the hand of Imam Ali (a.s.)
and said: “This is the one.”

Shaykh Tusi has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that when the Holy Prophet (S) concluded the
Hawazin expedition and came to the forts of Taif and laid siege to the
people of Dajj for some days, they sued for peace with some conditions,
which the Prophet accepted and returned to Mecca. Their messengers came
to the Prophet and said: “We accept Islam but please excuse us from
prayer and Zakat.”

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “It is not a religion that has no
prayer, by the one in whose hands is my life, it is obligatory on you to
establish the prayer and pay the Zakat, otherwise I will send such a man
to you who is like my self. He will cut off your heads and make captives
of your sons.” Then he held the hand of Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) and
said: “He is the one I am talking about.” When they returned to Taif and
reported the conversation, they agreed to pray, pay Zakat and agreed to
fulfill all the conditions laid by the Prophet.

Then the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “No one will disobey me from my
Ummah, but that I will throw an arrow of God to him.” “Who is the arrow
of God?” asked they. “Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.), when I sent him on an
expedition, I saw Jibraeel to his right, Mikaeel to his left. And an
angel walked ahead of him and a cloud shaded him till the Almighty Allah
helped that beloved of mine.”

Qutub Rawandi has narrated that when the Messenger of Allah (S) besieged
the people of Taif, Uyyana bin Hasan said: “Please permit me to go and
talk to the people of the fort.” The Prophet accorded the permission. He
said: “Do you guarantee my safety, that I may discuss some points with
you?” Abu Mahjan recognized him and said: “Come in.”

When he stepped inside he said: “May my parents be sacrificed on you,
your condition has pleased me. There is none like you among the Arabs.
By Allah there is none like you among the companions of Muhammad.”
Uyyana said: “You have sufficient stocks and we have less space of
camping. Be patient, do not surrender the fort to him.” And he went away
from there. Bani Thaqif said to Abu Mahjan: “We did not like his coming
here and we fear that he will report all our weaknesses to Muhammad.”

Abu Mahjan said: “I know him better than you. There is none among us
more inimical to Muhammad even though he is among their forces.” So when
he came to the Prophet he said: “I told them to embrace Islam, by Allah,
Muhammad will not move from here till you don’t surrender. So seek his
amnesty and thus I threatened them much.” The Messenger of Allah (S)
said: “You are lying, you spoke to them in such and such manner.”
Companions condemned him and he sought divine forgiveness and promised
not to repeat such a thing.

Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated that the Prophet conferred with his
companions about the people of Taif. Salman Farsi said: “O Messenger of
Allah (S). I think you should aim a catapult at the fort.” The Prophet
accepted the proposal and a catapult was prepared and loaded with skin
full of oil. The people of the fort burnt the catapult and their trees
were burnt in retaliation.

Sufyan bin Abdullah Thaqafi called out from the fort and announced: “Why
are you destroying our property? All this will be yours if you are
victorious. And if you are not victorious, have mercy for the sake of
God and leave our properties intact.” The Holy Prophet (S) replied:
“Leave them for the sake of Allah.”

It is mentioned in one report that the Holy Prophet (S) laid siege to
Taif for around thirty days and after that he returned. Then the people
of Taif came and embraced Islam. Shaykh Tusi has narrated through
authentic chains of narrators from Abu Dharr that the Messenger of Allah
(S) said that when the messengers of people of Taif arrived and I said
that they must establish prayer and pay Zakat or “I will send to them
one who is like my self, who loves Allah and His Messenger and Allah and
His Messenger love him.

He will strike off your heads,” companions craned their necks in
anticipation but I held aloft the hand of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and
said: “He is the one.” Abu Bakr and Umar said: “I have never seen this
excellence in anyone.”

Shia and Sunni scholars have mentioned that Imam Ali (a.s.) said on the
Shura along with his other merits that: I adjure you before Allah, did
the Messenger of Allah (S) say about anyone that: Bani Waliya should
refrain from hostilities or I will send to them who is like my self. His
obedience is my obedience and his disobedience is my disobedience.

One who will make them obey through the sword.” All Shura members said:
“None of us is like that.” Then he said: I adjure you before Allah, is
there anyone among you like me, to whom the Prophet spoke secretly on
the day of the Battle of Taif and Abu Bakr and Umar had told him: “You
speak to Ali in secret and conceal it from us.” And the Prophet had told
them: “I did not say anything of my own. The Almighty Allah had ordered
me to do so.” All said: “None of us is like that.”

Shaykh Tusi etc. have narrated that after this conquest, the Prophet
retired with his army to Jaranah, where he divided the booty taken at
Hunain among his Quraish followers and the Arabs, and gave none, or very
little to the Ansaris. His reason for such a division was to attach
firmly to him those who had recently become Muslims.

For this purpose he gave a hundred camels to Abu Sufyan bin Harb, and
the same number to his son Muawiyah. Several other individuals, like
Hakim bin Kharam of Bani Asad, Nazar bin Harith, Alaa bin Khalid
Thaqafi, Harith bin Hasham and Jubair bin Motam and Malik bin Auf,
al-Qama bin Alaqa, Aqra bin Habis, Uyyana bin Hasan enjoyed the same
share.

A poet, Abbas bin Mardas, receiving only four camels was so enraged that
he complained to the Prophet by chanting an extemporaneous ode. The
Prophet hearing this, ordered Ali to go and cut out Abbas’s tongue.
Accordingly he led away the confounded man, who earnestly asked him if
he really intended to cut out his tongue.

“I shall obey the prophet’s order,” replied Ali, who now led him into
the camel-yard and bade him take four camels and rank with the
Muhajireen, or hundred camels be classed with those that had received
that number. At Ali’s advice he contented himself with taking four
camels.

Some Ansaris were also much offended at his division of spoils, and
said, “the Prophet was for us in the day of his necessity, but now, when
he has gained his own kindred to his cause, he forgets us.” On being
informed of these reproaches, the Prophet ordered the Ansaris to be
assembled by themselves, when he came to them in anger, attended only by
the Amirul Momineen (a.s.), and thus addressed them:

“When you were all on the brink of Hellfire, did not Allah through me
give you salvation? and when you were at swords’ points with each other,
did not the Almighty Allah, through the blessing of my presence, inspire
union and love in your heart?” To which they responded, “Yes, you were
few and degraded when I came to you, and now, through my influence, you
have become numerous and honorable.”

In the way he enumerated the many favors he had conferred upon them. As
they continued silent after he had concluded his address, he said, “Why
do you not answer me?” they replied, “What answer can we give, O
Messenger of Allah (S)? All our fathers and mothers be your sacrifice!
all that we enjoy is from you.” The Prophet replied, you might indeed
say to me, “your people charged you with falsehood and expelled you from
among them, but we acknowledged your truth and gave you an asylum, you
came to us fearful, and we gave you assurance.”

At this, the whole company wept aloud, and the old men came to the
Prophet kissed his blessed hands, and feet, and knees saying, “We are
satisfied to have God and his Prophet; do what please with our own
property.” He then said, “you were vexed with me for dividing the
plunder among those that have recently embraced Islam, in order to
attach them firmly to the faith, and make them your efficient
coadjutors, while to you belonged the more excellent riches of the
faith.

Are you not content that others should take the sheep and camels, while
the Prophet is your portion?” He then declared the Ansaris peculiarly
his own, the ark of his mysteries, and said if all the world were to go
to one valley, and the Ansaris to another, he would certainly continue
with them. He concluded by imploring pardon for them and their
posterity.

Kulaini and Ayyashi has narrated through good chains of narrators from
Zurarah that Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) was asked about the meaning of
the phrase:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمُؤَلَّفَةِ قُلُوبُهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and those whose hearts are made to incline (to truth)…”***[^5]

Imam (a.s.) said: “Those who adopted monotheism and gave up idol worship
and confessed to the dictum of: There is no god except Allah, and
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, in spite of the fact that they
continued to doubt whatever the Prophet liked for them so the Almighty
Allah ordered His Prophet to make them incline to faith through wealth
and good turns so that Islam becomes good and they remain steadfast in
are religion they have embraced.

Doubtlessly on the day of Battle of Hunain, the Holy Prophet (S) went
out of his way to please people like, Abu Sufyan bin Harb and Uyyana bin
Hasan like the chiefs of Arabs and Mudhir tribe but Ansaris were
dissatisfied with this and they gathered around Saad bin Ubadah. So the
Holy Prophet (S) brought them to Jaranah. Saad bin Ubadah asked
permission to speak and then said that if the distribution of booty was
according to divine instructions, it was all right and if not, the
Ansaris were not prepared to accept it.”

The Prophet asked them if what their chief was saying was claimed by all
of them and they assented. Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) says: Since that
day the light of their faith decreased. And the Almighty Allah fixed a
portion for those inclined to faith. The following year the Ansaris
received a very large share of plunder, more than twice the booty of
Hunain.

And many groups embraced Islam. The Holy Prophet (S) recited a sermon
and said: “Whatever I said was better or what you said? A booty equal to
the booty of Hunain has come to me and a large number of people have
embraced Islam. By the one in whose hands is the life of Muhammad, I
would like to pay a 100 camels to everyone in order to attract them to
Islam.”

Ayyashi has narrated that on the day of the Battle of Hunain, an Ansari
objected to the Prophet’s method. A companion said: “You utter such
nonsense about the prayer?” Then he came to the Prophet and reports the
talk of that Ansari.”

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “My brother, Musa was harassed more by
the people but he observed patience for the sake of Allah. On the day of
the Battle of Hunain, the Prophet gave a hundred camel to each of those
who were inclined to faith.

Shaykh Mufeed, Shaykh Tabarsi and all Shia and Sunni tradition scholars
have narrated from Abu Saeed Khudri etc. that on the day of the Battle
of Hunain, when the Messenger of Allah (S) was dividing the booty, when
Zulkhaisra from Bani Tamim came to him and said: “O Messenger of Allah
(S) be just in distributing.” The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Woe be
on you, if I don’t practice justice, who will?”

Umar bin Khattab said: “O Messenger of Allah (S), allow me to strike off
his head.” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Let it be, he will rise with a
group whose prayers you will consider superior to yours whose fasts you
will consider superior to yours. They will be constantly reciting the
Qur’an but it will not go beyond their throat. They will go out of Islam
like an arrow leaves the bow.

Their sign is that a black man will lead them whose arms will have flesh
protruding. He will rise against the best company of men.” Abu Saeed
said: “I testify having heard this from the Messenger of Allah (S) and
testify that I was with Amirul Momineen (a.s.) in the Battle of
Khawarij. Imam Ali (a.s.) told us to search for one whom the Prophet had
indicated and he was found among the dead.  
 Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated that on the day of Battle of Hunain the
Prophet was distributing the booty and after it was done, he mounted and
set out from there.

People ran with him and beseeching him for more till they stopped him
under a tree and pulled his robe off his shoulders. He said: “People,
give my robe back. By the one in whose hands is my life, if I were to
get as much booty as there are trees on the earth, I will give it all to
you and you will not find me miserly then he plucked a hair from a camel
and told them that he was not enriched by the spoil they had taken to
the amount of that hair, except the fifth, which belonged to him, and
even this he would give up to them.

And if you have taken even a needle from it wrongly, you must return it
as it will make you liable for Hell. An Ansari came with a string saying
that he had taken it to sew the sheet of his camel. The Holy Prophet (S)
said: “I leave my share in it.” That man said: “When the matter is so
sensitive, I will leave it.” And he returned the thread.

In the month of Zilqad the Holy Prophet (S) marched back to Mecca, and
performed the rites of Umrah. He appointed Maaz bin Jabal and according
to another report, appointed Itab bin Usaid as the governor of Mecca and
left Maaz bin Jabal with him to instruct the people in faith.  
 Ibn Babawayh has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the Prophet was never in greater danger
than at Hunain, for most of the nomadic tribes were opposed to him in
that battle.

Shaykh Tabarsi etc. have narrated that a daughter of his nurse, Halima
was there taken prisoner, and on being brought to the Prophet, said she
was his sister, the daughter of his nurse, and that she was now a
prisoner. He spread his cloak for her to sit on, and conversed with her
for a long time, asking her many question. He did not take as much
notice of her brother, assigning as a reason, that the daughter had been
more dutiful to her parents than brother.

Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated that when some delegations from Hawazin came
to the Prophet and embraced Islam and said: “People from our clan are
taken prisoners and you know what trouble has afflicted us. So please do
us a favor with regard to them, may Allah bless you. Zuhair bin Surd
stood up to speak: “O Messenger of Allah (S) if we had nursed Harith bin
Abi Shimr or Noman bin Manzar and they had overcome us, they would have
indeed done much favor on us and they are much better than you people.

These camps house your maternal aunts and their daughters in captivity.
We don’t want money. Please free our women and children. Many of their
prisoners had already been distributed among the companions. When his
sister interceded on their behalf of the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “I
have given up my share and the share of the sons of Abdul Muttalib; but
you apply in my name for those who are in share of other Muslims,
perhaps they will also free them.”

After Noon Prayer, Halima’s daughter began to canvass for her prisoners,
which was immediately accepted by the Muslims and her people were
released. But Afra bin Habis and Uyyana bin Hasan refused: “This
community had taken many of our women prisoners, so we will not free
their women prisoners. So lots were drawn for their shares and the
Prophet prayed to Allah to decrease their shares. One got a servant from
Bani Aqil and another got a servant from Bani Numair.

When they received their share they also gave up the claims. But
regarding the women who were distributed first, the Holy Prophet (S)
said: “Whoever gives up his share will get six shares from the next
booty that we receive.” All freed their women and children. Then
Halima’s daughter asked for amnesty for Malik bin Auf and the Prophet
accepted. He came to the Prophet who returned his belongings and also
gave him a hundred camels.

It is narrated that on the day the Holy Prophet (S) distributed
prisoners in Autas Valley, he had it announced that pregnant women be
not taken to bed, till the time of their deliveries and non-pregnant
women must also not be touched till they have had one menstrual cycle.

It is narrated that the Holy Prophet (S) married Malika Kandia in the
eighth year of Hijrat. Her father was killed on the day of the conquest
of Mecca. Some of the Prophet’s wives said: “Are you not ashamed to
marry a man who killed your father?” That unfortunate woman despised the
Prophet and he separated from her.

The same year, in the month of Zilhajj, Ibrahim, the son of the Prophet
by Mariya, was born. His midwife was Abu Rafe’s wife, freed slave girl
of the Prophet. She told her husband that a son is born to the Prophet.
Abu Rafe conveyed the good news to the Prophet who gave her a slave in
reward and named his newborn son, Ibrahim. Seven days after the birth,
the Prophet performed Aqiqa, gave the customary entertainment, shaved
his son’s head and buried the hair, giving its weight in silver to the
poor.

Ansar women competed with each other to nurse him, so the Holy Prophet
(S) chose Umm Barda binte Manzar bin Zaid. It is said that in the same
year, his adopted daughter, Zainab died; and he sent Kaab bin Umair on
an expedition to Shaam, who, with his party, were all slain. He also
sent Uyyana bin Hasan to Bani Ambar and he defeated them and took their
women as prisoners.

Battle of Tabuk – Uqbah – Masjid Zirar
--------------------------------------

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that during summer a caravan from Shaam
arriving at Medina, with garments and provisions for sale, gave
information that the army of Rum, commanded by the emperor Harqal in
person, who had been joined by many of the Arab tribes, like Ghassan,
Kharam, Qahar and Hamla, had arrived at Humus, the main body of the army
having advanced as far as Balqa, their object being to attack the
Muslims.

The Prophet immediately made preparation to march to Tabuk, and summoned
all the tribes of Medina and Mecca, like Qaza-a, Marina and Jahinia,
with others, to the scared war. He ordered that those who had property
should assist the poor in the expedition. Great and general contribution
were made to defray the expense of outfit and charges of the war. After
leaving the city and encamping at Sinyatul Wida, he made the following
address to his army: Praise and thanksgiving be to Allah: O you people,
verily the truest word is the book of Allah; the best discourse is that
of piety; the best of community is that of Ibrahim, and the best of
religious observances are those of the Prophet.

The most excellent utterance is praising Allah, the best of narratives
are those of the Qur’an, the best of works are those which are moderate,
and the worst of deeds is heresy. The best of religious directions are
those of the prophets, and the best death is martyrdom. The worst of the
blind are those of a blind heart, who wander after receiving religious
instruction; the best deeds are those which confer advantages in the
future world.

The best guidance is that which is followed and the worst blindness is
the blindness of the heart. The hand that gives is better than the hand
that receives and small charity is better than great wealth, which makes
man forgetful of Allah. The best excuse is the excuse asked at the time
of death. The worst regret is to ask for pardon at death, and the most
degraded of penitents are those that appear as such at the judgment.

There are those who do not except rarely, assemble for worship on
Friday, and same only occasionally think of Allah. But the worst sinners
are those who are liars. The most perfect independence is that from
appetite, and the best of necessaries is fearing the wrath of God. The
beginning of wisdom is to fear God, and the best thing that comes to the
heart of man is assurance in faith. Doubt in religion is infidelity, and
distance from truth is part of ignorance.

Stealing from spoils is portion of Hellfire, drunkenness is a flame of
Hell, poetry is of Satan, wine is the gatherer of all sins, and women
are the nets of the devil. Youth is a branch of insanity. The worst
earnings are the earnings of women and the worst of frauds is defrauding
orphans. He is of a fortunate mind who receives admonition from states
of others, and unfortunate whom Allah knows to be such before his birth.

Everyone of you will at last go to a narrow cell (grave), toward which
all your acts tend. The worst device is that of lying. Whatever is to
come soon arrives. Enmity to believers is corruption, fighting them is
infidelity, and slandering them is sin against Allah. Their property is
as sacred as their blood.

Whoever trusts in God will be sufficiently assisted, and to the patient
and persevering Allah will give the victory. Whoever pardons the fault
of others, Allah will pardon his; whoever quells his anger, Allah will
give him a great reward; whoever is patient under calamity, Allah will
bestow on him a good recompense. Whoever wishes to make known his good
deeds to men, Allah will degrade and expose him in their estimation.

Whoever keeps fasts will receive a double reward, but Allah will punish
all that sin against Him. The Prophet then repeated several times: Lord,
pardon me and my community, and turning to his followers, said: I ask
forgiveness of Allah for you and for myself. He then incited them to
fight manfully for faith.

The people after hearing this address, became eager for battle and all
tribes whom the Prophet had invited became ready for Jihad. There was,
however, a party of hypocrites who would not go to the war, and among
them a man named Jadd bin Qays, to whom the Prophet said, “Will you not
go with us? perhaps you may take a daughter of Rum prisoner.”

The wretch replied, “It is well known that there is no man fonder of
women than myself; but what I fear is that on seeing the daughter of
Rum, I shall not be able to restrain myself within proper bounds: do not
therefore expose me to such temptation, but allow me to remain at
Medina.” Jadd then advised his neighbors not to march in such a hot
climate, saying there was nothing to be gained by it but fatigue.

His son reproved, and admonished him that presently some verses would be
revealed from heaven denouncing his infidelity, and which men would read
and curse him down to the Judgment Day. This apprehension was soon
realized, for directly the Almighty Allah sent down his verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ يَقُولُ ائْذَنْ لِي وَلَا تَفْتِنِّي ۚ أَلَا فِي
الْفِتْنَةِ سَقَطُوا ۗ وَإِنَّ جَهَنَّمَ لَمُحِيطَةٌ بِالْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And among them there is he who says: Allow me and do not try me.
Surely into trial have they already tumbled down, and most surely hell
encompasses the unbelievers.”***[^6]

Jadd further observed, “Muhammad thinks an engagement with armies of Rum
is like the battles he has already fought, but none of his army will
return.” But when these verses were revealed he and his followers were
exposed and armies from all around gathered at Sinyatul Wida. The Holy
Prophet (S) set out from there and Ali was left in command at Medina,
which arrangement was so scandalized by the hypocrites, that at last
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) took his arms and overtook the Prophet at Jarf.

The Prophet asked him why he had come. Ali replied that the hypocrites
declared that he had been left, lest he should bring misfortune on the
expedition. “That is false,” said the Prophet; “and are you not
satisfied with being my brother, and holding in respect to me the rank
of Harun to Musa, and to be Caliph among my people, as there will never
be a Prophet after me?” Thus consoled, Ali returned to Medina.

Then Amr bin Auf tribe and Salam bin Umair who were present in Badr came
to the Prophet wailing and Bani Waqif Muddai bin Umair and Bani Haritha,
Aliya bin Zaid and one who had revealed his hidden wealth to the Prophet
and it was because one day the Prophet asked them to donate something to
charity and people brought their contributions.

Aliya swore that he had nothing which he can give and he gave all his
hidden wealth to the Prophet, who said that Allah has accepted his
contribution. So Abdur Rahman bin Kaab, alias Abu Laila from Bani Mazin
and from Bani Salma came Aman bin Ghalma and Bani Zariq bin Zajar, Bani
Arna bin Saria came to the Prophet wailing and said that they were
financially incapable to accompany him. The Almighty Allah revealed the
following verse about them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْسَ عَلَى الضُّعَفَاءِ وَلَا عَلَى الْمَرْضٰى وَلَا عَلَى الَّذِينَ
لَا يَجِدُونَ مَا يُنْفِقُونَ حَرَجٌ إِذَا نَصَحُوا لِلَّهِ
وَرَسُولِهِ ۚ مَا عَلَى الْمُحْسِنِينَ مِنْ سَبِيلٍ ۚ وَاللَّهُ
غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It shall be no crime in the weak, nor in the sick, nor in those who
do not find what they should spend (to stay behind), so long as they are
sincere to Allah and His Apostle; there is no way (to blame) against the
doers of good; and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”***[^7]

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that these people only wanted a pair of
slippers, which they can wear and march forward. So the Almighty Allah
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا السَّبِيلُ عَلَى الَّذِينَ يَسْتَأْذِنُونَكَ وَهُمْ
أَغْنِيَاءُ ۚرَضُوا بِأَنْ يَكُونُوا مَعَ الْخَوَالِفِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The way (to blame) is only against those who ask permission of you
though they are rich; they have chosen to be with those who remained
behind…”***[^8]

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that eighty people remained behind from
various tribes. Who were physically fit and had good intentions and
there was no doubt about them. But they said that they will meet the
Prophet ahead. Abu Khatima was one of them. He had two wives and owned
two grape orchards, in which he had constructed thatches. His women
performed the function of irrigating the garden. He provided his wives
in the best way.

He said that it was not just for the Holy Prophet (S) whose past and
future sins are forgiven to be exposed to sun and go for Jihad while
people like me should enjoy life. He loaded his she-camel and joined the
Prophet. When people saw him approach the Prophet said that it was Abu
Khathima. Abu Dharr lagged behind for three days as he had a very thin
camel who refused to move. Abu Dharr left it to walk on foot.

When the sun rose high, Muslims saw a person approach. The Holy Prophet
(S) said: “It is Abu Dharr. Give him water, he is very thirsty.” He
drank the water although he was already having a pot of water with him.
The Holy Prophet (S) asked why he was thirsty when he had water, he
said: “O Messenger of Allah (S), I found some rain water collected in a
depression in a rock, but when I tasted it, I found that it was
extremely sweet and cool.

So I vowed that I will not taste it till I have given it to my beloved,
Messenger of Allah (S).” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “O Abu Dharr, may
the Almighty Allah have mercy on you. You will live alone, die alone,
will be raised alone on Judgment Day and enter Paradise alone. Some
people from Iraq will perform your last rites.”[^9]

The Prophet now ordered his army to be numbered, and it was found to be
twenty-five thousand strong, besides slaves and servants. He then
commanded the believers to be counted, and there were twenty-five
persons who had not opposed him in that expedition.

Some believers and some hypocrites had not accompanied in the
expedition. Believers were those who had wisdom in religion and sign of
hypocrisy had not been seen in them. They were: Kaab bin Malik, Marara
bin Rabi and Hilal bin Umayyah. Kaab says: “I was never as healthy and
powerful as I was at the time of the Battle of Tabuk and I never was
given two quadrupeds to ride. I thought that if I departed in a day or
two I would be able to join the Prophet; but I continued to lie in
laziness for many days.

Meanwhile I went to the market but I could not achieve anything. I saw
Hilal bin Umayyah and Marara bin Rabi that they had also remained
behind. We conferred among ourselves that the following day we will go
to the market, complete our business and then leave for the battle. But
the following day also, we could not achieve anything. This went on till
we learnt that the Prophet was returning from Tabuk and we were much
ashamed. When the Holy Prophet (S) reached near Medina we went out to
congratulate him on his safe return. When we saluted, the Prophet did
not respond. He turned away from us.

We saluted the believers, but they also did not respond. Our family
members learnt about this and they also stopped talking to us. When we
came to the Masjid, no one saluted us or spoke to us. Finally our wives
went to the Holy Prophet (S) and said: “We know that you are infuriated
with our husbands. If you want, we will separate from them.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said, “No, but do not go near them.” when Kaab bin
Malik and his companions saw this, they said: “Why should we remain in
Medina, when neither the Prophet speaks to us nor our friends or family
members? Let us go to a mountain and stay there till the Almighty Allah
accepts our repentance. Or we will die there only. Thus they climbed the
Zubab mountains. They fasted during days and their family members
brought them food which they placed in a corner without speaking to
them. Thus they continued to cry and seek forgiveness for a long time.

After many days passed in this condition, Kaab said: “All are angry with
us and no one is willing to talk to us; so let us separate from each
other also?” So they took a vow that they will not speak to each other
till death or that their repentance is accepted. Three days passed when
they did not even look at each other. On the third day when the
Messenger of Allah (S) was at Umm Salma’s place the Almighty Allah
accepted their repentance and revealed the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ تَابَ اللَّهُ عَلَى النَّبِيِّ وَالْمُهَاجِرِينَ وَالْأَنْصَارِ
الَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوهُ فِي سَاعَةِ الْعُسْرَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly Allah has turned (mercifully) to the Prophet and those who
fled (their homes) and the helpers who followed him in the hour of
straitness…”***[^10]

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: The verse is revealed like this and not
like how the people recite:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ تَابَ اللَّهُ عَلَى النَّبِيِّ وَالْمُهَاجِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly Allah has turned (mercifully) to the Prophet and those who
fled (their homes)…”***[^11]  
 One whose repentance was accepted was Abu Dharr, Abu Khathima, Amr bin
Wahab, who lagged behind and then finally joined the Prophet. But the
Almighty Allah revealed the following verse about Kaab and his two
companions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَلَى الثَّلاَثَةِ الَّذِينَ خُلِّفُواْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And to the three who were left behind…”***[^12]

Imam (a.s.) said that the verse revealed like this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَلَى الثَّلاَثَةِ الَّذِينَ خُلِّفُواْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And to the three who were left behind…”***[^13]

That is the Almighty Allah accepted the repentance of the three who
disobeyed the Prophet and did not go out to fight.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتّٰى إِذَا ضَاقَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ الأَرْضُ بِمَا رَحُبَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“until the earth became strait to them notwithstanding its
spaciousness…”***[^14]

Imam (a.s.) said: It implies that the Prophet, their brothers in faith
and their family members had boycotted them so it became difficult for
them to live in Medina and hence they retired to the hills.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَضَاقَتْ عَلَيْهِمْ أَنفُسُهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and their souls were also straitened to them…”***[^15]

Imam (a.s.) said: “It implies that they stopped interaction between
themselves and separated from each other.” At last the Almighty Allah
accepted their repentance as He was aware of their true intentions.

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that a group of hypocrites set out for the
Battle of Tabuk with the Prophet and on the way conferred among
themselves that Muhammad thinks that the Battle of Rum is like the other
battles that he has fought. None of them will return alive. Some of them
sarcastically said: “How learned is that God, Who informs Muhammad about
that which we talk among ourselves and that which passes through our
minds and He reveals verses about them so that people may continue to
read them forever.

The Holy Prophet (S) told Ammar Yasir to join their group, because he
was so bold in words that he would irritate them. Ammar came to them and
said: “What nonsense have you spoken that the Almighty Allah has
informed your Prophet?” They said: “We have not said any untoward thing
and it was all by way of jest.” At that juncture, the Almighty Allah
revealed the following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَحْذَرُ الْمُنَافِقُونَ أَنْ تُنَزَّلَ عَلَيْهِمْ سُورَةٌ
تُنَبِّئُهُمْ بِمَا فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ ۚ قُلِ اسْتَهْزِئُوا إِنَّ اللَّهَ
مُخْرِجٌ مَا تَحْذَرُونَ. وَلَئِنْ سَأَلْتَهُمْ لَيَقُولُنَّ إِنَّمَا
كُنَّا نَخُوضُ وَنَلْعَبُ ۚ قُلْ أَبِاللَّهِ وَآيَاتِهِ وَرَسُولِهِ
كُنْتُمْ تَسْتَهْزِئُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The hypocrites fear lest a chapter should be sent down to them
telling them plainly of what is in their hearts. Say: Go on mocking,
surely Allah will bring forth what you fear. And if you should question
them, they would certainly say: We were only idly discoursing and
sporting. Say: Was it at Allah and His communications and His Apostle
that you mocked?”***[^16]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا تَعْتَذِرُوا قَدْ كَفَرْتُمْ بَعْدَ إِيمَانِكُمْ ۚ إِنْ نَعْفُ
عَنْ طَائِفَةٍ مِنْكُمْ نُعَذِّبْ طَائِفَةً بِأَنَّهُمْ كَانُوا
مُجْرِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do not make excuses; you have denied indeed after you had believed;
if We pardon a party of you, We will chastise (another) party because
they are guilty.”***[^17]

Ali bin Ibrahim, in the commentary of this verse, has narrated from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that these were the ones who brought faith with
sincerity, but they had doubt in religion and became hypocrites; and
they were four persons, one, Mujtabir bin Himyar was such that the
Almighty Allah promised to forgive him. He confessed to his mistake and
repented for it saying that his name was responsible for his calamity.
So the Holy Prophet (S) named him as Abdullah bin Abdur Rahman.

He prayed: “O Allah, give me martyrdom at such a place that no one
should come to know about my whereabouts.” The Almighty Allah accepted
his prayer and he was martyred in the Battle of Musaylima and no one
knew where he was. Thus he was forgiven by the Almighty Allah. But
Ayyashi has through reliable chains narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) that these verses were revealed about Abu Bakr and Umar and ten
persons of Bani Umayyah, because these twelve had planned to assassinate
the Prophet at the Uqbah of Tabuk.

They had planned that if they were detected, they would claim that they
were joking, and if the remained undetected, they would eliminate the
Holy Prophet (S). At that time the Almighty Allah had revealed these
verses and forgiveness of some of them implies that Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) under an exigency forgave Abu Bakr and Umar in the world by the
order of Allah and cursed them from the pulpit and also cursed those ten
persons.

When the Holy Prophet (S) returned from the Battle of Tabuk, believing
companions objected to the hypocrites and condemned them. So they swore
that they were steadfast on faith they had not become hypocrites so that
believers may refrain from harassing them. So the Almighty Allah
revealed the following verses about their falsehood:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَيَحْلِفُونَ بِاللَّهِ لَكُمْ إِذَا انْقَلَبْتُمْ إِلَيْهِمْ
لِتُعْرِضُوا عَنْهُمْ ۖ فَأَعْرِضُوا عَنْهُمْ ۖ إِنَّهُمْ رِجْسٌ ۖ
وَمَأْوَاهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ جَزَاءً بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ ﴿٩٥﴾
يَحْلِفُونَ لَكُمْ لِتَرْضَوْا عَنْهُمْ ۖ فَإِنْ تَرْضَوْا عَنْهُمْ
فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَرْضَىٰ عَنِ الْقَوْمِ الْفَاسِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They will excuse themselves to you when you go back to them. Say:
Urge no excuse, by no means will we believe you; indeed Allah has
informed us of matters relating to you; and now Allah and His Apostle
will see your doings, then you shall be brought back to the Knower of
the unseen and the seen, then He will inform you of what you did. They
will swear to you by Allah when you return to them so that you may turn
aside from them; so do turn aside from them; surely they are unclean and
their abode is hell; a recompense for what they earned.”***[^18]

It is mentioned in *Tafsir Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.)* that those
hypocrites who took part in Battle of Tabuk on the night of Uqbah, the
wicked infidels plotted to assassinate the Prophet on the Uqbah pass and
those of the hypocrites who had remained behind in Medina decided to
eliminate Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.).

But they could not surpass Allah (Who was the protector of both of
them). It was due to the fact that the Holy Prophet (S) had appointed
Ali (a.s.) to a lofty position. At the time of departing for the Battle
of Tabuk, the Messenger of Allah (S) appointed Ali in Medina as his
representative and said: Jibraeel had come and said: After greetings,
the Almighty Allah says: O Muhammad, either you go out and Ali (a.s.)
remain in Medina or Ali (a.s.) may go and you remain in Medina. There is
no other choice, so I have chosen Ali for one of the options. None
except me knows the great rewards and majesty of one who will obey me in
both these matters.

At last when the Holy Prophet (S) set out for the battle of Tabuk after
appointing Ali (a.s.) as his deputy in Medina, the hypocrites began to
say many things about it. They said: Muhammad has had a tiff with Ali
and he is displeased with his company. That is why he did not take him
along on this expedition. Ali (a.s.) became very sad on hearing this, so
he set out after His Eminence (S) and met him on the outskirts of
Medina. On seeing him, His Eminence (S) asked: Why did you leave your
place?

Ali (a.s.) said: “O Allah’s Messenger (S), I heard such remarks from the
people and I could not bear them.” His Eminence (S) said: “O Ali, are
you not pleased that you are to me as Harun was to Musa (a.s.), except
that there will be no prophethood after me?” Thus Ali (a.s.) returned to
Medina and the hypocrites devised a plot to eliminate him.

So they dug out a pit, fifty yard long, on the way, covered it with palm
leaves and spread some mud upon it to conceal it. It was dug at a spot
that he had to cross in any way, and it was dug quite deep, so that the
Imam may fall into it along with his horse; and then stones may be
thrown over him to bury him alive. When Ali (a.s.) reached near the pit,
the horse turned its neck and by the power of God it became so long that
its mouth reached to the ear of His Eminence (a.s.), and then it said: O
Amirul Momineen (a.s.), the hypocrites have dug a pit over here and have
planned to kill you. You know better that you must not pass from here.

His Eminence (a.s.) said: May Allah give you a good reward, as you are
my well-wisher and concerned for my well being. Almighty Allah will not
deprive you of His great kindness. Then His Eminence (a.s.) drove the
horse till they came to the edge of that pit. The horse stopped, fearing
that it would fall into it. His Eminence (a.s.) said: Go on by the order
of Allah, you will pass over it safe and sound; and Allah will give an
outstanding rank and make this matter of yours unique. At last the horse
began to gallop over it and the Almighty Allah made the earth hard and
smooth and filling up the pit, made it like other grounds.

When Ali (a.s.) passed over it, the horse turned its neck and putting
the mouth on his ear said: Indeed your status is very venerable near the
Lord of the worlds, that He enabled you to pass over this empty pit. His
Eminence (a.s.) said: The Almighty Allah has rewarded you for your
concern about me and made you pass over it safe and sound. Then the head
of the horse turned to the back and the people who had planned it were
also present there.

Some were at the back and some ahead. His Eminence (a.s.) told them to
uncover the pit. When it was opened, it was found empty from inside,
such that if anyone had stepped over it, he would have fallen into it.
Seeing this miracle, the hypocrites were shocked and amazed. His
Eminence (a.s.) asked: Do you know who has done this? They replied: We
don’t know. His Eminence (a.s.) said: But my horse knows. Then he turned
to his horse and asked: What is the truth and who has done it?

The horse said: O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), when Allah wants, He makes
something firm and ignorant people want to spoil it or when ignorant
people want to make something firm and Allah wants to destroy it, then
only Allah gains the upper hand and people are subdued. O Amirul
Momineen (a.s.), this is the handiwork of so-and-so ten hypocrites and
twenty-four other men whose advice was taken but who have gone along
with Allah’s Messenger (S); and they have planned to kill His Eminence
(S) at Uqbah, and Allah is the protector of His Messenger (S) and His
Wali (a.s.).

Some companions of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: Let us inform the
Prophet about it and send a message through a fast messenger. Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) said: Allah’s messenger and His letter will reach sooner
than my messenger and letter. Don’t worry, they can never succeed in
this.

Thus when the Prophet reached near the cliff where the hypocrites had
planned to kill him, he halted there and gathering the hypocrites said:
“The Trustworthy Spirit has brought news from the Lord of the worlds
that hypocrites planned to kill Amirul Momineen (a.s.) on the outskirts
of Medina and Allah, by His Grace, made the ground hard below the hooves
of his horse and feet of his followers and they passed over it safely.

Then they turned back and opened the pit. Allah emptied it just as the
hypocrites had prepared it before, thus disclosing their wickedness.
Some believers advised him to send a message to the Prophet but he
replied that Allah’s messenger and His letter will reach sooner than his
messenger and message.” But the Prophet did not tell them about the
prophecy that Ali (a.s.) had mentioned to his companions at the gates of
Medina.

That some hypocrites who were in the company of the Prophet intend to
eliminate him and that the Almighty Allah will ward off their wickedness
from him. When these twenty-four hypocrites heard this discourse of the
Prophet that he delivered about Ali (a.s.), they began to talk among
themselves: Muhammad is an expert in deception; some fast messenger or a
carrier pigeon must have brought news that Ali has been killed in this
way as it is the same thing that our associates had taken advice on, now
he is hiding the facts from us, relating it in another way so that his
companions may rest content and may not turn upon him.

It is a remote possibility and it cannot be to the contrary. By Allah,
Ali’s death has retained him in Medina and his death has brought him
here. Ali has definitely been killed there and he will surely be killed
here. Anyway, lets go and show joy at Ali’s escape so that he may be
content with regard to us and we may carry out our plan easily. So they
came to His Eminence (S) and congratulated him of Ali’s escape from the
enemies.

Then said: O Allah’s Messenger, tell us, who is excellent? Ali or the
proximate angels? His Eminence (S) said: Angels are honored only because
they love Muhammad and Ali (a.s.) and they have accepted their
guardianship. And there is no devotee of Ali (a.s.) who is not purified
of all spiritual dirt and made purer than the proximate angels. Angels
were ordered to prostrate to Adam (a.s.) because they had the notion
that if Allah takes them up and create others in their stead in the
earth, they (the angels) would be superior to them and more cognizant of
divine religion.

Thus Allah intended to make them aware that their thinking was wrong, so
He has created Adam (a.s.) and taught him all the names and presented
these named ones before the angels, but they failed to recognize them.
After that He commanded Adam (a.s.) to mention the names and identify
those personalities, so that the angels may know that Adam was superior
to them in knowledge.

Then He separated a progeny from Adam’s loins, that included all
prophets, Muhammad (S) and his progeny, which is superior to all; his
virtuous followers and companions were all included. In this way, Allah
made them aware that they are superior to angels. They are entrusted
such duties that if angels are with them they would find it dreadful.
They will have to contend with Shaitan and struggle with evils, fulfill
family responsibilities and try to earn lawful sustenance.

They will suffer hardships and trouble from kings, cruel persons and
thieves. They will bear difficulties of straits, mountains, hills, seas
and jungles. Allah made them realize that virtuous people have to fight
Shaitans and defeat them; keep their selves from desires and
lustfulness. Besides this, Allah has collected in them lust and need of
clothes, food, desires, prestige, kindness, pride etc. as a result of
which they have to suffer a lot.

The shaitaans will try to create fear and temptations in their mind and
mislead them, but they will overcome their evil suggestions. They will
have to tolerate taunts, abuses, the desire for food and to escape from
the enemies and bear difficulties in travel. Almighty Allah told His
angels: O My angels, you are free from all this. You are not having lust
and desires and have no fear of enemies of the world and Shaitan is
unable to mislead you as he cannot interfere in this kingdom. I have
kept you safe from his hands.

O My angels! One who obeys My orders from the children of Adam and tries
to save the religion from troubles and difficulties, is deserving of My
rewards that angels are nor eligible for. He has obtained some things
from Me, that you have not. In short, Allah told His angels about the
excellence of the followers of Muhammad (S) and Ali (a.s.), his
successors and their believers and proved that the children of Adam
(a.s.) were superior to them.

Then Allah ordered them to prostrate to Adam (a.s.) for the reason that
the future generations were in him. This prostration was not for Adam
(a.s.); he was their Qiblah and they prostrated to Allah. This
prostration was for Adam’s respect and not because he was deserving for
it; and none is deserving of prostration except Allah.

If I order anyone to prostrate to other than Me I will order him to
prostrate to that person who is the medium of the knowledge of the Wasi
of the Messenger of Allah (S) and is sincerely devoted to the best of
men after Muhammad, that is Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.). And who in order
to explain the rights of Allah is prepared to undergo untold great
hardships and from His rights that Allah had revealed to him he does not
deny anyone of them, whether he knew about them beforehand or came to
know later.

After that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: Iblis disobeyed Allah and
was ruined because he became arrogant about Adam (a.s.). And Adam (a.s.)
disobeyed Allah when he ate the fruit of the tree forbidden by Allah,
but was saved, because he did not add to his disobedience with pride
against Muhammad and Aale Muhammad; so Allah revealed to Adam (a.s.):
Shaitan disobeyed Me with regard to you and was proud against you and
that is why he was ruined.

If he had prostrated to you under My command and respected My order and
majesty, he would have indeed become successful. And you disobeyed Me in
eating the fruit of that tree and gained deliverance by according
respect for Muhammad and Aale Muhammad (a.s.); and the shame that you
earned through your mistake will go away.

So you must pray to Me through the sake of Muhammad and Aale Muhammad
that I will fulfill your need. Thus Adam (a.s.) made Muhammad and Aale
Muhammad his intercessors and prayed through their sake and obtained a
great status of victory and deliverance, because he held on firmly to
the love of us, Ahlul Bayt.

After that the Prophet (S) ordered his companions to march at midnight
and announced to all Muslims not to ascend the hill until he (S) passes
it. Then His Eminence (S) ordered Huzaifa to sit below the hill and
watch who is passing first over it before him and inform him. Huzaifa
(r.a.) was instructed to hide behind a rock but he said: If I see the
faces of the leaders of your army sitting at the foothill and if they
plan to kill they would come before you and if somebody finds me and
thinks that I will inform you, they would kill me.

His Eminence (S) said: When you reach foothills, there is a big rock
towards the jungle, you go to it and say that the Prophet (S) orders you
to crack open for me, so that I can enter. Then say that the Prophet (S)
orders you to keep a hole, so that you can watch who passes by and also
that it may enable you to breathe and not die of suffocation. When you
tell the rock, by the order of Allah the rock will act accordingly.

Thus Huzaifa (r.a.) gave the message of His Eminence (S) to the rock, it
happened as predicted and he sat watching through the hole. At that
time, the twenty-four persons arrived on camels; footmen walked before
them saying to each other: If you see anyone here, kill him at once, so
that he cannot inform Muhammad and hearing this, they might return from
here and not climb till morning, and our plot may fail. Huzaifa (r.a.)
heard them and they searched everywhere but could not see anyone as the
Almighty Allah had concealed him in the rock.

After that, some of them climbed the hill, some left the usual path and
some stood to the left and right of the foothills; other were saying:
See how the plan to kill Muhammad is succeeding. He himself forbid the
people to climb the hill before him so that we get privacy and can carry
out our plan. Thus we shall be free before his companions arrive.
Huzaifa (r.a.) could hear them from near and far and he memorized
everything.

When they had settled in their places in the mountain, that rock spoke
up by the command of Allah and asked Huzaifa (r.a.) to go to the Prophet
and tell him what he had heard. Huzaifa (r.a.) said: How can I go out?
Because if they see me, they would kill me, so that I may not reveal
their plan. The rock said: Allah provided a place in me for you and
through the hole He made in me, conveyed air to you.

The same Allah will take you to His Eminence (S) and save you from the
enemies. At last when Huzaifa (r.a.) intended to go, the rock split and
Allah turned him into a bird and he started flying in the air and went
to His Eminence (S). When he landed, Allah again changed him to his
original form. Huzaifa (r.a.) told everything he had seen and heard. His
Eminence (S) asked: Did you recognize them by their faces?

He said: They had veiled their faces but I recognized them by their
camels. But later when they had inspected the place and could not find
anyone there, they lifted the veils and I saw their faces and recognized
them that they were such and such twenty-four persons. His Eminence (S)
said: O Huzaifa! When Allah wants to save Muhammad (S) no one in the
world can harm him. Because Allah will effect His affair through
Muhammad (S) even if disbelievers do not like.

Then he said: O Huzaifa! You, Salman and Ammar come along with me and
trust in Allah. And when we pass the difficult terrain, the people may
be permitted to follow us. Then His Eminence (S) mounted his beast and
climbed the hill. From Huzaifa and Salman (r.a.), one held the camel’s
nose string and the other drove it from behind, whereas Ammar (r.a.)
walked by the side. The accursed hypocrites were on their camels and
their footmen stood on various mounds of the hill.

Those who were above the pass, had with them pots filled with stones, so
that when His Eminence (S) comes up, they will roll down the pots so
that the camel along with His Eminence (S) may fall into the valley,
which is so deep that one feels uneasy seeing it. At last when the pots
filled with stones came rolling to the camel, they rose very high by the
order of Allah and when the camel passed by, all the pots fell into the
valley and the camel did not feel anything.

Then His Eminence (S) asked Ammar (r.a.) to climb the hill and beat
their camels with his staff and make them fall down. Ammar (r.a.) did
this. The camels started running helter skelter. Some of them fell down,
some lost their hands and some their legs and ribs. On account of this,
they suffered a lot and even after the wounds were healed, the marks
remained on their bodies till death.

That’s why His Eminence (S) said that Huzaifa (r.a.) and Ali (a.s.) know
all these hypocrites very well because Huzaifa (r.a.) saw all of them
from the foothill, whoever climbed the hill before the Holy Prophet (S)
and Allah protected His Apostle and Messenger (S) from the enemies and
he returned to Medina safe and sound. Allah disgraced those who had not
accompanied the Prophet to the battle, and those who had planned to kill
Ali (a.s.), Allah kept their wickedness away from His Wali (a.s.) and
made them disgraced.

Kulaini has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that when people
tried to provoke the she-camel of the Prophet, she began to speak by the
power of Allah: “By Allah I will not move from my place even I am cut up
into pieces.”

Ibn Babawayh has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from
Huzaifa bin Yaman that when the Prophet was returning from the Battle of
Tabuk, those who tried to provoke the Prophet’s she-camel were fourteen
persons: Abu Bakr, Umar, Muawiyah, Abu Sufyan father of Muawiyah, Talha,
Saad bin Abi Waqqas, Abu Ubaidah bin Jarrah, Abul Awar, Mughira bin
Shoba, Salim, the freed slave of Abi Huzaifa, Khalid bin Walid, Amr Aas,
Abu Musa Ashari and Abdur Rahman bin Auf, may Allah keep His mercy from
them. These were the ones regarding whom the Almighty Allah said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهَمُّواْ بِمَا لَمْ يَنَالُواْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and they had determined upon what they have not been able to
effect…”***[^19]

It is narrated in reliable traditions that the Holy Prophet (S) cursed
Abu Sufyan on seven occasions, one of which was when they attacked the
Prophet at Uqbah. They were twelve persons, seven from Bani Umayyah and
five others. The Messenger of Allah (S) cursed them at that time.

Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated through Shia and Sunni channels that when
the Holy Prophet (S) returned from the Battle of Tabuk, twelve
hypocrites were hiding on the top of the cliff to eliminate him.
Jibraeel came down and warned him of the impending danger and suggested
to him to send someone to beat their camels. On that night Ammar was
leading the Prophet’s she-camel and Huzaifa was driving it from behind.

The Holy Prophet (S) told Huzaifa to hit on the snouts of the camels of
those who stand on the cliff. Huzaifa drove them and returned to the
Prophet, who asked him if he had recognized them and he replied in the
negative. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “They were such and such… they had
come to assassinate me.” Huzaifa said: “Why don’t you send someone to
eliminate them?” The Holy Prophet (S) replied: “I don’t want the Arabs
to accuse me of eliminating ones who helped me gain victory once.”

Qutub Rawandi has through trustworthy chains narrated from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that one night the Messenger of Allah (S) was traveling on
his she-camel during the journey to the Battle of Tabuk and people were
walking ahead of him. When he reached near Uqbah, Jibraeel came down and
said: “Fourteen persons from your companions, six of whom are from
Quraish,” or he mentioned their names and said, “they wait on the cliff
to provoke your she-camel and eliminate you.”

The Messenger of Allah (S) called them by names that “you are waiting on
the cliff to kill me,” at that time, Huzaifa was behind the Prophet’s
she-camel and he was listening to the Prophet’s discourse. The Holy
Prophet (S) called him and asked if he had heard whatever he said to
which he replied, “Yes.” The Prophet told him to keep it confidential.

It is narrated from the same Imam through another channel that whatever
the hypocrites used to talk, was revealed in Qur’an and they used to be
exposed. So much so that they stopped talking out and they restricted
their interaction through gestures of the eyes. Some of them said: “We
are not content that a few verses should be revealed about us and we
should be exposed forever. Let us wait for Muhammad on that cliff and
finish him off and get rid of him.”

That cliff was called Uqbah Zeefataq. So they scaled the cliff and
waited there. Huzaifa was driving the camel and he says: “When the
Prophet wanted to sleep, I used to leave the camel so that it may amble
slowly. That night I thought that it was a dark night and I should not
leave the beast alone. So I was present with the Prophet.

Jibraeel arrived and warned that some persons sat on the cliff to
provoke the she-camel. The Holy Prophet (S) called them by their names:
“O so and so, O enemies of Allah.” Then he noticed me and he asked: “Did
you see them?” “Yes, O Messenger of Allah (S).” “Did you recognize
them?” “Yes, they have veiled their faces, by I recognized them from
their beasts.” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Don’t reveal this to anyone.”
Huzaifa said: “They are from Quraish.”

Shaykh Mufeed and Shaykh Tabarsi have narrated that the Prophet set out
for the Tabuk expedition in the month of Rajab in 8th Hijri because the
Almighty Allah had revealed that they should proceed to the Battle of
Rum and had informed him that they will not have to take part in actual
fighting and that they will achieve their aims without fighting.

The aim of this battle was in fact to distinguish between the believers
and hypocrites from the sincere companions, and that their hypocrisy
should be exposed. So the Messenger of Allah (S) called them for the
Battle of Rum at the time of harvest season in Medina and it was
extremely hot. So the people found it very painful to set out at that
time. It was an extremely long journey, the climate was hot, the enemy
was stronger and they feared loss of their crops. So many companions
made excuses and many came out reluctantly.

Then the Holy Prophet (S) wrote to the Arab tribes who had embraced
Islam and motivated them for Jihad. When they were setting out from
Medina he delivered an eloquent sermon and after divine praise motivated
people to finance the journey of poor and spend in the way of Allah.
Many hypocrites donated for show-off and some sincere believers also
donated whatever was possible.

Uthman bin Affan gave some Awqiya silver and Abdur Rahman bin Auf, Talha
and Zubair also contributed. Abbas donated a substantial amount. Then
they camped at Saniyatul Wida and whoever had accepted the invitation of
the Prophet gathered there from Muhajireen and Ansar and Arab tribes
like Bani Kanana, Mazniya, Jahniya, Wati, Tamim and Meccans.

The Holy Prophet (S) appointed Imam Ali (a.s.) in charge of Medina so
that he may oversee the affairs of Medina and family of the Prophet etc.
and stop any mischief that may appear. And he said: “O Ali, it is
necessary that one of us should remain in Medina,” because the Holy
Prophet (S) was aware of the true intentions of Arabs and most Meccans
as he fought all of them and had slain their relatives and he feared
that if he goes far away from Medina they may join with the hypocrites
of Medina and may attack his family members and create mischief.

The Almighty Allah also knew that except for the sword of Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) nothing could douse the flames of their enmity, so He
revealed that Ali (a.s.) should be left in Medina. And since the
hypocrites of Medina were against the Caliphate of Ali and they knew
that in his presence they will not be able to create any mischief. And
they also feared that if something happened to the Prophet, the
Caliphate of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) will be permanent.

So they spread rumors about his being left in Medina that the Holy
Prophet (S) had not left him in Medina because of his excellence,
actually he is fed up with his company and he hates his companionship.
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) thus came to the Prophet to expose those
allegations. The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “My brother, go back to
Medina, because your presence is necessary there and you are my caliph
in my family and my town.

Are you not satisfied that you are to me as Harun was to Musa (a.s.),
except that there will be no prophet after me?” Since the Holy Prophet
(S) issued a correct text about the caliphate of Imam Ali (a.s.) it
exposed the allegations of those hypocrites.

After that the Messenger of Allah (S) gave the standard of Muhajireen to
Zubair and Talha was appointed on the right wing and Abdur Rahman to the
left. They halted at Jarf where Abdullah bin Ubayy took some of his
companions and went away without the permission of the Prophet. So the
Prophet said:

“Allah is sufficient for me and He is the One who supported me by His
help and with the believers and united their hearts.” Then they set out
from there and reached Tabuk on a Tuesday of Shaban and stayed there for
the remaining days of that month and some days of the month of Ramadan
and conducted expeditions from there. Bakhta bin Ruwaiya agreed to pay
tribute and the Prophet wrote a document of amnesty for him.

Similarly the people of Arba and Azra accepted suzerainty and were
issued amnesty. During the Tabuk expedition, the Holy Prophet (S) sent
Abu Ubaidah bin Jarrah to a group of Bani Khazan under the leadership of
Nasnan bin Ruh Jazami, who brought some booty and prisoners. Saad bin
Ubadah was sent to Bani Salim group and some groups of Bali tribes, who
fled on seeing the Muslims. Khalid bin Walid was sent with some persons
to Akidar, the king of Domatul Jundal and the Holy Prophet (S)
miraculously said that the Almighty Allah would perhaps give him victory
because of mountain goats.

He said: When you reach near the wall of his palace, Allah will send a
herd of deer and mountain goats to the gate, who would rub their horns
on the door. When Akidar hears the animals, he will ask his men to go
out and hunt them down. His wife will restrain him saying: Don’t tell
them to go out at this time of the night because Muhammad has landed
near our fort. I am afraid he will send his men here and they would
capture you.

He replied: Who can dare to split from the army? Our people will detect
them from a distance in this moonlight. The whole sky is illuminated and
no one is here and if anyone were near the palace, these wild animals
would have run away. At last the king will came out to hunt the animals
that fled from there. He followed them and was surrounded by Khalid and
his men.

Thus what the Prophet (S) had said came to be true and they arrested
him. Akidar said: I have a request. They said: You may ask whatever you
want, but don’t ask us to release you. Akidar said: Remove my royal
garments and sword etc. and take me to His Eminence (S) in a simple
shirt so that he does not see me in rich garments.

Perhaps he would have pity on me in that case. They did that and when
the Muslims and Arabs saw the rich embroidered clothes in moonlight,
they remarked: O Messenger (S), these garments and ornaments look like
garments of heaven. His Eminence (S) said: No. These are the garments of
Akidar and this is his sword. If my cousin, Khalid and Samak are firm on
my command, they will surely meet me at the Kauthar pool.

Their one handkerchief is better than all this. The companions asked:
Their handkerchief would be better than this? His Eminence (S) said:
Even if the space between the earth and sky is filled with gold, one
thread of the handkerchief they will hold in Paradise, would be better
than that.

When they brought Akidar to His Eminence (S), he said: Spare me so that
I can prevent your enemies, who live beyond my country, to attack you.
His Eminence (S) said: What if you don’t fulfill your promise? He said:
Yes, Allah’s Messenger, if I cannot; then if you are really are the
Prophet of Allah, and Allah Who protected you and Who sent the herd of
deer to my door and took me out of my palace and made me arrested by
your companions; the same Allah will have me arrested again.

At last the Holy Prophet (S) signed a treaty with him that he would pay
a thousand ‘Awqiya’ gold and two hundred robes in the month of Rajab and
same in the month of Safar and whenever a Muslim passed through his
territory, he would be provided rations for three days till he goes out
of his boundaries. And if he breaks this promise, he would be out of the
guarantee of Allah and the Messenger. After that His Eminence (S)
returned to Medina

It is mentioned in some reliable books that on arriving at Tabuk, it
appeared that the report of the emperor of Rum’s advancing against the
Prophet was false. When Harqal learnt of the Prophet’s arrival, he sent
a man of Anan tribe to ascertain if the signs mentioned about the
prophet of the last age are present in him.

When he came to the Prophet and witnessed his praiseworthy qualities, he
reported them back to Harqal who gathered his people and said: “The
qualities we read in former books are all present in him. So let us go
and accept faith at his hands.” The people opposed him vehemently and he
feared his throne and believed in his heart without revealing to his
people and did not agree to fight him. The Prophet also did not receive
divine permission and he went to Medina.

Many miracles were displayed by the Prophet during this journey. First
it is narrated in *Tafsir Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.)* from Ali Ibnul
Husain that: Like Mecca, in Medina also there were hypocrites and
weak-hearted Muslims and they also desired the destruction of Masjids
there and throughout the world.

Those cursed ones had desires and intended to kill Ali (a.s.) in Medina
and the Holy Prophet (S) on his way while crossing the vale of Aqaba,
the Almighty Allah, in order to multiply the intelligence and eyesight
of the faithful and to wipe out the plots of the rebellious hypocrites,
issued such wonderful miracles through the hands of the Holy Prophet
(S), during the expedition of Tabuk, which showed Allah’s power and
mercy towards His faithful servants.

One of those miracles is that when the companions of the Prophet, during
the Tabuk journey, had, like Bani Israel, begged to the Holy Prophet
(S): O Allah’s Messenger! We are not satisfied with only one kind of
food. So, in this matter, the miracle shown by the Holy Prophet (S) was
in no way lesser than one shown by Prophet Musa (a.s.) to his community.
By the command of Allah, while leaving Medina for Tabuk, the Holy
Prophet (S) made Ali (a.s.) his deputy in Medina.

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: O Allah’s Messenger! In no circumstances do
I wish to disagree with you. But I also never desire to make myself
deprived of seeing your holy and radiant face. The Holy Prophet (S)
replied: O Ali! Do you not like that your rank, in my sight, should be
like that of Harun (a.s.) in the sight of Musa (a.s.)? The only
difference is that there will not be any prophet after me. So, O Ali!
You will have to remain here.

You will get the same divine reward, which you would have gained in my
company and also like of those who faithfully travel with me. Since you
wish that you see every move and condition of mine, the Almighty Allah
will call upon Jibraeel to raise up all the earth on which we move and
all places where you remain and also to make your eyesight so powerful
that you will be able to observe me and my companions during this
journey. Thus you will also not need to write me any letter of inquiry.

When the statement of the Holy Imam (a.s.) reached this point, a
hypocrite stood up and said: O son of Allah’s Messenger! How is such a
thing possible for Ali (a.s.)? It is reserved only for prophets. Imam
Zainul Abideen (a.s.) replied: That also was a miracle of the Holy
Prophet, of no one else, because, just as the Almighty Allah, in reply
to the Prophet’s prayer, raised up the ground, so also, responding to
his request, made the eyesight of Ali (a.s.) powerful enough to observe
all distant events.

Thereafter, Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: The people of this
community are very unjust to Ali (a.s.). They describe the gracefulness
of others but deny the same honor to Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.), though he
is higher than all others in this matter. How do they deny to Ali (a.s.)
what they grant to others? The companions requested Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) to explain this matter.

The Holy Imam (a.s.) said: Those people befriend the friends of Abu Bakr
bin Abi Qahafa and hate his enemies, whoever they may be. Similar is
their attitude towards Umar bin Khattab and Uthman bin Affan. But in the
matter of Ali (a.s.), they say: We do not love his friends and do not
hate his opponents. Who knows how they adopted this attitude when the
Holy Prophet (S) has already publicly pronounced: O Allah! Love those
who love Ali and be the enemy of those who are inimical towards Ali
(a.s.). Help the helpers of Ali and deny help to those who deny help to
Ali (a.s.). Therefore, not being against the opponents of Ali (a.s.) is
not a just attitude  
 .  
 Another injustice adopted by such people is that whenever graces and
excellences are granted to Ali (a.s.) in response to the Prophet’s
prayer, are described to them, they deny the same[^20] and when the same
kind of praise is made for others, they accept it.

After all, what has prevented them from agreeing to the same excellence,
which they have accepted for others?! For example, they describe that
once Umar bin Khattab was giving a sermon. Suddenly he cried out loudly:
O Saariya! Towards the hill! At the conclusion of his speech, when
people asked about the said words of interruption, he replied: While
giving sermon to you, I looked towards the grounds where your Muslim
brothers are waging Jihad under the banner of Saad bin Abi Waqqas
against the deniers.

The Almighty Allah removed all curtains from my eyes and I could see
that some infidels had arrived there with the intention of surrounding
the Muslims from behind to massacre them. Therefore, I cried out: O
Saariya! Towards the hill! So that they may take cover in the mountains
and be saved. The Almighty Allah has granted the villages and
habitations of the disbelievers to your brothers-in-faith and so through
their fight they may capture them victoriously. So remember this. Very
soon, you will know about this event, though the distance between Medina
and Nahavand is that of over 50 days’ journey.

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: When this can happen for Umar, why it
cannot be for Ali (a.s.)? But these people do not understand anything.
They are talking too unjustly.  
 Thereafter, he reverted to the speech of Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.) and
said that Imam Sajjad (a.s.) said: When the Holy Prophet (S) proceeded
to Tabuk, the Almighty Allah raised the ground on which Ali (a.s.)
stayed and moved, so that he could watch the conditions of the Holy
Prophet (S) and his army’s movements.

Imam Sajjad (a.s.) also said: Whenever the Holy Prophet (S) set out to
fight, he never mentioned the destination. But in case of Tabuk he spoke
out openly and ordered all to prepare for the journey taking necessary
materials with them. So they took with them flour, salted meat, honey
and dates in large quantities. They did so because the Holy Prophet (S)
had already informed them of the long distance and impending hardships
and non-availability of food.

Finally, when many days passed in traveling and the eatables with them
became stale, they did not like to eat the same things over and over
again and desired for fresh food. So they said to the Holy Prophet (S):
O Allah’s Messenger! We are fed up with this stale food which is about
to be putrefied and to give out foul smell. Kindly make some
arrangement.

The Holy Prophet (S) asked them: What are you having now? They replied:
Loaves of bread, dry salted meat, honey and dates. The Holy Prophet (S)
exclaimed: You have been like Bani Israel! They had said: We cannot pull
on with one kind of food. Now tell me what you want? They replied: We
want fresh and dried meat, chicken and sweetmeat. The Holy Prophet (S)
said: Of course, you are differing from Bani Israel in one thing.

They had demanded cucumber, onion, garlic, masoor and vegetables. They
desired to exchange good things for lower things but you desire higher
in exchange of lower, However, I will soon request the Almighty Allah to
fulfill your desires. At that time some of them said: We also have some
who desire the lower grade things like Bani Israel. They also desire to
eat onion, cucumber and vegetables etc. like Bani Israel. The Holy
Prophet (S) said: All right, the Almighty Allah will soon grant you all
that you want, you must testify my messengership and trust me and then
said: O servants of Allah! The people of Prophet Isa (a.s.) asked him
for a table of eatables from heaven. So when Isa (a.s.) prayed for it,
the Almighty Allah said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ اللهُ إِنِّي مُنَزِّلُهَا عَلَيْكُمْ فَمَن يَكْفُرْ بَعْدُ
مِنكُمْ فَإِنِّي أُعَذِّبُهُ عَذَابًا لاَّ أُعَذِّبُهُ أَحَدًا مِّنَ
الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah said: Surely I will send it down to you, but whoever shall
disbelieve afterwards from among you, surely I will chastise him with a
chastisement with which I will not chastise, anyone among the
nations.***[^21]

Simply: Allah said: I will surely send down for you a table of eatables
from the sky. But if after that, anyone from you becomes a disbeliever I
will punish in a way none has been punished before.  
 Thereafter, the Almighty Allah sent down to them Maidah (Food Table)
from heaven. But thereafter some of them became deniers. Consequently
Allah changed their faces for worse. He turned some of them into pigs,
some into monkeys, some into cats, some into bears and some into land
and sea animals as well as birds.

They were transformed into 400 different kinds of creatures. That is
why, I do not request Allah to fulfill your demand of a heavenly table
of food (Maidah), because if some of you become infidels thereafter,
they will also be punished by Allah like those in the past. I am very
kind towards you and hence I don’t like to see you in punishment.
Thereafter, the Holy Prophet (S) observed a bird flying in the sky. He
asked one of his companions: Go and tell that bird, that the Messenger
of Allah (S) orders you to drop to the earth.

The command was conveyed and the bird fell down. Then the Prophet asked
his companions: Surround this bird from all sides. They did so. The bird
had, as ordered become so big that more than ten thousand persons could
surround it. Then the Holy Prophet (S) said: O bird! By the command of
Allah, dissect your wings and feathers. It complied with the order
instantly. Only flesh and skin was visible with bones inside.

Then the Holy Prophet (S) ordered the bird to separate its beak and
bones and legs. It did so. All these parts of the bird were scattered on
ground and people were seated all around it. Then the Holy Prophet (S)
ordered the bones to turn into cucumber. They did so. Then he said: The
Almighty commands these wings and the big and small feathers to turn
into onions, garlic and different kinds of vegetables. The order was
complied with at once.

Then the Prophet asked his companions: Extend your hands and eat the
provision using your hands as well as your knives. They did so. Then a
hypocrite said: Muhammad imagines that in Paradise also there are birds,
which will enable the people of Paradise to taste roasted meat on one
side and cobwebs from their other side, but he has not yet shown this
phenomenon in this world. The Almighty Allah made the Prophet (S) know
what that hypocrite meant.

So the Holy Prophet (S) told his companions: O servants of Allah!
Everyone of you should pick up his morsel reciting *Bismillaahir
Rah’maanir Rah’eem wa S’allallaahu a’laa muh’ammadinw wa aalihit’
t’ayyibeen.*[^22] When you put that morsel into your mouth you will
taste meat, gravy or sweet as desired by you. The companions did so and
got what they had desired. All got gratified. Then they said: O Allah’s
Messenger! We are satisfied with eatables.

Now we need some good drink. The Holy Prophet (S) asked: Do you want
milk and other drinks? They replied: Yes, some of us do want it. The
Holy Prophet (S) said: Take a piece from this bird’s meat and put it in
your mouth reciting *Bismillaahir Rah’maanir Rah’eem wa S’allallaahu
a’laa muh’ammadinw wa aalihit’ t’ayyibeen.* That morsel will turn into
anything, giving you the desired taste of drinks. They did so and became
fully satisfied.

Then the Holy Prophet (S) told that bird: O bird, the Almighty Allah
orders you to revert to your original form and shape and all the organs
and parts of your body which had become eatables should regain their
earlier figure, form and size. So it happened. Then the Holy Prophet (S)
said: O bird, the Almighty Allah commands your departed spirit to come
back to you.

So that also happened. Then the Holy Prophet (S) said: O bird, now the
Almighty Allah orders you to rise from ground and begin to fly in the
sky as you were doing earlier. The bird, before the eyes of the
companions, rose from the ground and flew away into the sky. When they
looked on the ground they found none of the eatables.

Second Miracle: Qutub Rawandi has narrated that when the Messenger of
Allah (S) camped at Tabuk and there was exchange of messengers between
him and the King of Rum, and the period prolonged and there was shortage
of rations; people complained to the Prophet and he told them to bring
all the flour or dates that they may be having.

They brought a handful of flour and some dates. The Prophet spread a
sheet and put the things on it. Then he called all of them to collect
food from there. They brought their vessels and filled them up with
flour and dates but there was no decrease in the original. When the Holy
Prophet (S) came across a water hole that had gone dry, he took out an
arrow and gave it to companions and asked him fix it at the bottom. When
he did so, twelve springs of water gushed out from there and all drank
from it and filled their water skins.

Third Miracle: Qutub Rawandi has narrated that the Messenger of Allah
(S) set out to Tabuk and his she-camel Ghazba was lost and a hypocrite
Ammara bin Kharam sarcastically remarked that Muhammad informs us of the
earth and the heavens and is ignorant where his she-camel is.

The Messenger of Allah (S) was informed through divine revelation and he
said: “I only know that which the Almighty Allah has taught me. At the
moment the Almighty Allah has told me that the she-camel is in such and
such pass and its rein has got caught up in a tree. People went there to
find it in the same condition.

Fourth Miracle: Qutub Rawandi has narrated that during the Battle of
Tabuk, there were 25000 companions with the Prophet in addition to
slaves and servants. On the way, they reached a mountain from which
water was dripping slowly but running water was not available.
Companions said: “This is strange.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “This mountain is weeping.” The companions
were astonished. The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Why are you weeping?”
“O Messenger of Allah (S), one day Prophet Isa (a.s.) passed from here
reciting the Injeel in which it is stated that there is a stone which
will be used to burn fuel, so I am weeping from that day lest I also
become such a stone.”

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Rest assured as you are not that
stone. It is the stone of arrogance.” So the mountain was assured and no
one saw it weeping again. Fifth Miracle: It is mentioned in some
reliable books that when the Messenger of Allah (S) reached Wadiul Qura,
he camped below a rock and informed that there will be strong wind that
night and no one should venture out alone.

Also they must tie their camels securely. So a terrible storm appeared
and no one came out alone except two persons from Bani Saida. One of
them wanted to relieve himself and another went out in search of his
camel. The first one was blown away by the wind and the next one was
blown away to the mountain ranges of Bani Tai. The Holy Prophet (S)
prayed for the first and he became alive and returned and the next one
was sent back by Bani Tai when the Prophet returned to Medina.

Sixth Miracle: It is narrated that when the Prophet set out from below
that rock and reached the next stage of journey none of the companions
had any water and neither was it available there. People complained of
thirst and the Prophet faced the Qiblah and prayed, soon clouds appeared
and it rained so heavily that they drank to satiation and also filled up
their water skins. Then the clouds disappeared.

Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated from Abu Hamza Thumali that three men of
Ansar named: Abu Lubabah bin Abdul Manzar, Thalaba bin Rabia and Aws bin
Khazam disobeyed the Prophet and remained in Medina and they came to
know that Qur’anic verses were revealed about those who turned away from
battle and they became sure of their death.

So they tied themselves to the pillars of the mosque and remained like
that till the Holy Prophet (S) returned from the battle and inquired
about them. He was told that they would not untie themselves till they
are not released by the Prophet himself. He said: “I also swear that I
will not release them till the Almighty Allah does not send a
communication regarding them. At last the following verse was revealed
about them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَسَى اللَّهُ أَنْ يَتُوبَ عَلَيْهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…may be Allah will turn to them (mercifully)…”***[^23]

The Holy Prophet (S) came to them and untied their hands and accepted
their repentance by the order of Allah. They returned home and brought
their wealth to the Prophet and offered them saying: “These were
responsible for our misfortune. You may accept them as charity.” The
Holy Prophet (S) said: “I have not received any communication of the
Almighty Allah regarding this. At that juncture, the following verse was
revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُذْ مِنْ أَمْوَالِهِمْ صَدَقَةً تُطَهِّرُهُمْ وَتُزَكِّيهِمْ بِهَا
وَصَلِّ عَلَيْهِمْ ۖ إِنَّ صَلَاتَكَ سَكَنٌ لَهُمْ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Take alms out of their property, you would cleanse them and purify
them thereby, and pray for them; surely your prayer is a relief to
them…”(***[^24]***)(***[^25]***)***

It is mentioned in *Tafsir Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.)* that at last when
Saad Ibn Maaz was satisfied after the extermination of the Bani Quraiza
tribe and after sometime he passed away, the Holy Prophet (S) remarked:
O Saad, may Allah have mercy on you, you were like a bone stuck in the
throat of infidels, you would have prevented the appointing of the calf
which they want to establish in Medina, like it was done at the time of
Musa (a.s.).

Then he said: Yes, by Allah, they want to do this. If Saeed were alive,
he would not have allowed their plan to succeed. They will devise some
plans, but Allah will nullify them. The companions asked how it would
happen. His Eminence (S) said: Let it be, till Allah manifests His plan.

Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) said: When Saad Ibn Maaz passed away and His
Eminence (S) marched to Tabuk, the hypocrites from the Ummah of Muhammad
made Abu Aamir Rahib their leader and gave him oath of allegiance; and
decided to loot Medina and apprehend the family of Prophet, other
families and children of companions; and made a plan to attack the
Prophet and kill him on the way of Tabuk.

But Allah kept him safe in a beautiful way and disgraced these
hypocrites. That is why the Holy Prophet (S) had said: You will follow
the path of the previous nations just like a shoe follows another and
one feather of the arrow is like another; and you will resemble them
totally. So much so, that if they had entered a snake hole, you will
also enter it.

The audience asked: O son of Allah’s Messenger, please tell us, who that
calf is and what their plan was. Imam Kazim (a.s.) said: Listen, the
Prophet (S) was getting messages from the king of Domatal Jindal, a big
province near Syria, who used to threaten that he would attack Medina
and slay the companions. The companions were afraid of this and twenty
of them guarded the Prophet every day in turns and any time and whenever
anyone screamed, they thought the king’s army has arrived and the
hypocrites also spreads false rumors making the companions fall in doubt
and said that King Akidar has indeed prepared his army and horses and
announced in all areas: I make it lawful for you to plunder Medina.

The hypocrites then created doubts in the minds of weak Muslims and
said: How can the companions of the Prophet confront Akidar’s men; he is
about to attack Medina to kill the men and take women and children as
captives. At last the believers were much hurt by these statements of
hypocrites and complained to the Holy Prophet (S). After that the
hypocrites came together and paid allegiance to Abu Aamir Rahib, whom
the Prophet had labeled as a transgressor; they made him their leader
making incumbent his obedience on themselves.

He said: I think I should go out somewhere from Medina, so that I remain
free from blame till your plot is complete. Thus he sent a letter to
Akidar in Domatal Jindal saying: Lay siege to Medina and we will help
you to eliminate your enemies. When the hypocrite finalized their plot,
Allah informed the Prophet (S) and ordered him to march to Tabuk.

Before this, when the Prophet led an expedition, the destination used to
be kept confidential and other places were mentioned to mislead the
mischief-makers. But this time he openly announced his intention and
ordered the people to collect necessary equipments. This was the battle
in which hypocrites were disgraced and Allah censured those who
abstained from joining it.

The Almighty Allah informed the Prophet through revelation and he
announced: Allah, the mighty would make me victorious on Akidar; he
would be captured and make peace with us on the condition to pay a
thousand tolas gold and two hundred garments in the month of Safar and
same in the month of Rajab and I shall return to Medina safely within
eighty days.

Then he said to his companions: Musa (a.s.) promised his community forty
nights and I promise that I will return to Medina safely without
fighting after eighty nights and don’t have doubt on this. The
hypocrites said: This will never happen thus, it would be his last
defeat. After this, he will not recoup, because his companions will die
of heat and polluted air and water of jungles; and those who escape,
will be wounded and killed by Akidar or captured by him.

The hypocrites sought permission from the Prophet to exempt them, and
put forth different kinds of excuses. Some said they were sick, some
made the excuse of excessive heat and some mentioned their children’s
illness and the Prophet continued to excuse them. When the departure to
Tabuk was finalized, the hypocrites built a mosque outside Medina, which
became known as Masjid Zirar.

Their intention was to gather there and tell the people they were
gathering for prayer so that they succeed in their plan. After that some
people came to the Prophet and said: Allah’s Messenger, we live far away
from your mosque and we also don’t like praying solitary. That is why we
have built a mosque there, please come and pray there once so that the
mosque is blessed.

The Prophet (S) knew through revelation something but he didn’t say it;
and ordered them to bring a donkey. He mounted it and he and companions
tried to drive it, but it did not move from its place; however when it
was turned to another direction, it was willing to move. The hypocrites
said: This donkey is afraid of something and it doesn’t want to go this
way.

The Prophet (S) dismounted and asked for a horse and mounted it. Again
when he tried to ride to the mosque, the horse did not move; and when it
was turned to another direction, it started moving. The hypocrites said:
This horse is also afraid of something and doesn’t want to go this way.
Then His Eminence (S) said: Let us go on foot.

But when the Prophet and others decided to walk to Masjid Ziraar, their
feet became stiff and could not move at all; and when they turned to go
the other way, they found it easy to walk; their bodies become light and
their hearts, happy. Seeing this, the Prophet (S) said: Allah does not
like that we go there at a time when we are ready for a journey.

Wait for a few days till we return. After that we will do what Allah
wants. Thus His Eminence (S) made efforts to set out for Tabuk at the
soonest and the hypocrites decided to eliminate the remaining people in
Medina after the Prophet leaves for Tabuk. Hence Jibraeel (a.s.) came
from Allah and said: O Muhammad (S) after Durood and salutation, Allah
says: Either you go on the journey, leaving Ali (a.s.) in Medina or send
him on the journey and you remain here.

The Prophet (S) conveyed this divine command to Ali (a.s.) who said: I
happily accept the order Allah and His Messenger, even though I don’t
want to leave the company of His Eminence (S) under any circumstance.
His Eminence (S) said: Do you not accept that your status with regard to
me is just as Harun was to Musa (a.s.) except that there will be no
prophet after me? Ali (a.s.) said: O Allah’s Messenger, I accept.

His Eminence (S) said: O Abul Hasan, by staying in Medina you will get
reward of traveling in this journey. Allah has made you a Nation like
Ibrahim (a.s.) [That is just as Ibrahim (a.s.) was commanded to confront
alone the polytheists of that time, in the same way you will have to
confront these infidels and hypocrites alone] and due to your awe, the
hypocrites will not be able to cause any harm to the Muslims.

Thus when the Holy Prophet (S) set out to Tabuk and Ali (a.s.) went
along to see him off, the hypocrites said that Muhammad (S) did not take
Ali (a.s.) along with him because of his displeasure with him. His
intention is that we attack Ali (a.s.) and kill him. When this news
reached the Prophet, Ali (a.s.) said: Allah’s Messenger, have you heard
what these hypocrites say?

The Prophet (S) said: O Ali, is it not enough for you that you are to me
like vision is to my eyes and the soul to the body? After that His
Eminence (S) set out with his companions, leaving Ali (a.s.) as his
representative in Medina. Whenever the hypocrites thought of attacking
the Muslims, they used to be afraid of Ali, the victor of Khyber and
dreaded that others may also rise up in Ali’s support and thwart their
plans. But all the time they said that this would be the last journey of
Muhammad and that he will not return.

At last, when there was only a short distance between Holy Prophet (S)
and Akidar, one evening His Eminence (S) said to Zubair bin Awwam and
Samak bin Khurasha to go with twenty Muslims to the palace of Akidar and
capture him. Zubair said: Allah’s Messenger, how can we bring him here?
He has a huge army as you know, besides thousands of slaves and
maidservants etc. His Eminence (S) said: Capture him by some trick.

They said: How can we do that? First of all, it is a full moon night and
secondly the path is through an open plain, how can we hide ourselves
from their sight? His Eminence (S) said: Do you want Allah to hide you
from their sight and make your shadow vanish, so that there is no
difference between the moonlight and your light? They said: Yes, Allah’s
Messenger, we want that.

His Eminence (S) said: Then it is obligatory on you to recite Durood on
Muhammad and Aale Muhammad and have faith that Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.)
is most superior among all my progeny; and O Zubair, specially you stick
to the faith that Ali (a.s.) is most deserving of leadership in
whichever community he is present, and no one else is allowed
leadership. When you do this, and reach near the wall of his palace,
Allah will send a herd of deer and mountain goats to the gate, who would
rub their horns on the door.

When Akidar hears the animals, he will ask his men to go out and hunt
them down. His wife will restrain him saying: Don’t tell them to go out
at this time of the night because Muhammad has landed near our fort. I
am afraid he will send his men here and they would capture you. He
replied: Who can dare to split from the army?

Our people will detect them from a distance in this moonlight. The whole
sky is illuminated and no one is here and if anyone were near the
palace, these wild animals would have run away. At last the king will
came out to hunt the animals but they fled from there. He followed them
and was surrounded by Zubair and his men.

Thus what the Prophet (S) had said came to be true and they arrested
him. Akidar said: I have a request. They said: You may ask whatever you
want but don’t ask us to release you. Akidar said: Remove my royal
garments and sword etc. and take me to His Eminence (S) in a simple
shirt so that he does not see me in rich garments. Perhaps he would have
pity on me in that case.

They did that and when the Muslims and Arabs saw the rich embroidered
clothes in moonlight, they remarked: O Messenger (S), these garments and
ornaments look like garments of heaven. His Eminence (S) said: No. These
are the garments of Akidar and this is his sword. If my cousin, Zubair
and Samak are firm on my command they will surely meet me at the Kauthar
pool.

Their one handkerchief is better than all this. The companions asked:
Their handkerchief would be better than this? His Eminence (S) said:
Even if the space between the earth and sky is filled with gold, one
thread of the handkerchief they will hold in Paradise, would be better
than that.

When they brought Akidar to His Eminence (S), he said: Spare me so that
so that I can prevent your enemies, who live beyond my country, to
attack you. His Eminence (S) said: What if you don’t fulfill your
promise? He said: Yes, Allah’s Messenger, if I cannot; then if you
really are the Prophet of Allah, and it was Allah Who protected you and
Who sent the herd of deer to my door and took me out of my palace and
made me arrested by your companions; the same Allah will have me
arrested again.

At last the Holy Prophet (S) signed a treaty with him that he would pay
a thousand ‘Awqiya’ gold and two hundred robes in the month of Rajab and
same in the month of Safar and whenever a Muslim passed through his
territory, he would be provided rations for three days till he goes out
of his boundaries. And if he breaks this promise, he would be out of the
guarantee of Allah and the Messenger. After that His Eminence (S)
returned to Medina.

Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) said: The calf of the time of the Holy Prophet
(S) was Abu Aamir Rahib; whom His Eminence (S) had labeled as a
transgressor. When His Eminence (S) became victorious and returned to
Medina and Allah nullified the deceit of the hypocrites, the Prophet (S)
ordered to burn the mosque of Zirar and Allah sent the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ اتَّخَذُوا مَسْجِدًا ضِرَارًا وَكُفْرًا وَتَفْرِيقًا
بَيْنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَإِرْصَادًا لِمَنْ حَارَبَ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ
مِنْ قَبْلُ ۚ وَلَيَحْلِفُنَّ إِنْ أَرَدْنَا إِلَّا الْحُسْنَىٰ ۖ
وَاللَّهُ يَشْهَدُ إِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And those who built a Masjid to cause harm and for unbelief and to
cause disunion among the believers and an ambush to him who made war
against Allah and His Apostle before; and they will certainly swear: We
did not desire aught but good; and Allah bears witness that they are
most surely liars.”***[^26]

Then Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) said: Allah destroyed the calf that was
present during the time of the Prophet (S). He became involved in
leprosy and paralysis and this condition remained for forty days and
after that he died and fell into a severe chastisement of Hell.

Ali bin Ibrahim and Shaykh Tabarsi etc. have narrated that when the Bani
Amr Auf constructed a Masjid at Quba and asked the Prophet to pray there
and he prayed there, some twelve or fifteen persons of Bani Ghanam bin
Auf were jealous of this and they also said that we will also make a
Masjid and not attend the prayers led by Muhammad. According to the
report of Ali bin Ibrahim they came to the Prophet and said: “O
Messenger of Allah (S), do you permit us to make a Masjid for old, sick
and night-worshippers at Bani Salim?”

The Prophet gave them the permission. When the Masjid was ready, they
came to him and said: “O Messenger of Allah (S) we would like you to
pray at our Masjid to bless us.” At that time the Prophet was leaving
for Tabuk and he said: “I am already mounted. I will come on my return,
Insha Allah.” So when he returned, they repeated the same request. At
that juncture, the Almighty Allah revealed the verses about the Masjid
and Abu Aamir Rahib stood exposed for heresy.

The incident of Abu Aamir is that during the period of Jahiliyya, he had
adopted asceticism and donned a jute garment. When the Holy Prophet (S)
migrated to Medina that accursed one used to instigate the infidels
against the Prophet and harass him in various ways. When after the
conquest of Mecca, Islam became strong, he fled to Taif.

When people of Taif embraced Islam, he fled to Shaam and converted to
Christianity. He was the father of Hanzala who was martyred in the
Battle of Uhud and was bathed by angels. Afterwards that accursed one
sent a message to the hypocrites of Medina that they should be prepared
and that they should construct a Masjid in which they should gather. “I
am going to the Caesar of Rum to bring an army to attack Medina to drive
Muhammad out.” So the hypocrites of Medina were waiting for him as the
Almighty Allah has alluded to it. And before that accursed one died
before he can reach the King of Rum. Then the Almighty Allah restrained
the Prophet from praying there and He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا تَقُمْ فِيهِ أَبَدًا ۚ لَمَسْجِدٌ أُسِّسَ عَلَى التَّقْوَىٰ مِنْ
أَوَّلِ يَوْمٍ أَحَقُّ أَنْ تَقُومَ فِيهِ ۚ فِيهِ رِجَالٌ يُحِبُّونَ
أَنْ يَتَطَهَّرُوا ۚ وَاللَّهُ يُحِبُّ الْمُطَّهِّرِينَ ﴿١٠٨﴾ أَفَمَنْ
أَسَّسَ بُنْيَانَهُ عَلَىٰ تَقْوَىٰ مِنَ اللَّهِ وَرِضْوَانٍ خَيْرٌ
أَمْ مَنْ أَسَّسَ بُنْيَانَهُ عَلَىٰ شَفَا جُرُفٍ هَارٍ فَانْهَارَ
بِهِ فِي نَارِ جَهَنَّمَ ۗ وَاللَّهُ لَا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ
الظَّالِمِينَ ﴿١٠٩﴾ لَا يَزَالُ بُنْيَانُهُمُ الَّذِي بَنَوْا رِيبَةً
فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ إِلَّا أَنْ تَقَطَّعَ قُلُوبُهُمْ ۗ وَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ
حَكِيمٌ ﴿١١٠﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Never stand in it; certainly a Masjid founded on piety from the very
first day is more deserving that you should stand in it; in it are men
who love that they should be purified; and Allah loves those who purify
themselves. Is he, therefore, better who lays his foundation on fear of
Allah and (His) good pleasure, or he who lays his foundation on the edge
of a cracking hollowed bank, so it broke down with him into the fire of
hell; and Allah does not guide the unjust people. The building which
they have built will ever continue to be a source of disquiet*** ***in
their hearts, except that their hearts get cut into pieces; and Allah is
Knowing, Wise.”***[^27]

Kulaini, Ibn Babawayh, Shaykh Tusi and Ayyashi have narrated through
authentic chains of narrators from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the Masjid about which the Almighty Allah says
that its foundation was placed on piety, is Masjid Quba in Medina.
Therefore the Almighty Allah has praised those who used water to purify
themselves after urinating and Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that the building about which the Almighty Allah
said that it is on the verge of Hell is Masjid Zirar, which was
constructed by the hypocrites in deceit.

When these verses were revealed, the Holy Prophet (S) sent Malik bin
Waqsham Khuzai and Aamir bin Adi from the Amr bin Auf tribe to burn and
demolish the Masjid. When they came near, Malik said: “Wait, I will
bring fire from my home,” and they put it on fire which destroyed the
roof and pillars and it collapsed and the hypocrites ran away. After
that they demolished the walls and returned from there. According to
another report, Ammar bin Yasir and Wahshi were sent and the two of them
destroyed it.

Revelation of Surah Barat
-------------------------

Shaykh Mufeed and Shaykh Tabarsi, rather all Shia and Sunni tradition
and exegesis scholars have continuously related that since the Holy
Prophet (S) had made a covenant with the infidels and they had broken
the treaty, the initial verses of Surah Barat were revealed and the
Messenger of Allah (S) was commanded by Allah to break the treaty and
become aloof from them as mentioned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَرَاءَةٌ مِنَ اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهٖ إِلَى الَّذِينَ عَاهَدْتُمْ مِنَ
الْمُشْرِكِينَ. فَسِيحُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ أَرْبَعَةَ أَشْهُرٍ
وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّكُمْ غَيْرُ مُعْجِزِي اللَّهِ ۙ وَأَنَّ اللَّهَ
مُخْزِي الْكَافِرِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(This is a declaration of) immunity by Allah and His Apostle towards
those of the idolaters with whom you made an agreement. So go about in
the land for four months and know that you cannot weaken Allah and that
Allah will bring disgrace to the unbelievers.”***[^28]

We should know that there is controversy regarding the four months in
which the idolaters are given respite. Some say that it begins from the
day of sacrifice to the 10th of Rabius Thani and this is verified by a
true tradition from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and some say that they are
from 1st Shawwal and others say that they begin from 10th Zilqad since
those days, the idolaters used to perform Hajj and it was among their
innovations that they rotated Hajj from one month to another.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَذَانٌ مِنَ اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ إِلَى النَّاسِ يَوْمَ الْحَجِّ
الْأَكْبَرِ أَنَّ اللَّهَ بَرِيءٌ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ ۙ وَرَسُولُهُ ۚ
فَإِنْ تُبْتُمْ فَهُوَ خَيْرٌ لَكُمْ ۖ وَإِنْ تَوَلَّيْتُمْ
فَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّكُمْ غَيْرُ مُعْجِزِي اللَّهِ ۗ وَبَشِّرِ الَّذِينَ
كَفَرُوا بِعَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And an announcement from Allah and His Apostle to the people on the
day of the greater pilgrimage that Allah and His Apostle are free from
liability to the idolaters; therefore if you repent, it will be better
for you, and if you turn back, then know that you will not weaken Allah;
and announce painful punishment to those who disbelieve.”***[^29]

We should know that there is controversy in the meaning of Hajj Akbar
between the exegesists. Some say that it is the day of Arafah and in the
report of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) the same is recorded and many reliable
traditional reports from Kulaini and *Tahdhib* etc. from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) and Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the day of greater Hajj
is day of sacrifice.

Then there is controversy with regard to the meaning of ‘greater Hajj’
some have said that which has come in Shia books that ‘greater Hajj’ is
opposite of Umrah and Umrah is lesser Hajj although every Hajj is
‘greater Hajj’. Some say that ‘greater Hajj’ is that Hajj when all
Muslims and infidels came for Hajj after which idolaters were banned
from there and Hajj remained restricted to Muslims. After that the
Almighty Allah said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا الَّذِينَ عَاهَدْتُمْ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ ثُمَّ لَمْ
يَنْقُصُوكُمْ شَيْئًا وَلَمْ يُظَاهِرُوا عَلَيْكُمْ أَحَدًا
فَأَتِمُّوا إِلَيْهِمْ عَهْدَهُمْ إِلَىٰ مُدَّتِهِمْ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ
يُحِبُّ الْمُتَّقِينَ ﴿٤﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Except those of the idolaters with whom you made an agreement, then
they have not failed you in anything and have not backed up any one
against you, so fulfill their agreement to the end of their term; surely
Allah loves those who are careful (of their duty).”***[^30]

Some say that it implies Bani Kanana and Bani Zumrah that nine months
remained from their period and the Almighty Allah ordered them to
complete that period because they had not committed anything against the
treaty. Some have said that this command was common for all groups who
made treaty with the Prophet and did not violate its terms.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا انْسَلَخَ الْأَشْهُرُ الْحُرُمُ فَاقْتُلُوا الْمُشْرِكِينَ
حَيْثُ وَجَدْتُمُوهُمْ وَخُذُوهُمْ وَاحْصُرُوهُمْ وَاقْعُدُوا لَهُمْ
كُلَّ مَرْصَدٍ ۚ فَإِنْ تَابُوا وَأَقَامُوا الصَّلَاةَ وَآتَوُا
الزَّكَاةَ فَخَلُّوا سَبِيلَهُمْ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So when the sacred months have passed away, then slay the idolaters
wherever you find them, and take them captives and besiege them and lie
in wait for them in every ambush, then if they repent and keep up prayer
and pay the poor-rate, leave their way free to them; surely*** ***Allah
is Forgiving, Merciful.”***[^31]

It is narrated that in the ninth year of Hijra when these and later
verses till the tenth were revealed the Holy Prophet (S) gave them to
Abu Bakr and sent him to Mecca to announce them to the idolaters on the
occasion of Hajj. When Abu Bakr traveled for some distance, Jibraeel
came down and said: “The Almighty Allah greets you and says that except
for you or one who is from you,” and according to another report,
“except you or Ali, no is eligible to convey My message.”

The Messenger of Allah (S) called for Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and said:
“Take Ghazba, my she-camel and take Surah Barat from Abu Bakr and recite
it to the idolaters, break the treaty with them and send Abu Bakr back.”
According to another report: “Abu Bakr has the choice of going with you
or returning to Medina.” Imam Ali (a.s.) mounted Ghazba and set out at
speed and reached Zilhalifah and according to another report he reached
Abu Bakr at Rauha.

When he saw Imam Ali (a.s.) he was dismayed and he asked: “O Abul Hasan,
why have you come here?” “The Messenger of Allah (S) has sent me to take
Surah Barat from you and deliver them to the Meccans.” Abu Bakr gave him
the verses and returned to Medina and said: “O Messenger of Allah (S)
you gave me the status that all were vying for it. But you dismissed me
and called me back? Was some verse revealed about this?”

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Jibraeel came and stated such and such
command.” The same matter is related through various channels by Ayyashi
and other commentators and it is also reported in many Sunni books.

It is mentioned in reliable traditions from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) set out with the verses and recited the
first ten verses of Surah Barat to the idolaters on the day of Arafah at
Arafat and on the eve of Eiduz Zuha in Masharil Haram and on Eiduz Zuha
near Jamarat and all the days of halt in Mina. He had drawn out his
sword and was calling out that no one should perform the Tawaf of Kaaba
in nude. And no idolater should perform the Hajj of Kaaba. Four months
are given to those whose term has expired.

According to another report it is narrated from Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
that he said: “The Messenger of Allah (S) told me to mention four
points: First, only the believers should enter Kaaba. Second, no one
should perform the Tawaf in nude. Third, that after this year believers
and idolaters will not gather in Masjidul Haram. Fourth, whoever has a
treaty with the Prophet should remain faithful to it till the end and
who has no treaty would be given amnesty till four months.  
 It is mentioned in many traditions through Shia and Sunni channels that
one of the names of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) in Qur’an is Azan; as the
Almighty Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَذَانٌ مِّنَ اللهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And an announcement from Allah…”***[^32]

Because he was one who conveyed these laws to Meccans on behalf of the
Almighty Allah and the Holy Prophet (S).

Shaykh Tusi has narrated that on the 1st of the month of Zilhajj, the
Messenger of Allah (S) gave Surah Barat to Abu Bakr and sent him to
Mecca. Jibraeel came down and said that none except he or one who is
from him can convey the divine message. The Holy Prophet (S) called
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and sent him in pursuit of Abu Bakr. Imam Ali
(a.s.) caught up with him at Rauha stage on the third day, took the
Surah from him and recited it to the people on the day of sacrifice and
Arafah.

Sayyid Ibn Tawus has narrated through reliable chains from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that when the Messenger of Allah (S) conquered Mecca and
wanted to complete his arguments for the second time and call them to
the religion of Allah, he wrote to them and warned them of divine
chastisement and encouraged them to refrain from evil deeds, at the same
time promising them divine forgiveness and wrote the ten verses of Surah
Barat.

Then he gave that letter to companions to take it to the Meccans. All
found it very tiresome and excused themselves. Then he called Abu Bakr.
Jibraeel came down and said: “O Muhammad, no one can carry your message
except one who is from you.” So Imam Ali (a.s.) said: “The Messenger of
Allah (S) told me that the Almighty Allah has revealed thus and he sent
me to Mecca. The enmity of Meccans towards me was obvious and if they
had been capable they would have cut off each of my limbs and thrown it
around the mountains. Thus I conveyed the Prophet’s message to them and
each of them expressed their enmity to me. I paid no heed to all this in
carrying out the Prophet’s instructions.”

Tabari a reputed Sunni historian has mentioned in the events of the
sixth year of Hijra that when during the Umrah of Hudaibiyah the Prophet
wanted to send Umar with a message for Meccans he became fearful and
excused himself. In the ninth year of Hijra the Holy Prophet (S) called
and asked him to take his message to the Quraish chiefs.

Umar said: “O Messenger of Allah (S) I am fearful of Quraish,” although
he had not killed anyone from Quraish and was secretly supportive of
them, yet he did not convey the message and Amirul Momineen (a.s.) whose
sword blows had not spared the feelings of anyone in Mecca, did not care
and stood among the thousands of idolaters and revoked their treaty and
invalidated their religion.

Sayyid Ibn Tawus has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from
Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that when the
Holy Prophet (S) sent Abu Bakr with the initial verses of Surah Barat to
Mecca, Jibraeel came down and said: “The Almighty Allah orders you to
send Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) instead as other than him no one can
convey your message.” The Messenger of Allah (S) ordered Imam Ali (a.s.)
and he went took possession of the letter and sent Abu Bakr back to the
Prophet who asked if some communication was revealed about him. Ali
(a.s.) replied: “The Messenger of Allah (S) will inform you whatever is
revealed.”

When Abu Bakr came to the Prophet he said: “O Messenger of Allah (S) did
you think that I will not be able to deliver your message?” The Holy
Prophet (S) said: “On the contrary, the Almighty Allah did not want
anyone other than Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) to deliver this message.”
When Abu Bakr protested further, the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “How
was it possible for you to convey this to Meccans while you were so much
frightened in the cave in spite of the fact that you were concealed from
the idolaters?”

Thus Amirul Momineen (a.s.) went to Mecca and arrived in Arafat, from
there he went to Masharil Haram and from there to Mina and sacrificed
his animal, shaved his head and climbed a hillock, Shaab and called out
thrice: “O people, I am sent by the Messenger of Allah (S).” Then he
recited the initial verses of Surah Barat and continued to wave his
sword. People asked who he was that stood alone fearlessly talking like
that.

Someone said that he was Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.). Whoever knew him
said: “He is the cousin of Muhammad and no one except the family members
of Muhammad can have such daring.” Thus Amirul Momineen (a.s.) made the
announcement all through the three days, day and night in the same way.
At last the idolaters told him: “Tell your cousin that except for
swords, we have nothing for him.” From there Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
hurried to the Messenger of Allah (S).

During this time no revelation came to the Prophet and he was so much
worried about Imam Ali (a.s.) that it became obvious from his
countenance and so upset was he that he did not even approach his wives.
People thought that perhaps the Almighty Allah has informed him about
his death or he is involved in some illness. So they asked Abu Dharr to
ask the Prophet about it as he was having great proximity to him.

He came to the Prophet and asked him about it but he said that none of
these reasons were valid and he was in fact worried about Imam Ali
(a.s.) as no revelation had come to him for a long time and it was not
known in what condition he was. Indeed the Almighty Allah has given nine
things to Ali (a.s.) three are related to the world and three related to
the hereafter. Two are such that I am satisfied with them and I am only
worried regarding one thing.

The three matters connected to the world are that he will perform my
last rites, he will manage my family affairs and that he will be my
successor in the Ummah. The three matters connected to the hereafter is
that I will hand him the standard of praise on Judgment Day, I will
depend on him on the occasion of intercession and he will help me in
keeping the keys of Paradise in custody. The two matters I am assured
about is that he will not deviate after me nor will he commit heresy.
And that which I am worried about him is that the Quraish will conspire
against him.

It was the practice of the Messenger of Allah (S) that after the Morning
Prayers he continued facing the Qiblah reciting supplications till
sunrise and Amirul Momineen (a.s.) used to turn back and permit the
people to disperse so that they may go on their business. The Holy
Prophet (S) had appointed Imam Ali (a.s.) for this task.

But when he sent Amirul Momineen (a.s.) to Mecca, he did not ask anyone
else to take up this task; he fulfilled it himself. One day Abu Dharr
sought the Prophet’s leave and went out to meet Imam Ali (a.s.) who was
returning from Mecca. He met him, embraced him and kissed his forehead.
He said: “Please allow me to first convey the good news of your arrival
to the Messenger of Allah (S) as he was very much worried about you.”

Abu Dharr galloped to the Prophet and informed him that Ali (a.s.) has
returned safe and sound. The Messenger of Allah (S) and other companions
mounted and went out to meet Ali (a.s.). The Holy Prophet (S) embraced
and kissed him and said: “I was worried about you because revelation
came only after a long time.” Amirul Momineen (a.s.) told him how he had
completed the mission entrusted to him. The Prophet said: “The Almighty
Allah was more knowledgeable about you that is why He ordered me to send
you on this mission.”

Sayyid says that Ibn Ashnas Bazzaz in his book has narrated from Sunni
channels that when Amirul Momineen (a.s.) came to Mecca with the verses
of Surah Barat, Kharrash and Shoba, brothers of Amr bin Abde Wudd, whom
the Imam had killed in Khandaq came and said: “Is it you who has given
us respite for four months?

We are aloof from you and your cousin, Muhammad. We have nothing for you
but swords and spears. If you want, we can begin it now and finish you
off.” Imam Ali (a.s.) said: “Come, I will show you my sword strikes once
again.” According to another report, in the same book, Imam Ali (a.s.)
had it announced in Mecca: Henceforth no idolater will enter Mecca and
neither will anyone perform the Tawaf in nude. And know that no one will
enter Paradise, except Muslims and whoever has any treaty with the
Prophet will be secure till the expiry of that agreement and there is no
treaty with polytheists.

It is narrated that during the period of Jahiliyya, the Arabs had the
custom of doing the Tawaf of Kaaba in nude saying how they can do Tawaf
in clothes obtained through fraudulent means or in which they commit
sins and that is why they claimed to do it ‘in the way they first came
into the world.’[^33]

[^1]: Abu Sufyan bin Harith bin Abdul Muttalib

[^2]: Surah Taubah 9:25

[^3]: Surah Taubah 9:26

[^4]: Surah Taubah 9:25

[^5]: Surah Taubah 9:60

[^6]: Surah Taubah 9:49

[^7]: Surah Taubah 9:91

[^8]: Surah Taubah 9:93

[^9]: The author says: That last part of this report will be quoted in
full in the biography of Abu Dharr.

[^10]: Surah Taubah 9:117

[^11]: Surah Taubah 9:117

[^12]: Surah Taubah 9:118

[^13]: Surah Taubah 9:118

[^14]: Surah Taubah 9:118

[^15]: Surah Taubah 9:118

[^16]: Surah Taubah 9:64-65

[^17]: Surah Taubah 9:66

[^18]: Surah Taubah 9:95-96

[^19]: Surah Taubah 9:74

[^20]: Against excellence of Ali they either deny or put forth weak
arguments and raise doubts about the narrators with a view to prove that
the narrations are not reliable. But when such excellence is uttered for
others they gladly accept the same even though they are based on
narrations of unreliable people and even if it is against reason. Their
attitude has hardened to such an extent that they condemn Ali’s
followers in extremely mean terms and propagate the praise of the
opponents of Ali-lovers and Ali-admirers and those who give respect to
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). These people regard such writers as high as has been
recorded in history. – Translator

[^21]: Surah Maidah 5:115

[^22]: In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful and may Allah
bless Muhammad and his Purified Progeny.

[^23]: Surah Taubah 9:102

[^24]: Surah Taubah 9:103

[^25]: The author says: The story of Abu Lubabah’s incident mentioned
after the account of the Battle of Bani Quraiza is more reliable.

[^26]: Surah Taubah 9:107

[^27]: Surah Taubah 9:108-110

[^28]: Surah Taubah 9:1-2

[^29]: Surah Taubah 9:3

[^30]: Surah Taubah 9:4

[^31]: Surah Taubah 9:5

[^32]: Surah Taubah 9:3

[^33]: The author says: There was no purpose in first appointing Abu
Bakr to announce the verses and then to dismiss him and send Imam Ali
(a.s.) in his stead, except to highlight that when Abu Bakr was not fit
to announce a few verses how he could be considered capable to lead the
community. Also the Prophet could not have appointed him on his own as
he never did anything without the guidance of divine revelation. Hence
it can only be concluded that it was under the commands of the Almighty
Allah.


