Events that took place till the Farewell Hajj]
==============================================

Part One:
---------

Battle of Amr bin Mady Karb. Shaykh Mufeed and Shaykh Tabarsi have
narrated that when the Holy Prophet (S) returned to Medina from the
Battle of Tabuk, Amr bin Mady Karb came to the Prophet and the Holy
Prophet (S) asked him to accept Islam so that the Almighty Allah may
secure him from the harsh punishment of Judgment Day. He asked what the
‘harsh punishment’ is because there is nothing that terrifies me.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: the terror of Judgment Day is not as
you perceive. Indeed a sound would be uttered at which all the dead
would return to life, and all the living die, except those whom the
Almighty Allah wants to keep alive. And then a second sound would
restore to life those who had died due to the first sound.

Then both classes will be formed in a single line. And the heavens at
that awful signal would fall in pieces, the earth would be destroyed,
the mountain crumble to atoms, and the flames of hell blaze forth in
conceivable fury. No living thing will be such who is shattered by this
phenomenon. Everyone would recall their sins and be involved in personal
problems quite oblivious of the circumstances of other people.

Except one whom the Almighty Allah intends to keep calm and fearless. O
Amr, what do you know about this phenomenon and where have you ever
witnessed such a scene.” Amr asked: “What is that great news?” Amr
became a Muslim along with those who had arrived with him and
subsequently they returned to their community. By chance, Amr met Abi
Ibn Asath Khathami, whom he brought to the Holy Prophet (S) and asked
the Prophet to avenge the blood of his father.

But the Prophet said that he could not now be punished for an act
committed in his former state of ignorance, since he has become a true
believer. Hearing this Amr apostasied from Islam and returned from
there. Then he eliminated a group from Bani Harith bin Kaab and then
returned to his tribe. When Prophet was informed of this, he sent Ali
(a.s.) as the chief of the migrants, to the Bani Zubayd tribe, and sent
Khalid bin Walid as the chief of Arabs and sent him to the Jofi tribe.

And emphasized the point that wherever they meet the forces of Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) they must all subject themselves to Ali’s command.
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) set out and Khalid bin Saeed bin Aas was
appointed as the vanguard. Khalid himself appointed Abu Musa as his
vanguard. When Jofi tribe heard that Khalid bin Walid was approaching
them, they split into two groups; one went to Yemen and another joined
the Bani Zubayd clan.

When Amirul Momineen (a.s.) learnt of this development he wrote a
communication to Khalid that he must immediately halt on the receipt of
his letter but that transgressor did not obey the Prophet’s command. So
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) wrote to Khalid bin Walid to stop him on the way
and wait for Ali (a.s.). Khalid bin Walid stopped him till Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) reached there and scolded him for disobeying his
commands.

They returned from there and reached to confront the Bani Zubayd tribe.
When that clan saw His Eminence, Ali (a.s.), they said to Amr: O Abu
Thawr, what will be your consequence when this Qarashi youth duels with
you and demands taxes from you? Amr said: When he duels with me he will
come to know how he collects the taxes from me. When the two armies came
to confront each other, Amr came out to challenge.

When Amirul Momineen (a.s.) wanted to step forward to accept the
challenge, Khalid bin Walid came to His Eminence, and said: May my
parents be sacrificed on you, allow be to duel with him. Imam Ali (a.s.)
said: “If you consider my obedience obligatory, you must stay where you
are, so that I can eliminate him myself.

Saying this His Eminence, came to the field and called out like a lion
in such a terrifying manner that Amr was shocked and he fled from there.
Ali (a.s.) eliminated his brother and nephew and took as prisoner his
wife named, Rukana binte Salama and many other women of his clan. Then
Imam Ali (a.s.) returned with a large booty leaving Khalid bin Saeed to
collect Zakat from Bani Zubayd tribe to give security to those of them
who return from flight and accept Islam.

After issuing these directions Amirul Momineen (a.s.) returned to
Medina. On the other hand, Amr bin Mady Karb also returned and asked
permission to meet Khalid bin Saeed. Khalid permitted him. Amr came and
again accepted Islam and pleaded that his wife and children be restored
to him. Khalid returned them. Amr was standing at the door of Khalid bin
Saeed waiting for permission to enter. He saw a camel lying there
slaughtered. He gathered its legs together and slashed them with his
sword called, Samsama. When Khalid returned his wife and children to
him, Amr gave this sword to Khalid bin Saeed.

Ali, who had plundered them had appropriated from himself a maid. Since
Khalid bin Walid was a deadly enemy of Imam Ali (a.s.) he sent Buraidah
Aslami to the Messenger of Allah (S) with the complaint that Imam Ali
(a.s.) has misappropriated booty and taken from Khums a maid for
himself, and to say whatever else against Ali (a.s.). When Buraidah
Aslami came to the Holy Prophet (S), Umar was present there who asked
about the outcome of the battle and the purpose of his visit.

He was told that he had come to complain about Ali (a.s.) and mentioned
the matter related to the slave girl. Umar was elated at this and he
ushered Buraidah inside so that the Holy Prophet (S) is sure to be angry
with Ali (a.s.) since he was married to the Prophet’s daughter. Buraidah
entered into the Prophet and delivered Khalid’s letter. The Prophet
opened the letter and it was read out to him. As he noted the account of
the ‘misappropriation’ of Imam Ali (a.s.), his fury intensified and his
complexion altered.

Then Buraidah said: O Messenger of Allah (S), if people are allowed such
discretion in booty, the share of Muslims would be destroyed. The Holy
Prophet (S) said: Woe be on you, O Buraidah, have you become a
hypocrite. You should remember that Ali is entitled to all that from
booty as I am entitled. Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) is best for you from
all the people and is better than all the people of my Ummah after me. O
Buraidah keep away from Ali’s enmity. If you have enmity with him, the
Almighty Allah will have enmity with you.

Buraidah says that at time he was so embarrassed that he wished the
earth would swallow him. He said: I seek refuge from the fury of Allah
and from the fury of the Messenger of Allah (S). O Messenger of Allah
(S) seek forgiveness on my behalf from the Almighty Allah. After this I
would never harbor enmity to Ali (a.s.) and will not say anything except
good with regard to him. So the Holy Prophet (S) prayed for his
forgiveness and his sin was forgiven.

Part Two: Deputation of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) to Yemen
-------------------------------------------------------

Shaykh Mufeed and Shaykh Tabarsi have narrated that the Messenger of
Allah (S) now sent Khalid bin Walid to the people of Yemen in order to
invite them to Islam; and a group of Muslims also accompanied him, in
which Baraa bin Azib was also included. In spite of staying there for
six months they could not convert a single person there. The Prophet now
sent Ali to Yemen and asked him to send back Khalid with his army
saying: “And if any of his companions wants to remain there with you,
allow him.”

Baraa bin Azib says that he remained behind with Amirul Momineen (a.s.).
He says: When we reached the Yemenite borders and the people were
informed of our arrival, they gathered there. Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
prayed the Morning Prayer with us and standing before us addressed those
people and after praise and glorification of the Almighty Allah read out
Prophet Muhammad’s letter to them, and in one day, the tribe of Hamadan
became Muslims. Ali communicated this news to the Prophet, who was
greatly rejoiced and fell in adoration and thanksgiving to God, and on
rising said: “The mercy of God be on the tribe of Hamadan.” The
conversion of all Yemen followed that of this tribe.

### Amr bin Shas complains about Amirul Momineen (a.s.)

Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated that the Holy Prophet (S) sent Ali to Yemen
in order to call the people to Islam and collect religious taxes from
him and teach the laws of Islam and what is lawful and what is
prohibited. He was also commissioned to collect tribute from Christians
of Najran. Moreover, Shaykh Tabarsi and all Shia and Sunni tradition
scholars like Bukhari and Muslim etc. have narrated from Amr bin Shas
that he said that he was with a group of people in the company of Ali
Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.).

Ali did something which we did not like and I was angry at him. When I
came to Medina, I complained to the Prophet and some people who were
with him. Again one day, I came to the Prophet when he was in the
mosque. He looked me and I sat down with him. The Holy Prophet (S) said:
O Amr bin Shas you have hurt me. I said: Surely we belong to Allah and
to Him we shall return. I seek Allah’s refuge from the fact that I
should hurt the Messenger of Allah (S). The Prophet said: One who hurts
Ali has hurt me.

Kulaini has narrated through reliable chains from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: The Messenger of Allah (S) sent
me to Yemen and told me not to fight anyone before inviting him to
Islam. By Allah, if Allah guides a single person through you, it would
be better for him than the possession of all the things in the world,
and you are the heir of one who has no heir. Even if people make
allegations against you.

It is mentioned in *Basairud Darajat* that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said:
The Messenger of Allah (S) summoned me and sent me to Yemen so that I
may guide them. I said that they were in large numbers and I was a young
man. The Holy Prophet (S) said that when I reached the mountain pass of
Afiq, I should say aloud: O trees, rocks and lands, the Holy Prophet (S)
have conveyed his salutations to you. So when I reached Yemen, I found
the people ready to attack me. I called out aloud as the Prophet had
advised. All those addressed by me responded by trembling and said in a
united voice: Peace be upon the Holy Prophet (S) and upon you, O Amirul
Momineen (a.s.)! The Yemenites were terrified at the miracle and they
received him with great respect and embraced Islam. So I conveyed the
message of Islam to them and returned from there.

### The Prophet prays for Imam Ali (a.s.)

Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) through a
reliable chain of narrators that he said: When the Messenger of Allah
(S) ordered me to go to Yemen, I declined saying I was young and did not
know how to judge. The Prophet passed his hand over my chest saying, “O
Allah, guide his heart and make his tongue speak the truth. By the one
in whose hand is my life, after that I never had any doubt in any
judgment that I pronounced.

### Complaint against a judgment of Ali (a.s.)

Qutub Rawandi has narrated through authentic chains of narrators that
when Amirul Momineen (a.s.) went to Yemen, it so happened that a horse
ran away from its owner and trampled a man to death. His heirs caught
hold of the owner and brought him to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) demanding
revenge. The horse owners said that the horse had run away and it was no
fault of his. Imam Ali (a.s.) did not make him liable for blood money.

Heirs of deceased came to the Holy Prophet (S) and complained that Imam
Ali (a.s.) has not given the right decision. The Holy Prophet (S) said
that Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) is never unjust and after me he is the
Imam and guide. His decision is right and his statement is correct, his
judgment is not rejected by anyone except a disbeliever and only the
believer is satisfied with his decision. When the people of Yemen heard
this they said: We are satisfied with the judgment of Amirul Momineen
(a.s.). The Prophet said: This statement of yours will serve as your
repentance to what you claimed previously.

### Obedient Horses

Kulaini has narrated through reliable chains of narrators from Imam Ali
Reza (a.s.) that when Amirul Momineen (a.s.) returned from Yemen, he
brought as gift for the Messenger of Allah (S) four horses. The Holy
Prophet (S) asked him to explain the qualities of those horses. Imam Ali
(a.s.) said that they were of different colors. The Prophet asked if
there was one with some white? He replied: Yes, there is a red horse
with some white on it.

So the Holy Prophet (S) told that it should be kept aside for him. Two
horses are pure red and also have whiteness. The Messenger of Allah (S)
said that they should be given to Imam Hasan (a.s.) and Imam Husain
(a.s.). Imam Ali (a.s.) said that one was black. The Prophet said that
he should be sold and the cash obtained through it must be used for his
household expenses, since the auspiciousness of the horses is in the
whiteness on its mane and legs.

Part three: Arrival of Arab delegations and events that occurred till the Farewell Hajj
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Shaykh Tabarsi and Ibn Shahr Ashob have narrated that in the ninth year
of the Hijrat, the Arab chiefs and tribes came to the Prophet and
accepted Islam. It is said that in this year, envoys of the chiefs of
Himyar, came to the Messenger of Allah (S) with letters of those princes
in which they mentioned their acceptance of Islam.

These letters were brought by Harith bin Kalal and Naeem bin Kalal.
Other groups had also arrived. It is likewise said that in that year an
unchaste woman was stoned to death, by order of the Prophet, as she had
confessed committing adultery four times over.

That year the Holy Prophet (S) had effected curse between Awaimar bin
Harith and his wife, as stated by Shaykh Tabarsi narrating from Ibn
Abbas that when the verse of penalty for obscenity was revealed, Asim
bin Adi asked, “O Messenger of Allah (S), if one of us sees a man with
his wife and mentions it in public, will he receive eighty stripes, and
if he goes to bring four witnesses, will not the guilty man run away?”

The Prophet replied, “The verse is thus communicated.[^1] Asim returned,
but on his way home met Halal bin Umayyah, who was reciting the verse of
“We belong to Allah…” Asim asked him why he was reciting the verse of
return. Halal swore he had found Shareek bin Simha in bed with his wife.
Asim returned with Halal to the Holy Prophet (S), who, after hearing the
story, summoned Halal’s wife and stated the charge made against her.

The woman replied that Shareek sometimes came to their house to learn
the Qur’an from them, and that her husband often left them together, and
she did not know if he were excited by jealousy or by inability to
provide for her, to charge her falsely with so heinous a crime.

The Most High now sent down verse of cursing[^2]. Accordingly the
Prophet divorced Halal and his wife, and declared that the unborn child
belonged to its mother and had no father, and that the woman should not
be accused of adultery. He then said if the child should posses certain
characteristics, they would pronounce it was the husband’s child, but if
it had certain other marks the child must be someone else’s. When the
child was born he resembled that other man.

Among other events of this year, King Negus expired in the month of
Rajab, and the Prophet performed prayers for him the same day at Medina
as was previously mentioned. A light was constantly seen in his tomb.
Umm Kulthum, a girl the Prophet had brought up, died in the month of
Shaban, the same year. The same year Abdullah bin Salool, the hypocrite,
departed for Hell.

It is mentioned that in the tenth year of the Hijrat, the group of
Salaman came to the Prophet and the tribe of Ajarib also joined the
farewell pilgrimage. The same year Azud tribe, under the leadership of
Zard bin Abdullah also joined up.

The chiefs of Ghasan, Amir, and the tribe of Bani Zubayd including Amr
bin Mady Karb, with group of Abdul Qays and chiefs of Kinda, including
Ashath bin Qays this year embraced Islam, as did likewise the chiefs of
the Bani Hanifah, in which tribe was Musaylima, the liar, who on
returning to his own region apostated and claimed to be a Prophet. The
tribe of Bahila became Muslims, including Jarid bin Abdullah Bajali.

He had arrived with 150 persons of his community. That same year, Sayyid
Aqib had come with Christians of Najran and agreed to pay the tribute.
That same year people of the tribe of Abas and tribe Khawlan had arrived
to embrace Islam. That same year people of the tribe of Amir bin Saasa
had come to the Prophet, including Amir bin Tufayl and Arbud Qays.

Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated that Amir said to Arbud: I will engage the
Prophet in conversation and when his attention is diverted thus, you
slay him with the sword. So Amir began to converse with the Prophet: I
want you to become friends with me. The Prophet said: I will not
befriend you till you don’t accept Islam.

Amir repeated his request twice and the Prophet replied in the similar
manner. Thus when the Prophet did not accept his request, Amir flared up
saying: By God, I will fill up Medina with soldiers and fight a battle
with you. According to another version, he asked what he stands to gain
if he accepted Islam? The Holy Prophet (S) said: You will have the same
rights and duties as other Muslims have.

He said: You must appoint me as your successor. The Messenger of Allah
(S) said: It is not something that I can decide, it is decided by the
Almighty Allah. He bestows it to anyone He likes. So that man asked: So
what should I do? The Messenger of Allah (S) said: Take up the reins and
fight Jihad for the Almighty Allah. He said: It is in my hands, why I
should need your permission? So he returned from there.

When he turned away, the Prophet prayed to the Almighty to keep him safe
from his mischief. When the two of them came out, Amir asked Arbud why
he had not carried out the instructions? He said: By Allah, whenever I
wanted to attack him, I found you obstructing my hand. Would you have
liked me to kill you also? On his way back, Amir was struck with divine
chastisement of plague and he halted at the house of a lady of Bani
Salool.

When death approached him he asked if he had a tumor like the ostrich
and that he was dying at a woman of Bani Salool whereas their presence
in that tribe was a matter of shame. He died in that condition and Arbud
bin Qays buried him and returned home with his men. On the way the
Almighty Allah hit him with a bolt of lightning as a result of which he
died with his camel. And it is mentioned in the book of Aban bin Uthman
that Amir and Arbud had come to the Holy Prophet (S) after the Battle of
Bani Nuzayr.

Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated that Urwah bin Masood Thaqafi came to the
Holy Prophet (S) and embraced Islam and requested the Prophet’s
permission to return to his people. His Eminence, said that he was
afraid that his people might kill him. He said: O Messenger of Allah
(S), when they see me sleeping they do not awaken me.

So the Prophet said farewell to him. He reached Taif and invited the
people to Islam. He also propagated nice things but the people condemned
and abused him. The following day he stood on his attic to pray and
people heard him recite the Azan and testimonies of faith. An accursed
man of the tribe shot him with an arrow killing him, and thus the
miracle of the Holy Prophet (S) became obvious. After he died, ten
nobles of that tribe came to the Holy Prophet (S) with the message of
the tribe and embraced Islam.

The Holy Prophet (S) accorded welcome to them and presented them with
gifts and appointed Uthman bin Abil Aas bin Bashar, who knew some
chapters of Qur’an by heart as their leader. Thus when the people Thaqif
tribe embraced Islam, all the chiefs of Arab tribes, and delegations
came to the Prophet one by one, who were accompanied by Aqra bin Habis,
Zirqan bin Bud, Qays bin Asim, Uyyana bin Hasan Farari and Amr bin
Hatam. The Messenger of Allah (S) welcomed them cordially.

It is mentioned that the Messenger of Allah (S) sent his agents to
collect Zakat from the people of various regions in that same year. It
is also narrated that in that same year, verses were revealed approving
the testimony of People of Book with regard to bequests. Thus it is
narrated by Ali Ibn Ibrahim that Ibn Teedi and Ibn Mariya were two
Christian men, and there was Muslim named Tamim Darami. The latter
traveled with these two with the following goods: A bag, a mirror etched
with gold and a necklace, so that he may sell them.

When they reached near Medina, Tamim fell ill and was about to die. He
entrusted his belongings to the two Christian companions and asked them
to convey them to the heirs. When they reached Medina, they conveyed
those things to the heirs of Tamim but they retained the mirror and the
necklace with them. Tamim’s heirs asked them if Tamim had been ill for
long that so much was spent in his treatment?

They said that it was not so, and that he had died only after a few days
of illness. They asked if his belongings were stolen but they replied in
the negative. They asked if he had made loss in trade? The reply was
again negative. So the heirs of Tamim said: We did not find the mirror
of gold and the necklace among the belongings of Tamim. They said that
they have passed on to them whatever was entrusted to them by Tamim.
Tamim’s heirs brought the two of them to the Holy Prophet (S) and
claimed from them that they had cheated them.

The Holy Prophet (S) according to the prevalent Islamic practice made
them swear, after which they went away. After some days the mirror and
the necklace was found in their possession. This information was
conveyed to the Messenger of Allah (S), so he waited from divine
instructions about it. The Almighty Allah revealed the following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا شَهَادَةُ بَيْنِكُمْ إِذَا حَضَرَ
أَحَدَكُمُ الْمَوْتُ حِينَ الْوَصِيَّةِ اثْنَانِ ذَوَا عَدْلٍ مِنْكُمْ
أَوْ آخَرَانِ مِنْ غَيْرِكُمْ إِنْ أَنْتُمْ ضَرَبْتُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ
فَأَصَابَتْكُمْ مُصِيبَةُ الْمَوْتِ ۚ تَحْبِسُونَهُمَا مِنْ بَعْدِ
الصَّلَاةِ فَيُقْسِمَانِ بِاللَّهِ إِنِ ارْتَبْتُمْ لَا نَشْتَرِي بِهِ
ثَمَنًا وَلَوْ كَانَ ذَا قُرْبَىٰ ۙ وَلَا نَكْتُمُ شَهَادَةَ اللَّهِ
إِنَّا إِذًا لَمِنَ الْآثِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! call to witness between you when death draws nigh
to one of you, at the time of making the will, two just persons from
among you, or two others from among others than you, if you are
traveling in the land and the calamity of death befalls you; the two
(witnesses) you should detain after the prayer; then if you doubt
(them), they shall both swear*** ***by Allah, (saying): We will not take
for it a price, though there be a relative, and we will not hide the
testimony of Allah for then certainly we should be among the
sinners.”***[^3]

The Messenger of Allah (S) summoned the heirs of Tamim and the two men
and made them swear as mentioned in the verse. When they swore, the
mirror and the necklace was taken from them and restored to Tamim’s
heirs. Such details are mentioned in books of jurisprudence and are well
known among the scholars.

[^1]: And those who accuse free women then do not bring four witnesses,
flog them, (giving) eighty stripes, and do not admit any evidence from
them ever; and these it is that are the transgressors… وَالَّذِينَ
يَرْمُونَ الْمُحْصَنَاتِ ثُمَّ لَمْ يَأْتُوا بِأَرْبَعَةِ شُهَدَاء
فَاجْلِدُوهُمْ ثَمَانِينَ جَلْدَةً وَلَا تَقْبَلُوا لَهُمْ شَهَادَةً
أَبَدًا وَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ الْفَاسِقُونَ

[^2]: And (as for) those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses
except themselves, the evidence of one of these (should be taken) four
times, bearing Allah to witness that he is most surely of the truthful
ones. And the fifth (time) that the curse of Allah be on him if he is
one of the liars. And it shall avert the chastisement from her if she
testify four times, bearing Allah to witness that he is most surely one
of the liars; And the fifth (time) that the wrath of Allah be on her if
he is one of the truthful. وَالَّذِينَ يَرْمُونَ أَزْوَاجَهُمْ وَلَمْ
يَكُن لَّهُمْ شُهَدَاء إِلَّا أَنفُسُهُمْ فَشَهَادَةُ أَحَدِهِمْ
أَرْبَعُ شَهَادَاتٍ بِاللَّهِ إِنَّهُ لَمِنَ الصَّادِقِينَ
وَالْخَامِسَةُ أَنَّ لَعْنَتَ اللَّهِ عَلَيْهِ إِن كَانَ مِنَ
الْكَاذِبِينَ وَيَدْرَأُ عَنْهَا الْعَذَابَ أَنْ تَشْهَدَ أَرْبَعَ
شَهَادَاتٍ بِاللَّهِ إِنَّهُ لَمِنَ الْكَاذِبِينَ وَالْخَامِسَةَ أَنَّ
غَضَبَ اللَّهِ عَلَيْهَا إِن كَانَ مِنَ الصَّادِقِينَ

[^3]: Surah Maidah 5:106


