Wives of the Prophet – their number and a brief account of them
===============================================================

Ibn Babawayh has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from
Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that the Holy Prophet (S) married fifteen
women and established relations with thirteen of them. He left nine
widows and two ladies with whom the Holy Prophet (S) had not established
relations. One was Umrah and another was Shanawa.

The remaining thirteen are as follows: Khadija binte Khuwailad, Sauda
binte Zamaa, Umm Salma, who was named Hind, she was the daughter of Abi
Umayyah, Ayesha binte Abu Bakr, whose agnomen was Umm Abdullah, Hafasa
binte Umar bin Khattab, Zainab binte Khuzaimah al-Harith, who was
referred to as Ummul Masakeen, Zainab binte Jahash, Ramla binte Abu
Sufyan, whose agnomen was Umm Habib, Maimoona binte Harith, Zainab binte
Umais, Juwairiya binte Harith, Safiya binte Huyy bin Akhtab, Salma binte
Hakim who gifted her self to the Prophet; and there were two special
slave girls who also had their turns as the wives had.

One was Mariya and another was Raihana Khadafiya. And the nine wives who
survived the Prophet are as follows: Ayesha, Hafasa, Umm Salma, Zainab
binte Jahash, Maimoona binte Harith, Umm Habib binte Abu Sufyan, Safiya
binte Huyy bin Akhtab, Juwairiya binte Harith. Saudah binte Zamaa. The
best of all was Khadija binte Khuwailid, after her was Umm Salma.

It is narrated from through authentic chains of narrators from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said: “May Allah have mercy on the sisters
of the folks of Paradise and then he mentioned their names as follow:
Asma binte Umais Khathimiya, who was initially married to Ja’far, Salma
binte Umais, a sister of Asma who was initially married to Hamza. And
five ladies from Bani Hilal tribe; one of them was Maimoona binte
Harith, a wife of the Prophet, second Ummul Fazl, wife of Abbas, she was
named Hind. Third was Amisa, mother of Khalid bin Walid, fourth was
Gharra, wife of Hajaz bin Galaz. Fifth was Hamida who had no issue.

Kulaini has through authentic chains of narrators, narrated about the
wives of the Prophet and their number that at the time of the passing
away of the Prophet, he was having nine wives: Ayesha, Hafasa, Umm Habib
binte Abu Sufyan, Zainab binte Jahash, Saudah binte Zamaa, Maimoona
binte Harith, Safiya binte Huyy bin Akhtab, Juwairiya binte Harith.
Ayesha was from Bani Tamim tribe, Hafasa was from Adi, Umm Salma from
Bani Makhzum, Saudah from Bani Asad bin Abdul Uzza.

Zainab binte Jahash also was from Bani Asad but she was considered to be
from Bani Umayyah. Umm Habib binte Abu Sufyan was from Bani Umayyah.
Maimoona was from Bani Hilal and Safiya from Bani Israel. In addition
the Prophet had married some other women. One of them had gifted her
self to the Prophet. Another one was Khadija binte Khuwailid who was the
mother of the children of the Prophet and the third was Zainab binte
Jahash, whom people instigated and deprived from having relations with
the Prophet. The fourth was a lady from Kinda tribe.

Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated that the first lady whom the Prophet
married, was lady Khadija. At that time, the Messenger of Allah (S) was
aged twenty-five. Before that she was the wife of Atiq bin Ayad Makhzumi
and had a daughter from him. After Atiq, Abu Hala Asadi married her.
From this husband Hind bin Abu Hala was born. Then the Holy Prophet (S)
married her and took her son, Hind under his charge.

Sayyid Murtaza and Shaykh Tusi have narrated that when the Holy Prophet
(S) married Lady Khadija, she was a virgin and she did not marry anyone
before the Prophet, but the first report is more famous. And the
Messenger of Allah (S) did not take another wife as long as she was
alive. She spent twenty-four years and one month with the Holy Prophet
(S). The amount of her dower was 12.5 Awqiya. Which was according to the
value of that time 1500 dinars. Same was the amount of the dower of all
the wives of the Prophet and the first son born of her was Abdullah,
whose titles were Tayyib and Tahir. Qasim was born after him.

Later it is mentioned that Qasim was elder to Abdullah. And four
daughters were also born from her: Zainab, Ruqaiyyah, Umm Kulthum and
Fatima Zahra. The next wife of the Prophet was Sauda binte Zama-a;
before marrying the Messenger of Allah (S) she was the wife of Sakran
bin Umar. Sakran embraced Islam and died in Abyssinia. The third wife
was Ayesha binte Abu Bakr. His Eminence had married her in Mecca when
she was seven years old. Except for Ayesha the Prophet did not marry any
virgin lady. Seven months after migration to Medina, the Prophet
consummated his marriage to Ayesha, when she was nine years old.

She lived to a ripe age of seventy, till the time of Muawiyah’s reign.
The fourth wife of the Prophet was Umm Shareek, who had gifted her self
to the Prophet. Her name was Ariya binte Dauran bin Abir. Before
marrying the Prophet, she was the wife of Abul Askar bin Sami al-Azdi,
through whom a son named Shareek was born. The fifth wife of the Prophet
was Hafasa binte Umar bin Khattab. Her first husband was Khanees bin
Abdullah, after whose death the Messenger of Allah (S) married her.

His Eminence had sent Khanees to serve as a barber to the King of Iran.
He died in that same journey without leaving any issue. Hafasa stayed in
Medina till the reign of Uthman and Ibn Shahr Ashob has said that she
survived till the last period of the Caliphate of Amirul Momineen
(a.s.). The sixth wife of the Messenger of Allah (S) was Umm Habiba
binte Abu Sufyan and her name was Ramla. Before coming into the marriage
of the Holy Prophet (S), she was married to Abdullah bin Jahash.

Abdullah had migrated with her to Abyssinia, where he embraced
Christianity and died. The Holy Prophet (S) then married her and the
attorney was Amr bin Umayyah. The seventh wife of the Prophet was Umm
Salma. Her mother, Atika was the sister of Abu Talib, the paternal aunt
of the Prophet and some have said that Atika was the daughter of Amir
bin Rabia and she was named Binte Abu Umayyah. She was the daughter of
Abu Jahl’s uncle.

It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah (S) proposed to Umm Salma
through her son to marry her to the Prophet. So Umm Salma appointed her
son as the agent, and he married Lady Umm Salma to the Messenger of
Allah (S). King Negus of Abyssinia sent 400 gold coins as her dower at
the time of her marriage. Some say that King Negus had sent gold coins
for the dower of Umm Habiba. Umm Salma survived all the wives of the
Prophet.

Before marrying the Prophet, she was the wife of Abi Salma bin Abdul
Asad. Abu Salma’s mother was Baraa the daughter of Abdul Muttalib. From
Abu Salma a daughter, Zainab and a son Umar was born to Umm Salma. In
the Battle of Jamal, Umar was in the service of Amirul Momineen (a.s.).
Imam Ali (a.s.) appointed him as the governor of Bahrain. The eighth
wife, was Zainab binte Jahash from the Bani Asad tribe.

Her mother was Maimoona, daughter of Abdul Muttalib, the paternal aunt
of the Holy Prophet (S). Ibn Shahr Ashob has referred to Amima as the
daughter of Abdul Muttalib. She was the first to pass away from the
wives of the Prophet during the reign of Umar Ibn Khattab. Before she
married the Holy Prophet (S), she was the wife of Zaid bin Haritha. Her
story will be quoted after this. The ninth wife of the Holy Prophet (S)
was Zainab binte Khuzaimah Hilaliya and before that she was married to
Ubaidah bin Harith bin Abdul Muttalib.

Some have said that she was the wife of Tufayl Ibn Harith’s nephew and
she was called Ummul Masakeen. She also died during the lifetime of the
Prophet. The tenth wife was Maimoon binte Harith. The Messenger of Allah
(S) married her in Medina and consummated his marriage with her at Saraf
which is at a distance of three Farsakh from the holy city of Mecca. Her
death also occurred at that same place in 36 Hijri and she was buried
there.

Before marrying the Prophet, she was married to Abu Sira bin Abu Daham
Amir. The eleventh wife of the Prophet is Juwairiya binte Harith from
Bani Mustaliq tribe; she had come to the Prophet as a captive in that
battle. The Holy Prophet (S) emancipated her and then took her as his
wife. She died in 56 A.H. The twelfth wife was Safiya binte Huyy bin
Akhtab, who was chosen by the Prophet for himself from the booty of
Khyber and he fixed her emancipation as her dower. She passed away in 36
A.H. The Holy Prophet (S) had consummated his marriage to all of them.
He had performed Nikah with eleven of them and one wife had gifted
herself to the Prophet.

Those ladies with whom the Holy Prophet (S) did not consummate his
marriage were as follows: The first was Aliya binte Tabiyan. When she
was brought to the Holy Prophet (S) he divorced her before consummating
marriage. The second lady was Qeela, sister of Ashath bin Qays, who died
before her marriage was consummated and some say that the Holy Prophet
(S) divorced her before consummating marriage with her. It is said that
the passing away of the Messenger of Allah (S) Akrama bin Abu Jahl
proposed to her.

Third is Fatima binte Zahak, whom the Holy Prophet (S) married after the
death of her sister, Zainab. And when the verse of Takhyyur (choice) was
revealed and the Holy Prophet (S) gave choice to his wives to either
select him or the world, she chose the world and she separated from the
Prophet. After that she became involved in such hard times that she used
to dry camel dung into fire wood and lived on the income. She used to
say that she was unfortunate to have chosen the world. The fourth was
Shaniya binte Sult whom the Holy Prophet (S) married but before she
could be brought into the household of the Prophet, she passed away.

The fifth was Asma binte Noman bin Sharjeel. When the Prophet married
her, Ayesha and Hafasa felt jealous of her and deceived her that when
the Holy Prophet (S) comes to her house she must not let him overpower
her immediately. In this way he would be attracted to her and the
unfortunate woman was deceived by her. When the Holy Prophet (S) came to
her, she said: “I seek the refuge of Allah from you.” The Prophet said:
“You have adopted a very strong refuge, I give refuge to you; go back to
your house.” The sixth was the princess of Lithia.

It is narrated that when she was brought to the Prophet he told her to
gift her soul to him, but she said, can a princess gift herself to a
common man? When the Prophet came to her, she said “I seek the refuge of
Allah from you.” So the Prophet divorced her and after paying her some
money sent her home. The seventh was Umra binte Yazid. When she was
brought to the Holy Prophet (S) he noticed white patches on her and did
not consummate the marriage, and divorced her.

The eighth was Laila binte Khateem Ansariya. When she was brought to the
Holy Prophet (S) she expressed dislike from him and he sent her back.
Ibn Shahr Ashob says that her house was attacked by a wolf. The ninth
was a woman of Bani Hamza tribe, who proposed to give herself to the
Prophet but her father didn’t like the match and made an excuse that she
had white spots.

When he went home he saw that by the miracle of the Prophet she really
got the white spots. The tenth report is that there was a woman named
Umra and her father used to describe her good qualities and one of them
was that she had never fallen sick. When the Holy Prophet (S) heard
this, he said: “Such a woman has no merit in the sight of Allah.”

And he did not take her in marriage. Some have said that the Holy
Prophet (S) had married her, but he divorced her when he came to know
this fact. Thus on the basis of this report, the Messenger of Allah (S)
had twenty wives. Shaykh Tusi says that the Holy Prophet (S) married
eighteen women, and some have mentioned fifteen as mentioned previously.

Shaykh Tusi has narrated that the Holy Prophet (S) had two slave girls,
with whom he had established relations and as he had fixed nights for
his other wives, he had fixed nights for them also. One of them was
Mariya binte Shamoon the Copt and the other was Raihana binte Zaid
Qardiya.

The two of them were sent to the Prophet by Maqooqas, King of
Alexandria. Some have said that the Holy Prophet (S) had emancipated
Raihana and then married her. Mariya died five years after the passing
away of the Messenger of Allah (S). Some have narrated that the Holy
Prophet (S) selected a slave girl from Bani Quraiza, named Tukana. She
was under the charge of the Holy Prophet (S) till he passed away. After
the passing away of the Holy Prophet (S), Abbas married her.[^1]

Kulaini has narrated through good chains of narrators from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that a lady from Ansar came to the Prophet in perfect
make-up and in a very fine dress. At that time the Prophet was in
Hafasa’s room. She said: “It is not appropriate for the woman to offer
herself to a man, but a long time has passed, and I have neither a
husband nor any issue. If you like, I can gift myself to you.

The Holy Prophet (S) prayed for her and said O Ansari lady, may the
Almighty Allah give you a good reward. Indeed your men helped me and
your women were inclined to me. But Hafasa began to condemn that lady
and said: “How shameless you are and how desirous you are of men that
you present yourself with such audacity. The Prophet said: “Be quiet,
Hafasa, she is better than you as she is inclined to the Prophet of
Allah and you condemn her and pick defects in her.”

Then he addressed her and said: “Go, may Allah have mercy on you, indeed
Allah had decreed Paradise to you as a reward of being inclined to me
and you preferred my love and happiness. And my intercession will be
there for you, Insha Allah.” At that juncture, the following verse was
revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَامْرَأَةً مُؤْمِنَةً إِنْ وَهَبَتْ نَفْسَهَا لِلنَّبِيِّ إِنْ
أَرَادَ النَّبِيُّ أَنْ يَسْتَنْكِحَهَا خَالِصَةً لَكَ مِنْ دُونِ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And a believing woman if she gave herself to the Prophet, if the
Prophet desired to marry her- specially for you, not for the (rest of)
believers.”***[^2]

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) has said that the Almighty Allah has made
lawful for women to gift themselves to the Prophet and not for anyone
else. Ali bin Ibrahim has also narrated this report but he has mentioned
Ayesha instead of Hafasa.

Kulaini etc. have narrated through authentic chains of narrators that
the Almighty Allah has only allowed women to gift themselves to the Holy
Prophet (S) and it is not allowed to marry women without paying the
dower. There is consensus of Shia and Sunni scholars that marriage with
the word of Hiba (gift) is among the specialties of the Holy Prophet
(S).

Kulaini has through authentic chains of narrators, narrated that the
Holy Prophet (S) married a woman named Sanat from Bani Aamir bin Saa-a
tribe. She was the most beautiful woman of her time. When Ayesha and
Hafasa saw her, they said that she would overpower them, because she was
more beautiful and attractive and that she would take away the Prophet
from them.

So they resorted to trickery and deceived her that she must not express
her love for the Holy Prophet (S). When the Prophet came to her, the
unfortunate deceived woman said: “I seek the refuge of Allah from you.”
So His Eminence divorced her and sent her to her relatives. After that
the Holy Prophet (S) married a woman of Kinda, binte Abil June when his
son, Ibrahim died, that woman said that if he had been a Prophet, his
son would not have died.

So the Prophet divorced her before consummating the marriage and sent
her home. When the Holy Prophet (S) passed away from the world, both
ladies of Bani Aamir and Bani Kinda came to Abu Bakr and asked him that
people wanted to marry them, so what was his advice. Abu Bakr and Umar
discussed among themselves and said: “You have the choice of remaining
unmarried or to marry.” The unfortunate women got married.

At last by the miracle of the Prophet one of their husbands contracted
leprosy and the other suffered from insanity. Umar bin Azina, who is the
narrator of this report says: “When I mentioned this tradition to
Zurarah and Fazl, they narrated it to Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and the
Imam said: “The Almighty Allah has not prohibited anything but that
people committed it and disobeyed Him, so much so that they even married
the wives of the Prophet after him.”

Then the Imam narrated the incident of the women of Bani Aamir and Bani
Kinda. And he said: “If you ask Sunni scholars that if a man marries a
woman and divorces her without consummating the marriage, would that
woman be lawful for the son of that man? They will reply in the
negative. Then the sanctity of the Holy Prophet (S) is more than
fathers.[^3]

Barqi has through correct chains of narrators and Kulaini has narrated
through reliable chains of narrators from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)
that when Najjashi married Amina binte Abu Sufyan, who was also known as
Umm Habiba, to the Holy Prophet (S), the latter organized a dinner
(Walima) and he said: “It is from the practice of the prophets to call
people to dinner on the occasion of marriage.”

And the same authors have narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that
when the Messenger of Allah (S) married Maimoona binte Harith, he held a
dinner and served half ground cereal, oil etc. to the people.

Kulaini has narrated through reliable chains of narrators that when the
Holy Prophet (S) used to propose to any woman, he used to send a lady to
see her telling her to smell her neck, if it is fragrant, her whole body
will be fragrant; and to pay attention to her shank, if it is meaty, her
whole body will be meaty.

Shaykh Tusi has narrated that during the battle of Hunain, Safiya, the
wife of the Prophet arrived and said: O Prophet of Allah, I am like
other women. I bore the killings of my father, uncle and brothers for
the sake of Holy Prophet (S). If something happens to you, who will get
your Caliphate and successorship? The Holy Prophet (S) pointed out to
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and said: “Imamate and all matters related to
your Ummah will be related to him.”

It is narrated through authentic chains of narrators that Safir bin
Shajra Amari, came to the wife of the Prophet, Maimoona daughter of
Harith in Medina and after taking permission entered the house. Maimoona
asked him from where he was coming? He replied: “From Kufa.” “What tribe
are you from?” she asked. “Bani Aamir,” he replied. She said that his
arrival was welcome but what was the purpose of his visit.

Safir said: “O Mother of believers, when dispute erupted among the
people, I was afraid of getting involved in some trouble. So I have come
to you.” She asked, “Have you paid allegiance to Ali?” “Yes,” he
replied. She said, “Go back and don’t leave the army of Ali. By Allah,
neither he has deviated nor can anyone be deviated because of him.”

Safir said, “O Mother of believers, will you narrate a tradition about
Imam Ali (a.s.) that you have heard from the Messenger of Allah (S)?”
“Yes,” she said, “Listen, the Messenger of Allah (S) said: Ali is a sign
of truth, and the standard of guidance, Ali is the sword of Allah, which
Allah removes from the scabbard to slay infidels and hypocrites.

So one who is devoted to Me, will be devoted to him because of My love
and one who is inimical to him, has in fact been inimical to Me. Indeed
one who is inimical to Me is inimical to Ali. When he meets the Lord on
Judgment Day, he will have nothing to justify his stand.

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that Ayesha and Hafasa used to harass
Safiya, abuse her and call her a daughter of a Jew. Safiya complained to
His Eminence, who asked her why she did not reply to them. She asked, “O
Prophet of Allah, what reply shall I give?”

He replied: “My father, Harun was the prophet of God and my Uncle, Musa
(a.s.) was the Kalimullah (one spoken to by Allah) and my husband,
Muhammad, is the messenger of Allah. So what do you deny and what defect
can you see in me?” When Lady Safiya replied to them in this manner,
they said, “These are not your words, the Holy Prophet (S) has taught
you.” At that juncture, the following verses were revealed in their
condemnation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا يَسْخَرْ قَوْمٌ مِنْ قَوْمٍ عَسٰى
أَنْ يَكُونُوا خَيْرًا مِنْهُمْ وَلَا نِسَاءٌ مِنْ نِسَاءٍ عَسٰى أَنْ
يَكُنَّ خَيْرًا مِنْهُنَّ ۖ وَلَا تَلْمِزُوا أَنْفُسَكُمْ وَلَا
تَنَابَزُوا بِالْأَلْقَابِ ۖ بِئْسَ الِاسْمُ الْفُسُوقُ بَعْدَ
الْإِيمَانِ ۚ وَمَنْ لَمْ يَتُبْ فَأُولٰئِكَ هُمُ الظَّالِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! let not (one) people laugh at (another) people
perchance they may be better than they, nor let women (laugh) at (other)
women, perchance they may be better than they; and do not find fault
with your own people nor call one another by nicknames; evil is a bad
name after faith, and whoever does not turn, these it is that are the
unjust.”***[^4]

Shaykh Tabarsi has mentioned the following as the context of revelation
of this verse: One day Umm Salma had a white cloth around her waist,
whose both end were hanging behind. And the garments were trailing on
the ground. Seeing this Ayesha said to Hafasa: “See what she is hanging
behind her, it seems to be the tongue of a dog.” Some say that Ayesha
ridiculed her for her short stature.

Himyari and Kulaini etc. have narrated from correct and very reliable
chains of narrators from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) did not fix more than five
hundred dirhams as the dower of any of his daughters or wives.

Kulaini has narrated through correct chains of narrators from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that people asked him about the exegesis of the
following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ إِنَّا أَحْلَلْنَا لَكَ أَزْوَاجَكَ اللَّاتِي
آتَيْتَ أُجُورَهُنَّ وَمَا مَلَكَتْ يَمِينُكَ مِمَّا أَفَاءَ اللَّهُ
عَلَيْكَ وَبَنَاتِ عَمِّكَ وَبَنَاتِ عَمَّاتِكَ وَبَنَاتِ خَالِكَ
وَبَنَاتِ خَالَاتِكَ اللَّاتِي هَاجَرْنَ مَعَكَ وَامْرَأَةً مُؤْمِنَةً
إِنْ وَهَبَتْ نَفْسَهَا لِلنَّبِيِّ إِنْ أَرَادَ النَّبِيُّ أَنْ
يَسْتَنْكِحَهَا خَالِصَةً لَكَ مِنْ دُونِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ ۗ قَدْ
عَلِمْنَا مَا فَرَضْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ فِي أَزْوَاجِهِمْ وَمَا مَلَكَتْ
أَيْمَانُهُمْ لِكَيْلَا يَكُونَ عَلَيْكَ حَرَجٌ ۗ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ
غَفُورًا رَحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O Prophet! surely We have made lawful to you your wives whom you
have given their dowries, and those whom your right hand possesses out
of those whom Allah has given to you as prisoners of war, and the
daughters of your paternal uncles and the daughters of your***
***paternal aunts, and the daughters of your maternal uncles and the
daughters of your maternal aunts who fled with you; and a believing
woman if she gave herself to the Prophet, if the Prophet desired to
marry her- specially for you, not for the (rest of) believers; We know
what We have ordained for them concerning their wives and those whom
their right hands possess in order that no blame may attach to you; and
Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”***[^5]

The narrator asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.): “How many women were lawful
for the Holy Prophet (S).” Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) replied: “As many as
he liked.” The narrators asked him what is the meaning of the following
statement of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يَحِلُّ لَكَ النِّسَاءُ مِنْ بَعْدُ وَلَا أَنْ تَبَدَّلَ بِهِنَّ
مِنْ أَزْوَاجٍ وَلَوْ أَعْجَبَكَ حُسْنُهُنَّ إِلَّا مَا مَلَكَتْ
يَمِينُكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is not allowed to you to take women afterwards, nor that you
should change them for other wives, though their beauty be pleasing to
you, except what your right hand possesses…”***[^6]

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) replied: “It was allowed for the Messenger of
Allah (S) to marry the daughters of his uncle and paternal aunts,
paternal uncles and maternal aunts and marry the ladies who had migrated
with him to Medina.

And it was lawful for him to marry believing ladies and it is in form of
a gift. And no lady is allowed to gift her self to anyone except the
Holy Prophet (S) and no one is allowed to do Nikah without paying the
dower (*maher*) as the Almighty Allah has said in the Holy Qur’an.” The
narrator then asked: “What is the meaning of the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتُؤْوِي إِلَيْكَ مَن تَشَاء
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and you may take to you whom you please…”***[^7]

The Holy Imam (a.s.) replied: “It implies that the Holy Prophet (S) can
marry anyone. And the statement of Allah that after that it was not
lawful for them implies those who are made unlawful for others in the
next verse; that is mothers, daughters and sisters, and all prohibited
women.

If the verse had implied that which Ahle Sunnat think it does, that
after the revelation of this verse it became unlawful for the Holy
Prophet (S) to propose to any woman. And the women he had as his wives
cannot be changed. Then indeed the Almighty Allah must have made lawful
for you the women that were not allowed for the Prophet. Because you
have the choice to change the aged wife and you can send proposal to
anyone you like.”[^8]

Kulaini has narrated through reliable chains of narrators from Imam Ali
Reza (a.s.) that the Holy Prophet (S) had the sexual prowess of forty
men. And he had nine wives and he used to meet them every day.

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that when the Messenger of Allah (S)
returned from the Battle of Khyber and the treasure of the sons of Abil
Haqiq fell into his hands, the wives asked him to distribute that
treasure among them. The Holy Prophet (S) said that he has distributed
it all among the Muslims. The wives were angry and they said: “You think
that if you divorce us, we would not find anyone according to our
status.”

The Almighty Allah did not like this reply and He commanded the
Messenger to become aloof from those wives and stay in the house of the
mother of Ibrahim. The Holy Prophet (S) separated from those wives and
started to reside in the chamber of Ibrahim’s mother, which was near to
the mosque. So much so that those women had their menses. The Almighty
Allah revealed the following verse of choice at that juncture:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ قُلْ لِأَزْوَاجِكَ إِنْ كُنْتُنَّ تُرِدْنَ
الْحَيَاةَ الدُّنْيَا وَزِينَتَهَا فَتَعَالَيْنَ أُمَتِّعْكُنَّ
وَأُسَرِّحْكُنَّ سَرَاحًا جَمِيلًا. وَإِنْ كُنْتُنَّ تُرِدْنَ اللَّهَ
وَرَسُولَهُ وَالدَّارَ الْآخِرَةَ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ أَعَدَّ
لِلْمُحْسِنَاتِ مِنْكُنَّ أَجْرًا عَظِيمًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O Prophet! say to your wives: If you desire this world’s life and
its adornment, then come, I will give you a provision and allow you to
depart a goodly departing; And if you desire Allah and His Apostle and
the latter abode, then surely Allah has prepared for the doers of good
among you a mighty reward.”***[^9]

When the Holy Prophet (S) recited this verse to them, Umm Salma arose
first of all and she said: “I chose the Prophet over the world.” After
that all the women embraced the Prophet and repeated the same sentence.
At that moment the following verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُرْجِي مَنْ تَشَاءُ مِنْهُنَّ وَتُؤْوِي إِلَيْكَ مَنْ تَشَاءُ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“You may put off whom you please of them, and you may take to you
whom you please…”***[^10]

Then the Almighty Allah addresses the wives of the Prophet:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا نِسَاءَ النَّبِيِّ مَنْ يَأْتِ مِنْكُنَّ بِفَاحِشَةٍ مُبَيِّنَةٍ
يُضَاعَفْ لَهَا الْعَذَابُ ضِعْفَيْنِ ۚ وَكَانَ ذَٰلِكَ عَلَى اللَّهِ
يَسِيرًا. وَمَنْ يَقْنُتْ مِنْكُنَّ لِلَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ وَتَعْمَلْ
صَالِحًا نُؤْتِهَا أَجْرَهَا مَرَّتَيْنِ وَأَعْتَدْنَا لَهَا رِزْقًا
كَرِيمًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O wives of the prophet! Whoever of you commits an open indecency
(like going out to Basra*** ***to confront Ali), the punishment shall be
increased to her doubly; and this is easy to Allah. And whoever of you
is obedient to Allah and His Apostle and does good, We will give to her
reward doubly, and We have prepared for her an honorable
sustenance.”***[^11]

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) through correct chains of
narrators that “Fahisha Mubaiyyana” (open indecency) and the sins which
exposes is to undertake armed uprising which was committed by Ayesha.

Kulaini has narrated through reliable chains of narrators from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that Allah was
ashamed about His Prophet that some of his wives said that Muhammad
thinks that if he divorces them, they would not find any man in the
community willing to marry them. According to another tradition Zainab
said: “In spite of being the Prophet of Allah, you are not just among
us.”

Hafasa said: “If he divorces us we can choose someone else from our
community.” According to another traditions this statement was also made
by Zainab. When the verse of choice was revealed the Holy Prophet (S)
separated from all his wives for 29 nights and resided in the chambers
of Maria. And according to another report no revelation descended on the
Prophet for twenty days. After that, when the verse of choice was
revealed, the Prophet summoned his wives and gave them choice of himself
or the world.

If they had chosen the world, they would have become unlawful on the
Prophet, which means irrevocable divorce. And according to another
report, if they had chosen the world, the Prophet would have divorced
them and then it would never have been possible for them to choose the
Prophet and he never could have inclined to them. According to another
report, when Zainab binte Jahash’s turn arrived, she came running to the
Prophet, kissed his hands and said: “I choose Allah and His Prophet.”  
 It is mentioned in many reliable traditions that this was a command
restricted only for the Prophet and not for others to give such choice
to their wives.[^12]

Account of the marriage of Zainab
---------------------------------

Ibn Babawayh etc. have narrated from reliable chains of narrators from
Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) that one day the Holy Prophet (S) went to the house
of Zaid bin Haritha bin Sharjeel Kalbi. When he entered, he saw that the
wife of Zaid was taking a bath. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Glory be the
one Who has created you.” By this statement he meant that she must
consider the Almighty Allah as pure and free from the saying of infidels
who say that angels are the daughters of God, as the Almighty Allah has
Himself said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَأَصْفَاكُمْ رَبُّكُمْ بِالْبَنِينَ وَاتَّخَذَ مِنَ الْمَلَائِكَةِ
إِنَاثًا ۚ إِنَّكُمْ لَتَقُولُونَ قَوْلًا عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“What! has then your Lord preferred to give you sons, and (for
Himself) taken daughters from among the angels? Most surely you utter a
grievous saying.”***[^13]

When the Holy Prophet (S) saw her bathing, he said: “I consider pure the
one who has created you from the fact that he should have a son who is
needful of purification and bath.” When Zaid returned home, Zainab told
him about what the Prophet had said. Zaid thought that the Prophet had
stated thus because he found Zainab beautiful. Then he came to the
Prophet and said: “My wife is having a bad nature, I want to divorce
her.”

The Prophet said: “Protect your wife and fear the Almighty, because the
Almighty Allah had revealed to him the number of his wives and their
names of the world and the hereafter, and Zainab was among them and the
Prophet knew this, but he did not reveal this to Zaid or anyone else
fearing that people would say that Muhammad tells his slave that “your
wife will be married to me one day.”

And according to another report, the Prophet feared that the hypocrites
will say that Muhammad considers wives of others as his wife and mother
of believers. And thus they would make allegations about the Prophet.
Therefore the Almighty Allah ordered His Prophet to keep the matter
concealed, that which the Almighty Allah was about to reveal and the
Prophet continued to fear the allegations of the people.

Thus Zaid bin Haritha divorced Zainab and after the waiting period the
Almighty Allah married her to the Prophet and revealed those verses,
because He knew that the hypocrites will make allegations against the
Messenger of Allah (S), so He revealed the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا كَانَ عَلَى النَّبِيِّ مِنْ حَرَجٍ فِيمَا فَرَضَ اللَّهُ لَهُ ۖ
سُنَّةَ اللَّهِ فِي الَّذِينَ خَلَوْا مِنْ قَبْلُ ۚ وَكَانَ أَمْرُ
اللَّهِ قَدَرًا مَقْدُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There is no harm in the Prophet doing that which Allah has ordained
for him; such has been the course of Allah with respect to those who
have gone before; and the command of Allah is a decree that is made
absolute.”***[^14]

Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) said that the Almighty Allah never became a
guardian for the marriage of anyone of His creatures except for Hawwa
and Adam and for Zainab and the Messenger of Allah (S) because He has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زَوَّجْنَاكَهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We gave her to you as a wife…”***

And married Lady Fatima Zahra to Imam Ali (a.s.).  
 Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated that since Zainab binte Jahash whose mother
was Amima binte Abdul Muttalib, and the Holy Prophet (S) has asked for
her hand for Zaid, but she furiously declined to become Zaid’s wife. And
Zainab’s brother, Abdullah bin Jahash also said the same thing, upon
which the following verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لِمُؤْمِنٍ وَلَا مُؤْمِنَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And it behoves not a believing man and a believing woman…”***[^15]

Thus Zainab said: I have agreed and given authority to the Holy Prophet
(S). The Prophet married her to Zaid and sent ten gold coins and sixty
silver coins as her dower and a veil and a covering sheet, a shirt and a
pair of pajama, fifty seers of food and thirty Saa-a (120 seer) dates.

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that when the Holy Prophet (S) married
Zainab himself, since he liked her very much, he gave dinner in which he
invited the companions. When all companions has finished eating they
wanted to remain with the Prophet and converse with him, whereas the
Holy Prophet (S) wanted privacy with Zainab. At that moment the
following verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَدْخُلُوا بُيُوتَ النَّبِيِّ
إِلَّا أَنْ يُؤْذَنَ لَكُمْ إِلَىٰ طَعَامٍ غَيْرَ نَاظِرِينَ إِنَاهُ
وَلَٰكِنْ إِذَا دُعِيتُمْ فَادْخُلُوا فَإِذَا طَعِمْتُمْ فَانْتَشِرُوا
وَلَا مُسْتَأْنِسِينَ لِحَدِيثٍ ۚ إِنَّ ذَٰلِكُمْ كَانَ يُؤْذِي
النَّبِيَّ فَيَسْتَحْيِي مِنْكُمْ ۖ وَاللَّهُ لَا يَسْتَحْيِي مِنَ
الْحَقِّ ۚ وَإِذَا سَأَلْتُمُوهُنَّ مَتَاعًا فَاسْأَلُوهُنَّ مِنْ
وَرَاءِ حِجَابٍ ۚ ذَٰلِكُمْ أَطْهَرُ لِقُلُوبِكُمْ وَقُلُوبِهِنَّ ۚ
وَمَا كَانَ لَكُمْ أَنْ تُؤْذُوا رَسُولَ اللَّهِ وَلَا أَنْ تَنْكِحُوا
أَزْوَاجَهُ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ أَبَدًا ۚ إِنَّ ذَٰلِكُمْ كَانَ عِنْدَ
اللَّهِ عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! do not enter the houses of the Prophet unless
permission is given to you for a meal, not waiting for its cooking being
finished- but when you are invited, enter, and when you have taken the
food, then disperse- not seeking to listen to talk; surely this gives
the Prophet trouble, but he forbears from you, and Allah does not
forbear from the truth. And when you ask of them any goods, ask of them
from behind a curtain; this is purer for your hearts and (for) their
hearts; and it does not behove you that you should give trouble to the
Apostle of Allah, nor that you should marry his wives after him ever;
surely this is grievous in the sight of Allah.”***[^16]

Account of Lady Umm Salma
-------------------------

It is narrated by Ibn Babawayh from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) through
authentic chains of narrators that one day Umm Salma came to know that
one of her emancipated slaves had said something against Amirul Momineen
(a.s.). She summoned him and said: “Sit down, may your mother mourn for
you, let me narrate for you a tradition of the Holy Prophet (S): after
that you may choose whatever you like. Indeed, we nine women were
married to the Prophet.

On one of my turns, the Holy Prophet (S) came to my place. And Noor
(light) was shinning from his forehead and he was holding the hand of
Imam Ali (a.s.). He said to me: “O Umm Salma. Go away from here and
leave the house for us.: So I went out from there and the Prophet began
to converse with Imam Ali (a.s.) in private. I could hear their voices
but I was not able to make out what they were saying.

When it got very late I went to the door and said: “O Messenger of Allah
(S), can I come in?” My heart was full of joy, but I turned back
thinking that the Prophet might have been angry at me or some bad news
had been revealed to him about me from the heavens. After sometime, I
again came to the door and sought permission, but no permission was
forthcoming. And I was happier than before. Then I went there for the
third time and asked for permission.

This time the Prophet told me to enter. When I entered, I saw Imam Ali
(a.s.) kneeling before the Prophet and saying: “May my parents be
sacrificed on you, what do you advise me to do in such circumstances?”
He replied: “I advise you patience.” Ali (a.s.) again asked the same
question and the Prophet again advised patience to him.

When on the third time he asked the same question, the Prophet said: “O
Ali, O my brother, when it comes to this, you must take out the sword
and prepare to fight. You must not worry even if blood is dripping from
your sword when you come to me.” Then the Messenger of Allah (S) turned
to me and asked: “O Umm Salma, why are you so sad?” I replied, “Because
you sent me away a number of times.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said, “By Allah, I did not send you away because I
was angry with you, and you have no defect in my view. Indeed you are on
the good for Allah and His Prophet. But when you came, Jibraeel was to
my right and Ali was on the left and Jibraeel was informing about the
events that are to occur after me. And had emphasized me to make bequest
to Ali (a.s.) what he should do in those mischiefs. O Umm Salma, listen
to this and be a witness that Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) is my Vizier in
the world and the hereafter.

O Umm Salma, listen to this and be a witness that Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(a.s.) is my standard bearer in the world and the hereafter. O Umm
Salma, listen to this and be a witness that Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) is
my successor and legatee after me and one who would fulfill my promises
and one who will drive away the enemies from Hauz Kauthar. O Umm Salma,
listen to this and be a witness that Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) is the
chief and leader of Muslims and the leader of the pious, one who will
take the believers to Paradise and who is the killer of Nakiseen,
Qasiteen and Mariqeen.”

I asked, “O Messenger of Allah (S), who are the Nakiseen?” He replied:
“Those who will pay allegiance to Ali (a.s.) at Medina and break the
pledge at Basra,” I asked, “Who are the Qasiteen?” He replied: “Muawiyah
and the Syrians obedient to him.” I asked, “Who are the Mariqeen?” He
replied: “The Khawarij of Nahrawan.” When Umm Salma narrated this
traditional report to her slave, he said, “You have delivered me and
opened the knot of my heart. May Allah give prosperity to you. By Allah,
I will never say anything wrong about Ali (a.s.).”

Shaykh Tusi has narrated through reliable chains of narrators from the
slave of Abu Dharr that he said: “I was fighting on the side of Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) in the Battle of Jamal. When I saw Ayesha in the front
ranks of our enemies, a doubt appeared in my heart, like other people
were in doubt with regard to her. When afternoon came, the Almighty
Allah removed that doubt from my heart and became busy in fighting the
opponents with the army of Amirul Momineen (a.s.).

After that when I came to Umm Salma, the wife of the Prophet and
narrated my position, she asked: “What did you do when the hearts of the
people had flown away from their abodes?” I said that I had also fallen
into doubt and I thank the Almighty that He removed that curtain and I
fought the enemies of Imam Ali (a.s.) well.” Umm Salma said, “You have
done a nice thing.” I have heard the Messenger of Allah (S) that he used
to say: “Ali is with Qur’an and Qur’an is with Ali. They will not
separate from each other till they reach me at Hauz Kauthar.”

It is mentioned in *Qurbul Asnad Himyari* from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
through authentic reports that there was a lady among the Ansar, named
Hasrat. After the passing away of the Messenger of Allah (S) she used to
visit the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and was deeply devoted to them. One day Abu
Bakr and Umar saw her on the way and asked where she was going.

She said that she was going to the Progeny of Muhammad to fulfill their
rights and to renew her pledge. They said, “Woe be upon you, they don’t
have any right. It was only restricted to the lifetime of the Prophet.”
Hasrat returned on hearing this. After some days she again came to the
Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet. Umm Salma asked her, “It had been a long
time.” She said, “I had met so and so and they had said this and that.”
Umm Salma said, “They made a wrong statement, the right of the progeny
of Muhammad is incumbent on Muslims till Judgment Day.”

Umar bin Abi Salma, son of Umm Salma is quoted in *Basairud Darajat* to
have said that Lady Umm Salma said: One day the Holy Prophet (S) made
Ali (a.s.) to sit in my quarters and called for a sheepskin. The Holy
Prophet (S) was dictating and Ali was writing, till the skin was full.
The Messenger of Allah (S) gave that skin to me and said: “After me a
person will come to you and mention such and such signs, so you give
this skin to him.”

When the Messenger of Allah (S) passed away from the world, and Abu Bakr
usurped his Caliphate, my mother, Umm Salma told me to go and see what
that person does in the mosque. I came to the mosque and saw Abu Bakr
mounting the pulpit, delivering a sermon, then he came down and went
home. I returned to my mother and narrated what all I had seen or heard.
She fell silent. When Umar became the Caliph, again my mother sent me to
the mosque.

I returned and told her that Umar has also done what Abu Bakr had done.
Again my mother fell silent. When Uthman became the Caliph, like before,
my mother again sent me to the mosque and I returned and reported that
he also acted like his two predecessors. When Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
became the Caliph, my mother sent me to the mosque and said: “See what
this man does.” I came to the mosque.

Imam Ali (a.s.) recited a sermon and upon descending from the pulpit
summoned me and said: “Go and take permission from your respected mother
that I want to meet her in short while.” I came to my mother and
delivered the message of Amirul Momineen (a.s.).

She said, “By Allah, I wanted to call him myself. Then Ali (a.s.)
arrived and asked her for the writing that the Holy Prophet (S) had
entrusted to her. My mother arose, opened a casket, removed another
casket from it, opened it and taking out the sheepskin, gave it to Ali
(a.s.). Then she said to me: “Always remain in the service of Ali and
never leave his side, because after the Holy Prophet (S), I don’t see
anyone as his successor.”

Kulaini has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) proposed to Umm
Salma through her son, Umar bin Abi Salma and he married her to the
Prophet even though he was not yet mature.

Kulaini has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that one day Abu Bakr and Umar came to Lady Umm
Salma and asked her, “You were married to someone else before the Holy
Prophet (S), tell us whether the Prophet was sexually stronger than him
or not?” Lady Umm Salma said, “He is also like other men.”

After that the Holy Prophet (S) arrived and Umm Salma regretted what she
had said. And she feared that some verse might be revealed about her, so
she herself told the Prophet about what those two had said. The
Messenger of Allah (S) was so infuriated that his complexion changed and
there was perspiration on his brow. He came out of the house in such a
way that his cloak was dragging on the ground. Then he came into the
mosque ascended the pulpit and called the Ansar.

When they saw the Prophet in this condition, all armed themselves and
presented themselves before the Prophet. The Messenger of Allah (S)
praised and glorified the Almighty, why are some hypocrites busy to find
some defects in me.

By Allah, I am greatest among you from the aspect of lineage and most
pure of you from the aspect of birth and the most obedient one to the
Almighty in the absence of the people. Of one of you asks me who his
father is, I can tell you about it.” A person asked, “Who is my father?”
The Holy Prophet (S) said, “It is so and so shepherd.”

Another man asked, “Who is my father?” The Holy Prophet (S) said, “So
and so black slave.” Then a third person asked, “Who is my father?” The
Holy Prophet (S) said, “Your father is same that people relate you to.”

Then Ansar arose asked, “O Prophet forgive us so that Allah may exalt
your ranks, indeed the Almighty Allah has sent you as a mercy.” Since
the Prophet had a habit that when people spoke to him in humility and
requested him, due to shame, the forehead of the Prophet used to
perspire and he used to conceal their defects.

Thus the Messenger of Allah (S) descended from the pulpit and went to
his house. Next morning Jibraeel (a.s.) came down with a bowl of
Paradise food and said: O Messenger of Allah (S), this is prepared for
you by the Houries. You may eat it and except for you, Ali and his sons,
no one may eat from it, because except for you no one is capable of it.

Thus the Holy Prophet (S), Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain (a.s.) sat down
to eat from that bowl. Due to this, the Almighty Allah gave to the
Prophet, the sexual power of forty men. After that it was such that
whenever the Holy Prophet (S) wanted he could have intercourse with all
of his wives on a single night.

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) through authentic chains
of narrators that Mughaira’s son, Walid died. Umm Salma said to the
Prophet: “Mughaira’s family has organized a condolence meeting, please
allow me to go.”

The Prophet allowed her. Umm Salma dressed up to go there. She was as
beautiful as a fairy. When she used to stand up and untie her hair, her
whole body used to be covered with them. She used to tie up the ends of
her hair with her anklets. Thus she began to weep and wail for her son
and the Prophet did not restrain her and neither did he say that she had
committed any mistake.

It is narrated from the same Imam through authentic chains of narrators
that one day the Messenger of Allah (S) came to the house of Umm Salma
and asked her, “Why don’t I see any *barakah* in your place. Umm Salma,
said, “There is a lot of *barakah* in my house due to your presence. The
Holy Prophet (S) said, “Allah, has sent three blessings, water, fire and
sheep.”

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) through authentic chains of
narrators that one day the Messenger of Allah (S) saw a woman that he
liked. So he came to the house of Umm Salma, and it was her turn that
day; and the Holy Prophet (S) associated with her, then he performed the
ritual bath and came out of the house. The water of his bath was
dripping from his head. Then he said: “O people, glancing is due to the
Shaitan, therefore if on seeing a woman, one of you feel desirous of sex
he must come to his wife and sleep with her so that his desires are
cooled.”

Account of Ayesha and Hafasa
----------------------------

The Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ لِمَ تُحَرِّمُ مَا أَحَلَّ اللَّهُ لَكَ ۖ
تَبْتَغِي مَرْضَاتَ أَزْوَاجِكَ ۚ وَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ. قَدْ
فَرَضَ اللَّهُ لَكُمْ تَحِلَّةَ أَيْمَانِكُمْ ۚ وَاللَّهُ
مَوْلَاكُمْ ۖ وَهُوَ الْعَلِيمُ الْحَكِيمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O Prophet! Why do you forbid (yourself) that which Allah has made
lawful for you; you seek to please your wives; and Allah is Forgiving,
Merciful. Allah indeed has sanctioned for you the expiation of your
oaths and Allah is your Protector, and He is the Knowing, the
Wise.”***[^17]

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) through
authentic chains of narrators that the above verses were revealed at the
time when Ayesha and Hafasa came to know that the Prophet had had
relations with Mariya.

And the Prophet swore to them that he will never again go to Mariya. So
the Almighty Allah revealed the following verses so that he may pay the
penalty for his oath and he must not give up his relations with Mariya.
It is also narrated that these verses were revealed when one day the
Holy Prophet (S) was at Hafasa’s place and Mariya the Copt was in his
service.

During that time Hafasa went out on some errand and the Prophet had
relations with Mariya. When Hafasa came to know about this, she was very
angry and she said: O Messenger of Allah (S), you had relations with a
slave girl on my bed, and on the day of my turn?” The Prophet was
embarrassed at this and he said, “Cool down, I will not have relations
with Mariya again. I have made her unlawful for myself.” These verses
were revealed at that time.

It is narrated from Shaykh Tabarsi that after the Morning Prayer the
Prophet used to visit all his wives and ask about their well being. And
if someone sent honey to Hafasa, he used to spend a few moments at her
place to have some honey.

When Ayesha saw this, she conspired with some other wives that when the
Prophet comes to them they must say that his mouth is smelling of
‘maghafeer’, which is a smelly gum on which if the honeybee sits, the
honey becomes so smelly. And Ayesha knew that the Prophet disliked mouth
odor. Thus when the Holy Prophet (S) went to Saudah, she said due to the
fear of Ayesha, what smell was it that she could perceive from the mouth
of the Prophet?

Perhaps he has eaten Maghafeer. The Prophet said: “No, I have consumed
honey at Hafasa’s.” After that whenever the Prophet visited any of his
wives they told him the same thing. Till he came to Ayesha. She closed
her nose and said: “Why do I smell Maghafeer from your mouth?” the Holy
Prophet (S) said that he had taken honey at Hafasa’s place. Ayesha said
that perhaps that honeybee has sat on Maghafeer.

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “By Allah, I will never taste honey again.”
Some say that the Prophet had taken honey at Umm Salma’s and some say
that he had taken it at Zainab binte Jahash’s and Ayesha and Hafasa had
conspired that when the Prophet comes to them both should issue the same
statement that his mouth smells of Maghafeer. It was for this reason
that the Holy Prophet (S) made honey unlawful for himself.

Shaykh Tabarsi and Sunni commentators have reported that one day the
Messenger of Allah (S) was in Hafasa’s place and she asked the Prophet
if she could visit her father. The Prophet allowed her and she departed.
The Prophet called for Mariya and remained in privacy with her. Hafasa
returned to find the door closed till the Prophet opened it.
Perspiration was dripping from his face. Hafasa was extremely angry at
the Prophet. the Holy Prophet (S) said: “She is my slave girl and the
Almighty Allah has made her lawful for me. But I have made her unlawful
to me for your sake. However you don’t mention this to anyone.”

After that the Holy Prophet (S) went away from there. Immediately she
began to beat with a stone the wall separating her quarter from that of
Ayesha’s and she said: “Congratulations to you O Ayesha, the Holy
Prophet (S) has made his slave girl, Mariya, unlawful from himself. It
is good riddance for us.” Then she narrated the whole story to Ayesha as
the two of them were united in harassing the other wives of the Prophet.
At that time, the following verses were revealed. So the Holy Prophet
(S) divorced Hafasa and kept away from all his wives for 29 days.

He stayed in the attic of Mariya till the Almighty Allah revealed the
verse of choice. Some have said that the Prophet had relations with
Mariya on the day of Ayesha’s turn and Hafasa had come to know about it.
The Holy Prophet (S) had told Hafasa not to mention it to Ayesha as he
has made Mariya unlawful for himself. But she immediately informed
Ayesha and told her not to mention it to anyone. At that juncture, the
Almighty Allah revealed the following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ أَسَرَّ النَّبِيُّ إِلَىٰ بَعْضِ أَزْوَاجِهِ حَدِيثًا فَلَمَّا
نَبَّأَتْ بِهِ وَأَظْهَرَهُ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِ عَرَّفَ بَعْضَهُ
وَأَعْرَضَ عَنْ بَعْضٍ ۖ فَلَمَّا نَبَّأَهَا بِهِ قَالَتْ مَنْ
أَنْبَأَكَ هَٰذَا ۖ قَالَ نَبَّأَنِيَ الْعَلِيمُ الْخَبِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when the prophet secretly communicated a piece of information to
one of his wives- but when she informed (others) of it, and Allah made
him to know it, he made known part of it and avoided part; so when he
informed her of it, she said: Who informed you of this? He said: The
Knowing, the Aware one, informed me.”***[^18]

Ali bin Ibrahim and Ayyashi have narrated that when Hafasa came to know
about Mariya and she became infuriated at the Prophet, he told her to
drop the matter as he was making Mariya unlawful for himself for her
sake. But he told her that she must keep this matter concealed otherwise
the divine curse will be upon her and the anger of the angels and the
ridicule of all people. Hafasa said that she will maintain the secret.

But what is the secret? The Prophet said: “It is that Abu Bakr will
become the Caliph after me through injustice and oppression and after
him, your father will become the Caliph.” Hafasa asked him, “Who has
told you this?” The Holy Prophet (S) said that “the Almighty Allah has
informed me about it.” Hafasa revealed this secret to Ayesha the same
day and she mentioned it to her father, Abu Bakr.

Abu Bakr came to Umar and said that “Ayesha has quoted Hafasa thus, but
I don’t trust her statement, you ask Hafasa directly if this is true.”
Umar came to Hafasa, “Is it true what Ayesha has mentioned on your
authority?” Initially Hafasa denied having said any such thing to
Ayesha. Umar said, “Don’t conceal this from us if it is true, so that we
may plan about it beforehand.”

Hafasa said, “Yes, the Holy Prophet (S) had mentioned thus.” Then the
two men and their daughters plotted to poison the Prophet. Jibraeel came
down with those verses. And the secret that the Almighty Allah had
mentioned is the same secret. And apart from that the Almighty Allah had
informed His Messenger about some other secrets. And they had decided to
expose the secret and to eliminate the Prophet.

And the saying of the Almighty Allah that the Prophet had mentioned some
things and left out some, means that His Eminence, asked Hafasa why she
revealed the secret and did not fear the curse of Allah and His angels?
And those who had planned to eliminate the Prophet and the Almighty
Allah had informed the Prophet about this plot of theirs; so the
Almighty Allah in order to punish Ayesha and Hafasa said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ تَتُوبَا إِلَى اللَّهِ فَقَدْ صَغَتْ قُلُوبُكُمَا ۖ وَإِنْ
تَظَاهَرَا عَلَيْهِ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ هُوَ مَوْلَاهُ وَجِبْرِيلُ
وَصَالِحُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ ۖ وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ ظَهِيرٌ.
عَسٰى رَبُّهُ إِنْ طَلَّقَكُنَّ أَنْ يُبْدِلَهُ أَزْوَاجًا خَيْرًا
مِنْكُنَّ مُسْلِمَاتٍ مُؤْمِنَاتٍ قَانِتَاتٍ تَائِبَاتٍ عَابِدَاتٍ
سَائِحَاتٍ ثَيِّبَاتٍ وَأَبْكَارًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If you both turn to Allah, then indeed your hearts are already
inclined (to this); and if you back up each other against him, then
surely Allah it is Who is his Guardian, and Jibraeel and the believers
that do good, and the angels after that are the aiders. Maybe, his Lord,
if he divorce you, will give him in your place wives better than you,
submissive, faithful, obedient, penitent, adorers, fasters, widows and
virgins.”***[^19]

After that the Almighty Allah in order to remove the doubt that ignorant
people may not ask how is it possible that wives of the prophet can be
infidels and hypocrites? The Almighty Allah has mentioned an example for
them in which their disbelief was revealed for every sane person. As
mentioned after these verses that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضَرَبَ اللَّهُ مَثَلًا لِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا امْرَأَتَ نُوحٍ وَامْرَأَتَ
لُوطٍ ۖ كَانَتَا تَحْتَ عَبْدَيْنِ مِنْ عِبَادِنَا صَالِحَيْنِ
فَخَانَتَاهُمَا فَلَمْ يُغْنِيَا عَنْهُمَا مِنَ اللَّهِ شَيْئًا
وَقِيلَ ادْخُلَا النَّارَ مَعَ الدَّاخِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah sets forth an example to those who disbelieve the wife of Nuh
and the wife of Lut: they were both under two of Our righteous servants,
but they acted treacherously towards them so they availed them naught
against Allah, and it was said: Enter both the fire with those who
enter.”***[^20]

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that one of their dishonesty was Ayesha’s
going to Basra with Talha and Zubair in order to fight Amirul Momineen
(a.s.). And the Imam of the Time (a.s.) will enliven Ayesha by the
permission of Allah and would issue a penalty for this dishonesty.[^21]

Shaykh Tusi and Sayyid Ibn Tawus have narrated through reliable chains
of narrators from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he said: One day I was
with the Prophet when Abu Bakr and Umar were also present there. I also
sat down between the Prophet and Ayesha. Ayesha said: “Did you not get
any place except for the lap of the Prophet and me?”

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Shut up, Ayesha, don’t hurt me about Ali,
indeed in the hereafter he is my brother and chief of the believers. On
Judgment Day, the Almighty Allah will make him sit on the Sirat Bridge
and he will send his friends to Paradise and send his foes to Hell.  
 Ibn Babawayh has narrated through reliable chains of narrators from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that three persons had attributed falsehood to
the Prophet most: Abu Huraira, Anas bin Malik and Ayesha.

And Ibn Babawayh and Barqi have narrated through reliable chains of
narrators from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that when the Qaim of Aale
Muhammad will reappear, he will enliven Ayesha and punish her and take
the revenge for Lady Fatima Zahra (s.a.). The narrator asked, “May I be
sacrificed on you, why would he punish her?”

Imam (a.s.) said, “She had made allegations against Mariya, the Copt
also.” The narrator asked why the Prophet had not punished her? And why
did the Almighty Allah postpone this matter till the time of the Qaim.
Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) replied, “Because the Almighty Allah sent the
Prophet as a mercy and appointed the Qaim Aale Muhammad for taking
revenge.

Shaykh Tusi has narrated through reliable chains of narrators from Umm
Salma that the Messenger of Allah (S) had taken all his wives for the
Farewell Hajj and he used to live with each of them for a day and a
night, because he was married to them and he wanted to be equitable
among them.

When it was Ayesha’s turn, the Prophet conferred secretly with Imam Ali
(a.s.) for a long time, so this act of his was very hard for Ayesha. Umm
Salma says that Ayesha told me: “I feel like going to Ali and calling
him cruel and lazy, why he has kept away the Messenger of Allah (S) from
me?” I tried all means to restrain her from this but she did not
refrain. She rode her camel to him and returned soon to me crying. I
asked her why she was weeping.

She said that when she went to the Messenger of Allah (S) and told Ali
(a.s.): O son of Abi Talib, you always keep away the Holy Prophet (S)
from me, but the Prophet said: O Ayesha, don’t come between me and Ali;
indeed no one is apprehensive about me with regard to him.

By the one in whose hands is my life, no believer hates him and no
infidel loves him. Indeed, after me truth is with Ali, in whichever
direction he turns, the truth will turn with him and truth will never
separate from him till they both come to me at Hauz Kauthar.” Umm Salma
said: “O Ayesha, I had stopped you from this, but you never paid any
heed to me.”

Ibn Tawus has narrated from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) through reliable
chains of narrators that he said: Before the revelation of the verse of
Hijab, once I went to the Prophet when he was seated in Ayesha’s room. I
sat down between Ayesha and the Prophet. She said, “O son of Abu Talib,
did you not get any seat except my lap? Go away from here.” The Prophet
immediately slapped her back and said, “Woe be on you, what do you want
from the King of believers and one who is more superior to successors of
prophets and one with an illuminated face and limbs?”

Kulaini has narrated through reliable chains of narrators that Ibn Umm
Maktum, who was a blind Muezzin of the Prophet came to the Prophet one
day. Ayesha and Hafasa was with the Prophet. The Prophet told them to go
inside. They said, “But he is blind.” The Prophet said, “Even though he
cannot see you, you can see him.” According to another report he said,
“Even though he is blind, you are not.”

Through reliable chains of narrators it is narrated from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) married Ayesha in the month
of Shawwal. Also through reliable chains of narrators it is narrated
from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that one night the Holy Prophet (S) was
sleeping with Ayesha.

He arose during the night and began to pray the supererogatory prayers.
When Ayesha awoke, she did not see the Prophet on his bed. She thought
that he must have gone to his slave girl. So she arose in fury and began
to search for the Prophet. Suddenly she placed her foot on the neck of
the Prophet when he was weeping in Sajdah and imploring the Lord:

“My body and soul and all prostrate to You. And my heart has brought
faith on You. I confess for all the bounties from You to me and I
confess to all sins and I have done and oppressed my soul to forgive me.

Except for You no one can forgive this great sin. I seek refuge in Your
forgiveness from Your chastisement. And I seek refuge in Your pleasure
from Your anger. And I seek Your refuge in Your mercy from Your anger.
And I seek Your refuge and I cannot reach Your praise and glorification.
You are same as You have praised Yourself and I seek Your forgiveness
and turn to You.”

When the Prophet completed the Sajdah, he said, “O Ayesha, you have hurt
my neck. Did you think that I had gone to some slave girl of
yours?”[^22]

[^1]: It is possible that the Holy Prophet (S) had not taken that maid
slave as his wife and she was only appointed to serve him, or it would
not have been possible from Abbas to marry her, as according to the Holy
Qur’an she would have been among the mothers of believers and she would
have unlawful for every person of the Ummah.

[^2]: Surah Ahzab 33:50

[^3]: The author says: Ibn Idris etc. have narrated this tradition from
reliable sources and there is no difference of opinion among the Shia
and Sunni scholars. There is no doubts in it that the woman with whom
the Holy Prophet (S) had consummated the marriage, she would remain in
the marriage of the Prophet till her death. No one is allowed to marry
her. And the woman whom the Prophet has divorced during his lifetime or
has not consummated her marriage with him, there is difference of
between Shia and Sunni scholars whether she can marry anyone else or
not. Most Sunni scholars believe that she is lawful for others. But in
the view of Shia, the most common opinion is that she is unlawful for
others; even the tyrant rulers had not opposed the Holy Prophet (S) in
this matter. And they married to others the women with whom the Prophet
had not consummated the marriage. This does not prove any deficiency of
the Prophet and Ayesha’s mounting the camel and in the company of
thousands of infidels and hypocrites, and going out to fight Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) and to martyr the beloved grandson of the Prophet is
much worse. Therefore, it is not lawful to reject all these reports due
to improbability. Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that when the Almighty
Allah said: “And his wives are their mothers,” and made it unlawful to
marry them, Talha was very angry at this. And he said: “Muhammad has
made his women unlawful to us, and he marries our women. If Muhammad
dies, I will also do what he does with our women. At that moment this
verse was revealed by the Almighty Allah: وَمَا كَانَ لَكُمْ أَن
تُؤْذُوا رَسُولَ اللَّهِ وَلَا أَن تَنكِحُوا أَزْوَاجَهُ مِن بَعْدِهِ
أَبَدًا إِنَّ ذَلِكُمْ كَانَ عِندَ اللَّهِ عَظِيمًا And it does not
behove you that you should give trouble to the Apostle of Allah, nor
that you should arry his wives after him ever; surely this is grievous
in the sight of Allah. (Surah Ahzab 33:53)

[^4]: Surah Hujurat 49:11

[^5]: Surah Ahzab 33:50

[^6]: Surah Ahzab 33:52

[^7]: Surah Ahzab 33:51

[^8]: The author says: There are many traditions on the subject and some
commentators have explained this verse in the same way and some say that
after that the Holy Prophet (S) gave choice to his wives either to
choose him or choose the world. And if they chose the Holy Prophet (S)
the Almighty Allah made it lawful for him to take up other women or to
replace them with other women. Some have said that it was applicable at
the beginning and then abrogated later on. And whatever is mentioned in
the tradition is reliable and in agreement with other statements of Ahle
Sunnat.

[^9]: Surah Ahzab 33:28-29

[^10]: Surah Ahzab 33:51

[^11]: Surah Ahzab 33:30-31

[^12]: The author says: It is famous among Imamite jurist that the
choice to separate from her husband was only available for the wives of
the Prophet. But some have said that this rule is also applicable for
others, but there is difference of opinion in its application whether it
can be effected through revocable or irrevocable divorce. And more clear
is that this order was restricted to the Prophet, therefore it is
useless to think upon its derivations or make any comments about it. The
Almighty Allah is more cognizant of what is best.

[^13]: Surah Isra 17:40

[^14]: Surah Ahzab 33:38

[^15]: Surah Ahzab 33:36

[^16]: Surah Ahzab 33:53

[^17]: Surah Tahrim 66:1-2

[^18]: Surah Tahrim 66:3

[^19]: Surah Tahrim 66:4-5

[^20]: Surah Tahrim 66:10

[^21]: The author says: The Almighty Allah has in these verses explained
the infidelity and hypocrisy in these verses and their unity on
conspiring to harass the Prophet in such a way that it is not concealed
from any sane person. And due to the clarity of these verses their
infidelity is obvious. Zamakhshari and Fakhre Razi in spite of extreme
bias have said that the Almighty Allah has mentioned about the wife of
Firon in this verses and the verse after this, it is a great indication
about the two mothers of believers, who had united to harass the Prophet
and their exposure of the secret they were supposed to maintain. The
Almighty Allah has explained it in these examples that due to infidelity
and hypocrisy, relationship of lineage or marriage ties does not give
any advantage. If that relationship is even with the greatest creation,
who are prophets and messengers and due to having faith, relationship
with infidels does not create any harm even if that infidel was like
Firon. In the beginning of the Surah, the scolding that the Almighty
Allah has mentioned to the Holy Prophet (S) is obviously extremely kind:
That is, O my beloved, why do you, for the sake of those women, forsake
the pleasures that the Almighty Allah has made lawful for you? And the
Prophet’s forsaking of those pleasures, especially when there be some
exigency, was not unlawful. And neither that act of the Prophet can be
disobedience of Allah. And the scolding that appears in the verses is in
fact applicable to the same wives. As for their sake why should he
refrain from those pleasures? And their statement about the Caliphate of
Abu Bakr and Umar, if it is really a tradition there are many exigencies
in it, in which there is trial for them and an expression of their
infidelity and hypocrisy. And there are many exigencies, which cannot be
understood by the people, for example the purpose behind the creation of
Satan, presence of desires in human psychology and their control on evil
actions. And the believer, must in all matters, remain steadfast on
faith and he should not leave any scope for doubts on himself and must
not be caught in the instigations of Satan, and he must not deny
whatever he obtains from the Imams of religion and he should leave the
knowledge of those things to the Imams.

[^22]: The author says: Many examples of Ayesha’s cruelty and deviation
will be mentioned in the account of the Battle of Jamal, if Allah wills.


