Ancestry of the Holy Prophet (S) and Circumstances of His Forefathers
=====================================================================

Ancestry of The Holy Prophet (S)
--------------------------------

The well-known genealogy of the Holy Prophet (S) is as follows: Muhammad
(S), son of Abdullah son of Abdul Muttalib son of Hashim son of Abde
Manaf son of Qusayy son of Kilab son of Marrah son of Lavi son of Ghalib
son of Fahar son of Malik son of Nuzayr son of Kananah son of Khuzaimah
son of Madrakah son of Ilyas son of Mazar son of Nazar son of Maad son
of Adnan son of Ov son of Alyasi son of Alhameesa son of Salaman son of
Albant son of Hamal son of Qidar son of Ismail son of Ibrahim Khalil
(a.s.) son of Tarukh son of Nakhur son of Sharoogh son of Arghu son of
Faalagh son of Aabar son of Shaalakh son of Arfahshad son of Saam son of
Nuh son of Malik son of Matushalakh son of Akhnoon son of Alyaaraz son
of Mahlaail son of Feenaan son of Anoosh son of Sheeth son of His
Eminence, Adam (a.s.).

According to a narration of Lady Umm Salma, Adnan was son of Ov and he
of Zaid and he of As Saraa and he of Eraaqus Saraa. Umm Salma says that
Zaid is Hameesa and Saraa is Bant and that Eraaqus Saraa is Ismail
(a.s.). And according to the narration of Ibn Babawayh, Adnan is son of
Av and he of Awad and he of Zaid and he of Yaqdu and he of Hamesa and he
of Bant and he of Qidar bin Ismail.

According to the report of Ibn Abbas it is Adnan bin Ovbin and Bin Yasaa
bin Hamesa bin Yahsham bin Manjaz bin Sabugh bin Alhameesa bin Bant bin
Qidar bin Ismail bin Ibrahim bin Tarukh bin Matushalakh bin Saam bin Nuh
bin Malik bin Akhnoo bin Mahlaaeel bin Zabazar. And according to yet
another statement, Taarad and according to yet another Ayaad bin Qinan
bin Arad bin Anoosh bin Sheeth bin Adam.

What is more famous is that the name of His Eminence, Abdul Muttalib was
Shaibatul Hamd and the name of Hashim was Amr and that Abde Manaf was
Mughira and also that the name of Qasaa was Zaid, who was also called
Majma’ and the name of Quraish was Nasr.

There was some reason behind this naming of every one of them. It is
also said that the name of Arghu was Hud. Some have said his name was
Ghaabar and that Akhnu is His Eminence, Idris and that the mother of the
Holy Prophet (S) was Amina binte Wahab who was a son of Abde Manaf son
of Zuhra son of Kilab.

Creation of Effulgence (Noor)
-----------------------------

Ibn Babawayh (r.a.) has through his chains of narrators, narrated that
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: His Eminence, Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said
that the Almighty Allah created Prophet’s Noor 424000 years before the
creation of the heavens and the earth and Arsh (Throne) and Kursi and
Lauh and Qalam and Paradise and Hell and all prophets. Then from the
same Noor He created twelve veils, that is, the veil of Power
(*Qudrat*), the veil of Greatness (*Azmat*), the veil of Grace
(*Minnat*), the veil of Mercy (*Rahmat*), the veil of Bliss (*Saadat*),
the veil of Wonder (*Karamat*), the veil of Status (*Manzilat*), the
veil of Guidance (*Hidayat*), the veil of Prophethood (*Nubuwwat*), the
veil of Loftiness (*Rafat*), the veil of Awe (*Haibat*), and veil of
Intercession (*Shafat*). He kept this holy light in the veils of Might
for twelve thousand years. It was reciting, “Glory to the Lord, the
Almighty Allah,” therein.

Then He kept it in the veil of Power for eleven thousand years during
which it was reciting “Glory to be to the One Who knows the mysteries.”
He kept it in the Hijab of Minnat for ten thousand years during which it
used to recite, “Glory to be to the One Who is permanent and not
transient.” Then He kept it in the veil of Rahmat for nine thousand
years and it continued to recite, “Glory to be to the High and Exalted,”
and placed it in the veil of Saadat for eight thousand years when it
used to recite, “Glory to be to the One Who is eternal and not
temporary. Then He placed it in the veil of Karamat for seven thousand
years when it recited, “Glory to be to the One Who is self-sufficient
and not needy.”

Then He kept in the veil of Manzilat for six thousand years when it
continued to recite “Glory be to the one who is knowing and great”. Then
He kept it in the veil of Hidayat for five thousand years during the
course of which it used to recite “Glory be to the owner of the Great
Throne (Arsh).” Then He kept it in the veil of Nubuwwat for a period of
four thousand years when it recited the glory of the Lord in the words
“Glory be to the Lord of Might from what they attribute Him with.” Then
He kept it in the veil of Rafat for three thousand years when it praised
Him in the words “Glory be to the owner of the Kingdom and Celestial
world.”

Then He kept it in the Hijab of Haibat for two thousand years when it
said: “Glory be to Allah and praise be to Him.” Then He kept it in the
Hijab of Intercession for a thousand years when it recited: Glory be to
Allah the Great and praise be to him. Then He inscribed the name of the
Holy Prophet on Lauhe Mahfuz (Protected Tablet) and it continued to
shine there for four thousand years. Then Prophet’s name was displayed
on the Arsh and written on the leg of the Arsh where it continued to
dazzle for seven thousand years.

In this way that Noor continued to revolve with might, loftiness and
greatness until the Almighty Allah put it in the loins of Adam (a.s.).
Then it continued to be transferred until it reached the loins of Nuh
and thereafter till Allah placed it in the loin of Abdullah bin Abdul
Muttalib and decorated it with six wonders:

He gave it the shirt of His pleasure, beautified it with the chador of
awe, put the crown of guidance on its head, thus making it scale the
height and clothed it in attire of dignity, tied the belt of love, gave
it shoes of fear and hope and provided it with the staff of status.

Then sent a revelation to it: O Muhammad, go to the people and proclaim:
“There is no god but Allah and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah (S)
and ask them to believe in this proclamation. The aforesaid shirt of
Divine Pleasure had six basic jewels: Its length was of ruby, its
sleeves of pearl, its skirt of yellow flint glass, its neck of red coral
and slits of neck were made of the Almighty Allah’s radiance.

Allah accepted the repentance of Yaqub (a.s.) because of the same shirt,
he made him meet Yusuf due to its bliss, freed Yunus (a.s.) from the
belly of the fish by the wonder of the same shirt. The prophet got rid
of troubles and hardships due to it. It was but the same shirt of
Prophet Muhammad (S).

It is reported with reliable authorities that people asked Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) where was the Holy Prophet (S) before Allah created the
heaven and earth and light and darkness? He replied: “There were some
bodies of radiance revolving round the Divine Throne reciting Allah’s
praise 25000 years before Allah created sky, earth, light and darkness.
When Allah created Adam He placed us in his loins. He continued to
transfer us from holy loins to holy wombs until He appointed Muhammad
(S).”

It is narrated through many channels from Abdullah bin Abbas that the
Holy Prophet (S) said: “Allah created me and Ali from a light under the
Throne (Arsh) 12000 years before the creation of Adam. When He created
Adam, He placed that Noor in his loins. Thereafter that Noor continued
to be transferred from one loin to another until both of us were
separated in the loins of Abdullah and Abu Talib.”

It is narrated from Maaz bin Jabal that the Holy Prophet (S) said:
“Verily Allah created me, Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain (a.s.) seven
thousand years before the creation of the world.” Maaz asked: “O
Messenger of Allah (S), where were you at that time?” He replied, “We
were under the Divine Throne, praising, glorifying and hallowing Allah.”
It was asked: “What were you like?” He replied: “We were some bodies of
light. When Allah desired to form us, He turned us into a column of
light and put it in the loins of Adam (a.s.).

Thereafter He continued to transfer it from loins of fathers to wombs of
mothers, always keeping us away from impurity, polytheism and adultery,
which was being indulged in during the time of blasphemy. In every age
some groups used to be successful by putting faith in us. Some used to
remain hardhearted and unfortunate as they did not believe in us. When
we were brought to the loins of Abdul Muttalib that Noor was divided
into two. Allah put one half of it in the loins of Abdullah and the
other half in that of Abu Talib.

Thereafter my Noor was transferred to the womb of Amina and the other
entered the womb of Fatima binte Asad. I was born from Amina (r.a.) and
Ali (a.s.) from Fatima (r.a.). Then the entire pillar returned to me and
my daughter Fatima (r.a.) was born. Then that whole light was
transferred to Ali (a.s.) and Hasan (a.s.) and Husain (a.s.) were born
from those two parts of light. Similarly my Noor will continue to
revolve till Judgment Day in the descendants of Husain (a.s.) towards
the Imams (a.s.).

It is narrated from some channels from the Holy Prophet (S) that, “The
Almighty Allah created me, Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain (a.s.) before
creating Adam when there was neither Paradise nor Hell.” His Eminence,
Abbas asked, “O Messenger of Allah (S), how was your creation
initiated?” He replied, “When Allah intended to create us, He created a
Word, then a Light therefrom, then He created another Word and a Spirit
therefrom.

Then He amalgamated that Noor with that spirit and therefrom He created
Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain (a.s.). All of us were reciting Allah’s
greatness and praise. We were describing His Glory and Praise when no
one else was doing so. When Allah desired to create the whole of
creation He bifurcated my Noor and created the Arsh (Throne) therefrom.
Arsh is from my Noor and my Noor is from Allah’s Noor and (thus) my Noor
is greater than the Arsh. Then

He split the Noor of my brother Ali (a.s.) and created the angels
therefrom. The angels are from Ali’s Noor and Ali’s Noor is from the
Noor of Allah and (hence) Ali (a.s.) is greater than the angels.  
 Thereafter Allah bifurcated my daughter Fatima’s Noor and created the
heavens and the earth from it. The sky and earth are created from
Fatima’s Noor and Fatima’s Noor is from Allah’s Noor and (thus) Fatima
is greater that the skies and the earth.

He then divided my son, Hasan’s Noor and created the sun and the moon
therefrom. So the sun and the moon have come into existence from my son
Hasan’s Noor and Hasan’s Noor is created from Allah’s Noor and (so) it
is greater than sun and the moon. Thereafter Allah divided my son
Husain’s Noor and created Paradise and Houries (fairies). So Paradise
and Houries have been created from my son Husain’s Noor and my son
Husain’s Noor is from the Noor of Allah and (therefore) my son Husain
(a.s.) is better than Paradise and Houries.”

Abu Dharr has, through reliable chains narrated that the Holy Prophet
(S) said: “I and Ali have been created from one Noor and we were
glorifying Allah on the right side of the Arsh two thousand years before
the creation of Adam. When Allah created Adam, He put this Noor in his
loins. When he was allowed to dwell in Paradise we were in his loins.
Likewise when Nuh was riding the ship we were in his loins. So also when
Ibrahim (a.s.) was thrown into fire. The Almighty Allah transferred us
from holy loins into holy wombs until we reached the loins of Abdul
Muttalib.

Now the Almighty Allah divided that Noor into two, placed me in the
loins of Abu Talib. He granted me prophethood and gave eloquence and
courage to Ali and gave derivatives from His holy names to both of us.
The Almighty is the Lord of the Throne (Arsh) which is Mahmud and I am
Muhammad. Allah is High (Aalaa) and my brother is Ali. He designated me
for messengership and prophethood and appointed Ali for Wasayat
(guardianship) and Imamate and to command people with truth.

It is narrated through reliable chains from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that before the creation of the Universe, Allah had two radiances.
Angels looked at both these lights, found one to be original wherefrom a
ray was spreading, which was a part of it. They asked, “O Allah! What is
this Radiance? The Almighty Allah revealed that it is one of My Noors
the origin of which is messengership and branch is Imamate.

The Messengership is for Muhammad who is My servant and messenger; and
Imamate is for Ali who is Hujjat (proof) before the creation and the
caliph. Had I not created them, I would not have created anything.” In
another reliable tradition, the same Imam has said that the Almighty
Allah addressed the Holy Prophet (S): “O Muhammad, I created you and Ali
from one Noor, that is, I had created a bodiless spirit, before creating
the sky and earth and Arsh and sea. You were always hallowing and
praising Me and were continuously remembering Me with unique
attentiveness.

Then I amalgamated both the souls and that amalgamated soul was
remembering Me with piety and greatness and grandeur. Then I made two
parts of that soul. Then made two parts of the said two and thus were
created Muhammad and Ali and Hasan and Husain. Thereafter I created
Fatima from a single Noor in the form of a bodiless spirit. That same
Noor continued in Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).”

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition from His Eminence, Imam Muhammad
Taqi (a.s.) that the Almighty Allah was always One and Unique in His
Uniqueness. There was none except Him. Then He created Muhammad, Ali,
Fatima and after a thousand time periods created all things and made the
holy beings witness over their creation and made their obedience
incumbent on all creation and entrusted the administration of creation
to them. So they do not like or desire anything except what is desired
by Allah and have no intention of their own.

It is narrated through authentic chains that Imam Hasan (a.s.) said that
the Holy Prophet (S) said: “Behisht is a stream in Firdos, sweeter than
honey, softer than butter, cooler than ice and more fragrant than musk.
Therein is a kind of clay wherefrom the Almighty Allah created us and
our Shias.

One who is not created from that clay is neither from us nor is our
Shia.” It is mentioned in another tradition that he said: “I have heard
from my grandfather, the Holy Prophet (S) that he used to say: ‘I have
been created from the Noor of Allah and my Ahlul Bayt have been created
from my Noor and the lovers of Ahlul Bayt have been created from their
Noor. All other people are from hellfire.’”

It is narrated through authentic chains from Abu Saeed Khudri that a man
asked about the interpretation of the saying of the Almighty Allah to
Satan when the latter refused to prostrate before Adam (a.s.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَسْتَكْبَرْتَ أَمْ كُنتَ مِنَ الْعَالِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Are you proud or are you of the exalted ones?”***[^1]

The Holy Prophet (S) said: I, Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain were in the
enclosure of the Arsh and praising Allah. The angels were reciting
praise on hearing us, and this was two thousand years before the
creation of Adam. When Allah created Adam, He commanded the angels to
prostrate before him but we were not ordered to prostrate. All the
angels prostrated, but Iblis refused. At that Allah said to him: “You
have shown pride against prostrating; have you also became of those
exalted ones, that is of those whose names have been written in the
enclosure of the Arsh?”

According to a reliable tradition of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.): “The
Almighty Allah created Muhammad Mustafa (S) from a handful of clay which
was a pearl beneath the Arsh. From its leftover, He created us, Ahlul
Bayt. Then from the leftover of our essence were created our Shias.
Therefore their hearts are inclined to us and they love us and we are
truly kind to them just as a father is kind to his children. We are the
best for them and they for us. The Messenger of Allah (S) is the best of
all people for us and we are the best of all in the view of the Holy
Prophet (S).”

According to a reliable narration, Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.) is
reported to have said: “The Almighty Allah created eleven Imams from the
progeny of the Holy Prophet (S) and Ali (a.s.) and his progeny from His
Noor of Greatness. Those Noors were praising Allah in His radiation, and
worshipping 14000 years before He created all of His creation.” Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) is reported to have said that the Messenger of Allah
(S) said: “Fourteen thousand years before Allah created all of His
creation, He created fourteen Noors which were our souls.”

People asked: “O Messenger of Allah (S)! Who are those fourteen?” He
replied: “Muhammad, Ali, Fatima, Hasan, Husain and nine sons from their
progeny, the last of whom is Qaim (a.s.) who will remain unseen to
people’s eyes. Then he will appear and kill Dajjal and purify the earth
from every oppression.[^2]

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that: “The Almighty Allah, presented the holy spirit of Prophet Muhammad
(S) to the spirits of all the prophets 2000 years before the creation of
universe. The Holy Prophet (S) invited them to worship Only One Allah
and to obey Him and promised Paradise to the followers of prophets and
warned all those who oppose them of hellfire.”

In another reliable tradition, Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “I am a
slave of Allah and brother of the Messenger of Allah (S) and am a
constant attester from the very first day. Verily I believed in the
Messenger of Allah (S) and attested him when the soul of Adam was not
yet connected to his body. Also I am the first to testify for the
Prophet among this Ummah. Therefore we are the first among both the
earlier and the later.”

It is narrated through reliable chains that people asked the Holy
Prophet (S) why he was given first preference among all prophets? And
how did he get greatness over all when he was sent last? The Holy
Prophet (S) replied: “I am the first to admit to the lordship of Lord
Creator when Allah took confessions and promises from all the prophets
and made them witness to His Self saying: “Am I not your Lord?”[^3] And
all replied: “Why not?” It is verily You. Because of this, I gained the
first position among the believers of Allah’s Lordship and Divinity.

In another reliable tradition the same Imam is reported to have said:
“When the Almighty Allah created the souls and spread them before Him
addressing with the question: ‘Who is your Lord?’ before all others the
Messenger of Allah (S), Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and the pious Imams from
their progeny said: ‘You are our Lord.’ Then Allah inserted His
knowledge and religion into them and told the angels: “They are bearers
of My knowledge and religion and are My trustees in My creations. My
knowledge should be obtained from them.”

Then, addressing the progeny of Adam, said: “Admit to the Lordship of
Allah and the obedience of this group, their love and Wilayat
(guardianship).” They responded: “Doubtlessly, O Lord, we admit.” Then
Allah told the angels: “All of you be witness.” The angels replied: “We
witness,” so that none may say tomorrow that he did not know.

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: “By Allah, the prophets have been, on the
very first day of *‘Alast’* (as mentioned above), emphatically asked to
confess belief in our guardianship.

Shaykh Abdul Hasan Bikri has in *Kitabul Anwar* mentioned with his
evidence and through Abdullah bin Abbas and a group of companions that
when Allah intended to create Muhammad (S) He told the angels that He
wanted to create a creation and give it greatness over all other
creations and make it better than all the earlier and the later people
and also the intercessor on Judgment Day. Had he not been there, I would
not have created Paradise and Hell.

So realize his status and consider him prestigious for my honor and
appreciate his greatness because of My Greatness. The angels replied: “O
our Lord, we slaves cannot have any objection to our Lord and Master. We
have heard and we have obeyed.”

Then the Almighty Allah commanded angel Jibraeel and upholders of Arsh
to bring the radiant earth from the place of the grave of His Eminence,
Jibraeel took that earth to the sky and dropped it in the spring of
Salsabeel until it turned into a white pearl. Then they were dropping it
daily in one of the canals of Behisht and presenting it to the angels.

When angels saw that Noor, they welcomed it with full honor, respect and
salutations. Every group of angels before whom it was taken used to
admit its greatness and grandeur and to say: O Lord, if You command us
to prostrate before it we would do so. It is narrated from Amirul
Momineen (a.s.): “When there was nothing except the Almighty Allah, the
very thing which He created was the Noor of His beloved Muhammad Mustafa
(S). Allah created it 424000 years ahead of the creation of water, Arsh,
Kursi, sky, earth, Lauh, Qalam, Paradise, Hell, angels, Adam and Hawwa.

When the Noor of our Prophet (S) was created, it stood before the
Almighty Allah praising Him. Allah used to look at it and say: “It is
only you that is the aim of My act of creation of the universe. It is
you, the intender of good and well-being and you are My selection in My
creation. I swear by My Greatness and Might and say that had you not
been in My Will. I would not have created the celestial orbits. I will
love who loves you and I will be the enemy of the one who is inimical
towards you.”

(Upon this) the Noor of the Prophet (S) brightened further and its ray
rose up. Then Allah created twelve veils from that radiance: veil of
Might, veil of Greatness, veil of Power/honor, veil of Awe, veil of
Dominance, veil of Mercy, veil of Prophethood, veil of Divinity, veil of
Status, veil of Loftiness, veil of Bliss, and veil of Intercession. Then
He put the Noor of Muhammad in veil of Might where it remained for
twelve thousand years reciting “Glory to the Highest of the High.”

Then it entered veil of Greatness and recited: “Glory to be to the One
cognizant of the mysteries and secrets,” for eleven thousand years.
Likewise it went on reciting “Glory to be to the Master and Bestower,”
for ten thousand years in the veil of Awe, “Glory to be to the Noble and
Majestic One,” for 8000 years in veil of Dominance, “Glory be to the
Lord of the Mighty Throne.” for 7000 years in veil of Mercy, “Glory be
to the Lord of Might from what they attribute Him with,” for 6000 years
in veil of Prophethood, “Glory be to the greatest of the greatest.” for
5000 years in veil of Divinity, “Glory to the Knowing and the Noble” for
4000 years in veil of Status, “Glory be to the owner of the Kingdom and
celestial world.” for 3000 years in veil of Loftiness, “Glory to be to
the One Who makes things extinct and Himself never wanes,” for 2000
years in veil of Bliss, “Glory be to Allah and praise be to Him. Glory
be Allah the Great.” for 1000 years in veil of Intercession.

Then Allah made twenty rivers from that Noor. Every river had some
sciences known to none but Allah. Then He dropped the Noor of Prophet
Muhammad (S) into those rivers; that is the rivers of esteem, patience,
courtesy, humility, concurrence, loyalty, forbearance, virtue, piety,
penitence, function, addition, guidance, wisdom and modesty; that is in
all the twenty rivers. Finally when it came out of the last river, Allah
said to it: ‘My dear, the best of all Messengers! My first creation and
My last Messenger! I have made you intercessor on Judgment Day.’

That brilliant Noor fell down in prostration. When it raised its head
140000 drops dripped from that Noor. Allah created a prophet from every
one of those drops whose Noors were revolving round the Noor of the Holy
Prophet (S) saying: “Glory to be to the One Who is knowing without any
ignorance, glory to be to the One Who is forbearing and not hasty, glory
to be to the One Who is self-sufficient and not needful.”

Then Allah addressed all of them asking: Do you recognize Me? The Noor
of Muhammad (S) responded first of all saying: “You are the Lord, there
is no god except You, You are only one and there is no partner unto You,
You are the Lord of lords and the King of the Kings.” Then Allah said:
“You are My chosen, My friend and the best of all Ummahs.” Then from the
Noor of the Holy Prophet (S), Allah created an essence and divided it
into two. He threw a look of awe at one so it turned into sweet water.

Then He looked at the other part with love and created Divine Throne
from it and placed it on water. Then He created Kursi, Qalam (pen) from
the Noor of Arsh, Lauh (tablet) from the Noor of Kursi, Qalam (pen) from
the Noor of Lauh and revealed to pen to write His Oneness. So, hearing
the revelation, it remained spellbound for one thousand years. When it
recovered, it said: O Lord! What should I write?

Came the command: Write: There is no god except Allah and Muhammad is
the Messenger of Allah (S). Hearing the name of Muhammad (S) the pen
fell down in prostration and said: Glory be to the One and the Forceful.
Then raising its head it wrote the two phrases of witness and said: “My
Lord! Who is Muhammad?

You have connected his name with Your Name and joined his remembrance
with Your remembrance?” Allah revealed: O Pen! (Qalam) Had he not been I
would have created neither you nor the universe. He is the herald of
salvation and warner of punishment. He is the luminous lamp. He is the
intercessor and he it is who is My friend.” Upon this the pen zoomed
with a feeling of sweetness of the name of Prophet Muhammad (S) and
said: “Peace be upon you, O Messenger of Allah (S).” The Holy Prophet
(S) responded: “And peace be upon you from me and the mercy of Allah and
His blessings.”

Ever since that day it became incumbent to salute in these words it
being the way of the Prophet and replying to it an obligatory duty. Then
The Almighty Allah ordered the Pen: “Write down My decree and destiny
which I will go on creating till Judgment Day.” Thereafter Allah created
some angels so that they may go on invoking blessings on Muhammad (S)
and his progeny (a.s.) until Judgment Day and seek pardon for their
Shias. Then Allah created Paradise from the Noor of Muhammad and
beautified it with four virtues of reverence, dignity, generosity and
honesty and reserved it for His friends and obedients.

Then He created the sky from the smoke that rose from the water and
created earths from its foam. The earths were then trembling. So He
created mountains to make then still. Then He created an angel who held
the earth. Then He created a big rock whereupon the angel rested his
leg. Then He created a very big cow and placed that rock on her back.
And He created a very huge fish. The cow stood on its back. That fish is
on water, the water on air and the air is in darkness. Whatever is
beneath darkness is not known to anyone but Allah. Then He brightened
the Arsh with the Noor of Grace and the Noor of Justice. He created
intelligence, knowledge, forbearance and generosity from grace.

He created fear and panic from intelligence, consent and happiness from
knowledge, affection from forbearance and love from generosity. He mixed
up all these virtues in the essence of Muhammad (S) and his progeny.
Thereafter He created from the Ummah of Muhammad (S) the spirits of the
faithful. Then he created the sun, moon, stars, night, day, darkness and
all angels from the Noor of Muhammad (S). He kept the holy Noor of
Muhammad still for 72000 years. Then He went on transferring it from the
earth for making the body of Adam (a.s.).

At that time the cursed Iblis rushed to earth and told it that “Allah
wants to create a creation from you and then to punish it with fire. If
the angels come to you to take dust tell them that I seek Allah’s refuge
that something might be taken from me and then it might be thrown in
fire.” So when angel Jibraeel descended, the earth sought refuge of
Allah. So he (Jibraeel) returned and said: “My Lord! The earth sought
Your shelter so I pitied it.” Likewise came Mikaeel and Israfeel and
they also returned. Then Allah sent Israel. The earth as before, sought
refuge from him too. But Israel said: “I also seek Allah’s refuge from
disobeying Him.”

Then he gathered some earth from above and below and from every level of
earth white and black and red and soft and hard all kinds of dust.
Therefore the colors and morals of the children of Adam differed from
one another. Allah asked Israel: “Why did you not show mercy to earth as
others had?” Israel replied: “My Lord! Your obedience was better than
having mercy on it.”

Then Allah revealed: “I intend to create a creation from this earth
wherein there will be prophets and good people and so also hard-hearted
and bad ones also. And I have appointed you for the task of retrieving
the souls of them all.” Then Allah ordered Jibraeel to bring the white
and shining clay which is of the last prophet of the last age and which
is the origin of the entire creation. So Jibraeel came with all the
angels including cherubim, clean, the praise chanters to the holy grave
of the Prophet and amalgamated it with the waters of Tasnim and homage,
honor, creation, mercy, happiness and pardon.

Then Allah mixed affection with His Eminence’s chest, generosity with
his hands, patience and confidence with heart, chastity with private
parts, dignity with legs and fragrance with breaths, then mixed that
clay with the clay of Adam. When Adam’s body became ready, He revealed
to the angels: “I will create a man from clay. When I blow the spirit
into it all of you must prostrate before him.” The angels put the body
of Adam in Paradise and waited for Allah’s command so that they may
prostrate before it.

Then Allah ordered the soul of Adam to enter his body. Seeing it narrow
the spirit disliked entering it. So Allah ordered: “Enter it with
dislike and come out with dislike.” The spirit entered and reached the
eyes. Adam (a.s.) was seeing his body and hearing the hallowing of
angels. What it reached his brain, Adam sneezed. Allah made him speaking
so he said ‘Praise be to Allah’. It was the first word uttered by Adam
(a.s.).

Allah said through revelation: “May Allah have mercy on you. O Adam! I
created you for mercy and have reserved My Mercy for you and your
progeny whenever they also, utter like you.” That is why it has become a
tradition to pray for one who sneezes and no other deed is as much
disliked by Satan as a prayer for one who sneezes.

Then Adam looked up and observed that: ‘There is no god except Allah and
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah (S)’ was written on the Arsh. Names
of the members of the Holy Progeny were also written there. Then the
spirit reached his (Adam’s) forelegs. He intended to get up even before
it reached his feet. That is why Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُلِقَ الْإِنسَانُ مِنْ عَجَلٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Man is created of haste.”***[^4]

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the spirit of Adam
remained in his head for a hundred years, then for another 100 years in
his chest, for 100 years in his back, for 100 years in his thighs, for
100 years in his forelegs, for 100 years in his feet. When Adam stood up
Allah commanded the angels to prostrate before him. It was a Friday
afternoon. The angels remained prostrated till Asr. Then Adam heard a
voice chanting Allah’s praise and glory from the rear like songs of
birds. He asked: “My Lord! What is this voice?”

Came the reply: “O Adam! It is praise recitation of Muhammad the Arabi
(S) who is the best among the earliest and latest. Lucky is he who obeys
and follows him and ill luck for one that opposes him. Therefore, O
Adam! take this oath of Mine and never entrust it except to the pure
wombs of chaste women and clean loins of pious men.”

Adam submitted: “My Lord, you have multiplied my honor, dignity and
beauty because of this newborn. Then Allah created Hawwa from a part of
Adam’s body and put him in a deep slumber. When he woke up he saw Hawwa
beside his head. He asked her: “Who are you?” She replied: “I am Hawwa.
Allah created me for you.” He exclaimed: “How beautiful you are!” Then
Allah revealed to Adam: “This is My slave girl and you are My slave. I
have created for a place called Paradise. So consider Me Holy in every
respect and go on praising Me. O Adam! Ask for the hand of Hawwa from Me
and pay her dower.”

Adam asked: “My Lord! What is her dower?” Came the response: “Invoke
blessings on Muhammad and his progeny (a.s.) ten times.” Adam replied:
“My Lord! I will be grateful to you till I am alive for this blessing,
and will continue to recite Your Glory. Then Allah gave Hawwa to Adam in
marriage. The Qadi was the Creator Himself, the one who solemnized the
marriage was Jibraeel (a.s.), the witnesses were angels having nearness
to Allah.

Then the angels lined up behind Adam (a.s.). Adam (a.s.) asked: “My
Lord! Why have these angels stood behind me?” Allah said: “So that they
could see the radiance of Muhammad (S) which is in your loins.” He
requested: “My Lord! transfer this Noor from my loins (behind) to my
front so that the angels may stand in front of me.” Then the angels
stood in front of him.

Then Adam (a.s.) requested to Allah: “Please place the Noor at a point
where they too can see it.” So Allah put that Noor in Adam’s forefinger,
and the Noor of Ali (a.s.) in his middle finger, the Noor of Fatima
(s.a.) in the adjoining finger and the Noor of Hasan (a.s.) in his
little finger and the Noor of Husain (a.s.) in his thumb. The Noor began
to shine like the sun in the hand of Adam (a.s.) and the heavens and the
earth and the Arsh and the Kursi and the outskirts of the Glory,
everything became radiant by that Noor.

Whenever Adam (a.s.) desired to have intercourse with Hawwa, he used to
ask her to make an ablution and he too made himself clean and fragrant
with scents and used to tell her: “Allah will give this Noor to you and
this is a trust of Allah and a contract of binding nature.” That Noor
remained in the fingers of Adam (a.s.) until Sheeth (a.s.) came in the
womb of Hawwa (a.s.) when the Noor took place in the forehead of Hawwa
(a.s.) and the angels used to congratulate Hawwa (a.s.).

When Sheeth (a.s.) was born, the Noor of His Eminence, (S) came to his
forehead. Then Jibraeel (a.s.) drew a curtain between him and Hawwa
(a.s.) and made it invisible to his eyes. When he became adult, Adam
(a.s.) called him and said: “My son! I may shortly depart from you. So
come near me so that I may take from you an oath and promise as Allah
had taken from me.” Then Adam (a.s.) raised his head to the sky. Allah
knew his intention and ordered the angels to stop hallowing His Glory
and to close their wings.

The residents of Paradise became attentive from their high abodes. All
the rivers of Paradise became still, in short all became attentive to
hear the voice of Adam (a.s.). Allah revealed to him: “Say whatever you
want so say.” Adam said: “My Lord! O One, bestower of life and light to
all! O creator of the sun and moon! You created me as You pleased and
entrusted this holy Noor to me wherein I noticed blessings and wonders
and then that Noor was transferred to my son, Sheeth (a.s.). Now I
desire to take allegiance from him as You had taken from me and I make
You witness to it.”

Came the voice from Allah: “Yes, O Adam! Take the oath of allegiance
from your son, Sheeth and make Jibraeel, Mikaeel and all angels witness
it.” Then Allah ordered Jibraeel who came down together with seventy
thousand angels on earth. All of them carried a flag of praise (*Liwaul
Hamd*). Jibraeel had, in his hands, a piece of silk and a pen created by
Allah with His power. Then Jibraeel (a.s.) turned to Adam (a.s.) and
said: “Allah has sent greetings to you and ordered you to write down a
document of Caliphate and prophethood and the oath and make Jibraeel,
Mikaeel and all angels witness to it.”

The document was written and Jibraeel (a.s.) put a seal on it and gave
it to Sheeth (a.s.). Then they dressed him in two red clothes the
brightness of which was more than the sun and its color was prettier
than that of the sky. Both the clothes were neither cut nor sewn, rather
Allah said ‘Be’ and they were. The Noor of Muhammad (S) continued to
shine on the forehead of Sheeth all the time. He married a Hourie
Mahadila Baiza. Jibraeel (a.s.) solemnized her marriage with Sheeth
(a.s.).

When he mated with her, Anush came into her womb. At that moment a
caller called out: “O Baiza! Be pleased and happy. Allah has entrusted
to you the Noor of one who is the best among all the earliers and the
latters and who is the leader of all Prophets.” When Anush was born and
became adult Sheeth (a.s.) entrusted the oath to him and the Noor of
Muhammad (S) passed on to his son Qinan then from him to Mahlail then to
Bazu then to Akhnuh who is also called Idris (a.s.). Then from Idris
(a.s.) to Matushalakh and Idris (a.s.) took oath from him.

Then it passed on to Nuh (a.s.). From Nuh to Saam, from Saam to his son
Arfahshad from him to his son Aabir then to Qaale and from him to Arghu
then from him to Shaarigh then to Takhur and from him towards Tarukh and
from him to Ibrahim (a.s.), then to Ismail (a.s.) from him to Qidar from
him to Hamsee then to Bant then to Sahab ten to Awad then to Adnan then
to Maad then to Nazar then to Maghir then to Ilyas (a.s.) then to
Madraka then to Khazima then to Kanan then to Qassa then to Lavil then
to Ghalib, then to Fahar then to Abde Manaf and therefrom to Hashim who
was called Amr Ula.

The Noor of His Eminence, (S) was radiating from him so much so that
when he was entering Masjidul Haraam, the Kaaba used to brighten up due
to it. Always light used to rise up to the sky from his face. When His
Eminence’s grandmother, Atika was born, she had two strings of curly
hair on both sides as were for Ismail (a.s.) wherefrom the radiance used
to rise to the sky. The Meccans were astonished to observe this. Arab
tribes came to Mecca from all sides, soothsayers arose, idols began to
sing songs of the Prophet’s glory.

Stones by which Hashim (a.s.) used to pass were, by the might of Allah,
exclaiming: “O Hashim! Congratulations to you. Very soon a son will be
born in your progeny who will have a very great status in the view of
Allah and who will be honored very much by the entire creation, that is
the last Prophet, Muhammad (S).”

When Hashim was passing through a dark place that place used to brighten
up with the Noor of the Holy Prophet (S). When the time of death of Abde
Manaf arrived, he took oath from Hashim that he would not transfer the
Noor of the Holy Prophet (S) to any woman but the one who should be a
believer, pious and chaste.

Hashim agreed. The kings of that time wanted to give their daughters in
marriage to Hashim and they were sending lots of money and wealth to him
so that he may agree to marry their daughter, Hashim used to come to the
Kaaba every day, circumambulate it seven times and clung to the curtain.
Whoever approached him used to honor him. He was clothing the naked,
feeding the hungry and solving the problems of people, repaying debts of
the indebted and paying other’s blood money. His door was never closed
for anybody.

Whenever he gave a feast he made it so vast that invitees could take
even for their animals and birds. Thus he became famous for his kindness
all around and the kingdom of Mecca became assured for him. Keeping the
keys of the Kaaba, feeding the pilgrims, looking after the Zamzam well,
the trusteeship of Kaaba, hosting of Hajis and all the affairs of Mecca
were entrusted to him.

He inherited the Alam of Nazar, the bow of Ismail (a.s.), the shirt of
Ibrahim (a.s.), the shoes of Sheeth (a.s.) and the ring of Nuh (a.s.).
He accorded respect to Hajis and fulfilled their needs. When the moon of
Zilhajj was sighted, he gathered people and addressed them saying: “O
people, you have been granted safety by Allah. You are the neighbors of
this holy house. People come to visit this house in this season.

They are the guests of Allah. Guests are more respectable than others.
Allah has favored you with greatness. Very soon pilgrims will arrive
here from far off places through every vale and depression whose hair
will be in disarray and whose bodies full of dust. So host them and be
ready to assist them in every manner so that Allah may endear you.”

Responding to such advices, leaders of Quraish used to offer big amounts
to Hashim (a.s.). He prepared a big leather basin and filled it with
Zamzam water. He used to host pilgrims from the 7th of Zilhajj and send
them food etc. to Mina and Arafat.

One year brought a drought to Mecca. People had nothing to spare for the
Hajis. Hashim (a.s.) had some camels which he sent to Syria and sold
them out. He spent that income for feasting the pilgrims and did not
keep even a meal for himself. This made his generosity well known
throughout the world.

When Najjashi, the king of Abyssinia and the emperor of Rova heard about
this bravery and generosity they wrote a letter to Hashim requesting him
to marry their girls and sent him many gifts hoping that perhaps the
effulgence of Muhammad might be transferred to them, because the
soothsayers and monks had informed them that the Noor radiating on the
forehead of Hashim is the light of the last Prophet (S).

But Hashim (a.s.) did not accept and he married a chaste woman of his
community who bore sons and daughters. Names of the boys were Asad,
Mazar, Amr and Saifee and of the girls Sa’sah, Ruqaiyyah, Khalawah and
Sha’sha. But Prophet’s Noor continued to shine on his forehead as
before. So he was gloomy. One night he was circumambulating the Kaaba,
when he earnestly prayed to Allah to grant him a son soon who may
possess the Noor of the Holy Prophet (S).

He fell asleep praying and dreamt that an announcer was calling upon him
to ask for the hand of Salma, daughter of Amr as she was clean, pure and
sinless and to give her a rich dowry. No woman can be compared to her.
“A son whom she will bear for you will possess the Noor of the leader of
the Prophets.” Hashim woke up, gathered his cousins and his brother,
Muttalib and described his dream to them.

Muttalib said: “My brother, the woman you named belongs to the tribe of
Bani Najjar and she is famous for her chastity, modesty and beauty. Her
tribesmen are also generous, pious and hospitable. But you surpass them
in grace and parentage. All kings desire to become related to you. Yet
if you so desire, permit us to go with a proposal from you.”

Hashim replied: “A need is fulfilled only by the efforts of one who is
needy. I intend to go for trade to Syria and myself put a proposal on
route.” Then he prepared for the journey and went to Medina with his
brother, Muttalib and the sons of his uncle because Bani Najjar resided
there. When he entered Medina, the Noor on his forehead brightened
entire Medina and all the buildings of the city shone up.

Seeing this all the residents themselves advanced towards him and asked
him who he was, saying that they had never before seen anyone better
than him in beauty, especially due to the radiance that had brightened
the entire world. Muttalib replied: “We are residents of the House of
Allah and of the holy sanctuary of Almighty Allah. We are the offspring
of Lavi bin Ghalib and this is our brother, Hashim bin Abde Manaf.

We have approached you for his marriage. All of you know very well that
the kings all around us have proposed to us for his marriage but he has
denied. He himself has desired to ask for the hand of Salma from you.”
Salma’s father was also present in the gathering. He came forward and
said: “You gentlemen possess honor, respect, glory, credit, generosity,
kindness and magnanimity and the modest maiden whose hand you desire is
my daughter who herself is the owner of her wish. She has, yesterday
gone with the women of our tribe to Bani Qainqaa.

If you gentlemen camp here, it will be better and very kind of you. If
you intend to proceed towards them it is up to you. Now please let us
know who from you intends to hold her hand.” They replied: “It is this
gentleman from whose forehead this radiance is glowing. He is the lamp
of the House of Allah who removes all darkness. He is very kind and
generous. He is Hashim bin Abde Manaf.”

The father of Salma said: “Very good. His attention has given us honor
and status and we feel exalted and honored. We are inclined to him more
than he is to us. But she owns her wish herself. We shall accompany you
to her. But, O the best of visitors and O tribe of Nazar, wait here for
the time being.”

In short they made them stay there with much honor and respect and
hosted them very nicely with the best of feasts. They slaughtered a
number of camels and prepared many dishes for them. All the people of
the city and the tribesmen of Aws and Khazraj began to arrive to observe
the radiance and beauty of Hashim (a.s.). When Rabbis saw Hashim (a.s.)
they felt the world had become dark because they had read in Torah that
the said Noor was the sign of the prophet of the last age.

They began to weep and express grief. On inquiry they replied that it
was the sign of a man who will soon appear and will shed the blood (of
his enemies). Angels will help him in battles. His name in your book is
Mahi and this radiance shows the same Noor. All Jews wept hearing this
and became jealous of Hashim (a.s.). From that very day they decided to
extinguish the Prophet’s Noor.

Next morning Hashim (a.s.) ordered his companions to adorn costly
attire, put helmets on their heads, cover their chests with amour and to
raise the flag of Nazar. Thereafter people surrounded Hashim (a.s.) like
a moon surrounded by stars. Slaves were in the fore and followers
behind. With such pomp they proceeded to Bani Qainqaa.

The father of Salma, along with elders of his community and a big group
of Jews, accompanied them. When they approached the bazar, all who had
come there for business left their jobs and came forward to observe the
elegance of Hashim (a.s.). People rushed to him from all sides. Salma
too, stood in their midst, observing the holy beauty of Hashim (a.s.).

In the meanwhile her father approached her and said: “I congratulate you
for good news that will make you very glad and honorable.” She asked
what it was and her father said: “Salma! This sun of honor and moon of
generosity whom you are observing has come to ask for your hand. He is
famous all around for his kindness, generosity, chastity and
capability.” Salma, with a profound feeling of modesty, looked at her
toes.

Her father understood her consent and happiness. On this side, Hashim
ordered the putting up of a red silk pavilion and provided curtains all
around and took his seat therein. Men from the bazar came from all sides
to inquire what the matter was. After knowing the fact they became
extremely jealous because Salma was unique in her beauty, modesty,
chastity and morality. At that moment Satan appeared before Salma in the
form of an old man and said: “I am one of the companions of Hashim and
want to give you some good advice with sympathy.

This man, though he is very handsome and beautiful, is a great
womanizer. Even if he loves a woman he does not keep her for more than
two months. He has married many women and divorced them. He has nothing
like courage and bravery. He is very timid and fearful.” Salma replied:
“If what you have said is true I will never look at him even if the
forts of Khyber are filled with gold and silver for me.”

Iblis felt relieved on hearing this. Then again he came to Salma in the
form of yet another companion of Hashim (a.s.) and said false things
like before. Then he came again in the form of a third man and talked
similar nonsense. When Salma’s father arrived there he found Salma in a
gloomy mood. He asked why she was so unhappy, saying: “This is the
moment of extreme pleasure as you have been given great honor and
grace.”

Salma said: “Father, you are giving me to a man who has no liking for
women; who is swift in divorcing and is fearful in battles.” Her father
laughed and said: “This man does not possess the qualities mentioned by
you. People mention him as an example of generosity and goodness. He is
called Hashim because he hosts many guests. He has never divorced a
woman.

His bravery and courage is exemplary. No one can equal him in manners
and sweetness of tongue. One who has spoken ill of him is surely the
Satan.” Next day, when Salma looked at Hashim (a.s.) she became restless
because of the Noor shining on his forehead and sent to him a message
that he may forward his proposal the following day and that he may not
refuse any amount of dower demanded by her relatives telling him that
she herself would help him in that matter.

The next day Hashim (a.s.) arrived at pavilion of Salma’s father along
with his companions. Hashim, Muttalib and his brothers all sat in the
front portion of the pavilion. All in the audience looked attentively at
the elegance of Hashim (a.s.) when Muttalib started the dialogue. He
said: “O respected gentlemen having honor and grace! We belong to the
House of Allah and are residents of Mecca and possessors of great
symbols.

Waves and waves of Pilgrims come to us. You too know our value and
status and you also recognize the Noor of Muhammad (S) which Allah has
bestowed upon us. We are the sons of Lavi bin Ghalib and the said Noor
has reached us from Adam (a.s.) to our father Abde Manaf and therefrom
it is transferred to my brother Hashim (a.s.), now the Almighty Allah
has sent this blessing towards you and we have come to you with a
proposal for our gracious son.”

In response, Salma’s father, Amr said: “We greet you with respect and we
have listened to you and have accepted your invitation. But we are bound
by our ancient practice of demanding a big dower for the great thing
proposed by you, and desired by you.” Muttalib said: “We offer one
hundred black-eyed and red hair camels as dower.”

Iblis the cursed was also present in that gathering. He approached
Salma’s father and said weeping that the dowry must be much more than
that. So Salma’s father said: “I add a thousand mithqal[^5] gold.” Satan
again signaled for more and Salma’s father said: “O young man! It is
also less.” Muttalib said: “All right, I add a donkey load of amber, ten
pairs of Egyptian white clothing as well as ten pairs of Iraqi suits.”

Satan signaled again. Salma’s father said: “You have done good and come
nearer to our wish. Just add something more by way of grace.” Muttalib
said: “I also give five slave girls for your service.” Satan instigated
still for more dowry and Salma’s father said: “Whatever you give will be
returned to you.” Muttalib said: “I add ten Awqiya[^6] musk and five
measures of camphor. Are you happy now?” Satan again tried to create
hesitation so Salma’s father scolded him saying: “Old man, go away from
here. You have made me ashamed in this grand gathering.” Muttalib too
scolded him and drove him out of the pavilion.

The Jews also walked out with gloom and disappointment. Thereafter the
leader of the Jews told Salma’s father: “That old man (Satan) is one of
the wisest men of Syria and Iraq. Why did you not act according to his
advice? We are not pleased to give away our daughter to a man who is
poorer than poorest in our land.” Upon this the four hundred Jews who
were there drew out their swords. On the other hand, forty men, leaders
of the residents of the holy sanctuary who were with Hashim (a.s.) also
took out their swords.

Muttalib attacked the leader of the Jews and Hashim (a.s.) turned to
Iblis who tried to run away but was caught, Hashim raised him up and
then dashed him on the ground. When the Noor of the Holy Prophet (S)
fell on him he screamed and slipped from Hashim’s hand like wind. Then
he saw Muttalib. He had cut the commander of the Jews into two. Then
Hashim (a.s.) and his companions killed many Jews.

When the news reached Medina, men and women ran towards the scene. When
seventy Jews were slain, the remaining ran away and their enmity to the
Holy Prophet (S) doubled. Hashim (a.s.) said: “My dream has come true.”
Salma’s father said: “Now let it go and do not turn a happy occasion
into a gloomy one.” Upon this Hashim (a.s.) returned to his pavilion and
arranged for the Walima feast and fed all the guests and audience.

Then Salma’s father went to her and said: “Did you now see the bravery
of Hashim (a.s.)? Had I not requested them to stop, none of the Jews
would have remained alive.” Salma said: “Dear father! Do whatever is in
my interest and never mind the talks of mean-minded.” Then Salma’s
father came to the chiefs of Mecca and said: “O chiefs of House of
Allah! Remove gloom and unhappiness from your hearts. My daughter is a
gift for you.

I have no desire for money or wealth or property.” Muttalib said: “We
shall add even to whatever I have said (about the dower),” and asked
Hashim: “O brother! Are you pleased with whatever I have averred?” He
replied: “Yes.” Then all shook hands with one another and Salma’s father
showered a lot of wealth, amber, musk and camphor on Hashim and Muttalib
and their companions. Then all returned to Medina with goods.

There the diamond of the Abde Manaf mated with the pearl in the shell of
nobility. After some days when Salma knew all about the virtues of
Hashim (a.s.) she returned everything with some addition to whatever she
had received from him as dowry. That very night Abdul Muttalib’s chaste
sperm like a precious pearl settled in the pure shell of Salma and the
effulgence of Muhammad began to shine on the forehead of Salma.

All the residents of Medina congratulated Salma for this great
gracefulness. Her beauty and radiance redoubled due to this bright Noor.
Women of Medina used to come to her to observe her beauty and be
astonished. All the stones and pebbles she used to pass greeted her
saying: Salam and congratulations. Very often she heard words like:
Peace be on you, O best of the humans. She used to tell these wonderful
happenings to Hashim (a.s.) but concealed them from others.

One night Salma heard the announcement of an announcer addressing her:
Congratulations! Allah has given you such a nice son who is better than
all the residents of cities and villages. Thereafter Salma did not allow
Hashim to have intercourse with her. Thereafter Hashim stayed in Medina
for some days and then departed from there saying: O Salma! I have
entrusted to you the trust which Allah had entrusted to Adam (a.s.) and
which was entrusted by Adam (a.s.) to Sheeth (a.s.).

Thus the religious chiefs continued to transfer it from one to another
until this great Noor came to us which made us more graceful. Now, by
the command of Allah, I have entrusted it to you and I want from you an
assurance and promise that you will protect it. If it comes to life in
my absence, let it be dearer to you than your eyes and your life. Keep
it hidden from people as far as possible, because there are many who are
jealous of and inimical to it, especially the Jews whose enmity is older
and apparent.

In case I do not return and if you hear the news of my death, leave no
stone unturned in protecting and nourishing him. When he becomes a
major, send him to the House of Allah. And do not keep away from his
uncle because the Sanctuary of Allah is our place of honor and
prestige.” Salma said: “I have accepted all your words from the depth of
my heart but I am very much grieved due to your separation. I pray to
Allah: May He bring you back to me soon.”

Thereafter Hashim (a.s.) gathered his brothers and relatives and said:
“My dear brothers and relatives! Death is a path which no one can ever
escape. Now I am departing from you and do not know whether I will
return to you or not. So I tell you by way of my will that you should
always remain united. Do not get disintegrated as it would dishonor you
because, besides the kings and others also are envious of you. I make my
brother, Muttalib my caliph over you because he the dearest to me in the
world.

If you are to accept my will, you must consider him your leader and
entrust the keys of Holy Kaaba and the Zamzam well and my grandfather
Nazar’s flag and whatever lucky things have reached us from the prophets
to him so that you will be successful and lucky. My second wish is that
you must know that the son who is now in the womb of Salma is very
graceful and honorable. Take the utmost care of him. In short, do not
ignore any of my words.”

They responded: “We have heard you and are obedient to you. But your
will has broken our hearts.” Then Hashim proceeded to Syria. He finished
his jobs, sold his goods, bought necessary articles, purchased gifts for
Salma and turned to Medina but fell ill on the way. His illness
intensified the next day, so he gathered his servants and slaves and
told them: “I see signs of my death. It seems it is difficult to recover
from this illness. So you may return to Mecca.

When you reach Medina, convey my Salam to Salma and condole her and tell
her that: I have no worry except that about my son.” Then after two days
when the signs of death became clear to him he asked them: “Make me sit
up and bring pen and paper for me.” Then he began to write with the Name
of Allah: “This letter is written by His lowly slave when he got the
Divine command to prepare for his journey from the temporary abode
towards the permanent place.

So at this moment, when my soul is entangled in the scuffle of death
from which no one can escape, I am sending my wealth to you. You should
distribute it equally between you and not forget that chaste and modest
lady Salma who is far away from you and who possesses your Noor and
honor and I call upon you to honor her son.

Do honor his rights and convey my message and Salam to my sons and to
Salma and also tell her: Alas I could not be gratified by her meeting
and affection and many times alas as I could not see my son. May Allah’s
Mercy and blessings be on you forever till Judgment Day.” Then he sealed
the letter and entrusted it to them saying: “Now lay me down.” When he
was so laid he looked to the sky and exclaimed: “O My Lord’s messenger
and courier! For the sake of the Noor of Mustafa (S) which I was
carrying, be kind to me.”

With these words his soul flew away to the everlasting world easily.
They bathed and covered him and buried him in Syria and returned to
Medina weeping and wailing. Men and women of Medina came out of their
homes. Salma, her father and relatives tore their clothes. Salma cried
out: “O my crown! My honor and respect has ended with your death. Alas,
what will be the fate of this boy son of mine whom you have not seen?
Nor have you enjoyed his fatherhood.”

In that state of restlessness and absent mindedness Salma drew the sword
of Hashim (S) and slew their camels and horses and then paid up their
price herself and told the legatee of Hashim: “Convey my prayer to
Muttalib and also tell him that I remain firm on the promise of his
brother and that after him other men are unlawful for me.”

Leaving that place the caravan reached Mecca where also the news of
Hashim created widespread weeping and wailing. Women spread out their
hair, tore their necklaces. Every house was wailing. When his will was
opened and read it, added to the gloom and grief of people. According to
that will people made Muttalib their chief and leader and all the things
mentioned in the will, namely, the lofty flag of Nazar, the Zamzam for
quenching thirst of pilgrims, bow of Ismail (a.s.), shoes of Sheeth
(a.s.), shirt of Ibrahim (a.s.), and ring of Nuh (a.s.) were handed over
to Muttalib as desired by Hashim.

When it was time for Salma’s confinement she did not experience any
pains normally experienced by women at that time. A voice of the unseen
announcer was heard: “O beauty of all the women of Bani Najjar, keep
your newly born babe in secrecy and hide it from the eyes of the
people,” so that when Salma heard this voice she closed the doors of her
house and hang curtains and did not allow anyone to know about her.

Suddenly she observed that a curtain of light was dropped upon her from
earth upto the sky so that Satan could not approach. At that time
Shaibatul Hamd was born with the effulgence of Muhammad on his forehead.
He smiled as soon he was born. Salma took him in her arms and saw white
hair in his head and hence named him Shaibatul Hamd. She kept him in
hiding for one month. None could know about his birth. After a month,
when the kith and kin and nearby women knew about it they congratulated
her.

All were wonderstruck by the astonishing events. The newborn began to
walk after only two months. When the Jews saw him, their hearts
overflowed with enmity and jealousy because they knew that the Noor
displayed by him was the Noor of the Prophet of the last era who was to
slay those Jews and to nullify their religions. At the age of seven, he
appeared like a very strong and courageous youth who could carry the
heaviest load and pick other boys and dump them down.

Once, a man from the tribe of Bani Harith came from Mecca to Medina on
some business. He saw Shaibatul Hamd, the boy with a moon-like radiance
spreading from his forehead playing with other boys. He stood there
observing the wonderful boy’s apparent and hidden beauty and
gracefulness. Then he said: “How lucky are the people of the city in
which you live.” The boy was playing and singing: “I am the son of
Zamzam and Safa.

I am the beloved of Hashim and this is enough for my nobility.” That man
came near him and asked: “Young man, what is your name?” He replied: “I
am Shaibah son of Hashim bin Abde Manaf. My uncles have oppressed me
forcing me to live with my mother and my aunts in this poverty. O
respected uncle! Where are you coming from?”

That man replied: “From Mecca.” The youth said: “When you reach Mecca
safely, kindly convey my Salam to sons of Abde Manaf when you meet them
say that you are the messenger of an orphan whose father has expired and
who is being oppressed by his uncles. O sons of Abde Manaf! You forget
the will of Hashim so soon and destroyed his progeny! I smell your
fragrance through the wind blowing from Mecca and pass my nights
restlessly with a desire to meet you.”

Upon this message that fellow began to weep and hastened to Mecca. When
he reached the gathering of the sons of Abde Manaf, after greeting them
with Salam he said: “O leaders of community and sons of Abde Manaf! How
is it that you forgot your nobility and respect and have left your lamp
of guidance in the home of others to light it up?”

Then he conveyed the messages of Shaibah to them. They said: “We did not
know that he has become a youth and attained maturity.” That man said:
“By Allah, tongues of orators would become dumb before his talks and no
intelligence can equal his wisdom. He is the son of beauty and the light
of the eyes of all wise and experts.” Upon this, Muttalib asked for a
horse and at once headed for Medina all alone.

He reached Medina very speedily where he saw that Shaibatul Hamd was
playing with other boys. He recognized him from the effulgence of
Muhammad. He saw that Shaibah had held up a very big rock in his hand
and was saying: “I am the son of Hashim, well-known for his greatness
and grace.” Muttalib made his camel kneel and cried out: “O the
reminiscent of my brother! Come near me.” Shaibah ran up to him and
said: “Who are you? My heart is very much attracted towards you. Perhaps
you are one of my uncles.” He replied: “I am your uncle, Muttalib.”

Then he took him in his arms and endeared him and wept. Then asked: “My
dear son, what do you want? Would you like me to take you with me to the
hometown of your forefathers which is the place of your honor and
grace?” Shaibah said: “Surely, I very much like to go there.” Muttalib
rode the camel, seated Shaibah with him and headed for Mecca.

Shaibah said: “Dear uncle: Leave this place fast, lest my mother’s
relatives come to know and agreeing with them the brave men of Aws and
Khazraj too try to stop me.” Muttalib said: “My dear soul, don’t worry.
Allah will protect us from their evil.”

When the Jews came to know that Shaibah was going away to Mecca with his
uncle all alone, they decided to kill him. One day a boy named Latiya
who was the son of a Jew chief, Waahiya came out to play with other boys
when Shaibah hit his head with a bone of camel so forcefully that it
broke his head and said: “O son of a Jew! Your death has approached.
Very soon your homes will be destroyed.”

When his father heard this, he frowned and this added to their old
enmities. So when they (Jews) heard that he (Shaibah) was going to
Mecca, they called out to other Jews saying that the boy was going alone
with his uncle to Mecca. Let us follow him and slay him and be safe from
his evil. Seventy Jews armed themselves and followed the camel of
Muttalib who heard the noise of their horses at night.

So he said: “My son, the feared ones have arrived.” Shaibah said:
“Change the route.” Muttalib said: “My son, the radiance on your
forehead will show us to them wherever we go.” Shaibah said: “Hide my
face, perhaps the light will stop shining.” Muttalib put a threefold
cloth on his head but the brightness did not decrease. Then Muttalib
said: “O soul of my brother, this light of your beauty is the Noor of
Allah which cannot be hidden nor can anyone put it off.

You are esteemed in the eyes of Allah. Therefore the God, Who gave you
this Noor will also protect you from every danger. When they came to
Muttalib, Shaibah said: “Bring me down so that I may show you the
miracle of providence.” Muttalib brought him down.

He put his forehead on the ground and prayed: “O the Creator of light
and darkness and the revolver of the seven skies and the nourisher of
every group! I ask from You, for the sake of the intercessor on Judgment
Day whom you have entrusted to me! Protect us from our enemies.” The
prayer was not yet concluded when the group of the Jews came upto them
and encircled them. So they said cunningly in a flattering tone: “O
righteous gentlemen!

We have not come here to harm you.” We only request you to send Shaibah
to his mother, because he is a light, bliss and a sign of luck for our
city.” Shaibah said: “We are well aware of your conspiracies and
intrigues. Now as the Might of Allah has overpowered you, you are
talking in this way.” Upon this the Jews returned disappointed and
disgraced. After walking a little distance, Daahiyaa’s son Latiya said:
“Perhaps you don’t know that they are magicians, who have made us
spellbound. Let us go back on foot and kill them.”

Then they drew out their swords and rushed to Muttalib and Shaibah
(a.s.). Seeing it Muttalib said: “Now your intention has become quite
clear and a Jihad against you has become obligatory.” Saying this, he
took up his bow and shot some youths with arrows. Then all of them
attacked jointly. Muttalib too, uttering the name of Allah, started
fighting with them fiercely.

Shaibah was praying tearfully to Allah. Suddenly a dust storm arose from
far off and along with it the noise of running horses and dangling arms.
When they came close, Muttalib saw that Salma has arrived along with her
father and four thousand warriors of Aws and Khazraj to take back
Shaibah. When Salma saw the Jews fighting with Muttalib, she cried out:
“Woe upon you! What is this meanness?” Latiya began to run on hearing
this.

Salma said: “O enemy of Allah, where are you going?” She then cut him
into two with one blow of the sword. The warriors of Aws and Khazraj
then attacked the Jews and finished them all. Feeling afraid about the
safety of her son Shaibah, Salma stopped her tribe from fighting and
asked Muttalib who he was that intended to separate a lion’s cub from
its mother?

Muttalib said: “I am he who intends to multiply the honor and dignity of
this boy and am more merciful to him than you. I hope Allah will make
this boy the leader of the house of Allah and of all communities. I am
his uncle Muttalib.” Upon this Salma exclaimed: “Bravo! Welcome! But why
did you not talk to me about taking away this son of mine? I have vowed
not to separate him from me.”

Then she turned to Shaibah and said: “It is up to you; if you please you
may go with your uncle. Shaibah bowed down his head and tears fell from
his eyes. He replied: “My kind mother, I fear opposing you but I do want
the proximity of the House of Allah. If you allow, I will go there.
Otherwise I will come with you.” Salma began to weep.

Then averred: “My son! I accept your desire. I will, out of compulsion,
bear your separation. But do not forget me and continue to let me know
about your well being.” Then she took him up in her arms and showered
her affection. Then she allowed him to go, telling Muttalib: “O son of
Abde Manaf, the trust your brother gave me is now entrusted to you. Now
it is for you to protect him. When he becomes mature, marry him to a
woman who can equal him in piety and nobility.”

Muttalib replied: “Respected and kind lady! I am grateful to you. I will
not forget your favor till I am alive.” Then he turned to Mecca with
Shaibah. When Shaibah’s radiance fell on the walls of Mecca and so also
on the mountains all around the entire city shone up, which made the
residents of Mecca astonished. They rushed from their homes.

They saw Muttalib coming with a boy and asked: “Who is he?” As a
strategy, Muttalib said: “He is my slave.” That is why Shaibah became
Abdul Muttalib. Abdul Muttalib bought him home and kept his value hidden
for quite a long time. People did not know that he will be the
grandfather of the Messenger of Allah (S).

He became much honorable in the eyes of the people of Quraish who used
to be blessed in every matter due to him. It was due to him that they
were relieved from every trouble. At the time of every famine and
hardship they used to seek the shelter of the light of the Messenger of
Allah (S) and the Almighty Allah used to remove their troubles. That
Noor used to show miracles.

Ancestors Of The Holy Prophet (S)
---------------------------------

Imamiyah scholars are unanimous that all male and female ancestors of
Prophet Muhammad (S) right from Adam (a.s.) upto the parents of the Holy
Prophet (S) were Muslims and that the radiance of the Holy Prophet (S)
had never stayed in the loins of a polytheist man nor in the womb of a
polytheist woman. There has never been any kind of doubt in the lineage
of the Prophet. It is narrated in Shia and Sunni traditions that all
forefathers of the Holy Prophet (S) were prophets and messengers of the
true religion of Islam and that the sons of Ismail (a.s.) who were the
ancestors of the Holy Prophet (S) were the legatees of Ibrahim (a.s.).

From the very beginning, the trusteeship of the Holy Kaaba, its covering
and construction and the rulership of the city of Mecca had been in
their hands. They were the leaders of the common people. The community
of Ibrahim (a.s.) was from them. The Shariah of Musa (a.s.) and Isa
(a.s.) and of Ibrahim (a.s.) was not annulled for the sons of Ismail
(a.s.). They were the guardians of the same Shariat and were making
wills for one another and entrusting the relics of the prophets to their
progeny.

This continued upto Abdul Muttalib. Abdul Muttalib made Abu Talib his
legatee and after the prophethood of His Eminence, Muhammad (S), Abu
Talib entrusted a number of books and relics of prophets to him
[Muhammad (S)]. There are many traditions stating the honor and grace of
Abdul Muttalib. Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) is recorded to have said that
he (Abdul Muttalib) will stand alone on Judgment Day like one community
because he was the lone monotheist in his community.

He will manifest the signs of prophets and the awe of kings. In another
reliable tradition, it is mentioned that Abdul Muttalib was the first to
believe in Badaa. He will have, on Judgment Day, the beauty of kings and
signs of prophets. Then he said: “One day Abdul Muttalib sent the Holy
Prophet (S) after his camels. His late return made him restless and he
(Abdul Muttalib) sent some persons to find him.

He held the chains of Holy Kaaba and wept before Almighty Allah and
began to pray: ‘O Lord! Will you destroy those of Your believers about
whom You have promised that You will make them victorious over all other
religionists? If You will do so, then something strange has happened in
Your Will. When the Holy Prophet (S) came back he (Abdul Muttalib)
rushed to pick him up in his arms and love him affectionately and said:
‘My son, henceforth I will never send you on any errand lest the enemies
destroy you.’”

Another tradition of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) mentions that the Holy
Prophet (S) told Ali (a.s.) that Abdul Muttalib had introduced five
traditions during the pre-Islamic days of ignorance which Almighty Allah
continued even in Islam: First he made it unlawful for a man to marry
his stepmother, about which the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَنكِحُواْ مَا نَكَحَ آبَاؤُكُم مِّنَ النِّسَاء
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And marry not woman whom your fathers married…”***[^7]

Second, when he found a treasure he spent one-fifth of it in the way of
Allah about which Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّمَا غَنِمْتُم مِّن شَيْءٍ فَأَنَّ لِلهِ خُمُسَهٗ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And know that whatever thing you gain, a fifth of it is for
Allah…”***[^8]

Third, when he dug the Zamzam well, he made it public for all and Allah
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَجَعَلْتُمْ سِقَايَةَ الْحَاجِّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“What! do you make (one who undertakes) the giving of drink to the
pilgrims…”***[^9]

Fourth, he fixed one hundred camels as the blood money of a man’s murder
and fifth, there was no fixed number of Tawaf. He decided that it should
be seven. Then said: Abdul Muttalib never gambled, nor worshipped idols,
or ate the flesh of animals slaughtered for idols and he always used to
say that I am firm on the Faith and religion of my father, Ibrahim
(a.s.).

In yet another reliable tradition, it is mentioned by Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that once angel Jibraeel descended on the Messenger of Allah (S)
and said: “The Creator of the universe greets you and says: I have
forbidden Hellfire for one from whose loins you are born and in whose
womb you grew up and; that is Abdullah and Amina and also one who
maintained you, i.e., Abu Talib.”

In another authentic tradition Amirul Momineen (a.s.) is reported to
have said: “By Allah! Neither my father ever worshipped idols nor my
grandfather, Abdul Muttalib or my great grandfather, Hashim (a.s.), or
Abde Manaf. Rather all of them prayed facing the Holy Kaaba and they
were firmly on the religion of Ibrahim (a.s.) and remained connected
with the Faith of His Eminence, (S).”

In another tradition, Ibn Abbas has narrated that a carpet in front of
the Kaaba was never put except for Abdul Muttalib. In view of his honor
and respect no one else ever sat on it. But when the Holy Prophet (S)
arrived and wanted to sit on it, and whenever his uncle etc. were trying
to stop him from doing so, Abdul Muttalib used to say: “Leave my son,
his status is high and great. He will shortly become your commander and
leader. I observe the radiance of greatness and gracefulness on his
forehead. He will be the leader of the entire creation.”

Then he used to take him up in his lap and shower his love on him,
caressing his back repeatedly saying: “I have never felt a cheek softer
and purer than his cheek and a body better than his body.” As Abdullah
and Abu Talib were real brothers, he used to tell Abu Talib (r.a.): “The
dignity of this son is great. So protect him because he is alone without
father and mother. Be kind like a mother to him so that he may not
experience any shock or trouble.”

Then he used to seat him on his shoulder and to go round the Holy Kaaba
for seven times. When His Eminence, was six, his dear mother, Amina
(r.a.) expired at a placed called Abwa situated between Mecca and
Medina. Then they took him to his maternal uncles who belonged to the
tribe of Bani Adi.[^10] When the Holy Prophet (S) became totally
orphaned from both the paternal and maternal sides Abdul Muttalib became
all the more kind and affectionate towards him.

When the time of his death came near he seated the Holy Prophet (S) on
his chest and was kissing him and weeping. Then he turned to Abu Talib
(r.a.) and said: “Do take utmost care of this unique child and protect
him. He smelled neither his father’s odor nor enjoyed mother’s
affection. Consider him as a piece of your own liver. I have selected
you from among my sons for his care and protection because his father
and you belong to one and the same father and mother. O Abu Talib! If
you witness the appearance of his greatness and glory which I am fully
aware of, follow him to the best of your ability and help him with your
hand and tongue and wealth. By Allah, he will soon become your chief and
leader and gain a dignity and honor which none of our forefathers ever
attained. O my son! Have you accepted my will?”

Abu Talib replied: “Yes, I have accepted and agreed and have made Allah
a witness to this promise of mine.” Upon this Abdul Muttalib took the
hand of Abu Talib and made the covenant more firm saying: “I have never
smelled such holy fragrance in the body of any of my sons. Alas, I wish
I would have lived till the time of your (Muhammad’s) time to become the
Prophet.” With these words his soul departed from his body and flew up
to the high heavens.

At that time Prophet Muhammad (S) was eight years old. Then Abu Talib
made him dearer than his own life and never left him alone during the
day or night. He never trusted anyone in this matter always making him
sleep on his bed.

According to reliable evidence Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: “A seat of
dignity used to be spread near the Holy Kaaba for Abdul Muttalib – not
for anyone else. His sons used to stand near his head and never allowed
anybody to approach him. When the Holy Prophet (S) began to walk, he
once came up and sat in the lap of His Eminence, Abdul Muttalib (a.s.).
His sons intended to remove him from there but Abdul Muttalib said:
‘Leave my child because very soon he will acquire kingship and an angel
will descend on him.’”

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition that a man came to Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) and said: “A man has some of my wealth and I am afraid he
will not return it.” Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: “When you reach
Mecca, perform two Rakats prayer on behalf of Abdul Muttalib (a.s.) and
make two rounds for Abu Talib (a.s.) and likewise also for His Eminence,
Amina (r.a.), Fatima binte Asad (Mother of Amirul Momineen (a.s.)). That
man says: “I did that and I got back my property the same day.”

Account Of The Army Of The Elephant
-----------------------------------

One of the miracles of the Noor of the Holy Prophet (S) is the miracle
of Ashaabe Feel which had occurred during the time of Abdul Muttalib
(a.s.). Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) is reported to have said that when the
king of Abyssinia, Abraha bin Sabbaah planned to demolish the Holy Kaaba
and reached Mecca, he first plundered the wealth of Meccans which
included the camels of Abdul Muttalib also. Abdul Muttalib went to that
king’s assembly and saw him after obtaining permission. Abraha was then
sitting in a silken pavilion.

His Eminence saluted him. He replied to his Salam and was wonderstruck
with his radiance, beauty, grandeur and majesty. He asked: “Did your
forefathers also have this Noor?” He said: “Yes.” Abraha said: “Then you
people are higher than all others due to this greatness and nobility.
You ought to be chief of your community.

Then he seated him on his throne.” The king had white elephant both of
whose teeth were decorated with various jewels. The king considered
himself higher than other kings because of that elephant. He ordered
that elephant to be brought forward. So the animal was brought in the
court fully decorated. When that animal approached Abdul Muttalib it
prostrated before him though it had never before done so for his master,
the king.

Then that animal, by the Might of Allah and as a miracle of the Noor of
the Holy Prophet (S) spoke up in fine Arabic language saluting Abdul
Muttalib and said: “O the light of the best of creation and O possessor
of the holy Sanctuary and Zamzam well and the best grandfather of the
best prophet: Peace be on you and on the Noor which is lying in your
loins. O Abdul Muttalib! All honor is for you. You can never be downed
and disgraced.”

Seeing this extraordinary miracle, Abraha became fearful. He thought it
was magic, so he sent back that elephant and asked Abdul Muttalib: “Why
have you come here? I have heard much praise of your generosity, beauty,
greatness and awe and have now personally observed your greatness and
awe. I am prepared to meet your need. So let me know what you want.” He
had imagined that he would ask him to refrain from destroying the Kaaba.

His Eminence, Abdul Muttalib said: “Your soldiers have taken away my
camels, I request you to return them.” Abraha became angry and said:
“Your honor has now decreased in my sight. I came here to destroy the
honor of your Kaaba and also to destroy your community who are proud of
the ownership of the Kaaba which has made you distinct. This house is
where people from the whole world arrive for performing Hajj. You do not
say anything about it and merely demand your camels from me?”

His Eminence replied: “I am not the owner of the House. I am the owner
of my camels and have come ask you about them. The Owner of the House of
Kaaba is mightier than all mighties. He Himself will protect and save
His House as it is His prerogative more than all others.” Upon this
Abraha returned the camels to Abdul Muttalib (a.s.) who then returned to
Mecca with his animals.

Then Abraha turned his attention to the destruction of the Sanctuary of
Allah and advanced with a big army and huge elephants. When he
approached Kaaba his elephant stopped and sat down. When freed, it
returned and when forced to go forward it lay down on the ground. His
Eminence, Abdul Muttalib asked his men: “Call my sons.”

They brought Abbas. He said: “Not him. You bring my son.” At last they
brought Abdullah, father of Muhammad (S). Then he told Abdullah: “Go up
to mount Abu Qubais and look all around and let me know what you see.”
Abdullah climbed the mountain and saw birds called Abaabeel advancing
like a dark cloud with a speed of a flooded river. Then they (birds) sat
on that mountain.

Then they flew therefrom, circled the Holy Kaaba seven times, did Sayy
between the hillocks of Safa and Marwah seven times. Seeing all this,
His Eminence, Abdullah rushed back to Abdul Muttalib and described what
he had seen. His Eminence, said: “My son! Just see what else the birds
do.” Abdullah said: “Then they went to the Abyssinian army.” Then Abdul
Muttalib asked Meccans: “Go to Abraha’s army and take your share of the
booty.”

When the Meccans reached there they saw all the soldiers lying dead like
rotten wood. They also observed that every one of the birds was holding
a stone in its beak and claw hitting to death every one of the army men.
After finishing all of them, the birds flew back. Prior to that no one
had ever seen such birds nor did anyone after that.

After all the invaders had died, Abdul Muttalib came to the Holy Kaaba,
held its curtains and recited some couplets in praise of Allah for this
great grace and bliss. Then he returned to his men and again recited
some poetry criticizing the giving up of Kaaba by the Quraish and the
description of his loneliness and his patience over it and his reliance
on Only One Allah.

It is narrated through reliable chains from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that when the king of Abyssinia, Abraha’s army had come to demolish
Kaaba and had taken away the camels of Abdul Muttalib, he (Abdul
Muttalib) went to meet Abraha. The king asked why he had come. He was
told that he had come for his camels. The king said: “This man is the
chief of his people. I have come to destroy their place of worship. Yet
he does not make any recommendation about it but asks only for his
camels? Has he requested me not to destroy the Kaaba, I would have
accepted that too.”

Then he returned his camels. Abdul Muttalib responded in the words
quoted above and while returning, passed by Abraha’s big elephant named
Mahmud. He cried: “O Mahmud!” The animal moved its head in response.
Then Abdul Muttalib asked: “Do you know for what purpose they have
brought you here?” Raising its head and then shaking it the elephant
replied: “No.” Abdul Muttalib said: “They have brought you here so that
you may destroy the House of your Lord. Will you do so?”

Moving its head the animal said: “No.” Therefrom Abdul Muttalib came
back to his house. Next day Abraha’s army moved in the early morning to
enter the Holy Sanctuary. The elephant did not go forward. At that time
Abdul Muttalib asked one of his slaves to climb the hill and see the
events and to relate them to him. The slave went, returned and narrated
that a darkness was advancing from the direction of the sea.

When it came nearer he observed that there were innumerable birds. Every
one of them had a pebble in its beak. The size of the pebble was as
little as the top portion of a finger or even smaller. Abdul Muttalib
said: “By Allah these birds intend to destroy the army men.” The birds
hovered over those soldiers and began to drop the pebbles. The pebbles
pierced the body of every soldier from head to foot and killed him
instantly.

None but one man survived; who rushed back to his people to relate what
had happened. When he was relating the story, people saw that one of
those birds was hovering on his head also. He said: “The birds were like
this.” At that very moment the bird dropped a pebble on that man which
killed him then and there.

In yet another tradition the Imam mentions that when Abdul Muttalib
entered Abraha’s assembly, Abraha got up from his throne and greeted him
bowing and advanced towards him.Another reliable tradition says that
those birds were like bats. Another narration describes that their heads
were like those of wild animals and their beaks were like those of
sparrows.

There is difference of opinion about the number of elephants too. Some
say it was only one elephant, called Mahmud and others say they were
eight and according to some twelve.

Opinions also differ regarding the intention of Abraha about the
destruction of Kaaba. Some say he had built a house of worship in Yemen
to equal the Holy Kaaba and he was asking people to make pilgrimage to
that new house and also to go around it making Tawaf. Once a man from
Quraish entered that place at night and dirtied it with excreta and ran
away and that is why the accursed man became so angry that he vowed to
destroy the Kaaba. The author of *Kitabul Anwar* has narrated that some
Meccans had gone to Abyssinia for trading purpose and had stayed in a
church.

There they made a fire to cook their food and then did not blow it out.
Wind blew and burnt down everything therein. When the Christians came
there and inquired who burnt the structure they were told that a group
of Meccan traders were responsible for it. When the news reached the
king of Habasha he became furious and sent his vizier, Abraha bin Sabaah
along with 4000 elephants and 100000 warriors to destroy the Kaaba and
to throw away its stones in the sea of Jeddah, to kill their men and to
plunder their sons and their property and not to spare anyone.

Abraha advanced towards Mecca with that intention and first sent Aswad
bin Maqsood with a vanguard of 20000 men and ordered them not to kill
any of the men or women on the way until he arrived as he wanted to
punish them in an unprecedented manner. When they reached Mecca and
Meccans knew about it, all of them collected their wealth and relatives
and intended to run away. Abdul Muttalib told them that it was shameful
on their part to cut off themselves from the Holy Kaaba. The people
replied: “We are not able to confront the enemy, and if they overpower
us they will kill every one of us.”

Abdul Muttalib said: “The Lord of the Kaaba will never let them win over
Kaaba and if you take shelter in this holy house they will not be able
to defeat you also.” But the people did not listen to him and went away
from Kaaba. Some went up hills and some hid themselves in valleys and
some took shelter in ships on the sea. Abdul Muttalib said: “I feel
ashamed to keep myself away from His House. I will not move from my
place until Allah decides between me and them. In short, Aswad camped
after reaching Mecca and Abraha followed him with huge elephants and a
big army, rushed to Mecca and seized the animals of Meccans. His men
took away eighty red-eyed camels of Abdul Muttalib too.

When Abdul Muttalib came to know about it, he exclaimed: “Praise be to
Allah, they belonged to Allah which I had gathered for feasting guests
of this holy house. If Allah returns them, I will thank Him and even if
He does not return it, I will be thankful to Him.” Then Abdul Muttalib
dressed: put the chador (sheet) of Lavi bin Ghalib on his shoulder, tied
the waistband of Ibrahim (a.s.), hung the bow of Ismail (a.s.) on his
arm, mounted his horse and proceeded to Abraha. His relatives approached
him saying: “We will not allow you to go to that oppressor who does not
respect the House and the precincts of the House of Allah.” Abdul
Muttalib replied: “I am aware of Allah’s Might and His Mercy more than
you do. Let me go. If Allah wills, I will return very soon.”

Then he proceeded. When the army men of Abraha observed his elegance and
radiance they were astonished and trembled due to fright. They too came
to him and requested him not to go to the merciless ruler who had vowed
not to spare alive even a single Meccan. “We feel pity for you and are
afraid that despite all this elegance of yours that cruel man will kill
you.” His Eminence, told them: “You only take me to him and give up
advising me.” Then they informed Abraha of the arrival of Abdul Muttalib
(a.s.) and described his courage and bravery etc. He issued orders
whereupon all of his men stood up and drew their swords.

He called his biggest elephant in his court and put on his crown and
then called His Eminence, Abdul Muttalib (a.s.). His elephant was called
Mazmoom. Two iron branches were fixed on the head of that elephant so
that even if it were to attack a mountain it would have broken it up.
Two swords were tied to its trunk and it was trained to fight. He had
issued orders to the effect that when Abdul Muttalib arrived in the
assembly, this elephant should be made to attack him. In short, when
Abdul Muttalib entered, the entire audience was awed to see him.

When the elephant was called upon to attack him that animal approached
Abdul Muttalib and began to rub its head on the ground and turned
obedient for him. Abraha was wonderstruck by this scene and he began to
tremble in fear. He respectfully made him sit beside him and asked his
name, saying: “I have never seen anyone more handsome than you. I will
fulfill everyone of your need and would even return from here if you say
so.” Abdul Muttalib said: “I am not concerned with all that. Your men
have taken away my camels which I had collected for visitors of the
House of Allah. Order them to return my camels.”

Abraha issued orders for the return of his camels and then asked if he
had any other wish to which Abdul Muttalib replied in the negative. He
asked: “Why did you not recommend the protection of your citizens? I
have vowed to destroy your Kaaba and to kill your men. But I saw that
your status is very high and would have accepted your request had you
asked me for their safety.” Abdul Muttalib replied: “I have no concern
with it because this House is owned by one Who does not require my
recommendation. If He desires, He can surely defend His House.”

Abraha retorted: “I am following you with my army and my elephants to
destroy the Kaaba and all around it and to kill all its residents.”
Abdul Muttalib replied: “Do so if you can.” Then he returned to Mecca.
When he approached the biggest elephant that animal prostrated before
him. The viziers and courtiers of Abraha asked him why he spared Abdul
Muttalib’s life. He said: “Don’t criticize me because when I saw him, my
heart was filled with fear and awe. Did you not see that even the
elephant bowed before him? Now say something about my intention. What is
advisable in your opinion?”

They replied: “Whatever is ordered by the ruler must be carried out. So
the army advanced to destroy Kaaba. After reaching Mecca, Abdul Muttalib
asked his men to climb Abu Qubais Mountain and see what happens. He
himself clung to Kaaba and prayed to the Almighty Allah tearfully for
the sake of the Noor of the Holy Prophet (S): “O Allah! It is Your House
and all of us are your family members and the residents of Your House.
Everybody defends his house and its residents.”

By repeating such words, Abdul Muttalib was requesting Allah when
suddenly he heard the voice of an invisible announcer saying: “Your
prayer is accepted due to the Noor in your forehead.” Then Abdul
Muttalib told his community: “Congratulations, I have observed the
radiance in my forehead rising up due to the bliss of which you are
saved.”

At that time people observed the dust raised by enemy’s army. Thereafter
they saw elephants covered with iron from top to bottom standing like
mountains in front of their army. Though the men riding them were trying
their utmost, the animals did not move towards Kaaba. When their faces
were turned round they ran speedily.

At that time Aswad said: “The Meccans have bewitched these elephants,”
and sent a word about this to Abraha. Abraha’s fear multiplied and he
sent a word to Aswad telling him: “We have made repeated trials and it
is now not advisable to act against our experience. So send a number of
messengers to the Meccans for making peace and do not make any mention
of the elephants otherwise they will become more courageous. Tell them
to hand over to us as many of their men as have been killed of us and to
pay the losses caused to our house of worship so that we may go back.”
Abraha’s messenger carried this message to Aswad.

The messenger was a very courageous man and his name was Hanatah who was
very proud of his strength as he could all alone confront big armies.
His appearance was very dreadful. Aswad asked him: “You yourself go to
them with this message. Perhaps peace will be established between us and
them because of you.” Hanatah replied: “I am going. If they don’t agree,
I will bring back to you the heads of all of them.” When he arrived in
Mecca and looked at Abdul Muttalib he became fearful and began to
tremble.

Abdul Muttalib asked him: “With what intention have you come?” He
replied: “My master, Abraha is convinced of your gracefulness. Now he
has bestowed you your Sanctuary and he wants that you should hand him
over as many of your men as have been killed from our side and to pay
the losses caused to our house of worship. Then we will return with our
army.”

Abdul Muttalib replied: “We never punish one for the mistake committed
by another. Justice and honesty is our trait. We always refrain from
oppression and never act against Allah’s command. As regards the House
of Kaaba I have already said clearly that, that House has its own Lord
Who is definitely able to defend it. By Allah! I am neither afraid of
Abraha nor I give any importance to his army and weapons.”

Hanatah became furious at this and intended to kill Abdul Muttalib. His
Eminence, caught him by neck, raised him up and flung him on the ground
saying: “Had you not been a messenger I would have finished you just
now.”

Hanatah returned to Aswad and informed him that it was no use talking
with them; that Mecca was empty; that it must be attacked. So they
approached the Holy Sanctuary. Then they saw birds hovering like clouds;
and that the birds were like bats; each of them held three pebbles, (two
in their claws and one in the beak); that the said pebbles were somewhat
larger than the *Masoor*[^11] seed and smaller than a gram. Seeing the
birds, the army men became fearful and said: “What is this? We have
never seen such birds before.”

Aswad said: “There is nothing to be afraid of. He also said that these
sparrows come out once annually.” Saying this he shot one arrow towards
them from his bow. The birds began to make noise. Then an unseen
announcer announced: “O obedient birds, obey your Lord’s command and do
what you have been asked to do as Allah’s anger has multiplied against
these deniers.”

When the birds began to hit the army men with the aforesaid pebbles, the
first to be hit was Hanatah whose body was pierced from head to bottom
and that pebble went through the ground beneath him. Hanatah fell down
and entered Hell. The army started to scatter all around. The birds
followed them and dropped pebbles on their heads until all of them were
killed.

Aswad also went to Hell. Abraha was fleeing when his right hand was
fractured and he fell down, then his left hand, then both of his legs
also broke down. When he talked about all this after reaching his
destination, his head also disintegrated from his body. There was a man
from Hadhramaut in Abraha’s army who had asked his brother to join him
but he had refused to do so saying: “I can never march to destroy the
House of Allah.”

That man, after seeing the condition of the army, ran back to his
brother in Hadhramaut and told him what had happened. At that moment
when he raised his head to the sky he saw one of those birds still
hovering above. That bird threw a pebble on his head which killed him
instantly. During all this time His Eminence, Abdul Muttalib was busy
begging Allah and requesting through the mediation of the Divine Noor:
“My Lord! Protect me from this trouble through the blessing of this Noor
which You have bestowed on me and give me victory over Your enemy.” When
he saw the running away of the elephants and the dead bodies of the
enemies, he thanked Allah, took possession of the booty and utilized it.

The Digging Of Zamzam Well – Sacrifice Of Abdullah – Events Of His Sons Etc.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Shaykh Kulaini (r.a.) and others have narrated that there were two gold
deer and five golden swords. When the tribe of Khaza won over the tribe
of Jurham and they intended to take over the Sanctuary of Allah (Kaaba),
the people of Jurham threw the said deer and the swords in Zamzam well
and filled it up with earth and stones in such a way that no sign of the
aforesaid things was at all visible so that they could not be brought
out.

When Qusayy, the grandfather of His Eminence, Abdullah overpowered Khaza
and regained the control of Mecca he remained uninformed about the
Zamzam well till the time of Abdul Muttalib (a.s.) and he became the
owner of Holy Mecca. For him, a carpet was laid in front of the Holy
Kaaba. It was never done so for anybody else. One night when he was
asleep near Kaaba he saw in a dream that someone was asking him to dig
up Barrah. When he awoke, he could not follow what Barrah was. Next
night when he slept at the same place the same man asked him to dig up
Teebah. On the third night he was asked to dig Maznunah.

Finally on the fourth night he was instructed to dig up Zamzam well
which would never dry up; no matter how much of it is served to hajis;
to dig it at the place where a white crow came daily to eat ants. When
Abdul Muttalib dreamt like that he followed its meaning and also found
the location of Zamzam.

Then he told Quraish: During four nights, I have dreamt about the
digging of Zamzam well which is our precious treasure. Let us dig it. As
they disagreed, he began to do the job himself. At that time he had only
one son named Harith who also helped him. When they felt it was hard to
dig, he came to the door of Kaaba and prayed to Allah to grant him ten
sons and vowed that he would sacrifice the dearest one of them in His
path. Then he began to dig the well again until he saw the foundation
stone of Ismail (a.s.) and understood that they had reached water.

He cried out “Allah is the Greatest.” Upon this the people of Quraish
also repeated Takbir and said: “We are also partners in this treasure of
grace and bliss; it cannot be reserved only for you.” Abdul Muttalib
replied: “As you did not help me in digging it, it is now exclusively
mine and my sons’ till Judgment Day.”

It is narrated through reliable chains from Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) that
when Abdul Muttalib concluded digging of Zamzam and reached its bottom,
he perceived very bad smell from one direction of that well which made
him fearful and made his son Harith go out. But His Eminence remained
therein firmly and dug deeper for one hand length. Then he felt sleepy
and he fell asleep. In dream he saw a beautiful, nicely dressed, cleanly
clothed, tall, perfumed man who was asking him to dig more, “you will
get booty, do not hoard it for your heirs but use it yourself. While the
gold etc. is for you, the swords etc. are for others.

Your honor and prestige is higher among all Arabs because the Arab
prophet (the leader of this community and his legatee will also be from
your progeny and so also will be born all the wise men. The swords are
their share. That messenger’s prophethood will become manifest one
century after you. Allah will brighten the earth with his light (Noor),
drive out the devils from earth, disgrace them after honor and kill them
after making them strong.

He will disgrace the idols and will kill the idol worshippers wherever
they be…Then from your lineage, after that prophet, his brother and
vizier will remain. His age will be less. He will break idols and will
be obedient to him in all affairs. That prophet will not hide anything
from him. He will consult him in every important matter. When Abdul
Muttalib woke up after having this vision he found six swords near him.

He took them up and intended to come out but thought that the digging
was yet incomplete so he dug a depth of a paw length more and saw that
the horns and the head of a golden deer had appeared before him. He took
it out and saw that on its head was inscribed:  
 “There is no god except Allah, Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah (S).
Ali is the Wali of Allah; so and so is the Caliph of Allah.”

What was meant by the last phrase is that Sahibul Amr (Mahdi (a.s.)) is
the caliph of Allah. Abdul Muttalib was about to come out of the well
when the Satan appeared in the form of a snake and began to slip out of
the well ahead of him. His Eminence, Abdul Muttalib gave it a blow of
the sword which cut off its tail and then it disappeared. Now His
Eminence, Qaim (a.t.f.s.) will kill it. His Eminence, Abdul Muttalib
(a.s.) desired to, contrary to the dream, hang those swords on the door
of Kaaba.

Then the following night he again saw in dream the same man saying: “O
Shaibatul Hamd! Thank your Lord, who will very soon compensate you for
your land and will make you famous through the world and make Quraish
submit to you. Some of them will submit to you due to fear and some
because of greed. Keep the swords in their place.” When His Eminence,
woke up he understood that if the man is guiding him in visions is from
Allah then it is a divine commandment and if he is a devil, then he must
be one whose tail he had cut off.

Next night he dreamed that many men and children approached him saying:
“We are among your children’s followers and we live in the sixth sky.
Those swords do not belong to you. You should marry a woman from Bani
Makhzum, then make matrimonial contracts with the girls belonging to all
Arab tribes. Even if you do not possess wealth, you do have a high
status.

No tribe will hesitate in giving you their girls in marriage. You may
give these thirteen swords to the sons who will be born of that girl
belonging to Bani Makhzum. Nothing more needs to be told you. Yes, one
of those swords will disappear and remain hidden in such and such
mountain. Its reappearance will be one of the signs of the appearance of
Qaim Aale Muhammad (a.s.).”

After waking up, His Eminence hung those swords in his neck and went
around Mecca. Meanwhile the best of those swords disappeared, which will
reappear at the same place of the coming of the Qaim (a.s.). Then His
Eminence, Abdul Muttalib wore Ihram for performing Umrah and entered
Mecca, made twenty-one circumambulations carrying those swords and the
golden deer.

While going round the Kaaba he was reciting: “My Lord, make Your word
come true, prove my words right. Spread my description throughout the
world, strengthen my arms…” Then he gave those swords to the sons of
Makhzumiya. Out of those twelve swords one went to His Eminence, Prophet
(S) and one each to all the eleven Imams upto Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.)
and the sword of the twelfth Imam has gone in hiding in the earth and
the earth will present it to His Eminence, Mahdi (a.s.) when he
reappears.

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition that Ibn Fazal asked Imam Ali
Reza (a.s.) about the words “I am the son of two slaughtered ones.” His
Eminence said: Those two slaughtered ones are His Eminence, Ismail
(a.s.) and Abdullah bin Abdul Muttalib. Ismail (a.s.) was that great son
whose glad tiding was given by Allah to Ibrahim (a.s.). When he was busy
performing Hajj with his son, Ibrahim told his son: “I have dreamt that
I am slaughtering you.

Therefore think upon it and let me know what your opinion is.” He
replied: “Dear father! Do as you have been commanded to do. Insha Allah,
you will find me patient.” He did not say: “Do what you saw in the
dream.” When Ibrahim (a.s.) was about to slaughter him, Allah made a
black and white sheep his ransom, which could walk, graze, drink and so
also see, pass water and drop dung in the darkness. Prior to that it was
grazing in Paradise for forty years. It was not born from a mother.

Allah commanded ‘Be’ and it came into being. It was to become a ransom
for Ismail (a.s.). Every sheep which is slaughtered in Mina becomes a
ransom for Ismail (a.s.) till Judgment Day. The story of another
slaughtered one is that once Abdul Muttalib, clinging to the door of
Kaaba prayed that if Allah gives him ten sons, he will, as a gesture of
thankfulness, sacrifice one of them in His path. Allah granted him ten
sons. So he said: “Allah fulfilled my desire, now I must also keep my
word.” So he gathered his sons, went to Kaaba with them and drew lots
thrice.

On all the three occasions Abdullah’s name, father of the Holy Prophet
(S), appeared in the lot who was the dearest to him. Then he laid him on
the ground and intended to slaughter him. When the news reached Quraish
chiefs, all rushed to him and tried to stop him. Women of Abdul Muttalib
also came weeping and wailing and his daughter Atika said: “Dear father!
Submit an excuse before Allah in the matter of your son.” He inquired:
“How?”

Atika said: “Draw lots between these camels of yours grazing in the
Sanctuary and your son and go on increasing the number of the camels
every time until Allah is pleased.” Then Abdul Muttalib drew a lot
between Abdullah and ten camels which came out in Abdullah’s name. Then
he drew again doubling the number of camels. Again it showed Abdullah’s
name. Likewise when he raised the number of camels upto hundred it came
in their names.

All the Quraish raised the slogan of Takbir so loudly that hillocks of
Mecca trembled. Abdul Muttalib said: “I will not give up unless the lots
show the names of the camels three times.” Then he drew lots twice and
it showed the names of the camels. Then Zubair and Abu Talib and his
sister drew out Abdullah (a.s.) from under the hands of Abdul Muttalib.
The radiant skin of Abdullah got scratched due to this dragging on the
ground.

All of them snatched Abdullah and hugged him and kissed him. All tried
to clean dust from the face of Abdullah. Then Abdul Muttalib sacrificed
camels between Safa and Marwah and distributed the meat among all and
did not prevent anyone from taking it. This was also one of the
traditions established by Abdul Muttalib which Allah continued; that is
the blood money of every Muslim would be one hundred camels in Islam.

According to another reliable and authentic tradition from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Abdul Muttalib had ten
sons besides Abbas (a.s.).” Ibn Babawayh has given their names as
follows: Abdullah, Abu Talib, Zubair, Hamza, Harith, Eedaaq, Maqoom,
Hajal, Abu Uzza who known as Abu Lahab and Zaraar and Abbas. Harith was
the eldest. Some have said that Maqoom and Hajal were one and the same
person.

His Eminence, Abdul Muttalib had ten names: Kings of the times used to
address him by these names: Aamir, Shaibatul Hamd, Saiyyidul Batha,
Saaqiyul Hajj, Saaqiyul Ghais, Ghaisul Waraa fil Aam, Abus Shaadatul
Ashrah, Abdul Muttalib, Haafir and Zamzam.

It is also mentioned in a reliable tradition that the very first lot
which was drawn in the world was in the name of Maryam daughter of
Imran; then for Yunus (a.s.). When Abdul Muttalib got nine sons, he
vowed that if Allah gives him one more son he would sacrifice him in the
Name of Allah. When Abdullah was born, he could not sacrifice him as the
Messenger of Allah (S) was in his loins. So he brought ten camels and
drew lots.

It came out in Abdullah’s name. He added ten more camels and drew lots
again. It again came in Abdullah’s name. Then he went on adding ten
camels every time until the draw showed the camels when the number was
raised to one hundred. Abdul Muttalib said: “It is not fair on my part
to act according to the only lot which is in my favor.” So he drew again
twice and when it came in the name of camels for three consequent draws
he understood that now Allah was pleased with him and then he sacrificed
the camels.[^12]

Ibn Abil Hadid and the author of *Kitabul Anwar* etc. have reported that
when Abdul Muttalib found out the Zamzam well, the Quraish became very
jealous. They said: “O Abdul Muttalib! This well belongs to our
forefather, Ismail (a.s.) and therefore we also have a right over it, so
make us also partners in it.” Abdul Muttalib replied: “Almighty Allah
has granted this honor exclusively to me. You have no share in it.”

After a prolonged dispute he agreed to get the matter decided through a
lady soothsayer who belonged to Bani Saad tribe and lived in Syria.
Abdul Muttalib, accompanied by a group of Bani Abde Manaf, proceeded to
Syria along with the Quraish. On the way, where there was no water, the
water which was with the companions of Abdul Muttalib exhausted and
Quraish refused to oblige them.

When thirst took a serious turn Abdul Muttalib said: “Let all of us dig
our graves so that those who die could be buried and thus only one, the
last one to die, would remain unburied in this wilderness. It would be
better than a situation in which all of us might remain unburied.” They
awaited their deaths, after digging the graves.

Then Abdul Muttalib said: “To sit waiting for death and not to try to
find water would be like being despairing of the mercy of Allah. So let
us get up and search. Allah may give us water.” So they got up, loaded
their goods and Quraish also accompanied them. When Abdul Muttalib rode
his camel, a freshwater stream began to flow from beneath the hooves of
his camel. He exclaimed: “Allahu Akbar.”

His companions also raised the slogan pronouncing the greatness of Only
One Allah and filled up their leather bags. Abdul Muttalib called the
Quraishi tribes and said: “Look, Allah has given water to us. You may
also drink as much as you want.” When the Quraish saw this generosity of
Abdul Muttalib they said: “Allah has decided between you and us.” Now we
need not go to the soothsayer for settlement. Henceforth we will never
raise any dispute with you in the matter of Zamzam well.

The Lord Who gave you water in this desert has also given Zamzam to
you.” Then they returned from there and reserved Zamzam for Abdul
Muttalib. The author of *Anware Hidayat* has mentioned that when Abdul
Muttalib reached the bottom of Zamzam well, he found two golden deer,
many swords and armors. Then also Quraish asked for their share in it.

Abdul Muttalib decided to settle the dispute through lots. He took two
yellow arrows in the name of Kaaba, two black arrows in his name and two
white arrows in the name of Quraish, gave the six arrows to a man and
made him enter Kaaba and drew lots. The result was: Two in the name of
Kaaba for the deer, two black which were in the name of Abdul Muttalib
for the swords and the armors and the two which were in the name of
Quraish for none.

So Abdul Muttalib utilized the swords and armors himself, and hung the
two big deer on the door of Kaaba for decoration. Then the governance of
Mecca and the service of supplying water to Hajj pilgrims was reserved
for Abdul Muttalib. Thereafter none except Hudi bin Naufal raised any
dispute in this matter with him. He was the chief of Mecca before Abdul
Muttalib, so he became envious of him.

One day he came to confront and said: “You were merely a boy among the
boys of your community. You have neither a son nor any helper. You came
from Medina all alone. Then how are you superior to us?” His Eminence
became angry and retorted: “Do you taunt me for having few sons?” Then
he gave a word to Allah that if He gives him ten sons he would sacrifice
one of them to uphold His Might and Grace. “O Allah, grant me many sons
and do not allow the enemies to laugh at me. Doubtlessly You are Unique
and Needless.”

Then he began to marry women. He married six women and got ten sons from
them. Every one of those women was very beautiful and prestigious in her
community. One of them was Manah, daughter of Harith Kalabiya, second
Samraati binte Aneedaq va Taleeqiyah, third Hajra Khazaaiyah, fourth
Saad daughter of Habib Kalbiya, fifth Hala binte Wahab and sixth Fatima
binte Amr Makhzumiya. Fatima had given birth to Abu Talib and Prophet’s
father Abdullah. Some say Zubair was also born of Fatima and the other
children were from different women.

His Eminence, Abdul Muttalib was making untiring efforts to serve the
Holy Kaaba. Once when he was sleeping near the Kaaba he saw a dream and
became restless next morning. He got up, drew his sheet and approached a
group of soothsayers shivering. They asked: “O Abul Harith, what’s wrong
with you?” He replied: “I dreamt that a bright chain sprang out from my
back that dazzled the eyes. That chain had four angels one in the east,
another in the west. One end was on the ground and the other was
reaching the sky.

Then I saw two persons who were very handsome and graceful. They were
standing under that chain. I asked one of them: “Who are you?” He
replied: “I am Prophet Nuh (a.s.).” Another said: “I am Allah’s friend
Ibrahim (a.s.) and we have come here to live under the shade of this
holy tree. Lucky is one who resides beneath this tree and woe unto one
who stays away from it.”

The soothsayers said: “O Abul Harith! This is glad tiding for you. You
will get a thing which will be exclusively for you and none will have
any share in it. If your dream is true, a son will be born to you who
will invite the residents of the east and west to the religion of Allah.
He will be a blessing for one group and punishment for another.” Abdul
Muttalib became much happy and said: “Who is to possess the light of my
forehead?”

Once, Abdul Muttalib went on a hunt all alone; where he became very
thirsty. Then he saw a very clean and sweet spring of water which had
stagnated in the midst of a clean rock. He drank some water from it
which was sweeter than honey and cooler than ice. He understood that it
was heavenly water which had arrived for him. After returning from there
he mated with his honorable wife, Fatima Makhzumiya who was more noble,
virtuous and pious, than all others.

It resulted in the conception of Abdullah, the father of the Holy
Prophet (S) and the radiance which was in the forehead of Abdul Muttalib
was transferred to Fatima. When Abdullah was born, that Noor began to
spread from him to such an extent that all corners of the sky became
bright. His Eminence, Abdul Muttalib became very happy due to the
passing of the Noor to that virtuous and chaste lady. All soothsayers
and People of Book became active. They were aggrieved by this. Rabbis
had a gown which they claimed to be the gown of Prophet Yahya (a.s.)
that he wore at his martyrdom and it contained stains of his blood.

The Jews had read in their holy book that when a drop of blood would
fall out from that gown it would be the time when a prophet would be
born soon who would wage Jihad with his sword. They went to that gown
and saw blood oozing therefrom. They understood that the time for
appearance of the prophet of the last age had approached; so they became
very sad. They sent a group to Mecca to inquire about the birth of that
prophet.

His Eminence, Abdullah was growing very fast. His one day’s growth was
equal to the growth attained by other boys in two months. People used to
come to see him in groups and were astonished to observe his elegance
and radiance. The behavior of the Jews with His Eminence, Abdullah was
just like that of the brothers of Yusuf with His Eminence, Yusuf (a.s.).
When Abdul Muttalib got eleven sons, he remembered his vow. He called
all his sons and arranged dinner for them.

After they had dined he said: “Dear sons! You know that all of you are
very dear to me. I cannot bear even if a thorn troubles you. But Allah’s
right upon me is greater than yours. I had vowed to my Lord that if He
gave me ten or more sons I would sacrifice one of them in His way. Now
Allah has bestowed me good sons like you. So what is your opinion about
my vow?” Upon this all kept quiet and began to look at one another.

Finally Abdullah, who was the youngest of them all, said: “Dear father!
You are also our ruler and we are your sons. We will obey whatever your
command is. Allah’s right over you is higher than ours on you. We are
obedient to Allah and will be patient. We are also obedient to you and
are happy with Allah’s wish and we seek Allah’s protection in opposing
your decision.” At that time Abdullah was only eleven years old. Hearing
these words of his good son, Abdul Muttalib wept very much and thanking
him turned to others, asking them what did they thought? They also said:
“We have heard and we have obeyed. We are prepared even if you intend to
sacrifice all of us.”

Abdul Muttalib blessed all of them and said: “Go to your mothers and let
them know what I have said to you. Also tell them to wash your hands and
faces and apply antimony to your eyes and to bid you goodbye after
dressing you in clean clothes, as if you were not to return to them.”
When the boys conveyed this painful news to their mothers they began to
cry in grief and continued it till the next morning. In the morning,
Abdul Muttalib put the chador of Adam (a.s.) on his shoulder, put on the
shoes of Sheeth (a.s.) in his feet, and wore the finger ring of Nuh
(a.s.) and came out of his house with a sharp dagger in his hand.

Then he called every one of his sons from the houses of their mothers.
All of them arrived dressed in the best dresses except Abdullah whose
mother was sure that only her son was worthy of going to Allah’s court
and that the draw would come only in his name and so she was not
separating him from her. Abdul Muttalib went to the house of Fatima,
Abdullah’s mother, held Abdullah’s hand and brought him out. Fatima
clung to him and Abdullah clung to his father. Abdul Muttalib was
drawing Abdullah towards him and the child’s mother was preventing him
crying and complaining.

Abdullah was advising his mother: “Dear mother! Please leave me and
allow me to go with my dear father so that he may do to me whatever he
thinks fit.” At last, Fatima became extremely gloomy and she tore her
collar saying: “O Abul Harith! This act of yours is such that no one has
ever done in the world. How will you be able to slaughter your own dear
child with your own hand? And if you at all want do so, leave Abdullah
as he is the youngest of all. Have mercy on his childhood and respect
the radiance emanating from his forehead.”

When she saw that her wailing had no effect on Abdul Muttalib she
embraced her child closely to her bosom and said: “Allah forbid. May the
radiance on your head never be put off. I do not know what should I do?
If only I had become blind before this and been buried in earth. I am,
my dear son, separating you from me by force and have no hope of your
coming back.” Upon this Abdul Muttalib became restless; tears flowed
from his eyes and his complexion changed; his legs stopped walking. Then
Abdullah spoke: “O my merciful mother, allow me to go with my father. If
Allah has selected me for being sacrificed in His path, I am most
fortunate. I will submit my life again and again, and if he selects
someone else from us, I will return sorrowfully to you.”

Then Abdul Muttalib arrived in Kaaba with all of them. All men and women
of Quraish gathered and began to weep and wail. Jews and soothsayers
became happy thinking that perhaps the light of prophethood will be
extinguished. They did not realize that no one can ever blow out the
light of Allah. Holding a very sharp dagger in hand Abdul Muttalib began
to draw lots in the names of his sons. He was praying: “O Lord of Kaaba
and Sanctuary and Sustainer of angels and Creator of universe, for the
sake of Your Noor, remove every darkness from us with Truth and decide
this matter as none can ever reject what You have decided.

The weak have no shelter except in You. You are Almighty and Omnipotent.
Needs of the needy can never be fulfilled but only by You the Needless.
My Lord! You know what Promise I gave You and what my vow is. Now I have
brought all of my sons in Your service so that You may select whom you
want please. If You please grant patience and peace to the elders as
their patience is more amidst troubles and the younger are mostly
pitiable. O Lord of Kaaba and the Rukn and the Maqam and O Sustainer of
the earth, skies, sea and mountains and O sender of clouds and rain,
remove difficulty and trouble from the boys.”

Thereafter he wrote the name of every one of his sons on every arrow and
put them in the Kaaba and also sent his sons in the Kaaba. The mothers
of the boys began to weep and wail aloud and the entire audience also
wept. Abdul Muttalib was falling down due to old age and again getting
up with the power of spirituality saying: “O Lord! Declare Your judgment
soon.” People were raising their heads and crying restlessly waiting to
see in whose name the lot was to appear. Then suddenly all saw that the
man who was drawing lots came our carrying with him Abdullah who was
covered in a chador hanging by his neck.

His color was getting yellow like the sun and was trembling like the
lamp of the morning hours. He was the worthiest of all for being
sacrificed in the court of the Lord. That man told Abdul Muttalib: “The
draw has come out in the name of this bright son. Now you may slaughter
him if you please or leave him.”

Upon this Abdul Muttalib fell down unconscious and all of his brothers
came out of the Kaaba weeping. Abu Talib was weeping more than all
others and he was kissing the bright face of his brother wailing: “I
wish I could live till the time I could see your worthy son grow up who
is the heir of this Noor and whom Allah has made superior to the entire
creation and through whom He will clear the earth of every dirt and
impurity of blasphemy and idol worship, who will destroy the soothsaying
of soothsayers.”

When Abdul Muttalib regained consciousness, he heard the noise of
weeping men and women all around him. He observed that Fatima,
Abdullah’s mother was throwing dust on her head and beating her breast.
All this also could not weaken his decision. He thought of holding the
hand of Abdullah to lay him on the ground for slaughtering. The elders
of Quraish and the sons of Abde Manaf clung to him.

Abdul Muttalib told them: “Woe unto you, you cannot be more merciful to
my son than me. But I cannot leave him unless I carry out my Lord’s
command regarding him.” Clinging to Abdullah, Abu Talib was saying,
“Dear father, sacrifice me instead of him but leave him.” Abdul Muttalib
said: “I cannot contravene my Lord’s commandment. I will slaughter one
in whose name the arrow was drawn.” Then elders of Quraish requested
Abdul Muttalib to draw lots once again saying that perhaps it might show
something else.

When they all urged much the lot was drawn again. Once again it drew in
Abdullah’s name. Abdul Muttalib said: “Now obeying the Divine order has
become absolutely obligatory and now there is no question of any
recommendation.” So he brought Abdullah (a.s.) at the altar and Arab
elders stood in rows behind him. Abdul Muttalib tied up Abdullah’s hands
and legs and laid him down on earth. When Abdullah’s mother saw this,
she rushed crying to her relatives. They rushed to Abdul Muttalib when
the dagger had almost reached the neck of Abdullah. At that moment,
angels in the sky made noises spreading their wings.

Jibraeel and Israfeel prayed to Almighty Allah when they got a
revelation: “My angels! I am aware of all this and I know everything. I
have tested the faith of My servant so as to make his patience known to
the entire world.” At that moment ten men belonging to Fatima’s tribe
advanced barefoot and bare head with naked swords in their hands, clung
to Abdul Muttalib and said: “We will never allow our sister’s son to be
slaughtered. It will be possible only after you kill all of us.” At that
time Abdul Muttalib raised his head to the sky and said: “My Lord! You
see that these people are not allowing me to obey Your order and are
preventing me from fulfilling my vow. So decide between me and them as
You alone are the best judge.”

Then a wise community elder, Akram bin Aamir came forward and suggested
a plan that lots be drawn between Abdullah and camels. The next day
Abdul Muttalib ordered that all of his camel be brought. Abdullah was
adorned with the best fragrant dress and brought to the Holy Kaaba.
Abdul Muttalib prayed: “O Allah! Your Command is effective and Your Will
prevails.” Then he drew a lot and it came out in Abdullah’s name. Then
ten camels were added in the lot of camels praying: “My Lord! If my
prayer is not being answered because of my sins, You are the Most
forgiving and the remover of all difficulties. Please have mercy on us
and give us grace.” Then he drew the lot again. Again it showed
Abdullah’s name.

He added ten more camels and prayed: “My Sustainer and My Pardoner! My
Lord! Every allowance and denial is only from You and only Your will
prevails over all. I have done something unwise due to my ignorance. I
am hopeful of Your pardon. Please forgive me and do not disappoint me.
Again the lot drew in Abdullah’s name.” When the number of camels to be
slaughtered reached ninety and every time the lot drew in Abdullah’s
name, Abdul Muttalib dragged his dear son towards him for slaughtering
him.

All around him began to scream and complain when Abdullah himself
exclaimed: “My dear father! Be ashamed of the Lord and do not disobey
His order and make no delay in sacrificing me and hasten it up so that I
may remain patient at His will. Tie my hands and feet firmly so that I
may not be able to convulse. Also hide my face so that compassion may
not overcome you. And draw back your clothes so that the stains of my
blood may not multiply the sorrowfulness in your heart. My dear father!
After my passing away, do not be careless about my dear mother and leave
no stone unturned in appeasing and consoling her, because I know that
she will not live longer after my departure. I also request you to feel
happy at the will of Allah and not to remain so gloomy.”

Hearing these words from his son, the heart of Abdul Muttalib overflowed
with restlessness and sorrow. He laid down Abdullah, put his radiant
forehead on earth and made his dagger reach the neck of his son when all
the elders of Quraish once again rushed to him and kissed his feet and
requested him to draw lot once more.

They also promised that if it showed Abdullah’s name they would not
recommend any more. So again a lot was drawn between Abdullah on one
hand and a hundred camels on the other. This time it indicated camels.
So all screamed with joy, rushed to Abdul Muttalib and snatched away
Abdullah from his hands and congratulated him and Fatima ran up and took
Abdullah in her arms and began to thank Allah tearfully.

At that time Abdul Muttalib said: “It is not justice on my part to spare
Abdullah if the lot shows his name on nine occasions and of camels only
once.” So he drew the lots again twice and on both occasions it showed
camels. An announcer announced from the midst of Kaaba: “Allah has
accepted your prayer and soon the leader of the pious, the Holy Prophet
(S) will be born from his progeny.”

The Quraishi leaders said: “O Abdul Muttalib! Congratulations for this
blessing from Almighty Allah. The unseen announcers are giving you glad
tidings regarding your son.” Then Fatima (a.s.) took her son to her
house. Arab tribes from all around arrived to congratulate the Sayyid in
Mecca. Since then the blood money of every man was fixed at one hundred
camels.

When Jews and soothsayers were disappointed and they saw Abdullah safe,
they began to conspire for his detention. One of their conspiracies was
that they arranged a feast at the place of one of their chiefs named
Reebaan where they mixed poison with food which they sent through some
women to the house of Abdul Muttalib as a gift to Fatima.

Fatima asked: “Who are you?” They replied: “We are among your relatives
in the progeny of Abde Manaf. We are very pleased due to the safety of
Abdullah. We have prepared this food on this happy occasion. This is
your share therefrom.” When that food was brought before Abdul Muttalib
he asked: “Wherefrom has it come?” Fatima (a.s.) said: “Your relatives
have cooked it to celebrate the well being of our beloved son.

They have sent this as our share.” When Abdul Muttalib intended to eat
from it, the food, as a miracle of the Noor of the Holy Prophet (S)
spoke up: “Do not eat me as I am poisoned.” Then they realized that it
was a conspiracy, so they buried that food. When His Eminence, Abdullah
became adult, the Noor of the Holy Prophet (S) appeared on his forehead
and nobles from all around came and offered their daughters in marriage
to him and to benefit from his beauty and light as he was unique in his
elegance and grace.

During the day the path he traversed became fragrant due to the good
smell emanating from his body. At night, buildings all around were
brightened by the radiance of his holy face. Meccans used to call him
‘Lamp of the House of Allah’. In short, the prophetic radiance was
destined for the virtuous lady Amina binte Wahab with whom His Eminence,
Abdullah got married.

The cause of this blissful marriage was that when the scholars of People
of Book observed the signs of the appearance of this most intelligent
person all of them gathered in Syria and discussed about the birth of
the Prophet of the last age. Then all proceeded to their most aged and
experienced scholar in Jordan. He asked: “Why have all of you come and
why you look so much worried?”

They replied: “We have read in our holy books about the virtues of the
prophet who will be helped by angels and who will destroy our religion.
We have come here to consult you in this matter. Perhaps you may suggest
some idea to prevent the appearance of that man.” He said: “One who
intends to prevent what Allah has decided is ignorant. Whatever you have
seen and read will surely happen and it cannot be prevented. One of his
relatives will be his vizier who will assist him in every matter.”

They were shocked at the discourse of that learned man. One of them
named Heuba, who was very bold and haughty disbeliever. He got up and
said: “This man has become very old and hence his intellect has
weakened. Do not listen to his words. I say that a tree which is
uprooted and thrown away cannot become green. It is advisable to kill
the man from whose loins the said prophet is to be born and then stop
worrying about him.

The plan is that you should purchase some goods and go to Mecca under
pretext of trade where your aim will be fulfilled. I will also accompany
you. Dip your swords in poisoned water and prepare for the journey.”
Those cursed fellows accepted the suggestion of that unlucky denier.
They bought goods for Mecca and proceeded for that city.

When they approached the holy city, they heard the voice of an unseen
announcer saying: “O the most unlucky persons! You are going to the best
city and are intending to harm the best man among Allah’s creation! A
man who tries to overturn the Divine Designs returns to hellfire and
ends up as a loser in the world as well as the hereafter. They were
bewildered and were about to return, but Heuba made them go ahead
through his satanic talks. The cursed fellows were inquiring about His
Eminence, Abdullah (a.s.) from every one who met them on the way. People
were all praise for Abdullah’s beauty and virtues which doubled their
enmity and jealousy.

Then all of them entered Mecca and showed their goods to traders
demanding a high price so that they might not purchase and they could
stay there for a long time. They were awaiting for an opportunity to
fulfill their evil designs. One night Abdullah saw a dream and described
it to his father, Abdul Muttalib. He narrated that some monkeys waving
naked swords were attacking him until he was lifted up in the air.

Then a fire came down from the sky and it burnt down those mischievous
monkeys. Abdul Muttalib said: “My dear son! Allah will always protect
you from every calamity. Many are anxious of you because of the radiance
shining on your forehead. But even if all on the surface of this earth
join hands they will not be able to harm you in the least because this
radiance is the Noor of the Prophet of the last age and Allah is its
protector.”

Abdul Muttalib and Abdullah used to go hunting on many occasions but
those deniers were not able to confront Abdullah for fear of Abdul
Muttalib. Once Abdullah went alone. Heuba went to his companions and
said: “Here is a good chance. Abdullah has gone for hunting all alone
and this is an appropriate time.” When Abdullah was slaughtering his
hunted animal in one of the caves, the Jews surrounded him from all
sides and closed all passages of escape. When Abdullah saw that they
intended to kill him, he raised his head to the sky and prayed weeping
to Allah; the knower of the open and the hidden.

Then he turned to the Jews and asked: “Why do you want to kill me? By
Allah! I have never harmed anyone of you nor have I grabbed any of your
wealth, neither have I killed anyone of you.” The cursed fellows did not
reply to any of his questions. They attacked him suddenly and jointly.
Abdullah took the Holy Name of Only One Allah and shot four arrows
towards them.

When four of them were killed, the unbelievers began to make excuses and
said: “Why are you killing us? We are not confronting you. One of our
slaves has run away. We are searching him. We mistook you for him.
Abdullah laughed at this mischievous lie and, taking up his bow,
intended to ride off when they attacked him again.”

Some began to throw stones and some attacked with their swords. Abdullah
also confronted them very courageously and felled many of them. But when
he became very tired he jumped off his horse and took support of the
mountain rock. The oppressors began to stone him but they dared not
approach him. At that moment when they had surrounded Abdullah, Wahab
Ibn Abde Manaf came up to that valley. Seeing the big number of the Jews
he feared and rushed back to Mecca and cried out to the Quraish asking
them to rush to the help of Abdullah who was surrounded in a valley by
the enemies.

All men of Bani Hashim took up swords, rode their horses without saddles
and rushed to that mountain, saw that Abdul Muttalib, Abu Talib, Hamza,
Abbas and other men of Bani Hashim had entered that valley. At that time
Abdul Muttalib said: “My son, this is the meaning of the vision which
you had seen in a dream.” The Jews understood that they were not likely
to remain alive so they began to flee. Some hid themselves in a narrow
pass when, by the command of Allah, a rock fell on them and killed them.
Many of them were caught.

When people intended to kill them, they said: “Allow us some time so
that we may settle our monetary accounts with Meccans. Thereafter you
may do whatever you like.” So they were tied up and brought to Mecca.
Meccans stoned and cursed them. Then Abdul Muttalib sent some of them to
Wahab by way of thanks.

When Wahab went to his wife, Barrah he said to her: “Today I observed
some strange things in Abdullah, son of Abdul Muttalib, which were never
observed in anybody before even in the bravest of Arabs. Allah has given
him a unique beauty and grace which none in the world has ever seen or
heard.

I saw that when Jews surrounded him, angels were descending from the
sky.” Then he said: “Please go to Abdul Muttalib and talk to him.
Perhaps they will accept our daughter, Amina for marriage with Abdullah
and allow us also to share their grace.” Barrah said: “O Wahab! Almost
all chiefs of Mecca and surroundings have offered their daughters but
they did not accept. How will they accept our daughter?” Wahab replied:
“I have today established one of our rights on them by informing them
about Abdullah. They may, due to it, consider our request about our
daughter.”

Barrah came to Abdul Muttalib’s house. He said: “Welcome, today your
husband has done a favor to us. Let us know if you have any need so that
we may fulfill it.”

Barrah said: “O Abdul Muttalib! He has sent me to you. He wants that the
radiance of Abdullah to be transferred to his daughter, Amina. We have
no other need. I offer Amina to you as a gift.” Abdul Muttalib looked at
Abdullah and said: “My son! Even though you have not accepted daughters
of some kings, this girl belongs to your family. No other girl can equal
her in wisdom, piety, chastity, honesty, beauty, grace and perfection.”
Abdullah remained calm and did not express dislike. Then Abdul Muttalib
said to Barrah: “We accept your offer and take your daughter, Amina for
Abdullah.”

That night Abdul Muttalib took Abdullah to Wahab’s house and began to
talk about marriage. At once, the Jews imprisoned in Wahab’s house took
undue benefit of this engagement, broke their ties and ran away to their
houses. As they were unarmed at that time, they began to pelt stones on
them (Bani Hashim). But as a miracle of the Noor of the Holy Prophet
(S), the stones boomeranged on them and broke their heads and chests.

The brave persons also took out their swords and, taking intercession of
the Noor of the Holy Prophet (S), attacked the deniers and killed them
all. After the end of this ugly incident, Abdul Muttalib told Wahab: “If
Allah wills, we and you will perform this marriage in the presence of
our people, next morning.”

Next morning, Abdul Muttalib took his sons, family members and relatives
with him. Wahab also gathered his kith and kin. When people from both
sides gathered, Abdul Muttalib gave a nicely worded eloquent speech
saying: “I praise Allah like the praise of the thankful. The praise of
which He is worthy for the bounties, which He has granted to us. He
granted us the shade of His Holy Sanctuary and allowed us to reside in
it.

He poured love for us in the hearts of His slaves and He gave us
superiority over all communities. He protected us from all calamities
and hardships. I praise Almighty Allah who made marriage permissible and
adultery unlawful for us. Know that our son, Abdullah demands the hand
of your daughter, Amina for this much dower. Do you accept?” Wahab
replied: “Yes, we agree and we accept.”

Then Abdul Muttalib told the audience: “Be witness to this.” Then Abdul
Muttalib gave a feast to all the residents of Mecca and its surroundings
for four days. After the night of consummation of Abdullah with Amina,
at the time of sunrise, the Creator of the universe commanded Jibraeel
and he (the angel) announced in Paradise that the means of the arrival
of the great prophet who is to give glad tidings as well as warnings,
the shining moon have been completed.

“That prophet will order good and prohibit evil and call My servants to
good and to follow the truth. He will be My Mercy on My creation. He
will be perfectly honest and trustworthy. His light of guidance will
spread throughout the universe. Glad tiding of grace and bliss is for
one who will be friendly with him and one who will nurture enmity
against him will get the severest chastisement. He is one whose holy and
pious clay was presented before you prior to the creation of Adam. His
name in the sky is Ahmad and in the world, Muhammad (S) and in Paradise,
Abul Qasim.

Upon this the angels rained the slogans hallowing and pronouncing the
greatness of the Only One Allah. They opened the doors of Paradise,
closed the gates of Hell, the Houries popped their heads out of their
heavenly apartments, birds of Paradise began to sing the praise of the
Lord Creator of space and time.

Then Jibraeel came down to the earth with one thousand angels and
conveyed the glad tiding of the conception of the friend of the Lord
Creator throughout the universe. So much so that the good news reached
the guardians of the seas and mountains and clouds and all the residents
of the universe even upto the seventh strata of the earth.

Everyone of them who loved one selected by Allah got His Mercy and one
who envied, deprived himself of divine grace. They (angel) chained the
devils and prevented them from hearing the news of heavens, driving them
away from every door of the sky hitting them with missiles of meteors.
Next day, which was a Friday as well as the day of Arafat, when Abdullah
was busy taking a walk with his father and brothers in the field of
Arafat they became very thirsty. There was no water in that sandy land.
Suddenly there appeared a stream of pure water which astonished all.

At once they heard the voice of an unseen announcer saying: “O Abdullah!
Drink this water.” Then Abdullah understood that that the stream had
appeared for conception of that beloved of Lord Creator. At that very
moment he hurriedly rushed back to his tent and asked Amina: “Please get
up, take a bath, wear good clothes and apply fragrance as you are,
shortly, to become the treasurer of the Divine Radiance.”

So she at once became pregnant with the embryo of the chief of all
prophets and that Noor was transferred from the loins of Abdullah to the
womb of Amina. Amina (r.a.) says: “When Abdullah was upon me, a Light
came out of him which brightened all the skies and the earth.”
Thereafter the same radiance dazzled from the forehead of Amina (r.a.)
like the image of sun. Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that there was a
woman named Fatima, daughter of Marrah, who had read many books about
the past prophets and religious scholars.

Once His Eminence, Abdullah passed by her. That lady asked him: “Are you
the one whose ransom of a hundred camels was paid by your father?” He
replied: “Yes.” She said: “How nice if you contract a marriage with me
and mate with me only once.” I will give you one hundred camels in
exchange. But His Eminence, Abdullah did not pay any attention. After
the holy sperm settled in the womb of Lady Amina (a.s.), Abdullah once
again, passed by that woman but he did not find the earlier desire in
her.

When he asked the reason, she said: “The thing for which I wanted you
was destined by the Almighty Allah for another lady and she has already
been fortunate to get it.” It is mentioned in a tradition that when
Amina got married to Abdullah, two hundred women died of despair. When
the time for the transfer of that radiance from Abdullah arrived, it
dazzled so much that nobody was able to look at his shining face at
night.

All the rocks and trees he passed bowed down to him, saluting him. It is
said that when His Eminence, Abdullah proceeded to Paradise, the age of
the Holy Prophet (S) was only two months. According to one narration he
was seven month old. Yet another report mentions that he was not born
till then. When Lady Amina (r.a.) expired, the Holy Prophet (S) was four
years old. According to another saying he was six and according to yet
another tradition he was two years and six months old. Her end came at
Abwa which is situated between Mecca and Medina.

When His Eminence, Abdul Muttalib passed away, the Holy Prophet (S) was
eight years, two months and ten days old. It is mentioned in Shia and
Sunni narrations that one night the Holy Prophet (S) came to the grave
of his dear father, Abdullah, offered two units of prayer and called
him. The grave opened.

He observed that His Eminence, Abdullah was sitting in the grave and
that seeing the Holy Prophet (S) he (Abdullah) said: I testify that
there is no god but only One God and that you are His Prophet and
Messenger.” His Eminence, asked: “Who is your Wali?” He inquired: “My
son: Who is your Wali?” The Holy Prophet (S) replied: “This Ali (a.s.)
is my Wali.” Then Abdullah said: “I testify that Ali is my Wali.”

Then His Eminence, said: “My son: Go back to your garden where you had
been.” Therefrom the Holy Prophet (S) went to the grave of his dear
mother and repeated the same things. That grave too opened and the Holy
Prophet (S) observed that Amina was sitting therein saying: “I testify
that there is no god but only One God and that you are His prophet and
messenger.” He asked: “Who is your Wali?” She inquired: “Who is your
Wali?” He said: “This Ali bin Abi Talib is my Wali.” Amina (a.s.) said:
“I testify that Ali (a.s.) is my Wali.” His Eminence, said: “Please
return to your garden.”[^13]

Shazan bin Jibraeel Qummi, Ibn Babawayh and Shaykh Tabarsi (r.a.) have
also narrated with little difference and much agreement. Shazan has said
that during the days of Abdul Muttalib (a.s.) there was a king in Yemen
known as Saif bin Zuyazan. He had captured Mecca and had appointed his
son as the governor. Abdul Muttalib took some chiefs of Bani Hashim with
him and proceeded to Yemen so as to meet him and to ask him to be kind
to the residents of Mecca.

When they reached Yemen they came to know that the king was in his
palace named Wardi and that according to his habit he lived in Amadan
palace during spring where he remained busy in luxury for more than
forty days. At that time no one was allowed to approach him. The garden
attached to the Amadan palace had a gate also in the direction of the
forest.

Guards were posted at every gate. When Abdul Muttalib arrived at the
said gate and asked permission to enter, the guard said: “In these days
the king remains in privacy with his mates and women and no one is
allowed to go there. If he sees you, he will kill us also along with
you.” Abdul Muttalib gave him a purse full of golden coins saying:
“Please don’t prevent me from going in, the question of my death is more
important to me and as for you, I will recommend to the king that you
will not be harmed.”

When the eyes of the guard fell on the red golden coins, he forgot his
black blood and restlessness and could not stop His Eminence, from
entering. When Abdul Muttalib entered that garden, he saw that the
Amadan palace was in the middle of that garden and that various kinds of
flower plants were planted all around it and a clean water canal was
flowing around it and Saif, was staring happily at the flowers resting
on a pillow in his palace. When he saw Abdul Muttalib, he angrily asked
his slaves: “Who this man, who has entered this garden without my
permission? Bring him to me at once.”

The slaved rushed and took Abdul Muttalib to the king. Abdul Muttalib
observed that the palace was decorated with all kinds of jewels besides
gold and silver and extremely beautiful slave girls stood in rows on all
sides. There was a pillar of red agate near the king’s seat and a cup of
ruby on top of that pillar full of musk wine. On its left was a glass of
red gold. The king had a naked sword on his lap.

He asked Abdul Muttalib: “Who are you?” He replied: “I am Abdul Muttalib
son of Hashim son of Abde Manaf,” and he described his ancestry right
upto Adam (a.s.). The king asked: “O Abdul Muttalib! Are you the son of
my sister?” He replied: “Yes, because Saif belonged to Aale Qahtan and
Aale Qahtan was the brother’s progeny and Aale Ismail was sister’s
progeny.” Then Saif gave much respect and honor to Abdul Muttalib and
shook hands with him and seated him beside him and asked the reason of
his arrival.

His Eminence, replied: “We reside in the neighborhood of the House of
Allah and we are serving that House. We have come to congratulate you
for your victory over your enemies.” He wished well for the king who
became very happy and made Abdul Muttalib and all of his companions stay
as his guests in the hall of entertainment and gave them much respect.
He fixed some amount for feast every night.

One night he called Abdul Muttalib in privacy, sent away his companions
so that no one would know about their talks and said: “O Abdul Muttalib:
I want to tell you a secret which I have never told anybody as, in my
opinion, you alone are worthy of knowing it. I want you to keep it
secret till the time of its manifestation arrives.”

Then Saif said: “In your city there is a very beautiful child with a
well built physique and extremely beautiful and unique stature. There is
a mark between his shoulders. He will arrive in the land of Tahama.
Allah will put the crown of prophethood on his head. Clouds will provide
shade to him. He alone will be the intercessor of humanity on Judgment
Day.

There are two seals of Messengership between his shoulders wherein it is
inscribed: There is no god except Allah. Muhammad is the Messenger of
Allah. Allah has called both of his parents to His fold of Mercy. His
grandfather and his uncle are nourishing him. His signs are shining like
full moon in the holy books of Bani Israel. Almighty Allah will make a
group of we, Yemenis his helpers and assistants. Allah will make his
friends win and disgrace his enemies. He will break idols and silence
the fire temples.

His words will be full of wisdom. His deeds will show justice and
equity. He will order good and will do good himself. He will forbid evil
and remove them. If I remain alive till his arrival, I will go to
Medina, his capital, with my armies to assist him. Had I not feared that
enemies would destroy him, I would have publicized everything about him
and would have at once invited all the Arab tribes to side with him. I
imagine that you are his grandfather.”

Abdul Muttalib said: “Your guess is correct.” He said: “You are most
welcome, you have honored us with your arrival here. I make you a
witness that I have believed in that Prophet and that whatever he has
brought from His Lord is Truth.” Then he sighed thrice sorrowfully
saying: “How good it would have been if I had been living in his time
and sacrificed my life for helping him.

O Abdul Muttalib! Try your best to protect him because his enemies are
many, especially the Jews whose jealousy is very bitter. And also beware
of your community as they too will envy, harass and harm him.” Abdul
Muttalib saw many white hair in the beard of Saif. Then Saif bid good
bye to Abdul Muttalib and said: “Do come with all your companions
tomorrow to my court so that I may arrange a special feast in your
honor.”

Next day, His Eminence, Abdul Muttalib put on nice clothes, applied
scent and went to Saif’s court. The king made him sit near him with much
respect. Abdul Muttalib said: “O King, yesterday I observed white hair
in your beard but I cannot see so now!” The King said: “I apply hair
dye.” It is said that Saif was the first man ever to apply dye. Then the
king sent all of them to the bath and also sent dye for them and they
all applied it.

Thereafter he gifted to every one of them a purse of gold coins, one
slave, one slave girl and one pair of clothing and also the total of all
that to Abdul Muttalib. According to another report each one was given
ten slaves, ten slave girls, two Yemeni robes, a hundred camels and ten
pounds of silver tinged with musk and ambergris and tenfold of all that
to Abdul Muttalib.

Then he called for his horse, Uqaab and his mule, Ashhab and camel,
Ghazba and handing them over to Abdul Muttalib said: “When your grandson
matures, give these gifts to him. Till then these things are a trust
with you. Whenever I rode Uqaab for hunting or war I was successful. If
I ever returned from an enemy riding this horse, no one could harm me. I
have traveled in numerous hills, vales, plains and forests riding on
this mule so happily that I never wished to get down from it. Please
present these gifts to your forthcoming grandson and convey my regards
to him.”

Abdul Muttalib responded: “I accept with hearty pleasure.” Then Abdul
Muttalib departed from Saif and returned to Mecca. He used to say: “I am
not as happy with these gifts because they are all to perish. But I am
very happy about the grace for me and my grandson, which are everlasting
and you will know everything about him very soon. When the Meccans came
to know about the return of Abdul Muttalib, their chiefs rushed to
welcome him and the Holy Prophet (S) also walked a little with peace of
mind and poise and sat down on a wayside rock.

When the companions and friends arrived, Abdul Muttalib asked them:
“Where is my chief and commander Muhammad (S)?” They replied: “He is
waiting for you in the way.” When Abdul Muttalib approached him
(Muhammad) he got down from his horse, took up His Eminence, (S) in his
lap, kissed his forehead and said: “My dear son! Saif bin Yazan has sent
this horse, this mule and this camel as gifts for you and has also sent
Salams to you.” His Eminence, prayed for his well-being and rode the
horse which began to gallop happily.

It is narrated that the lineage of that horse was Uqab, its father
Nizoob it’s father Qaabil, its father Bataal, its father Zaadurraakib,
its father Alkifaah, its father Aljanah, its father Mauj and its father
Maimoon was from Reeh and Reeh was by the Word of Allah, born without a
father and a mother. When the Prophet was eight years, eight months and
eight days old, his grandfather, Abdul Muttalib fell seriously ill.

According to his wish, he was laid on a board and brought near the
curtains of the Holy Kaaba. His nine sons sat all around him weeping.
The Holy Prophet (S) also arrived and sat near Abdul Muttalib on the
board. The cursed Abu Lahab intended to remove him. But Abdul Muttalib
scolded him: “O Abdul Uzza! You will not remove the enmity against this
selected servant of Allah from your heart!”

Then, turning to Abu Talib he made many recommendations concerning
Muhammad (S) and emphatically advised all his sons to give utmost
respect and honor to Muhammad (S) saying: “Very soon his greatness and
grandeur will come before you.” Then he became unconscious. On regaining
consciousness he addressed Quraish chiefs: “Do I have any right over
you?”

All responded: “Why not? You have a right on all of us, big or small.
May Allah give you a good reward and make death easy for you. You were a
very good elder and commander for all of us.” Abdul Muttalib said: “I
wish that all of you should give utmost respect and honor to my son,
Muhammad (S) and to consider him your leader, to respect his rights and
to honor him fully.” All responded: “We heard and we accepted
sincerely.”

Then Abdul Muttalib began to breathe his last. He took up Muhammad (S)
in his lap and said: “O my lucky and graceful son! Do not get separated
from me. I feel peace and rest so long as you are with me.” With these
words his lucky soul flew away towards the Most Merciful Allah.

According to authentic reports, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) is reported to
have said: “The Almighty Allah had orphaned his dear Prophet and he
called up his parents in his childhood so that obedience of none but
Only One Allah be incumbent on him and so that only Allah’s right may
remain on him.”

Condition Of Arabs And Meccans Before The Arrival Of The Holy Prophet (S)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is mentioned in a reliable, rather true tradition that Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) said: “The trusteeship of Kaaba had always remained among
the descendants of Ismail (a.s.) They were always in charge of issues
pertaining to Hajj and religion. They inherited leadership by birth from
their elders until the time of Adnan bin Awad when their hearts hardened
and they became corrupted. They began to create innovations in the
religion of Allah. They expelled some people from the holy precincts.

Most of them dispersed to earn livelihood and some to escape quarrels.
Their majority remained loyal to the way of Ibrahim (a.s.) like obeying
the Divine Commandments (as mentioned in the Holy Qur’an) like
prohibition of marriage with mothers, sisters and daughters. But they
considered marriage with step mothers and with daughters and sisters and
with sisters of existing wife lawful. They believed in Hajj. Talbiyah
and ritual bath after sexual intercourse but they had created
innovations in Hajj and Talbiyah etc.

They had also indulged in polytheism and idol worship. In these
circumstances, Musa (a.s.) was appointed between the times of Ismail
(a.s.) and Adnan. It is narrated that when Maad bin Adnan feared that
the Kaaba would become untraceable after being dilapidated, he made
marks and signs of its identification. When the tribe of Jurham took
control of Mecca and the trusteeship of Kaaba came in their hands, they
continued to pass it on to their heirs as heritage until mischief and
corruption spread among them too. They degraded the value of Kaaba and
grabbed its property and wealth and began to oppress whoever came to
Mecca.

Their lawlessness increased. In those days it so happened that whoever
dishonored Kaaba was soon destroyed and so also the one who made
mischief in Mecca. That is why this city is called Mecca meaning the
city which breaks the necks of oppressors. It is also called Basasa as
it destroys those who resort to oppression therein.

This city is also called Umm Raham (merciful mother or the source of
mercy) as one who serves and respects it, becomes the rightful gainer of
Divine Mercy. So when the people of Jurham community became lawbreakers
and mischievous, Allah punished them through plague, which killed many
of them.

Then the people of Khaza came together with an intention to drive the
remaining people of Jurham out of the Sanctuary. The chief of Khaza was
Amr bin Rabiah bin Harith and the leader of Jurham was Amr bin Harith
bin Jurhami. They fought with one another. Khaza overpowered the
Jurhams. Some of the Jarhamis who had survived went away to a place
called Jahina and settled there.

A flood there killed them all. Thereafter Khaza became the trustees of
Mecca until the time of Qusayy bin Kalab who was the great grandfather
of the Messenger of Allah (S). He drove the Khaza out of Mecca and
became the trustee of Kaaba. The trusteeship of Kaaba remained in their
progeny till the time of the Holy Prophet (S).

It is narrated that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: The Arabs to some
extent, continued to serve and follow the religion of Ibrahim (a.s.) and
also to be kind to the kith and kin. They were serving their guests and
performing the pilgrimage of Hajj of Kaaba. They used to say that one
must always refrain from grabbing the property of an orphan because it
is like a rope which ties up man. They were also desisting from many
prohibited things due to the fear of Divine punishment because no sooner
than they did anything unlawful they were caught in one or another
calamity.

They were hanging the skin of the trees growing in the limits of
Sanctuary in the necks of their camels and then let them free (untied)
but then no one could ever dare to steal those camels or to put another
skin belt in their necks. If anybody did so he used to be punished soon.
But today they have been given a respite and the Almighty Allah does not
grab them forthwith and does not chastise instantly. He keeps the matter
pending till Judgment Day. Once the people of Syria invaded Kaaba.

They installed a catapult on mount Abu Qubais to attack the Kaaba. Allah
sent a cloud like the wings of sparrows wherefrom a lightning fell and
killed seventy persons standing around that catapult. Another reliable
tradition says that once a man came to the Holy Prophet (S) and said: “A
girl was born in my home. I nourished her. When she matured, I dressed
her in nice clothes and jewellery, took her to a well and pushed her in
it.

The last words which I heard from her were: ‘My dear father!’ Now please
let me know how I can compensate for this misdeed?” The Holy Prophet (S)
asked: “Is your mother alive?” He said: “No.” Then the Holy Prophet (S)
asked: “Have you a maternal aunt?” He said: “Yes.” The Holy Prophet (S)
said: “Behave nicely with your aunt as she is like your mother. Perhaps
it would compensate.”

The narrator asked Imam (a.s.): “When was this misdeed committed?” He
replied: “Before the advent of the Holy Prophet (S), in the days of
ignorance people used to kill their daughters so that the enemy may
never be able to apprehend them and get sons from them, putting them to
shame.”

[^1]: Surah Saad 38:75

[^2]: The author says: There are many traditions about the creation of
those holy beings which cannot be accommodated in this book. If Allah
wills, some of them will be mentioned in the forthcoming book of
Imamate. As for the difference of opinion about the creation of Noor
before the creation of the universe, it is because of variations in
meaning of creation. Possibly they are applicable to any of the grades
as mentioned in Biharul Anwar.

[^3]: Surah Araaf 7:172

[^4]: Surah Anbiya 21:37

[^5]: One mithqal equals 1.234 grams approx.

[^6]: Approx. equal to seven mithqal. One mithqal is 1.234 grams.

[^7]: Surah Nisa 4:22

[^8]: Surah Anfal 8:41

[^9]: Surah Taubah 9:19

[^10]: The Arabs used the word Khaalu to mean maternal uncle as Allah
has also said in verse 61 of Surah Noor: “There is no blame on yourself
...that you eat from…your maternal uncles’ houses…

[^11]: A lentil

[^12]: The author says; It appears from the act of Abdul Muttalib that
may be the sacrifice of sons was permissible in the Shariat of Ibrahim
(a.s.). It is also probable that it might have been exclusively for
Abdul Muttalib who might have got a revelation.

[^13]: The author says that these narrations show that the parents of
the Holy Prophet (S) had faith in the Oneness of God and also in the
Messengership of the Holy Prophet (S) and that their calling in the
grave was to make their faith perfect by the attestation of the Wilayat
of Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.).


