An Account of some Senior Companions
====================================

Ibn Babawayh has narrated from Kariza bin Salih that he said: I heard
from His Eminence, Abu Dharr that he said that the Messenger of Allah
(S) mentioned three points about Amirul Momineen (a.s.): That even if
one of them had been in my favor, I would have preferred it over the
world and whatever is in it. First: O Allah help him and seek help
through him only and help him and take revenge from his enemies.

Indeed he is Your slave and the brother of Your Messenger.” Then Abu
Dharr said: “I testify that Ali is the Wali of Allah and the brother of
the Messenger and his successor.” Then Kariza said: “This testimony
gives him precedence on all Muslims like Salman Farsi, Ammar Yasir,
Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari, Abul Hasheem bin Taihan, Khuzaimah bin Thabit
Zul Shahadatain, Abu Ayyub Ansari and Hashim bin Atba Naufal (r.a.), who
were senior companions of the Prophet.”

Through reliable chains of narrators, it is reported that people asked
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) about His Eminence, Abu Dharr. He said: “He was
having the knowledge of truth and he had tied up its end secretly in
such a way that nothing can be lost from it.” Then they asked him about
Huzaifa. Ali (a.s.) said that he well remembered the names of the
hypocrites. Then they asked him about Ammar. He said: he was such a
believer whose bone marrow was filled with faith. And he used to forget
errands and when people reminded him, he used to remember immediately.

Then they asked about Abdullah bin Masud. He said: He recited the Qur’an
and it was revealed before him. People asked him about Salman Farsi. His
Eminence said: He achieved the knowledge of the formers and latters. And
he is an endless ocean of knowledge and he is from us, Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.). People said: O Amirul Momineen (a.s.): “Tell us about yourself.”
The Imam said: “I was such that when I asked a question the Holy Prophet
(S) used to bestow knowledge and when I was silent he initiated the
discussion.”

Moreover, it is narrated from Habba Arafi that Abdullah bin Umar found
ten persons arguing about Ammar. Each was claiming to have eliminated
him. Abdullah said: “You are fighting to get priority in going to Hell.
Because I have heard from the Holy Prophet (S) say that the killer of
Ammar, one who plunders his weapons and one who removes his garments,
will all go to Hell.” It is also narrated that when His Eminence, was
killed, people came to Huzaifa and said that Ammar has been killed and
people are debating whether he was on the right or not, so what was his
opinion? Huzaifa said: “I have heard from the Holy Prophet (S) that he
repeated thrice: Abul Yaqzan is firm on the nature Islam and he will not
leave it as long as he lives.”

It is also narrated from Ayesha that the Holy Prophet (S) said: “When
Ammar is given two choices, he opts for one which is the most
difficult.”

It is mentioned in *Qurbul Asnad*, through correct chains of narrators
from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) said:
“Allah has commanded me to love four persons. Companions asked who they
were. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “One of them is Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(a.s.),” and then he fell silent. Then he said: “The Almighty Allah has
commanded me to love four persons.” “Who are they,” asked the people. He
replied: “Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.), Miqdad bin Aswad, Abu Dharr Ghiffari
and Salman Farsi.”

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) through authentic chains of
narrators that when the Almighty Allah revealed the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
الْقُرْبٰى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives…”***[^1]

… the Holy Prophet (S) arose and said: “O people, the Almighty Allah has
made a duty incumbent on you with regard to me. Will you fulfill it?” No
one replied. The Prophet returned without any assurance. The Messenger
of Allah (S) again came to his companions the next day and asked the
same question but again he did not receive any response. On the third
day the Messenger of Allah (S) repeated the same question.

When no one responded, the Holy Prophet (S) said: “O people, whatever
the Almighty Allah has made incumbent on you with regard to me is not
from gold, silver or any edible item.” Then the people said: Then tell
us what it is?” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “The Almighty Allah has
revealed this verse and has made love of my Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) as the
recompense of my prophethood.” Then the people said: “We accept.” After
that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: “By Allah, this promise was not
fulfilled by anyone except the following seven persons: Salman, Abu
Dharr, Ammar, Miqdad, Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari, freed slave of the
Prophet, known as Thabeet and Zaid bin Arqam (r.a.).”

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ كَانَتْ لَهُمْ
جَنَّاتُ الْفِرْدَوْسِ نُزُلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely (as for) those who believe and do good deeds, their place of
entertainment shall be the gardens of Paradise.”***[^2]

This verse revealed in praise of Abu Dharr, Miqdad, Salman and Ammar
(r.a.) and the Almighty Allah has fixed Jannatul Firdos as their final
abode.

Ibn Babawayh and Shaykh Mufeed etc. have narrated that the Messenger of
Allah (S) said: “Allah has commanded me to love four of my Companions
and He himself loves them. Companions asked: “Who are they, we all like
to be from them?” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “They are: Ali Ibn Abi
Talib (a.s.), Salman, Abu Dharr and Miqdad.”

Ibn Babawayh has narrated from the Messenger of Allah (S) through
authentic chains of narrators that Ammar Yasir used to say in the Battle
of Siffeen: “I have fought thrice under this banner in the service of
the Prophet, and this is the fourth time. By Allah, if these people kill
me, or take us to date orchard of Hijr, even then we will continue to
believe that we are on the right and they are wrong.”

Moreover, it is narrated from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) through authentic
chains of narrators that the Holy Prophet (S) told Amirul Momineen
(a.s.): “Paradise is eager for you, Salman, Abu Dharr, Ammar and
Miqdad.”

Through authentic chains of narrators, it is narrated from Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) that His Eminence, said: “Five persons have precedence
in faith: I am the first among Arabs, Salman is the foremost among
Iranians, Suhaib is the first among Romans, Bilal is the first among the
Abyssinians and Khabab from the Copts.”

Through authentic chains of narrators, it is narrated from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) and Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) that love and Wilayat of those
believers is obligatory who after their Prophet didn’t make any changes
in the Caliph of Allah and the religion of Allah. For example: Salman
Farsi, Abu Dharr Ghiffari, Miqdad bin Aswad Kindi, Ammar bin Yasir,
Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari, Huzaifa bin Yaman, Abu Haitham bin Taihan,
Suhail bin Hanif, Abu Ayyub Ansari, Abdullah bin Samit, Ubadah bin
Samit, Khuzaimah bin Thabit, Zul Shahadatain and Abu Saeed Khudri and
those who walked on their path and performed deeds like them.

It is narrated from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that the world was created
for the following seven persons, for whose sake the inhabitants of the
world get their livelihood and through their auspiciousness rain falls,
and only through their sake are the people helped. And they are: Abu
Dharr, Salman, Miqdad, Ammar, Huzaifa and Abdullah bin Masud (r.a.).”
After that His Eminence said: “I am their Imam and chief. And it them
alone who were present at the funeral prayers of Fatima Zahra
(s.a.).”[^3]

Through authentic chains of narrators, it is narrated from Imam Ali Reza
(a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Ammar will be on the right
when he will be killed between two armies. One of them would be on my
religion and Sunnah and the other would have gone out of the pale of
religion.”

It is mentioned in *Tafsir Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.)* that when the Holy
Prophet (S) came to Medina, the Jews, who were enemies of Allah, came
with Abdullah Bin Surya to His Eminence (S). Ibn Surya asked His
Eminence (S): O Muhammad, what is the condition of your sleep? Because
we know about the sleep of prophets. His Eminence (S) said: My eyes
sleep, but my heart is awake. Abdullah said: That is right, now tell me
whether the child is created from the father or mother? His Eminence (S)
replied: Bones, muscles and veins are from the father and flesh, blood
and hair from the mother. He said: It is so.

Then he asked: O Muhammad, how is it that sometimes a child resembles
his maternal uncle and not the paternal uncle? And sometimes he
resembles his paternal uncle and not the maternal? He (S) said: He
resembles one whose fluid is dominant over the other. Abdullah said:
That is right.

Then he said: O Muhammad, how is it that some have issues and some
don’t? His Eminence (S) said: When the sperm becomes red and turbid, a
child cannot be conceived and when the sperm is clean, a child is
conceived. Then he asked: Tell me, what your Lord is? Allah revealed
Surah Tauheed. Ibn Surya said: It is right. Now one point is left, if
you give me the right answer, I shall bring faith on you and obey you.
Tell me, which angel brings the divine commands to you? His Eminence (S)
said: Jibraeel (a.s.).

He said: This angel is our enemy who arrives with battles, severity and
calamities of war. Our ambassador is Mikaeel (a.s.), who brings peace
and happiness for us. If angel Mikaeel (a.s.) brought Allah’s commands
to you we would bring faith. Mikaeel used to make our kingdom strong
whereas Jibraeel destroyed it, that is why he is our enemy. Salman Farsi
(r.a.) asked: How did this enmity begin?

He replied: Yes, Salman, he has always been inimical to us. It was the
time when Allah revealed to His prophets, that an unfortunate person
will destroy Baitul Maqdas and in that time also we got this
information. And Allah brings one command after another, as He likes,
and does what He wants. When we came to know about Baitul Maqdas, our
elders sent a man, whose name was Daniyal; he was a prophet at that
time. He was very famous and a strong fighter in Bani Israel.

He was sent to search out that person and eliminate him; he was also
sent with a lot of wealth and many things. When he went in his search,
he found a man in the city of Babel who was very thin and weak. Our man
wanted to kill him, but Jibraeel (a.s.) forbid it and said: If he is the
one Allah has appointed to destroy you, you will not be able to subdue
him and if he is not such, why do you want to kill him?

Our companions agreed and returned to us again and informed us about it.
Nebuchadnezzar became very strong and after becoming a king, came to
fight us and destroyed Baitul Maqdas. That is why we consider Jibraeel
our enemy. Salman (r.a.) said: O! Ibn Surya, you don’t use your common
sense and are misguided. See, your elders selected a man to kill him,
how was his action? Allah had informed His prophets in His books that
Nebuchadnezzar will become a king and he would destroy Baitul Maqdas.

Now they intended to falsify Allah’s apostles and their information and
blamed them; or they accepted Allah’s information and wanted to
overwhelm Allah. Those who went to fight Nebuchadnezzar were infidels.
How is enmity possible from Jibraeel (a.s.)? He (Jibraeel) restrained
him from falsifying divine prophecy and overwhelming Allah. Ibn Surya
said: Indeed Allah informed through His Apostles, but He erases whatever
He wants and sets up what He likes.

Salman (r.a.) said: If it is so, then do not believe in any information
of Taurat; first or last, because Allah erases what He likes and sets up
whatever He likes. Hence, it is also possible that Allah might have
cancelled the prophethood of Musa and Harun (a.s.); and what they
informed you that it will occur, may not occur and what they informed
will not occur, may occur.

In this way their saying that such and such thing occurred, may not be
true for it might not have occurred. And Allah has promised you reward
but may be He cancels it and also erases the chastisement. Because Allah
erases whatever He likes and whatever He wants to establish, He does. At
last, Salman (r.a.) said: You are unaware of the meaning of:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَمْحُو اللَّهُ مَا يَشَاءُ وَيُثْبِتُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah makes to pass away and establishes what He pleases.”***[^4]

Because you are disbelievers and falsify the divine messages and you
have gone out of the pale of religion.  
 Then Salman (r.a.) said: I witness, that those who are enemies of
Jibraeel are also enemies of Mikaeel and they both are enemies of those
who are inimical to them and they are at peace with those who are at
peace with them. Then Allah revealed the following verse in support of
Salman’s (r.a.) statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ مَنْ كَانَ عَدُوًّا لِجِبْرِيلَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Whoever is the enemy of Jibraeel…”***[^5]

O Muhammad, tell them, those who are enemies of Jibraeel (a.s.) because
he helps the friends of Allah against their enemies and he descends with
Ali’s greatness by the command of Allah they are My enemies and I am
also their enemy.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنَّهٗ نَزَّلَهٗ عَلٰى قَلْبِكَ بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…for surely he revealed it to your heart by Allah’s command…”***[^6]

How Jibraeel (a.s.) brought this Qur’an on your heart by Allah’s
command?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُصَدِّقًا لِمَا بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…verifying that which is before it…”***[^7]

That verifies all the heavenly scriptures that descended before it…

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُدًى وَبُشْرٰى لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and guidance and good news for the believers.”***[^8]

And it guides the misguided ones and it is a good news for those who
believe in the prophethood of Muhammad and Wilayat of Ali and the other
Imams (a.s.), who are, in fact, the true friends of Allah.

After that His Eminence (S) told Salman (r.a.): Salman, Allah has
verified your words and Jibraeel (a.s.) says from Allah that Salman and
Miqdad are two brothers, who sincerely love you and your brother, your
successor and your chosen one, Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) and they are
from your companions just as Jibraeel and Mikaeel (a.s.) are from the
angels. One who bears enmity with one of them, both are his enemies. And
one loves both of them and you and Ali (a.s.), they love him.

And one who bears enmity to Muhammad and Ali and their friends, they are
his enemies. And if the people of the world had sincerely loved Salman
and Miqdad, just as angels of the empyrean and the heavens love the two
and Muhammad and Ali (a.s.) and their friends and enemies of their
enemies, because of this, Allah would not have punished any of them.

It is mentioned in *Ihtijaj* from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he said:
“When the Holy Prophet (S) passed away and I buried him after giving him
shroud and bath and began to collect the Qur’an, and when I concluded
it, I held the hands of Fatima, Hasan and Husain and went to the houses
of all the companions of Badr and those who had precedence in faith and
adjured them of my right and asked for their help, but except for four
persons, no one accepted it and they were Abu Dharr, Salman, Miqdad and
Ammar and according to another report, twenty-four persons paid
allegiance to him.

Imam Ali (a.s.) told them to shave off their heads the next day and come
to meet him fully armed and that they should swear that they will not
forsake him till death. But no one arrived the next morning, except for
Salman, Abu Dharr, Miqdad and Ammar. Imam Ali (a.s.) called the people
in this manner for three consecutive nights but except for these four
persons no one responded.

Through authentic chains of narrators it is narrated from Salman that:
“When Amirul Momineen (a.s.) concluded the shrouding and funeral bath of
the Prophet, he called me, Abu Dharr, Miqdad, Fatima, Hasan and Husain.
He stood in front of us and we formed a row behind His Eminence and we
prayed the funeral prayer of the Messenger of Allah (S) in this manner.
Ayesha was in the same room but Jibraeel had closed her eyes and she
could not see us.”

It is narrated from Asbagh bin Nubatah that Abdullah bin Kawwa asked
about the companions of the Prophet. Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “Whose
circumstances do you want to know?” “Abu Dharr Ghiffar,” he replied.

Imam Ali (a.s.) said, “I have heard from the Messenger of Allah (S) that
he said: The green sky has not shaded and the dusty earth not borne the
weight of any speaker more truthful than Abu Dharr.” Then he asked about
His Eminence, Salman (r.a.). He said: “Salman is from us, Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) and how can the earth bring anyone else one who is like the Hakim
Luqman? He was cognizant of the former as well as the latter sciences.”
Then the inquirer asked about Ammar.

Imam Ali (a.s.) said: “He was such that his flesh and blood the Almighty
Allah has prohibited for the fire of Hell.” Then the inquirer asked
about Huzaifa bin Yaman. Imam Ali (a.s.) said: “He was such that he knew
the names of the hypocrites and if you ask him about the divine
penalties, you will find him aware and intelligent.” Then the inquirer
said: “Please say something about yourself.” Imam Ali (a.s.) said: “I
was such that when I asked a question the Holy Prophet (S) used to
bestow knowledge and when I was silent, he initiated the discussion.”

According to some authentic reports, a group of people came to Imam Ali
Reza (a.s.) and said: “We are Shia of Amirul Momineen (a.s.).” Imam
(a.s.) did not allow them audience and they were not able to meet the
Imam for a long time.

When at last they were permitted, they complained why they were denied
access to him for so many days. “Why should I not have stopped you when
you falsely claimed to be Shia of Amirul Momineen (a.s.), while the
truth is no one is Shia of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) except Hasan, Husain,
Salman, Abu Dharr, Miqdad, Ammar and Muhammad bin Abi Bakr. They were
such that they did not disobey the Imam in anything.”

Shaykh Tusi has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from
Husain Asbat that he said that he heard from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) when
he was busy in the Battle of Siffeen: “O Allah, if I come to know that
Your pleasure lies in that I throw myself from this mountain, I will do
it. And if Your pleasure lies in that I lit a fire and jump into it, I
will do that also. And I am not fighting the Syrians except for Your
pleasure. And I hope that You will not make me despair of that which I
have decided.”

Sayyid Ibn Tawus has narrated from Sunni channels from Anas bin Malik
that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Paradise is eager for four
persons of my Ummah.” But the awe of the Prophet prevented me from
asking him who they were. So I went to Abu Bakr and asked him to inquire
from the Prophet.

Abu Bakr said: “If I will not be from those four, Bani Tamim will
condemn me.” So I went to Umar and asked him to ask the Prophet. He also
said that if he is not from the four, Bani Adi will ridicule him. After
that I went to Uthman and requested to make this inquiry. He also said
that if I am not from the four, Bani Umayyah will condemn me.

At last I came to Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) who was watering his orchard.
I said: The Messenger of Allah (S) has said that Paradise is eager for
four persons. I plead you to ask the Prophet who the four are? He said:
By Allah, I will indeed ask him about it. If I am from those four, I
will thank the Almighty.

If I am not from them, I will ask Allah to make me of them and I will
love them. Thus Imam Ali (a.s.) set out to make the inquiry and Anas
followed. When they came to the Prophet, they saw that the head of the
Prophet was in the lap of Dahiya Kalbi. When Dahiya Kalbi saw Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) he stood up to pay respect and said: Take your cousin’s
head, as you are more deserving of it.

When the Holy Prophet (S) awoke and found his head in the lap of Ali
(a.s.), he said: “O Ali, perhaps you have come to ask something?” He
said: “May my parents be sacrificed on you, when I came here, I saw your
blessed head in the lap of Dahiya Kalbi. So he arose and after greeting
me said: “Take your cousin’s head in your lap.” The Holy Prophet (S)
said: “Did you recognize who he was?” Ali (a.s.) said: “It was Dahiya
Kalbi.” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “He was Jibraeel, who addressed you
as Amirul Momineen.”

Imam Ali (a.s.) said: “May my parents be sacrificed on you, O Prophet of
Allah, Anas told me that the Prophet has said that Paradise was eager of
four persons from my Ummah. So please tell us who the four are?” The
Messenger of Allah (S) pointed to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and said
thrice: “By Allah, you are the first of them.” Then Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) asked him: “May my parents be sacrificed on you, who are the
other three?” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “They are Miqdad, Salman and
Abu Dharr.”

Ibn Idris has through authentic chains of narrators narrated from
Mufaddal that he asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) about a group of people
who had apostasied from faith after the passing away of the Prophet. I
was mentioning each name and the Imam was saying: Be away from me. Till
I mentioned the name of Huzaifa bin Masud. The Imam continued to say
that. Then he said: If you want to know about those who were not haunted
by the least doubt, they were Abu Dharr, Miqdad and Salman.”

Ayyashi has narrated through authentic chains from Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) that when the Messenger of Allah (S) passed away from the world,
except for the following four persons all had become apostates: Ali Ibn
Abi Talib (a.s.), Miqdad, Salman and Abu Dharr. The narrator asked what
the Imam says about Ammar? Imam (a.s.) said: “If you ask about those who
never had an iota of doubt, they were only these three.”

It is mentioned in *Tafsir Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.)* that the Holy
Prophet (S) turned towards his companions and asked: Has anyone of you
today given any benefit to your believer brother employing your rank?
Ali (a.s.) replied: O Allah’s Messenger! I have done so. The Holy
Prophet (S) said: Describe the event. Ali (a.s.) said: Today I happened
to pass by Ammar Yasir who was apprehended by a Jew, who had loaned him
thirty Dirhams. Ammar complained to me: Dear brother of Allah’s
Messenger!

This Jew has apprehended me only to harass and disgrace me and that too
only because I befriend you, Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). Kindly use your rank and
position and get me released. I intended to request that Jew to favor
Ammar with kindness, but Ammar (r.a.) spoke up: Dear brother of Allah’s
Messenger! Your honor in my eyes and heart is much more than that you
make recommendation to him, who would never reject your word, even if
you ask him to give feast to the whole world.

Please just request Almighty Allah to help me to return his money and
protect me from seeking loans in future. So I raised my hands to the sky
and prayed: O Allah! Please fulfill Ammar’s need. Thereafter I said to
him: Pick up any stone or brick in front of you from the ground and it
will turn into gold by Allah for you. So he picked up a stone weighing a
few kilograms. It became gold in his hands.

Then he asked the Jew: How much do I owe you? He replied: Thirty
dirhams. He was asked how much in gold coins? He replied: Three Dinars.
Ammar (r.a.) prayed to Allah Almighty: O Lord! Kindly make this gold
soft so that I may slice it off and give to this Jew. Allah softened the
metal. He took off three Mithqal gold and gave it to that Jew. Then
looking at the remaining gold, he said: O Allah: I have heard that You
have said in Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْإِنْسَانَ لَيَطْغٰى. أَنْ رَآهُ اسْتَغْنٰى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nay! man is most surely inordinate, because he sees himself free
from want.”***[^9]

I don’t wish to be that much wealthy. Therefore, O Allah: for the sake
of one, for whom You made this stone, gold, please return it to its
original form. So it became a stone and Ammar (r.a.) threw it away and
exclaimed: O dear-most brother of Allah’s Messenger! Your friendship in
this world and Hereafter is enough for me.

Upon hearing this, the Prophet of Allah (S) said: Ammar’s contentment
made even the angels wonder. They described Allah’s glory. Allah’s mercy
continues to rain on him from high heavens. Then turning towards Ammar
Yasir (r.a.) he said: O Abal Yaqzan: Good news for you. You, in honesty,
are Ali’s (a.s.) brother and are the most high ranking in his
friendship.

You are among those who will be killed due to your devotion for him. You
will be killed by a rebellious group and in this world, your last
provision will be some uncooked milk and your soul shall join with the
souls of Muhammad and his progeny (a.s.). You are, in my sight, among
the desired Shias.

It is mentioned in the same *Tafsir* that when Muslims suffered a great
shock in the battle of Uhud, after a few days some Jews met Ammar Ibn
Yasir and Huzaifa Ibn Yaman and said: See how much you grieved on the
day of Uhud? And the battle of Muhammad (S) is like that of kings who
are worldly persons. Sometimes he wins and sometimes he loses.

If he were a prophet, he would not have been defeated; he would have
been victorious every time. You should give up his religion. When
Huzaifa (r.a.) heard this, he said: Woe on you. I am not sitting with
you and not talking with you or hearing your arguments. I am afraid of
my belief and soul because of you and I am running away from here; and
saying this he went away from there.

And Ammar (r.a.) continued to sit there and said to them: O Jews,
Muhammad had taken promise from Muslims on the day of Badr that if they
observe patience, they will succeed. So they were patient and got
victory. In Uhud also, they were promised victory on being patient but
they took to cowardice and opposition, so they had to suffer. If they
had obeyed and remained patient and not opposed the order of His
Eminence (S), they would never have been defeated and indeed succeeded.

The Jews said: O Ammar, if you obey Muhammad, would you gain an upper
hand on the chiefs of Quraish in spite of your thin shin bones? Ammar
(r.a.) said: Indeed, by one except whom there is no deity, who sent
Muhammad as a true prophet, His Eminence (S) has filled me up with
excellence and knowledge, because he taught the excellences of his
prophethood and excellence of his brother, successor and best of
creation after him, and explained and ordered me to be obedient to his
purified progeny and also that I should pray through their sake in
difficult times.

Then Ammar said: If the Prophet orders me something and I do it with
full concentration, obeying the Prophet; indeed I shall be able complete
it. So much so, that if the Prophet orders me to bring the sky down to
the earth and carry the earth to the sky, then indeed Allah will give me
strength despite my thin shinbones to obey his orders. On hearing
Ammar’s arguments, the Jews said: It is not so, O Ammar. By Allah, the
status of Muhammad is lesser near Allah, contrary to what you say and
your status is also lesser near Allah and Muhammad, than what you claim.

At that time, forty hypocrites were also present among the Jews. Ammar
(r.a.) stood up from there and said: I have fully conveyed the proof of
Allah and advised you also but you don’t like it. And Ammar (r.a.)
returned from there and came to His Eminence (S). His Eminence (S) said:
O Ammar, I know everything about you two. Huzaifa (r.a.) came here
running to save his religion from Satan and his companions and he is one
of the true believers of Allah and you have struggled in the religion of
Allah and are also a well-wisher of Muhammad (S) and you are also
included among warriors in the way of Allah.

The Prophet, Ammar and Huzaifa were discussing this, when the Jews who
were talking with Ammar came there and said: O Muhammad, your friend
says that if you order him to raise the earth to the sky and bring the
sky to the earth and if he has faith and is obedient to you, Allah will
definitely help him. If you are a prophet, we don’t want more. If Ammar
(r.a.) picks up this rock, despite his thin shinbones it would be enough
for us. At that time the Prophet (S) was outside Medina and that rock
was lying before him. It was so huge and heavy that even two hundred men
would not be able to move it.

The Jews said: O Muhammad, if Ammar tries to lift this rock, he cannot
even move it and if he lifts it, his shin bones will break and his body
will disintegrate. His Eminence (S) said: O Jews! Don’t underestimate
Ammar’s shinbones, because they are heavier than Mount Thawr, Mount
Basir, Mount Hira and Mount Abu Qubais; rather heavier than the whole
earth and all it has. And on account of reciting benedictions on
Muhammad and Aale Muhammad, things heavier than this rock have become
light; like the empyrean, which seems light on the shoulders of eight
angels, even though before that numerous angels could not lift it.

After that His Eminence (S) said to Ammar (r.a.): O Ammar, believe in my
obedience and pray: O Allah, for the sake of Muhammad and Aale
Muhammad’s excellence give me strength to lift this rock, make it easy
for me just as You made it easy for Kalib bin Yohanna to pass over the
sea and he crossed it on horseback, because he prayed to Allah through
Muhammad and Aale Muhammad. Ammar (r.a.) prayed thus, placing faith in
the Prophet and lifted the rock and exclaimed: Allah’s Messenger, by One
Who sent you as a true Prophet, this rock seems lighter than a twig in
my hands.

Then His Eminence (S) pointed to a mountain, three miles away and told
him to throw that rock on the top of that mountain. Ammar (r.a.) threw
it in the air and that rock rose up high and fell down on the peak of
that mountain. After that the Prophet said to the Jews: Have you seen
Ammar’s strength? They said: Yes. Then His Eminence (S) said to Ammar
(r.a.): Go to the mountain peak, you will find a rock heavier than this
one.

Bring it to me. Ammar (r.a.) took a step to move, the earth drew close
together and in the second step, he reached the mountain peak, picked
that rock and in the third step came back to His Eminence (S). The
Prophet (S) told him: Throw it hard on the ground. Seeing this, the Jews
ran away in fear. Ammar (r.a.) threw it with force on the ground and it
disintegrated and dispersed in the air. After that His Eminence (S) said
to the Jews: O Jews! You have seen the signs of Allah, now you must
accept faith. Some Jews believed and some were overpowered by
wretchedness and remained deprived of faith.

Then His Eminence (S) said: O Muslims! Do you know what this rock is
like? They said: No. The Prophet (S) said: By One Who sent me as a true
prophet, when one of our followers, whose sins are many times more than
the earth, mountains and the sky, seeks forgiveness and renews the
Wilayat of us, Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) in his mind, his sins hit against the
ground harder than this rock was hit. Besides, there is a man whose
worship acts and obedience is like mountains, seas, skies and earth but
he does not believe in our Wilayat; his worship acts and devotion will
be thrown away as Ammar (r.a.) threw the rock and it dispersed in air.

When he will be brought in the hereafter, he will find nothing good in
his record of deeds and his sins will be greater than skies and earth
and his account will be taken very severely and he will remain in
chastisement forever.

When Ammar (r.a.) got this much strength that he threw the rock with
full strength on the ground and broke it into small pieces, he said: O
Allah’s Messenger, allow me to fight the Jews and destroy them. His
Eminence (S) said: O Ammar, Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاعْفُوا وَاصْفَحُوا حَتّٰى يَأْتِيَ اللَّهُ بِأَمْرِهٖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…but pardon and forgive, so that Allah should bring about His
command…”***[^10]

That is His chastisement, victory of Mecca and other things that He has
promised.  
 In the mentioned book it is narrated from Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.)
that the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَنْ يَشْرِي نَفْسَهٗ ابْتِغَاءَ مَرْضَاتِ اللَّهِ ۗ
وَاللَّهُ رَءُوفٌ بِالْعِبَادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And among men is he who sells himself to seek the pleasure of Allah;
and Allah is Affectionate to the servants.”***[^11]  
 …was revealed about the good companions of the Prophet whom the people
of Mecca oppressed and tortured so that they may recant their faith of
Islam. And they were: Bilal, Suhaib, Khabbab,

Ammar bin Yasir and his parents. Bilal was purchased by Abu Bakr bin Abi
Qahafa in exchange for two black slaves. When he came to the Prophet, he
paid more respects to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) than he was respectful to
Abu Bakr. So a group of mischief makers said: O Bilal you have shown
thanklessness and caused disrespect of Abu Bakr who is your master, who
had purchased you and set you free from the infidels.

Although Ali has not done any such favor on you and you respect him more
than Abu Bakr, it is nothing but thanklessness.” Bilal said: “Is it
necessary for me to respect Abu Bakr more than the Prophet?” They said:
“How can we say this?” Bilal said: “This statement opposes your previous
saying that I cannot honor Ali (a.s.) more than Abu Bakr, because he has
purchased and emancipated me.”

They said: “The Holy Prophet (S) and Ali is not equal, because the
Prophet is most excellent of all the creatures. Bilal said: Ali is also
in the view of Allah better than all after the Messenger of Allah (S),
because when the roasted bird was brought for the Holy Prophet (S) he
prayed: O Allah, send me one who is most beloved to You so that he can
share this bird with me. So Ali (a.s.) arrived and joined him.

And Ali is most resembling the Prophet because the Almighty Allah made
him as his brother in religion; therefore Abu Bakr cannot hope from me
that which you people state, because he knows that Ali is superior to
him and Ali has more right on me. It is so because it is Ali who saved
me from divine punishment. And due to his love and for considering him
superior to others I became eligible for perpetual bounties of
Paradise.”

Imam (a.s.) said with regard to Suhaib: “He used to tell the infidels: I
am an old man and my company with you will not give you any advantage
and neither will my separation harm you. Therefore take away my money
and leave me on my religion. So the infidels took away all his
belongings. The Holy Prophet (S) asked: “How much wealth did you
possess?” He said: “Seven thousand dirhams.” His Eminence, asked him if
he had surrendered that amount willingly. Suhaib replied: “By the one
who has sent you with truth.

If the whole world had been of pure gold and I had owned it all, I would
have given it all just to glance at your elegance and the face of your
brother and successor, Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.).” The Holy Prophet (S)
said: “You have made the treasurers of Paradise helpless to be in your
favor for the wealth the Almighty Allah has given you in exchange of the
wealth you sacrificed, because no one except Allah can encompass all
that.”

Imam (a.s.) then mentioned the merits of Khabbab bin Aras that when
infidels tied him in heavy chains and put an iron collar in his neck, he
beseeched the Almighty Allah in the name of Muhammad and his Purified
Progeny. The Almighty Allah through their Barakat made that chain into a
horse on which he mounted and converted that iron collar into a sword
which he wore and came out of that place.

When the infidels saw him in this condition, no one dared to approach
him and he used to say: Whosoever from you likes may come to me and see
how I prayed in the name of Muhammad, and Ali and his Progeny and I know
that if along with this faith, I hit this sword on Abu Qubais, it will
also split into two.” Thus none of them approached him and he came to
the Holy Prophet (S).

Then Imam (a.s.) explained about the mothers of Yasir and Ammar that
they had observed patience in order to seek the pleasure of Allah till
the infidels martyred them after a severe torture.

Regarding Ammar he said: “Abu Jahl was harassing him when the Almighty
Allah made the ring of his finger so tight on his finger that he fell
down due to the pain and He made his garments so heavy on his body that
they became heavier than a coat of mail. So Abu Jahl asked Ammar to
release him from this trouble “because it is only due to the strange
phenomena of Muhammad.”

Ammar removed the ring from his finger and took off his clothes. Abu
Jahl said: “Now you don’t remain in Mecca or you would cause
embarrassment to me and say that you have taken off my ring and
garments. So Ammar set out for Medina. When he came to the Prophet,
companions said: “Khabbab was freed through the miracle that was shown
for him. What is the reason that your parents were tortured till death?”

Ammar said: “It was the command of that God who saved Ibrahim from the
fire and involved Yahya and Zakariya to be killed.” The Messenger of
Allah (S) said: “You are very intelligent.” Ammar said: “Only this much
is sufficient for me in knowledge that you are the Messenger of Allah
and the best among His creatures, and that your brother, Ali is your
successor and Caliph and he is the best of those who will survive you.

And your statement and his statement is truth. And your behavior is
truth and I know that the Almighty Allah has not given me good sense
except to remain devoted to you in the world and the hereafter.” The
Messenger of Allah (S) said: “You are right, Ammar, and indeed the
Almighty Allah will strengthen the religion through you and cut off the
excuses of the careless ones and expose the malice of the enemies, when
you will be killed by a group of those who have rebelled from their
rightful Imam.”

Then he said: “O Ammar, reach to the level of excellence due to
knowledge, and increase your knowledge so that your excellence
increases. Because when a man goes out to seek knowledge, the Almighty
Allah calls him from the Empyrean: “Welcome O slave, do you know what
position you are seeking? You are trying to be like proximate angels. I
will indeed fulfill your wish and complete your mission.”

Shaykh Mufeed has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from
Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said: “I heard Jabir Ansari say: If
Salman and Abu Dharr are made alive again, and they see the group who
claims the love of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) they will say that they are liars.
And if the claimants of your love, see people like Salman and Abu Dharr,
they would indeed exclaim that they are insane.”

Kulaini etc. have narrated through authentic chains from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that faith is having ten levels. And Miqdad was on the
eighth level, Abu Dharr was on the ninth and Salman was at the tenth
level.

It is narrated from Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) in *Ruzatul Mawaizeen* etc.
that on Judgment Day a caller will call out from the Almighty Allah:
“Where are the close companions of Muhammad bin Abdullah, who did not
break their oath of allegiance and who remained faithful to their
covenant as long as they lived?” Salman, Abu Dharr and Miqdad will
arise. Again it will be announced: “Where are the close companions of
successor of Muhammad, Ali?” Amr bin Hamaq Khuzai, Mitham Tammar,
Muhammad bin Abi Bakr and Owais Qarni will arise.

It is mentioned in the same book that a person asked Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) what he said about Ammar. Imam (a.s.) said thrice: “May Allah
have mercy on Ammar. He fought Jihad on the side of Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) and was martyred.” The narrator says that I thought to myself
that there cannot be anything greater than this.

Imam (a.s.) said: “Do you think he can be like those three: Salman, Abu
Dharr and Miqdad? It’s a pity, it’s a pity.” The narrator said: “Did
Ammar know that he would be martyred that day?” Imam (a.s.) said: “On
that day when he saw that the battle was raging and becoming more
intense and more people were being killed, he separated from all and
came to Amirul Momineen (a.s.). He asked: “Is it time for my martyrdom?”
Imam Ali (a.s.) said: “Go back to your row.”

Ammar asked this question thrice and every time Imam Ali (a.s.) gave the
same reply. Finally he said: “Yes.” So Ammar the brave came back to his
row and began to fight valiantly, saying: “I will meet my friends today
who are from Muhammad and his group.”  
 Moreover it is reported in the same book from the Holy Prophet (S) that
he said: “Paradise is eager for three persons.”

“Who are the three?” asked Amirul Momineen (a.s.). He replied: “You are
the first, then it is Salman Farsi, indeed there is no arrogance in him.
He is your well wisher, so you must consider him as your friend. Third
is Ammar bin Yasir; who will be on your side on many occasions and on
each occasion his good deeds will be more, his effulgence will be great
and his reward will be more.”  
 Moreover, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) has mentioned that there is a noble
from every family and the noble from the worst family is Muhammad bin
Abi Bakr.  
 Furat bin Ibrahim has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) in the
exegesis of the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ فَلَهُمْ أَجْرٌ
غَيْرُ مَمْنُونٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Except those who believe and do good, so they shall have a reward
never to be cut off.”***[^12]

…that His Eminence, said: This verse was revealed about Ali Ibn Abi
Talib (a.s.), Salman, Abu Dharr, Miqdad and Ammar (r.a.).  
 It is narrated in *Ikhtisas* that Hamza bin Isa asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) about the four persons about whom the Holy Prophet (S) had stated
that Paradise was eager for them. Imam (a.s.) said: “Yes, they are
Salman, Abu Dharr, Miqdad and Ammar.” The narrator asked: “Who is the
best of them?” Imam (a.s.) replied: “Salman.” After a moment he again
said: “Salman possessed such knowledge that if Abu Dharr had that
knowledge he would have become infidel.”[^13]

Through authentic chains of narrators, it is narrated from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that Jabir Ansari said: I asked the Messenger of Allah (S)
about Salman Farsi. The Prophet said: “Salman is the ocean of knowledge
and no one can reach to its extreme end.

Salman is exclusive in every knowledge. Allah hates one who hates
Salman, and loves one who loves him.” Jabir asked what the Prophet said
about Abu Dharr. The Prophet replied: “He is from us, Allah hates one
who hates him and loves one who loves him. Jabir asked what the Prophet
said about Miqdad. The Prophet replied: “He is also from us, Allah hates
one who hates him and loves one who loves him.” Jabir asked what the
Prophet said about Ammar.

The Prophet replied: “He is also from us, Allah hates one who hates him
and loves one who loves him.” Jabir says that I took the leave of the
Prophet and came out so that I could give them the glad tidings of what
the Prophet had said. Again the Prophet called me and said: “O Jabir,
you are also from us. May Allah hate one who hates you and may He love
one who loves you.” Jabir says: I asked: “O Messenger of Allah (S), what
do you say about Ali?” The Prophet said: “He is the dearest to me.”

I said: “What do you say about Hasan and Husain?” He replied: “They are
my souls and their mother, Fatima is my daughter. One who hurts her,
hurts me and one who pleases her, pleases me. I hold Allah as a witness
that I am at war with one who is at war with them and I am at peace with
one who is at peace with them. O Jabir when you want to supplicate Allah
and you wish Him to accept your supplication, you must supplicate
through their names, because these names are the favorites of the
Almighty Allah.”

Shaykh Kishi has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from
Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “The earth
has become straitened for seven persons through whom the inmates of the
earth receive their sustenance and through who they are helped. Among
them are Salman, Miqdad, Ammar and Huzaifa.”

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) says that I am their Imam and it is they who
attended the funeral prayer of Fatima.” Moreover, through authentic
chains, it is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that people become
deviated after the Messenger of Allah (S) except for Salman, Abu Dharr
and Miqdad. Then they were joined by Abu Sasan, Ammar, Shatita and Abu
Amr thus they were seven persons in all.”

It is mentioned in *Ikhtisas* through authentic chains of narrators from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the Holy Prophet (S) said: “O Salman, if
your knowledge is revealed to Miqdad, he will become a disbeliever,” and
he told Miqdad, “If your patience is presented to Salman, he will be
become an apostate.”[^14]

It is narrated from Salman Farsi: “One day I came out of my house after
the passing away of the Messenger of Allah (S) and met Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) on the way. His Eminence, said: “Go to Fatima, she has received a
gift from Paradise which she wants to share with you.” So I came to the
honorable lady.

She said: “Yesterday I was sitting at the same spot yesterday in a
pensive mood and the door was closed and I was thinking that we have
been deprived of divine revelation and the angels have stopped visiting
our home. Suddenly the door opened and three girls entered; such that no
one must have seen more beautiful, delicate and fragrant than them.” I
stood up and asked: “Are you from Mecca or Medina?”

They said: “O daughter of Prophet, we are not from the folks of the
earth. The Almighty Allah has sent us to you from Paradise. We were very
much eager to visit you.” I asked the name of the one who seemed to be
eldest of them and she replied: “Maqduda.” I asked why she was named
thus? She replied that because I am created for Miqdad bin Aswad. Then I
asked the name of the second girl.

She said: “My name is Zarra.” When I asked why she was named thus, she
said that she had been created for Abu Dharr Ghiffari. I asked the third
and she said: “Salma.” I asked the reason she said that she was named
thus as she is created from Salman Farsi.” Lady Sayyidah says that after
that those girls took out some dates for me which were as big as a
bread. Whiter than snow and more fragrant than musk.

Salman says that Lady Fatima gave one of the dates to me and said:
“Break your fast with this date today and bring the seed to me
tomorrow.” I took it from her and returned. Whenever I passed a group of
companions they used to ask if I was carrying Musk, and I always replied
in the positive. When I broke the fast with it, I could not find any
seed in it. The following day I came again to Lady Fatima and stated
that there was no seed in it.

She said: “How it could have any seed, because it was from the tree that
the Almighty Allah has created in Paradise due to the supplication that
my respected father has taught to me, and which I recite every morning
and night. Salman said: “Please teach it to me also.” She said: “If you
want that you should not have fever as long as you remain alive you must
recite the following supplication regularly. It is as follows:  
 “In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. In the name of
Allah the light. In the name of Allah light of the light. In the name of
Allah light upon light. In the name of Allah Who is the controller of
the affairs. In the name of Allah, the One Who has created the light
from the light. Praise be to Allah, the One, Who created the light from
light.

And sent down the light upon Tur in a written book in a scroll that is
spread in a limited quantity upon the delighted prophet. Praise be to
Allah, the One having celebrated power and by the pride which is
well-known. And upon all sorrows and joys I am thankful. And may Allah
bless our chief Muhammad and his purified progeny.”

Salman says that he learnt it and taught it to more than a thousand
people of Mecca and Medina who were sick with fever. All of them were
cured of their illness by the leave of Allah, the Exalted.

Excellence and good qualities of Salman Farsi
---------------------------------------------

Ibn Babawayh has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from
Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) that a person asked him:

“O son of Allah’s Messenger, will you not tell us what was the reason
Salman Farsi accepted Islam?  
 He replied: my father (a.s.) informed me that one day Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(a.s.), Salman Farsi, Abu Dharr and a group of people from Quraish had
congregated at the tomb of the Holy Prophet (S) when Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) said to Salman Farsi: O Aba Abdillah will you not tell us the
beginning of your story? Salman said: By Allah, O Amirul Momineen, if
anyone other than you had asked, I would not have told anything.

I was a resident of Shiraz and the son of a farmer and my father loved
me very much. One day I was going with my father to attend a festival of
that town when by chance we passed by a monastery in which a man was
screaming: I testify that there is no god except Allah and that Isa is
the spirit of Allah and Muhammad is the beloved of Allah. Thus the
description and praise of Muhammad permeated my flesh and blood and
after that I was interested in neither eating nor drinking.

My mother asked: What is wrong with you son, that today you did not
prostrate at the time of the rising of the sun? When I opposed her, she
fell silent. When I went to my room, I saw a letter hanging from the
roof. I asked my mother what that letter was. She said: O Ruzbah when we
returned home after celebrating our festival, we found it hanging from
the roof. So you don’t go near it. If you do so, your father will kill
you. Salman said that he continued to argue with his mother. When night
fell and my parents went to sleep, I arose and took up the letter. I saw
written therein: In the Name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful.

It is a covenant from Allah with Adam that He will create a prophet from
his loins who will be named Muhammad. He will teach the best of morals
and restrain the people from idol-worship. O Ruzbah, go to the legatee
of Isa, accept the Faith and leave the Majoosi[^15] religion. He
(Salman) says that after this he screamed and fell down unconscious and
his trouble increased. He says: Thus my father became aware of this and
he cast me into a deep pit. He said: Come back to your religion or I
would kill you. I told him: You do whatever you like with me.

The love of Muhammad will not leave my heart. Salman says: Before
reading that letter I didn’t know Arabic and Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime taught me this language from this day. He says: I remained in
that pit and they used to throw small pieces of bread to me.  
 When my matter became prolonged I raised up my hands to the heavens and
prayed: O my Lord, You have put the love of Muhammad and his legatee in
my heart. So I beg you in their name that You hasten my deliverance and
take me out from the condition I am in.

At that moment a person came to me dressed in white. He said: Ruzbah,
get up. After that he held my hand and took me to the monastery. I began
to recite: I testify that there is no god except Allah and Isa is the
spirit of Allah and that Muhammad is the beloved of Allah. The person
who resided in the monastery came to me and asked: Are you Ruzbah?
“Yes,” said I.

He said: Go up. I went up and continued to serve him for two complete
years. When it was the time of his death he said: I am going to die. I
asked him: On whom are you leaving me? He said: I don’t know anyone who
follows my beliefs except a monk who lives in Antioch. Thus if you meet
him, convey my salutations to him and give him this tablet. Saying this
he gave me a tablet. When he died, I gave him the funeral bath, shrouded
and buried him and taking the tablet set out for Antioch.

When I reached the monastery in Antioch, I began to recite: I testify
that there is no god except Allah and Isa is the spirit of Allah and
that Muhammad is the beloved of Allah. The resident of the monastery
came to me and said: Are you Ruzbah? “Yes,” said I. He said: Go up. I
went up and continued to serve him for two complete years. When it was
the time of his death he said: I am going to die. I asked him: On whom
are you leaving me? He said: I don’t know anyone who follows my beliefs
except a monk who lives in Alexandria.

Thus when you meet him, convey my salutations to him and give him this
tablet. Saying this he gave me a tablet. When he died, I gave him the
funeral bath, shrouded and buried him and taking the tablet reached the
monastery he had indicated. Upon reaching there, I began to chant: I
testify that there is no god except Allah and Isa is the spirit of Allah
and that Muhammad is the beloved of Allah. Thus that monk came to me and
asked: Are you Ruzbah?

“Yes,” said I. He said: Go up. I went up and continued to serve him for
two complete years. When it was the time of his death, he said: I am
going to die. I asked him: On whom are you leaving me? He said: I don’t
know anyone in the world who follows my beliefs and indeed the birth of
Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Abdul Muttalib is near. So if you meet him,
convey my salutations to him and give this tablet to him.

When he died, I gave him the funeral bath, shrouded and buried him and
set out taking the tablet with me. I met a group of people and I offered
to serve them if they gave me food and water and they agreed. When their
mealtime arrived, they tied up a sheep and beat it to death. After that
they prepared Kebab with some of the meat and some they roasted red on
the fire. When I declined to partake it, they said: Eat it! I told them:
I am a monk and a young man that spent his life in a monastery and monks
do not eat meat.

They began to beat me and were about to take my life when some of them
said: Wait till the wine arrives. And know that he would not take wine
also. When they brought the wine, I said: I am a monk and a young man
who lives in a monastery and the people of monastery do not imbibe wine.
They tied me up and decided to eliminate me. I said: O people, do not
beat me or put me to death as I have confessed to be a slave of yours.
And I agreed that I was a bondman of one of them.

That person saved me from those people and sold me to a Jew for three
hundred dirhams. Salman says that the Jew asked me about my story and I
told him about it and said that I had no fault except that I loved
Muhammad and his legatee. The Jew said: Then know that I hate you and
Muhammad. He took me outside his house where there was a huge quantity
of sand. He said: O Ruzbah, if you are not able to shift all the sand
till the morning next I will surely kill you.

Salman says: I spent the whole night shifting that sand from one place
to another. When I was absolutely exhausted, I raised my hands to the
sky and prayed: O my Lord, You have filled up my heart with the love for
Muhammad and his legatee. So I ask you in their names, please hasten my
deliverance and save me from this terrible situation. So Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime sent a windstorm that transferred all the sand to the
spot that Jew had specified. In the morning the Jew was surprised that I
had shifted all the sand.

Then he said: O Ruzbah, since you have proved to be a sorcerer, I shall
throw you out of this town so that you may not destroy the locals. Thus
he externed me from there and sold me to a kind-hearted lady. She was
very kind to me. She had an orchard which she put at my disposal and
said: It is for you, you can take whatever you want from it or give to
anyone or spend in charity.  
 Salman says that: I lived in that orchard for a very long time.

One day I was sitting there when a group of seven persons shaded by a
cloud came towards me. I said to myself: By Allah all of them cannot be
prophets but one of them is definitely a prophet. They moved forward and
entered the orchard and the piece of cloud was also moving with them.
The group that entered the orchard comprised of the Messenger of Allah
(S), Amirul Momineen (a.s.), Abu Dharr, Miqdad, Aqil bin Abi Talib,
Hamza bin Abdul Muttalib and Zaid bin Haritha.

They entered the orchard and began to eat the date fruits that had
fallen from the trees. The Messenger of Allah (S) was saying: Eat the
fallen date fruits and do not spoil anything that belongs to these
people. So I went to my owner and said: Please give me a tray of fresh
dates. She said: You can have six. Salman says that he took up a tray of
fresh dates and said to himself: If one of them is a prophet he would
not eat Sadaqah and he would not mind eating a present.

So I kept the tray before them and said: This is Sadaqah. The Messenger
of Allah (S) said: Eat it. But he himself abstained from eating as did
Amirul Momineen (a.s.), Aqil bin Abi Talib and Hamza bin Abdul Muttalib.
Zaid was told to go ahead and eat. I said to myself that this was the
first sign of prophethood. Then I went to my mistress and said: Give me
another tray. She said: You can have six. Salman says that I picked up a
tray and came to them and placed the fresh dates before them and I said:
This is a present.

The Messenger of Allah (S) stretched out his hand and uttered: In the
Name of Allah…eat. All of them began to eat the dates. So I said to
myself: This is the second sign. After that when I moved towards his
back, the Holy Prophet (S) became attentive to me and said: Ruzbah, are
you looking for the mark of prophethood? “Yes,” I said. He displayed his
shoulders and I saw the mark of prophethood on him and above it were
some hair. Salman says that he fell down at the feet of the Messenger of
Allah (S) and began to kiss them.

He (the Prophet) said: Ruzbah, go to that lady and say that Muhammad bin
Abdullah is asking if she would sell this slave to him. So I went to her
and said: Muhammad bin Abdullah is asking if you would sell this slave
to him? She replied: I will not sell the slave except in exchange of
four hundred date trees two hundred of which should be yellow and two
hundred golden. Salman says that when he conveyed this to the Holy
Prophet (S) he said: How easy is that which she has asked. Then he said:
Arise, O Ali and gather all the date seeds.

Ali gathered all the seeds and sowed them in the ground. The Prophet
told him to pour water on them which Ali did. He had hardly finished
watering that the trees grew up so much that they began to strike one
another. Then the Prophet told me to go to the lady and tell her:
Muhammad bin Abdullah is saying: Take your thing and give me mine.
Salman went and told the lady. She came out, saw the trees and said: By
Allah, I will not sell him unless all the trees become yellow. Salman
says: Jibraeel descended and touched his wings to those trees. All of
them became yellow.

Then the Messenger told me: Go and tell her: Muhammad is saying: Take
your thing and give me mine. Salman says that when I conveyed this to
her she said: By Allah, one of those trees is more precious to me than
your Muhammad and you. I said: By Allah, a day in the company of
Muhammad is more precious to me than you and everything including you.
After that the Messenger of Allah (S) emancipated me and named me
Salman.”

Ibn Babawayh has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that Salman used to say: I am surprised about
six things; three of them make me laugh and three make me cry. The three
things that impel me to cry are separation of friends, and they are
Muhammad (S) and his companions. Secondly: the terror of death and the
circumstances after death. Third: To stand before the Almighty for
accounting.

And the three things that make me laugh is firstly the man who is in
pursuit of the world while death is in his pursuit. Secondly the one who
is oblivious of the circumstances of the hereafter even though the
Almighty Allah and His angels are not oblivious of this and they have
surrounded his deeds. Thirdly, the one who opens his mouth to laugh and
he does not know whether Allah is pleased with him or He is infuriated.

Shaykh Tusi has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) through authentic
chains of narrators that a companion of Salman fell ill. When he could
not meet him for some days, he asked the people where he was. He was
told that he was ill. Salman said: “Let us pay him a visit.” Thus people
accompanied there and reached the place of that man to find him near his
death. Salman addressed the Angel of death to be lenient and kind with
the friend of Allah.

The Angel of death replied in a voice that was heard by all those who
were present there: “O Abu Abdullah, I am kind to all believers and if I
ever come before anyone in such way that he could see me, it will be
you.”  
 Shaykh Ahmad bin Abi Talib Tabarsi has narrated in *Ihtijaj* that when
the second Caliph after Huzaifa’s son, appointed Salman as the governor
of Madayan and Salman accepted the post by the permission of Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) and departed for Madayan, the Caliph wrote a letter to
him raising some objections.

Salman replied: “In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.
This is a letter from Salman, the freed slave of the Messenger of Allah
(S) to Umar bin Khattab. I received your communication in which you
condemned me and written that you have appointed me as the governor of
Madayan and follow the practice of the son of Huzaifa and emulate his
way of governance. So how can I inform you of all the good and bad
things even though the Almighty Allah has restrained me in His clear
verses from all that you order me to do? And He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اجْتَنِبُوا كَثِيرًا مِنَ الظَّنِّ
إِنَّ بَعْضَ الظَّنِّ إِثْمٌ ۖ وَلَا تَجَسَّسُوا وَلَا يَغْتَبْ
بَعْضُكُمْ بَعْضًا ۚ أَيُحِبُّ أَحَدُكُمْ أَنْ يَأْكُلَ لَحْمَ أَخِيهِ
مَيْتًا فَكَرِهْتُمُوهُ ۚ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! avoid most of suspicion, for surely suspicion in
some cases is a sin, and do not spy nor let some of you backbite others.
Does one of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? But you abhor
it; and be careful of (your duty to) Allah…”***[^16]

So it can never happen that I should disobey the Almighty Allah and obey
you with regard to the son of Huzaifa.

And what you have written to me that I weave baskets and consume barley;
these are not any such things about which one could criticize a believer
and try to change these habits. O Umar, by Allah, I prefer weaving of
baskets and consuming barley bread to usurping the rights of believers
and claiming that which I don’t deserve, in the view of Allah. And it is
nearer to piety. Indeed I have seen the Holy Prophet (S) that when he
received barley bread he used to be happy and was never sorry at it.

And what you have mentioned that all that I earn I give it away in
charity, it is only that which I am sending for the day of need and
poverty (in hereafter). O Umar, I swear by Allah, I don’t care that the
food that reached my mouth and goes down my throat is whether it is
wheat flour or brain of a goat or barley husk. And what you say is that
I have made the divine rule weak and degraded my self and made myself a
public servant. So much so that the people of Madayan do not consider me
as their ruler and they take me for a bridge over which they pass and
place their loads upon it.

So you have written that all this causes weakness of and insult to the
rule of Allah. So you should know that being humiliated in obedience of
Allah, in my view is better than being exalted in the disobedience of
Allah. And you also know that the Holy Prophet (S) used to have sympathy
for the people and used to remain close to them and people used to
obtain his nearness and sit close to him in spite of his majesty and
prophethood. So much so that he was one among them. Due to his closeness
with them the Prophet used to have ordinary food and wore coarse
garments.

All Quraishite and Arabs and black and white were all equal in religion
in the view of the Prophet. And I testify that I heard the Holy Prophet
(S) say: “One who rules over seven Muslims after me and does not deal
with them with justice and he meets the Almighty Allah, He will be
infuriated with him.” So, O Umar, I hope to be relieved from the
governorship of Madayan safely. And become same as you allege: one who
considers his self to be lowly and one who serves in favor of Muslims.
Therefore, O Umar, what would be the condition of one who is the
caretaker of the whole Ummah after the Messenger of Allah (S)? Certainly
the Creator of the Universe says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تِلْكَ الدَّارُ الْآخِرَةُ نَجْعَلُهَا لِلَّذِينَ لَا يُرِيدُونَ
عُلُوًّا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَا فَسَادًا ۚ وَالْعَاقِبَةُ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(As for) that future abode, We assign it to those who have no desire
to exalt themselves in the earth nor to make mischief and the good end
is for those who guard (against evil).”***[^17]

And you should know that I am not inclined to their punishment and I
don’t apply any legal penalty for them except through the advice of a
leader and possessor of intellect.

Therefore, I have adopted the middle path among them on the lines of the
same leader and I behave only with his practice. And I know that if the
Almighty Allah desires the well being of this Ummah, He would have
intended betterment and guidance for them, and then he would have
appointed over them a ruler who is better and wiser than them and if
this Ummah had feared the Lord of the worlds, and had followed their
Prophet and recognized the truth, it would not have addressed you as the
chief of believers.

Thus you may issue any command you like, it cannot be applicable to us
except in this worldly life. Therefore do not become arrogant as Allah
has given you respite, and instead of that do not show off about it.
Know that the Almighty Allah will catch you for your injustice and
oppression in the world and the hereafter and He will ask you about the
deeds that you have sent ahead. And you will see the consequences of
your deeds.”

Qutub Rawandi has narrated through authentic chains of narrators that
Salman used to say that I was a resident of a village of Isfahan, named
Ji and my father was the village headman. He loved me very much and kept
me at home like girls are protected. I was a child and knew nothing
about religion except for fire-worship which I used to see. So much so
that my father got a building constructed. He had a farm. One day he
said to me: “O son, I am so busy in this construction that I have no
information about my agricultural lands.

So you go to the farms and instruct the workers in such and such manner.
But don’t be late in returning.” So I set out for the farms. On the way
there was a church in which I heard their voices. I asked: Who are
they?” “They are Christians, and they are praying.” I entered the church
to study their practice. I liked the way they worshipped and I stayed
with them till sunset. My father sent people to look for me. I returned
home at night without having visited our farms.

My father asked where I had been and I told him that I way on way to the
farms when I passed by a church. I liked their method of worship and
devotions. My father said: “O son, the religion of your ancestors is
better than theirs.” I said, “No, by Allah, it is not so. They worship
Allah, supplicate Him and recite the prayers. Whereas you worship fire,
which you lit yourself and if you don’t pay attention to it, it goes
out.” My father put me in chains and imprisoned me at home. I sent a
messenger to the Christians and inquired from them where foundation of
their religion lies?

They said it was in Syria. So I sent a message to them to let me know
when they received visitors from Syria. They agreed to do so. After some
days when traders from Syria visited the church, I was informed about
it. I told them to inform me when they are about to return. They agreed
and after some days when they were departing for Syria, I was informed
about it. I removed the chains and joined their group which was on way
to Syria. When I reached Syria, I asked: Who is the greatest scholar of
this religion.

People directed me to the biggest chapel in charge of a Bishop. He was
the most knowledgeable of them. I went to him and beseeched him to allow
me to remain with him so that I can learn the points of truth. He
accepted my request and I began to live with him, but he was an
incapable person and ordered the fire worshippers to bring the charities
to him, which they brought and he used to hoard them without giving them
to the poor. Thus I remained with him for some days and he died.

When Christians came to bury him, I told them that he was not a
righteous man. And I informed them about the treasure he had collected.
They removed seven pots full of gold and crucified him and stoned him.
In his stead, another scholar was appointed and I did not find anyone
more pious than him. He was most religious and pious. I always used to
be present in his service and was very fond of him. Till one day he was
about to die when I asked him to whom he was entrusting me?

He said: O son, I don’t consider anyone better than the scholar at
Mosul. Go to him and when you reach him you will find him like me.
Saying this, he passed away from the world. I went to Mosul to that
scholar and he was also similarly abstemious and pious. I told him that
such and such scholar had sent me to him. He said: “O son, stay with me.
I lived with him till the time of his death.

I asked him to whom he was entrusting him?” He said that he didn’t know
any such person except one who lived in Nasibiyyan, so I should go to
him. Thus after he died, I buried him and went to Nasibiyyan. I came to
the monk of Nasibiyyan and told him that so and so scholar has sent me
to him. He said: “O son, stay with me.” I lived with him till the time
of his death. He was also extremely knowledgeable and a pious man.

When his death approached, I asked him to whom he was entrusting him? He
said that he didn’t know any such person except one who lived in Amuriya
Rum. “If you go to him you will find him like me.” After his death I
went to Amuriya and found him like those scholars. I lived with for a
long time and earned some goat and sheep and some money.

When his death approached, I asked him to whom he was entrusting me? He
replied: “I don’t know of anyone who is like us in this time. But the
time is near for the rise of the Prophet who will come from Mecca. And
who will migrate to a place between two mountains, rich with many date
trees. Many distinguishing signs will appear about that Prophet and the
seal of prophets will be found on his back. He will not consume charity
but accept gifts.

If you can reach there, you should do so.” Salman says: After burying
him, I continued to live there till a caravan of Bani Kalab arrived from
Arabia. I asked them to take me to Arabia in exchange of the things I
possessed. They agreed to do so. So I accompanied them till Wadiul Qura.
They began to oppress me and making me a slave sold me to a Jew. When I
saw the date trees, I began to hope that it is the same place that was
described to me. That the last of the prophets will arise from there.

Thus I remained with that Jew till one of the Jews of Wadiul Qura, a
person of Bani Quraiza arrived and purchased me and brought me to
Medina. When I reached Medina, I found it same as the monk had described
to me. So I lived with that Jew for a long time. Till I heard that the
Holy Prophet (S) has appeared in Mecca. Since I was a slave, I could not
get more information about the Prophet.

Till the time the Holy Prophet (S) migrated to Medina and halted at
Quba. I was working in one of the orchards of that Jew. One day the
cousin of that Jew came to the orchard and said: May Allah kill Bani
Qaila (Ansar) all of them have gathered around a person who has come
from Mecca and they all consider him to be a prophet. By Allah when I
heard this about the Prophet I began to tremble so hard that I was about
to fall down before my master.

I asked: What is the fact? Who is that man from Mecca? My master slapped
me at the chest and asked: Why are you concerned about it? Mind your own
business. Thus at night I took a little food and came to the Messenger
of Allah (S) at Quba. I asked: “I have heard that you are a superior
person and there are some companions with you. I have some things of
Sadaqah, which I have brought for you to eat.”

The Holy Prophet (S) told his companions to eat from it but himself did
not touch it. I said that it was the first sign. Then I brought
something else and said that since he did not eat anything from Sadaqah,
I have brought it as a gift for him. So the Prophet ate from it as did
his companions.

I said to myself that it is the second quality which the monk has told
me of. I came to the Prophet for the third time when he was going with a
bier. He was wearing two old garments and was accompanied by the
companions. I began to circle the Prophet to see if the seal of
prophethood was visible on his back. When I reached behind him, the
Prophet understood through the intelligence of his prophethood that I
was looking for that sign of prophethood.

So he removed the cloth from his shoulder and I could see the seal
between his shoulders as the monk had told me. I fell down on seeing
that; I kissed it and continued to weep. The Prophet said: O Salman,
come before me. I returned to him and he said: Narrate your story for
the benefit of the companions. I narrated my whole story to them. Then
the Holy Prophet (S) said: O Salman, pay your master and obtain your
freedom.

I came to my master and had myself freed with the condition that I will
plant 300 trees for him and give 40 Awqiya of silver. Companions helped
me with date saplings. Some gave me 30 and some 20. Thus all gave
according to their position till they came to be 300. The Holy Prophet
(S) said: I will plant myself. So I dug the ground where it was planned
that the trees will be planted.

And the Prophet arrived there. I presented the saplings to His Eminence,
and he planted each and I watered and threw soil on each; till we
completed them all. And by the one who sent the Prophet with truth not a
single was wasted. All grew into good trees. Then a person gave to the
Prophet a piece of gold as big as an egg. So the Prophet asked where
that Persian is who has freed himself from my master.

I came and the Prophet said: Take this gold and clear the debts that
remain upon you. I asked: How can it be equal to the amount that I still
owe? The Prophet replied: The Almighty Allah will bless it so much that
it will repay all the debts owed by you. By the one in whose control my
life is, I paid 40 Awqiya silver from that piece of gold and secured my
freedom for that Jew.

Thus I was not able to take part in the Battles of Badr and Uhud. I came
in the Khandaq Battle and participated in all battles thereafter. In
another report, it is narrated from Salman that when it was time of the
death of the monk of Amuriya, he said: “Go to Syria, there are two
forests there.

A person comes out of one every year and enters another. At that time
people suffering from chronic diseases wait on his way and get cure
through his prayers. So you must also meet him at that time and ask him
about the Hanif religion which is the religion of Ibrahim. I went to
that glade and waited for him for a whole year, till that person came
out on an appointed night and entered another.

He had hardly emerged when I put my arms around him and said: “May Allah
have mercy on you, I want to know about the Hanif religion from you
which is the religion of Ibrahim.” He said: “You have inquired something
that people do not inquire in this age. Indeed, the time is near when a
prophet will appear from the Holy Kaaba which is in the sanctuary of
Mecca. And he will be sent with the religion about which you are
inquiring. So if you meet him, it would be as if you have met Isa
(a.s.).”

Through another chain of narrators it is mentioned in *Al-Jaraih* that
when the Messenger of Allah (S) was staying at Quba and had said that
till Ali does not join him, he will not proceed to Medina, when Salman
used to ask the people about the Prophet at that time he had been
enslaved to a Jew of Medina and he used to work in his date orchard.

When Salman came to know that Prophet was staying in Medina, he took a
tray of dates and came to him and said: I have heard that you are poor
people staying at this place, so I brought these dates as my Sadaqah,
please eat from them. The Holy Prophet (S) told his companions to eat
from it with the name of Allah, but he did not eat from it himself.

Salman watched all this with interest and remarked in Persian that it
was the first sign. Then he filled the tray with dates and told the
Prophet: I noticed that you did not partake from the dates of Sadaqah,
so I have brought these dates for you as gift. The Prophet partook from
them and also told his companions to follow suit.

After that Salman picked up the tray and remarked: This is the second
sign. And he went to the back of the Prophet and noticed the seal of
prophethood. And pleaded to the Prophet that he was enslaved to a Jew,
so what he advises him? He said: Go and make a deal with him to free you
at a cost, so that I can arrange it and have you freed. Salman came to
his Jew master and said: I have become a Muslim and have started
following the Prophet who has arrived in this town. So you will not be
able to gain anything from me.

Please take an amount of cash and free me. He said that he would free
him only if Salman planted 500 date trees for him. And that he would
serve him only till they bear fruit; and also to give him 40 Awqiya of
gold and each Awqiya is equal to 40 Mithqal. Salman reported this to the
Prophet who said: Go and accept his conditions. Salman went there and
made the agreement.

The Jew was under the impression that this will take a few years. Thus
Salman remained with the Prophet according to that agreement. The
Prophet said: Go and bring 500 seeds of date. I presented them. The Holy
Prophet (S) said: Give them to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and show me the
place where the man wants the trees planted. The Prophet came to that
place with Ali (a.s.) and Salman.

He made holes in the ground with his finger and told Ali (a.s.) to put a
seed in each. Then he cast some earth on it and when he separated his
fingers, water used to gush out of them. The same procedure was carried
out with the next seed. When he finished with the second seed, the first
used to become a tree. And when he sowed the third, the second grew into
a tree and the first bore fruits.

In this way all the seeds were sowed and 500 trees grew up and
fructified. When the Jew witnessed this strange phenomenon, he said: The
Quraish are right that Muhammad is a magician (Refuge of Allah). He
said: Now bring the gold. The Prophet picked up a rock which turned to
gold by his miracle. The Jew said: I have not seen gold better than
this. Then he weighed it and it was exactly 40 Awqiya, neither less nor
more. Salman says that I returned with the Prophet a freed man and I
began to live with him.

Shaykh Kishi has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that Misab which
is among the orchards owned by Lady Fatima (s.a.) is that same orchard
which the Holy Prophet (S) had planted in order to get Salman freed. The
Almighty Allah took it away from that Jew and restored it to the
Messenger and he had given it to Lady Fatima (s.a.) and she had turned
it into an endowment for the poor.

Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that the Messenger of Allah (S) for the
tribe of Salman who lived in Gazron, wrote a document about this as
follows: This is a document executed by Muhammad bin Abdullah which
Salman has requested for him to execute. In the name of his brother,
Mahar bin Qaroh bin Mahiya and for all his relatives who will come after
him through his line and those who remain Muslims and follow the
religion faithfully.

Peace be on you, I praise the Almighty Allah indeed the Almighty Allah
had ordered me to testify that there is no god except Allah, the one who
has no partner. I testify to it and also ask others to testify this. The
command belongs only to Allah and He is one who has created everything
and He it is that gives them death and He will enliven them again and
all will return to Him one day.

After that many points were mentioned in praise of Salman. For example
it was also mentioned that – shaving of head, paying of Jizya, accepting
Khums and Ashar (10th part), and had exempted them from all taxes. Thus
if they ask you for anything, you give it to them. If they call for
help, help them. If they seek refuge, give it to them. If they commit a
mistake, forgive it.

And if people act badly to them you restrain them. And give them 200
robes and 100 Awqiya silver every year from the Muslim Public Treasury
because Salman is deserving of these honors on behalf of the Prophet.
And in the last lines prayed for one who acts on this and cursed those
who harass them. And this document was entrusted to Amirul Momineen
(a.s.). Ibn Shahr Ashob has said that this document is still treasured
with the descendants of Salman and people act according to the command
of the Prophet and it is one of the miracles of the Holy Prophet (S).

If the Prophet had not known that his religion will spread all over the
world, he would not have written such a document for those rulers who
were not under his control at that time. It is mentioned in *Rijal
Kishi* narrating from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that: “Salman has
mastered the prior and latter sciences. And he was an endless ocean of
knowledge he is from us Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). Such was the level of his
knowledge that one day he came across a man who was standing in a crowd.

Salman told him: O servant of Allah, seek the forgiveness of Allah from
the act that you committed last night in the privacy of your house.” And
then Salman went away from there. People told him that Salman had
attributed evil to you but you did not refute him? He replied: Salman
informed of that about which no one except Allah and me were aware of.
In another report it is mentioned that it was Abu Bakr.

Through another authentic chain of narrators it is narrated from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he asked Fudail bin Yasar: Do you know what
the statement that: Salman had the knowledge of the former and latter,
means. Fudail said: It means that he had the knowledge of Bani Israel
and knowledge of the Holy Prophet (S). Imam (a.s.) said: “No, it does
not means this, on the contrary it means the knowledge of the Prophet
and knowledge of Amirul Momineen (a.s.). And he was aware of the most
extraordinary matters related to the Messenger of Allah (S) and Amirul
Momineen (a.s.).”

Also, Shaykh Kishi and Shaykh Mufeed, had through authentic chains
related from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that one day Abu Dharr came to
the house of Salman. The bowl of Salman was full of soup and fat. During
their conversation it so happened that the bowl overturned but nothing
fell out of it. Salman straightened it and then continued talking. Abu
Dharr was astonished at this. By chance that bowl again overturned but
nothing fell out of it.

Abu Dharr’s astonishment increased and he arose from there in deep
thought. Suddenly he saw Amirul Momineen (a.s.) there. Imam Ali (a.s.)
asked Abu Dharr why he has come away from Salman and what had horrified
him? Abu Dharr narrated the strange happening. Imam Ali (a.s.) said: If
Salman informs you of the matters he knows, you will indeed say: May
Allah bless the killer of Salman.

O Abu Dharr, Salman is the court of Allah on the earth. One who
recognizes him is a believer and one who denies him is an infidel.
Indeed Salman is from us, Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). Shaykh Mufeed has narrated
that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) came to Salman and said: “O Salman, welcome
your companion and do not reveal to him the matters that they cannot
bear.”

Kulaini, Kishi and Shaykh Tusi have through authentic chains of
narrators narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that one day Salman
was sitting with a group of Quraish in the mosque of the Prophet.

They were boasting about their superior lineage etc. till it was
Salman’s turn. Umar bin Khattab said: “Tell us, O Salman, what is your
parentage and family tree.” Salman said: “I am a son of an ordinary man.
I was misguided and Allah guided me through the blessing of Muhammad. I
was in hard times and the Almighty Allah made me self-sufficient for the
sake of Muhammad. I was a slave and the Almighty Allah freed me through
the goodwill of Muhammad. This is my lineage and descent.”

They were discussing this when the Holy Prophet (S) came out and Salman
said: “O Messenger of Allah (S), how much I have been insulted by these
people! I was seated in their company and they began to boast about
their lineage and finally turned to me. And Umar bin Khattab asked such
and such question.” The Holy Prophet (S) asked what reply he offered.
Salman quoted his answer. The Prophet announced to Quraish: “The lineage
of man is his religion and his valor are his good manners; and the root
of man is intelligence: the Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ وَأُنْثَىٰ
وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا ۚ إِنَّ
أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you men! surely We have created you of a male and a female, and
made you tribes and families that you may know each other; surely the
most honorable of you with Allah is the one among you most careful (of
his duty)…”***[^18]

If you are the most pious of them you are most excellent of them.
Moreover, Kishi has narrated that when Salman used to see a camel called
Askar, on which Ayesha mounted in the Battle of Camel he used to lashed
it and express distaste about it. People asked Salman why he despised
that animal? Salman replied: “It is not an animal, this Askar was son of
Canan the Jinn, who has assumed this shape to mislead the people.”

Then he told the Bedouin owner of that camel, “Your camel is valueless
here, take it to the boundaries of Hawwab and you will get whatever
price you demand, there.” It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)
that the army of Ayesha purchased that camel for 700 dirhams at the time
they were marching to confront Imam Ali (a.s.).[^19]

Moreover Kishi has narrated through Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) from
authentic chain of narrators that Salman married a woman of the Kinda
tribe. When he reached her place, he saw a slave girl and that a curtain
hung from the door. Salman said: Perhaps a sick person was lying there.
Or you have brought the holy Kaaba over here. People said that the lady
has put this curtain for herself. Salman asked: Who that slave girl is?
People said: This woman was very rich, therefore she purchased this
slave girl to serve her.

Salman said: I have heard from the Messenger of Allah (S) that a person
who possesses a slave girl and who does not have relations with her or
does not arrange for a husband for her, and if that slave girl falls to
adultery, that person will be as much liable for that sin as that slave
girl. And if one lends an amount to someone it is as if he has given
half his wealth in charity. And if he gives a loan a second time it is
like giving up all his wealth in charity. And fulfillment of right of
the owner is that you take the money to his place and pay him there.

Kishi has narrated through authentic chain of narrators that one day
someone mentioned Salman in the presence of Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)
and the Imam said: He is Salman Muhammadi and he is from us Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.). Salman used to say that people have turned away from Qur’an to
traditions, because they found Qur’an to be a lofty Book in which it is
clearly mentioned that even the smallest deed will be accounted for even
it is equal to a grain of rye. That is why you found the laws of Qur’an
difficult and people turned to traditions which simplified the matters.”

Shaykh Kishi and Mufeed have narrated through authentic and reliable
chains of narrators from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that one day, Salman
was passing by the iron mongers lane in the Kufa market, and there he
saw that a young man had fainted and people had surrounded him. People
said to him: This youth had a fit, please recite some supplication in
his ear, perhaps he will gain consciousness.

When Salman came near him, he became conscious. He said: “O Abu
Abdullah, I am not suffering from the illness that these people think,
but when I was passing by the iron mongers, I saw their hammers with
which they pound the iron, and I recalled the statement of the Almighty
Allah that is mentioned in Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَهُم مَّقَامِعُ مِنْ حَدِيدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And for them are whips of iron.”***[^20]

Thus I lost my senses due to the fear of Allah and I fell down
unconscious.” Salman took that youth to be his brother and the sweetness
of his love appeared in his heart only for the sake of the Almighty
Allah. He cultivated his company and fulfilled the conditions of
brotherhood, till that youth fell ill and Salman paid a visit to him. He
sat down at his bedside and realized that he was on the verge of death.
Salman said: “O Angel of Death, be lenient to my brother.” The Angel of
Death replied: “O Salman, I am lenient and kind to every believer.”

Also, Kishi has through authentic chains of narrators, narrated from
Musayyab bin Najiya that when Salman Farsi arrived as the governor of
Madayan, all of us came out of the city to welcome him. When we reached
Kerbala with him, Salman asked what that place was called. We told him
that it was Kerbala. He said: It is the place of the martyrdom of our
brothers. This is the point where they will place their belongings and
it is here that their camels will be tied.

This is the place where their blood will be shed. It was on this land
that prior good people were killed and it is here that the best of the
coming generations will be martyred here. Thus we reached upto Harura
with him, which was the place of conglomeration of the Khawarij of
Naharwan. Salman asked what that place was called. “Harura,” we said. He
said: “This is the place from where the worst of the people will rise up
in revolt.” When they reached Kufa, he asked: Is this Kufa? We replied
in the positive. He said that this was the dome of Islam.[^21]

Once Salman Farsi (r.a.) passed by a group of Jews. They requested
Salman (r.a.) to sit near them and relate whatever he heard from
Muhammad (S). Longing for their becoming Muslims, Salman (r.a.) sat
before them and said: Today, I heard from Muhammad (S) that the Lord of
the world says: O My servants!

Does it not so happen that someone wants something from you but you do
not intend to fulfill that need, but when he brings to you a person who
is very friendly with You and who recommends his case, you fulfill the
need? O My servants beware and know that My Messenger, Muhammad (S) and
his brother Ali (a.s.) and thereafter his truthful Imams (a.s.) are the
means of approaching Me from the entire creation and they are most
honorable in My sight.

So, whoever has a need or whoever wants to be protected from any harm,
should request Me in the name of Muhammad (S) and his pious progeny. I
will fulfill his need in the best way. Hearing this, the Jews mockingly
told Salman (r.a.): O Abu Abdullah! Then why do you not give the
mediation of those persons and request God to make you the richest and
wealthiest person in Medina?

Salman (r.a.) replied: I have requested Almighty Allah to grant me a
thing greater than the kingship of the whole world and which is most
beneficial and it is that He may grant me a tongue which may continue
praising Him and give me a heart which may constantly thank Him and also
a mind that may value His bounties and that I may be patient during
hardships. Almighty Allah has answered my appeal and granted that, which
is more valuable than everything in the world.

The Jews laughed at Salman (r.a.) and told him: You have indeed asked
for a very great rank from your Lord. Now we want to test the
truthfulness of your intention.

Just see, we are hitting you with this whip. Request your Lord to stop
our hands from hitting you. Salman (r.a.) supplicated: O Lord! Grant me
patience and forbearance in this calamity. The Jews began to hit Salman
(r.a.) with their whips so much, that they became tired, but Salman
(r.a.) said nothing except, O Lord! Grant me patience.

When the cursed ones got extremely tired, they said: O Salman! We never
imagined that anyone could remain alive after such whipping. We wonder
why you did not ask your Lord to prevent us from giving you so much
pain?! Salman (r.a.) replied: Such request would be against patience.
Rather, I am pleased with the respite given by God to you. I have
requested Him to grant me forbearance.

After a while, the Jews once again took up their whips and advanced
towards Salman (r.a.) saying: Now we will continue hitting you, till the
time you either die or deny the messengership of Muhammad (S). Salman
(r.a.) replied: I can never do the latter, I can never deny the
messengership of Muhammad (S), because Almighty Allah has revealed this
verse to Muhammad (S) in His Holy Qur’an: **‘Those who believe in the
unseen’.**

Hence your oppression is easier for me to bear, so that God may admit me
to the group which has been praised in this verse. Hearing this, the
cursed ones hit Salman (r.a.) till their hands could move no more. So
they sat down and said: O Salman! Had God raised your rank because of
your belief in Muhammad (S) He would have answered your supplication and
prevented us from hitting you.

Salman (r.a.) said: You are extremely ignorant. How could the Most
Mighty Lord accept the request quoted by you? Had He accepted it, it
would have been against my desire. I appealed Him to grant me patience
and He accepted my request. I never asked Him to prevent you from
oppressing me. Had it been so, it would have been against my desire.
Your imagination is quite wrong.

Thereafter they started hitting Salman (r.a.) for the third time. But
Salman (r.a.) continued to recite the same supplication, that is, O
Allah! Grant me patience to bear this oppression due to my love for Your
selected friend, Muhammad (S). Then the Jews said: Woe unto you. Did
Muhammad not allow you to speak something against your belief by way of
dissimulation during such hard times?

Salman (r.a.) replied: Indeed God has given me such permission, but it
is not obligatory. It is permitted that I may not allow you to fulfill
your evil intentions and continue to bear this oppression, as it is
better and more honorable in my sight. Hearing this, the cursed ones
once again took up their whips and hit him so much that blood oozed out
from his body. Then laughing more, they said: Why do you not request
your God to prevent us from hitting you so that you may not have to
utter what we want.

If you are true in your faith, God will not reject your supplication. So
request Him, giving mediation of Muhammad and his progeny, to destroy
us. Salman (r.a.) replied: I regard it bad to ask for your destruction,
because perhaps there may be someone among you about whom God knows that
he would believe after some time.

If I do as you say, it would mean that I asked for preventing that man
from becoming faithful. After hearing this reply, the unfortunate and
cursed ones said: Request God to destroy that man about whom He knows
that he would not refrain from his high-handedness and rebellious
haughtiness. In this way, you will be saved from what you fear.

Finally, when the Jews said so, a wall of the house in which they and
Salman (r.a.) were present tore apart and Salman (r.a.) could see the
Holy Prophet (S) and hear him saying: O Salman! Pray for the destruction
of this community as none from them is ever going to come to the true
path. It is just like the time when Prophet Nuh (a.s.) knew, after final
investigation, that none from his community except those who put faith,
would believe, he prayed to God for their destruction. Then Salman
(r.a.) asked the Jews what kind of divine punishment they would like.

They replied: Ask your God so that He may turn all of these whips into
pythons and every python may attack its owner and chew away his bones.
Salman (r.a.) prayed accordingly. Consequently, Allah Almighty turned
every whip into a big snake having two heads.

Every snake held the head of its holder in one mouth and with another
mouth held the owner’s right hand that held the whip. Then the giant
snakes broke and chewed their bones and finally swallowed them all. At
that time, the Holy Prophet (S) addressed his audience and said: O group
of believers! Almighty Allah has helped your brother-in-faith, Salman
(r.a.) against twenty Jews and hypocrites.

Come, let us go and see the snakes which broke the oppressors’ bones and
swallowed them up; the snakes that have been appointed by Allah to
protect Salman (r.a.). When the Holy Prophet (S) and his companions
reached the house in which Salman (r.a.) was oppressed, the snakes were
killing the oppressors and the latter were screaming loudly. Hearing
their screams, the Jews and hypocrites in neighborhood also had arrived
there to see what was happening. But they could not go near them for
fear of the deadly pythons.

When the Holy Prophet (S) reached there, all of them came out of that
house and gathered in the street which was too narrow to accommodate all
of them. But Almighty Allah due to the auspiciousness of the holy steps
of the Holy Prophet (S) widened that street ten times. When the snakes
saw the Holy Prophet (S), they jointly spoke out in pure language: Peace
be on you, O Muhammad! O the leader of the formers and latters.

Thereafter, they saluted Amirul Momineen (a.s.): Peace be on you, O Ali,
leader of the legatees. Thereafter, saluting the purified progeny of the
Holy Prophet (S) they said: Peace be on your Pure and Pious progeny whom
Allah has made the establisher of the affairs of the entire creation.
May our salutations reach them. We are the whips of the hypocrites.
Allah has turned us into snakes due to the prayer of this faithful,
Salman (r.a.).

Then the Holy Prophet (S) said: All praise befits Allah Who brought this
servant of His in my community. He, initially due to refraining from
cursing and continuing forbearance and finally cursing the oppressors
after getting totally disappointed, is like Prophet Nuh (a.s.). Then the
pythons said: O Allah’s Messenger! We are extremely furious against
these denier infidels. In the Kingdom of God, your and your legatee’s
orders are binding on us.

We wish that you pray to God that He may turn us into those giant snakes
of Hell who may override these infidels, whereby like here in this
world, we may continue to crush them in the Hereafter. The Holy Prophet
(S) replied: Your request has been accepted by God. Now throw out the
pieces of the bodies of these oppressors out of your bellies and then go
away into the lowest part of Hell so these oppressors may be more
disgraced and that their disrepute may last longer.

When they will be buried in the burial ground of Muslims, many believers
will take lesson by looking at their graves knowing that they were
destroyed due to the curse of a great friend of Muhammad (S), that is,
Salman (r.a.). Accordingly the snakes threw out the oppressors’ parts
out of their mouths. Their relatives collected them and buried them.
Many disbelievers became faithful and many hypocrites turned into true
believers. Also many infidels turned more stone-hearted and said: This
is clear magic.

The Holy Prophet (S) turned towards Salman (r.a.) and said: O Abu
Abdullah! You are our special faithful brother. God’s special angels
love you from their hearts. In their sight, your excellence is higher
than that of the sun over all from down in earth upto high heavens when
there is nothing like darkness all around with no sign of any cloud. You
are greater than all who have been praised by God in the verse: **‘Those
who believe in the unseen’.**

Shaykh Tusi has narrated through authentic chains of narrators that a
person said to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.): “We used to often hear about
Salman Farsi. Imam (a.s.) said: “Don’t say Salman Farsi, say Salman
Muhammadi. Do you know why we remember him so much?” “No,” said the
narrator.

Imam (a.s.) said: “It is because of three qualities: firstly he
preferred the desire of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) to that of his own;
secondly he used to love the poor and preferred them to the wealthy
people. Thirdly, he loved knowledge and scholars. Indeed, Salman was an
extraordinary man, and he used to avoid every falsehood and was inclined
to truth. And he was a true Muslim, and he did not adopt any kind of
polytheism.

Ibn Babawayh has narrated through correct chain of narrators from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “Once it so
happened that there was an argument between Salman and another person.
So that man asked: O Salman, what are you? Salman replied: Both of us
have originated from an impure sperm and our end is filthy carrion. But
when Qiyamat is established, the balance of deeds will be installed, so
whosoever has more good deeds will be honored and whoever has less good
deeds is unfortunate and degraded.

It is mentioned in the book of Husain bin Saeed through authentic chain
of narrators that Salman Farsi used to say: If the worship of Allah and
company of pious persons, who speak good things, had not been good, I
would have wished for death.

Ibn Abil Hadid has narrated from Abu Wail that he said: I went along
with a friend of mine to Salman and he said: If the Holy Prophet (S) had
not prohibited us to go out of the way to serve the guest, I would have
indeed done it for you. And it denotes getting something through
difficulty that which he does not have. Then he brought a loaf of bread
and ground salt unmixed with anything.

My companion said: It would have been better if Satar[^22] had been
there with this. Salman pawned his pot and brought Satar. When we
finished eating, my companion said I thank the one who made us content
with the sustenance that He provided to us. Salman said: If you had been
content on what Allah had destined for you, my pot would not have been
pawned.

Moreover, Abil Hadid has mentioned that Salman was a subject of King
Hurmaz of Iran and some say that he lived in Ji, a village of Isfahan.
He was among the friends of the Holy Prophet (S). His agnomen was Abu
Abdullah. When he used to be asked whose issue he was he used to reply
that he was the son of Islam and a descendant of Adam. It is also
narrated that he had remained as a slave of more than ten different
people and was sold from one to another till he reached to the Holy
Prophet (S).

Ibn Abde Barr has mentioned in *Istiab* from Hasan Basri that Salman
used to receive 5000 dirhams annually from the Public Treasury. Whenever
this amount was paid to him, he used to give it all in charity and
obtain his livelihood through the labor of his own hands.

He possessed a sheet half of which he spread and with the other half he
covered himself. He did not own his own house and lived in the shade of
walls and trees. One day someone told him that a house can be
constructed from him if he wished. He replied: I don’t need a house.

But that person insisted much on this and at last he said: I know what
type of a house you require. Salman told him to describe it. He said: I
will build such a house for you that when you stand up your head will
touch the roof. And if you spread your legs they will reach to the
walls.

Salman said: Yes, I want such a house. So the same type of house was
constructed from him. Moreover it is mentioned in *Istiab* that the Holy
Prophet (S) said: If religion had been in Suraiyyah star, Salman would
have surely obtained it.” Also it is narrated from Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) that Salman Farsi is like Hakim Luqman and it is narrated from
Kaab al-Ahbar that Salman is brimming with knowledge and wisdom.

Kishi has narrated through reliable chains of narrators from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) was one who spoke to
the angels and Salman was one with whom the angels spoke (*Muhaddath*).
And it is narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that Salman being a *Muhaddath* means that the Imam
used to mention traditions to him and teach him secretly and not that he
received divine revelation directly.[^23]

Moreover, it is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) through authentic
chains of narrators that people asked him about the fact that Salman was
a *Muhaddath.* Imam (a.s.) said: The angels used to talk to him in his
ear. In another authentic tradition he said: A big angel used to talk to
him. The narrator said: If Salman was such, how Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
must have been? Imam (a.s.): Mind your own business and have no concern
with these things.

And in another tradition he said: An angel used inspire in his heart in
such and such way. In another tradition he said that Salman was from
among the *Mutamusimeen,* that he used to know about the circumstances
of the people through wisdom. Through another authentic chains it is
narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that Salman was knowing Isme Azam
(the great name).

Moreover, it is narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) through
authentic chains of narrators that Taqayyah was mentioned one day in the
presence of Amirul Momineen (a.s.). Imam (a.s.) said: If Abu Dharr had
known what belief Salman had, he would have indeed killed him. Even
though the Messenger of Allah (S) had established brotherhood between
them. So what do you think about others?[^24]

Moreover, it is narrated through authentic traditions that Salman sent a
proposal to the daughter of the second Caliph. He refused initially and
then regretted it later and wanted Salman to accept it. But Salman said
that he was not interested, he only wanted to see if the discriminations
of the period of Ignorance and disbelief were still haunting him.

Ibn Babawayh has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from
Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that one day the Holy Prophet (S) asked his
companions: Which one of you fasts all the year around? Salman said: I,
O Messenger of Allah (S). The Prophet asked: Which of you prays the
whole night?

Salman said: I, O Messenger of Allah (S). Then the Prophet asked: Which
one of you completes the whole Qur’an everyday? Salman said: I, O
Messenger of Allah (S). Umar was infuriated at this and he said: This
person from Faras thinks that he can be proud on us Quraish? He is a
liar. He never fasted most of the days, and sleeps most of the nights
and on most days he did not recite the Qur’an.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: He is like Hakim Luqman, you ask him
and he will explain the matter. When Umar asked Salman, he said: As for
fasting the year round, the fact is that I fast three days every month
and the Almighty Allah says that one who does a good deed, He rewards
with ten so it is equal to a whole year. In spite of the fact that I
also fast through the month of Shaban and join it to the month of
Ramadhan.

Remaining awake in prayer the whole night means that I sleep with
ablution since I have heard from the Prophet that one who sleeps with
ablution is like one who has prayed the whole night. Completing the
Qur’an everyday means that everyday I recite Surah Ikhlas thrice, and I
have heard the Prophet say that he said to Amirul Momineen (a.s.): O
Ali, you are in my Ummah like Surah Ikhlas, one who recites it once has
recited one-third of Qur’an and one who recited it twice, recited
two-third of Qur’an and one who recited it thrice is like one who has
completed the whole Qur’an.

O Ali, one who befriends you verbally has one-third of faith. One who
befriends you with the tongue as well as the heart has achieved
two-third of faith. And one who befriends you with the tongue as well as
the heart and who helps you with his hands, has achieved complete faith.
O Ali, by the one who sent me with truth, if the folks of the earth had
loved you like the inmates of the heavens, the Almighty Allah would not
have punished anyone with Hell. Umar was dumbfounded as if his mouth was
filled with stones.

Ibn Babawayh has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from
Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s.) that one day Salman invited Abu Dharr and
placed two loaves of bread before him. Abu Dharr began to turn the
loaves here and there. Salman asked why he was turning the loaves in
this way.

He said: I notice that they are not fully baked. Salman was infuriated:
How you dare to turn about these loaves, by Allah, in this bread that
water has worked which is below the heaven and angels had spread it and
wind had conveyed to the clouds and the clouds have sprinkled it on the
ground. And Raad and angels, have all worked with it and conveyed its
drops to their respective places.

Then earth, wood, iron, quadrupeds, fire, fuel and salt etc. have worked
in it; such that I cannot encompass them, so how you can give thanks to
this bounty? Abu Dharr said: I repent before Allah, and ask you to
forgive me for what I have said. Imam (a.s.) said: The next day, again
Salman invited Abu Dharr and removed two pieces of dry bread from the
bag, moistened them in his pot and brought them for Abu Dharr.

Abu Dharr remarked: How nice this bread is. If only it would have been
accompanied with salt. Salman arose, went out and pawned his pot; then
he brought the salt from that money. Abu Dharr sprinkled it on bread and
began to eat saying: I praise the Almighty who gave us this sustenance
with contentment. Salman said: “If you had been content, my pot would
not have been pawned.”

It is mentioned in *Basairud Darajat* from Fazal bin Isa that: Once I
and my father came to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and my father asked: Is
it true that the Holy Prophet (S) has said that Salman is from us Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.)? Imam (a.s.) replied: “Yes.” My father asked: “Was he from
the progeny of Abdul Muttalib?” Imam (a.s.) said: “He was from us, Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.).” Again he asked the same question and got the same answer.
Again my father said: “I don’t get you.” Imam (a.s.) said: “You should
know that he was from us, Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).”

And the Imam pointed to his chest and said, “It is not as you think. The
Almighty Allah has indeed created our essence from Illiyyin and created
the essence of our Shia from one grade lower than that. So he is from us
and the essence of our enemies is created from Sijjin and the essence of
their friends is created from one grade lower than that. Therefore they
are from them and Salman is better than Luqman.”

It is mentioned in *Rauzatul* *Waezeen* from Ibn Abbas that: I saw
Salman in my dream and asked him if he was Salman and he replied in the
positive. I said you are not the one who was emancipated by the Holy
Prophet (S). “Yes,” he said. I saw a crown of rubies on his head and he
was wearing different types of robes and embellishments.

Then I said: O Salman, what a lofty grade the Almighty Allah has
bestowed to you! Yes, he replied. I said: After believing in Allah and
the Prophet, which act did you find to be the best in Paradise? He said:
“After believing in Allah and the Prophet, nothing is better in Paradise
than the love of Ali (a.s.) and his obedience.”

Moreover it is narrated from the Messenger of Allah (S) that Paradise is
more eager for Salman, than Salman is eager for it. And Paradise is as
much crazy about Salman as much as Salman is obsessed with it. Kulaini
has through authentic chains narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that
the Holy Prophet (S) established brotherhood between Salman and Abu
Dharr, and told Abu Dharr not to oppose Salman.

It is narrated in *Ikhtisas* from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) through
authentic chain of narrators that Asbagh bin Nubatah asked Imam Ali
(a.s.) about the excellence of Salman. Imam (a.s.) said: what can I say
about the one who is created from our Teenat (essence) and whose spirit
is connected to ours? The Almighty Allah has made him special with
knowledge of the first and the last and the outward and inward.” Imam
Ali (a.s.) says: I went to the Holy Prophet (S) and Salman was also
present there. A Bedouin came and removed Salman from his seat and
himself sat down there.

The Holy Prophet (S) was infuriated at this so much that the nerve
between his eyes swelled up and his eyes reddened and he said: “You are
removing the one whom the Lord of the worlds loves? Whose love is
announced in the heavens and whom the Messenger of God loves on the
earth. O Bedouin you are removing such a person, that when Jibraeel
comes down, he conveys the greetings of the Almighty Allah for Salman.

O Bedouin, Salman is from me and one who oppresses him is as if he has
oppressed me and one who has hurt him has hurt me and one who has driven
him away is like he has driven away me and one who had brought him near
is like he has brought me near. O Bedouin, do not make a mistake about
Salman; because the Almighty Allah has commanded me to inform him about
the time of the death, calamities and lineage of the people and tell
about things that separate the truth from falsehood.

Bedouin said: O Prophet of Allah, I never knew that the deeds of Salman
were of such a level. Was he not a fire-worshipper and then he became a
Muslim? The Prophet said: O Bedouin, I narrate the excellence of Salman
from Allah and you still say that Salman was a Majus? Indeed he was
never a Majus, he only displayed polytheism on the basis of Taqayyah and
he kept his faith concealed, Have you not heard the Almighty say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَا وَرَبِّكَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ حَتَّىٰ يُحَكِّمُوكَ فِيمَا شَجَرَ
بَيْنَهُمْ ثُمَّ لَا يَجِدُوا فِي أَنْفُسِهِمْ حَرَجًا مِمَّا قَضَيْتَ
وَيُسَلِّمُوا تَسْلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But no! by your Lord! they do not believe (in reality) until they
make you a judge of that which has become a matter of disagreement among
them, and then do not find any straitness in their hearts as to what you
have decided and submit with entire submission.”***[^25]

So, O Bedouin, you should accept what I say and be from the thankful
ones. And do not deny my statements or you will be eligible for divine
chastisement. And obey the Prophet so that you may be of them too.[^26]

Moreover, it is mentioned in *Ikhtisas* through reliable chain of
narrators that one day Salman Farsi entered the gathering of the
Messenger of Allah (S) and the companions paid respects to him and
preferred him over others and escorted him to the front. And they
honored him for the sake of the specialty that he possessed with the
Prophet and his Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). After that arrived Umar and saw that
Salman was seated at the best place in the gathering. He remarked: Who
is this non-Arab seated like a chairman among the Arabs?

The Messenger of Allah (S) went up to the pulpit and said: “Since the
time of Adam till date all the people are like the teeth of a comb and
there is no excellence of Arab over non-Arab and neither for a white
over black, except through piety. Salman is a never-ending ocean and an
endless treasure. Salman is from us, Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). Salman bestows
wisdom and expresses arguments of truth.”

Moreover it is narrated in *Ikhtisas* that once a mention was made of
Salman and Ja’far Tayyar in the presence of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
while the Imam was reclining on the pillow. Some were saying that Ja’far
was more excellent. Abu Basir was also present there. He said: Salman
was a fire-worshipper and then he became a Muslim. Imam (a.s.) sat
upright and said angrily: “O Abu Basir, the Almighty Allah made Salman
an Alawaite after being a Majusi, and made him a Quraishite after being
a Farsi. So may Allah’s mercies be on him and indeed Ja’far has a lofty
status in the view of Allah and he glides around in Paradise with the
angels.”

Ibn Babawayh has narrated through authentic chain of narrators that one
day Salman was seated with group of people when Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
passed by mounted on the camel of the Prophet. Salman said: “Why don’t
you get up and catching hold of his skirt you ask him questions about
your religion? By the one who split the seed and created the creatures,
no one except him will make you aware of the practice of the Prophet.
Because he is knowledgeable about the earth and his task on the earth is
all divine work, and through his blessings is the earth stable. If he
goes away from you, you will not find knowledge and see everyone in
denial mode.”

Ibn Abil Hadid has said that Salman passed away during the reign of
Uthman in year 35 A.H. Some have said that it was in the beginning of 36
A.H. and some other say that he died during the reign of Umar. But the
former statement is more popular.[^27]

It is mentioned in *Fadail Shazan bin Jibraeel* from Asbagh bin Nubatah
that he said: I was with Salman when he was the governor of Madayan in
the beginning period of the Caliphate of Imam Ali (a.s.). He was
appointed by Umar as the governor of Madayan during his reign and he
continued in that post till the first part of the Caliphate of Imam Ali
(a.s.). I went to him one day to find him ill and he passed away in the
same illness.

I used to visit him regularly till his illness intensified and he told
me: O Asbagh, the Messenger of Allah (S) has informed me that a dead man
will speak to him when the time of my death is near. So I want to know
if the time of my death is near. Asbagh asked him what he wished. Salman
told him to bring a wooden plank and spread a sheet over it and lift me
up like a bier and take me to the graveyard.

Asbagh says: I will do the same. After that I came out in haste and
returned very soon and did what Salman had told me to do. I called for
some people who carried him to the graveyard. When he was placed on the
ground he told the men to make him face the Qiblah. Then he said aloud:
“O folks of the old and decayed field, peace be on you. O those who are
veiled from the earth, peace be on you.”

The next time he said: “Peace be on you O that group for which the earth
is made as a place of eating. Peace be on you O that group for which the
earth is made as a blanket. Peace be on you O that group who are being
recompensed for their worldly deeds. Peace be on you on those who await
for Israfeel to blow the horn so that you they come out of the graves.

I adjure you in the name of the Almighty Allah, the noble Messenger, I
am Salman Farsi, the freed slave of the Holy Prophet (S) and the Prophet
has informed that a dead man will speak to me when my death is near. So
I want to know if my death is near. When Salman completed his discourse,
a dead body spoke up from its grave: “Peace be on you, and the mercy of
Allah and His blessings. O those who construct buildings for destruction
and those are involved in the world. I can hear you, O Salman, and I am
replying to you.

Ask me whatever you want, may Allah have mercy on you.” Salman said: “O
one who speaks after his death, are you from the folks of Paradise or
Hell?” He said: “I am from those whom the Almighty Allah has blessed
with Paradise.” Salman said: “Tell me how you found the hardships of
death and what did you see?”

He said: “Wait a bit, don’t make haste, because by Allah, the sawing of
my body and cutting up with a scissor is easier than the hardship of
death in my view. O Salman, the Almighty Allah gave me the good sense to
perform good deeds in the world, fulfill the religious duties, recite
the Qur’an and did good turns to the parents, abstained from unlawful
acts and was terrified of oppressing others.

Day and night I strived to earn lawful livelihood because I feared the
day I will have to appear for accounting before the Almighty Allah. Thus
on a day when I was extremely happy with life, I fell ill and remained
in that illness for some days till my life came to an end. At that
moment a very ugly and horrible appearance came to me and stood
suspended in air.

He gestured to my eyes and made me blind; then he gestured to my ears
and I became deaf. He pointed to my tongue and I became dumb. I could
neither see or hear or speak anything. My relatives began to weep and
wail and my brothers and neighbors came to know about this. I asked that
person: “Who are you that you are separating me from my family and
property?” He replied: “I am the Angel of Death. I have to transfer you
from the world to the hereafter.

Because your tenure on the earth is over and it is time for your death.”
Meanwhile he was joined by two more persons; they were in a beautiful
human form; one stood to my right and another to my left. They said:
Peace be on you, and the mercy of Allah and His blessings. We have
brought your scroll of deeds; you can read it yourself.” I asked; “What
type of scroll is it that I have to read?” They replied: “We are the two
angels that accompanied you every moment of your life.

We used to record your good and bad deeds and this is the same record.”
I began to read the book of my good deeds. And it was held by the angel
named Raqib. Thus as much I saw my good deeds, I used to be happy at
them and then I began to peruse my bad deeds, which was held by the
other angel, who is named Ateed. When I read it, I became very sad and
finally began to weep.

The angels said: “Glad tidings to you, you shall have a good end.” The
Angel of Death arrived and began to pull out the soul from my body and
it was the most painful thing in the world. I was in that condition when
my soul reached to my chest. Then the Angel of Death attacked me with a
weapon such that if he had placed it on mountains they would also have
melted. At last my soul was taken away through my nose. My family
members began to weep and wail aloud. I was able to hear and see them.

When they wept more intensely, the Angel of Death addressed them: “Why
are you weeping and wailing like this? By Allah, I have not done any
injustice to him that you may protest. Don’t cry as I and you are all
the servants of same God. If God had ordered you something about us, as
He has commanded me about you, indeed you would also have obeyed Him
with regard to me as I am obeying Him with regard to you.

By Allah, I have not captured his soul, except that his destined
sustenance had ended and his appointed tenure was over and he has gone
to the court of his Kind Lord, who will do what He wants about him and
He is powerful over everything. So if you are patient, you will be
rewarded, and if you are impatience and weep and wail, you will be
sinful and I have to visit you many times.

I will take away your sons, daughters, fathers and mothers. Thus he
moved away from my body taking my soul with him. Another angel came and
took my soul from him and wrapped it up in a silk cloth and conveyed it
to Allah in a flick of the eye. Then my soul was presented to the
Almighty Allah and I was questioned about each of my small and big deed.

And I was asked about Prayers, fasting, Hajj, recitation of Qur’an,
Zakat, Sadaqah and every act that I had performed during my life. And
obedience of parents and wrongful murder, usurping the property of
orphans, oppressing the people, worshipping at night, when others sleep,
and whatever such deeds that I had performed were also subjected to an
inquiry from my soul. After that my soul was sent back to the earth by
the order of Allah.

Those who wanted to give me the funeral bath approached me, removed my
clothes and began to bathe me. My soul called out: O men, be lenient
with this weak body as I broke each of his nerve when I came out, and I
didn’t come out of his body but that I shattered it. By Allah, if that
person had been able to hear this voice he would never have bathed the
body.

Then water was poured on my body and I was washed three times. And I was
shrouded in three pieces of shroud and Hunut (anoint) was given and this
was the ration with which I set out to the abode of the hereafter. Then
he removed the ring from my right hand. Thus after completing my Ghusl,
they entrusted my body to my elder son and said: May Allah reward you
for the calamity of losing your father and bestow you endless divine
rewards; then they wrapped me up in a white cloth and recited some
devotions.

My family members and my neighbors were called to bid farewell to me.
They came near me and bid farewell to me. Then I was placed on a wooden
plank. At that time my soul was between my mouth and shroud. My funeral
prayers were recited and then I was taken to the grave.

When I was placed in the grave, I witnessed a great terror, O Salman, as
if I fell down from the sky to the earth. Then I was placed in the grave
and the grave was closed with bricks and filled up with soil. My soul
returned to my tongue and ear. When people were asked to move away from
my grave, I felt a great regret and I said: Alas, if I had also returned
with them. Someone said from the corner of the grave: It is not
possible. And he recited the following verse of Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَعَلِّي أَعْمَلُ صَالِحًا فِيمَا تَرَكْتُ ۚ كَلَّا ۚ إِنَّهَا
كَلِمَةٌ هُوَ قَائِلُهَا ۖ وَمِنْ وَرَائِهِمْ بَرْزَخٌ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ
يُبْعَثُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Haply I may do good in that which I have left. By no means! it is a
(mere) word that he speaks; and before them is a barrier until the day
they are raised.”***[^28]

Barzakh is the distance between the world and the hereafter. I asked who
are you? He replied: I am Mamba, an angel, whom the Almighty Allah has
appointed on all creatures so that after their death, their deeds may be
shown to them so that I will seal the proof for them. He pulled me and
made me sit up. And told me to write my deeds. I said I don’t remember
anything. He said: Have you not heard the statement of the Almighty
Allah that He made in the Holy Qur’an?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَحْصَاهُ اللَّهُ وَنَسُوهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Allah has recorded it…”***[^29]

Then he said, I will dictate and you write down your deeds. I asked,
“Where is the paper?” He pulled out a piece from the corner of the
shroud and I saw that it was a piece of paper. And he said: “This is
your scroll.” I asked, “From where can I get a pen?” He told me that my
index finger was my pen. I asked, “Where is the ink?” He replied: “It is
your saliva.” Thus he began to tell me about whatever I had done in the
world, and nothing was missed by him as the Almighty Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَقُولُونَ يَا وَيْلَتَنَا مَالِ هَٰذَا الْكِتَابِ لَا يُغَادِرُ
صَغِيرَةً وَلَا كَبِيرَةً إِلَّا أَحْصَاهَا ۚ وَوَجَدُوا مَا عَمِلُوا
حَاضِرًا ۗ وَلَا يَظْلِمُ رَبُّكَ أَحَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they will say: Ah! woe to us! what a book is this! it does not
omit a small one nor a great one, but numbers them (all); and what they
had done they shall find present (there); and your Lord does not deal
unjustly with anyone.”***[^30]

Then that angel took away the writing, placed a seal upon it and put it
around my neck. I felt as if all the mountains of the world have been
placed on my neck. I asked him: “O Mamba, why have you done this to me?”
He replied: “Have you not heard what your Lord has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكُلَّ إِنْسَانٍ أَلْزَمْنَاهُ طَائِرَهُ فِي عُنُقِهِ ۖ وَنُخْرِجُ
لَهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ كِتَابًا يَلْقَاهُ مَنْشُورًا. اقْرَأْ
كِتَابَكَ كَفَىٰ بِنَفْسِكَ الْيَوْمَ عَلَيْكَ حَسِيبًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We have made every man’s actions to cling to his neck, and We
will bring forth to him on the resurrection day a book which he will
find wide open: Read your book; your own self is sufficient as a
reckoner against you this day.”***[^31]

Mamba said: “It is a discourse with which you will be addressed and you
will be presented for accounting. And the scroll of your deeds will be
unfurled before your eyes and you will be your own witness for your
self. Then Mamba went away from me and the angel named Munkar, arrived
carrying an iron mace, which was so heavy that even if all the men and
jinn try to move they cannot do so.

He told me in such a terrifying voice that if the people of the earth
had heard they would have died of fright. He asked: Tell me who your
Lord is? What is your religion? Who is your Prophet and who are your
Imams? What were your beliefs in the world?” I was speechless due to
fear and didn’t know what to reply.

Each joint of my body was shattered till the mercy of Allah came to my
rescue, which supported my heart and made my tongue vocal. So I said: “O
creature of Allah, why do you make me afraid: I witness that Allah is
One and Muhammad Mustafa (S) is the Messenger of Allah. And I witness
that the Lord of the worlds is my Lord and Muhammad Mustafa (S) is my
Prophet. Islam is my religion, Qur’an is my Book, Kaaba is my Qiblah and
Ali is my Imam.

I will meet my Lord on Judgment Day with the same beliefs.” The angel
said: “Glad tidings for you, you have indeed got salvation.” Then he
went away. After that the angel named Nakeer arrived and told me in such
a terrifying voice: that like before my limbs entangled into one
another. And he said: O man, narrate your deeds to me.

I was bewildered and could not say anything. Then the Almighty Allah
removed the terror and inspired the answer: and He gave me the best
Taufeeq and certainty. I said: O creature of Allah, be lenient with me
as I am coming from the world. I witness that except for the One God,
there is no other god and neither does he have a partner. And I witness
that Muhammad (S) is the servant of Allah and His Messenger.

Paradise is truth, Punishment of Hell Fire is truth, Sirat is truth,
Mizan (scale) is truth, accounting of creatures is truth, questioning of
the grave is truth, enlivening of the dead on Judgment Day is truth,
bounties of Paradise that the Almighty Allah has promised is a fact, and
the chastisement that He has warned about in Hell is a fact, and there
is no doubt that Qiyamat is imminent, and that the Almighty Allah will
raise to life again, those who are in the graves. The angel said: “Glad
tidings to you for perpetual blessings and rewards.” Then he made me lie
down in the grave and said: “Sleep like a bridegroom.”

And he opened near my head a door into Paradise and door to Hell at my
feet. And he said: “O slave of Allah, look at the bounties of Paradise
that you will get and also look at the fire of Hell, which you have
escaped.” Then he closed the door leading to Hell and left the door to
Paradise open through which I regularly received fragrance of the
blessings of Paradise.

He also widened my grave as far as the sight could perceive and then he
went away from there. O Salman, I have not seen anything more worthy
than these three things in the view of Allah: First: Praying on the cold
nights; Second: Fasting on the hottest days; Third: Giving Sadaqah in
such a way that the left hand should not come to know what the right
hand has given.

This is all that I have experienced and I testify to the Oneness of
Allah and Messengership of Muhammad (S); and I testify that death is
imminent, so you must be contemplative about it and keep fearing the
inquiry of your deeds by Allah. Thus concluded the discourse of that
dead man. Salman said: Lay me down on the earth. When we placed his head
on the ground, he said: “Give me the pillow.” We obliged him. Salman
gazed at the heavens and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ مَنْ بِيَدِهِ مَلَكُوتُ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ وَهُوَ يُجِيرُ وَلَا يُجَارُ
عَلَيْهِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Who is it in Whose hand is the kingdom of all things and Who
gives succor, but against*** ***Him Succor is not given, if you do but
know?”***[^32]

“O One in whose control is the power of everything and to whom all go
back and He is refuge to all and none gives refuge to Him. I brought
faith on You and followed Your Prophet and testified to Your Book. And I
have received all that You promised. O One, Who does not go back on His
word. Take my soul to Your mercies and land me in the court of Your
honor as I testify that there is no god except Allah, the One Who has no
partner and I witness that Muhammad is His servant and messenger.”

When he concluded, his soul flew away to the abode of eternity and he
joined the services of the Messenger of Allah (S) and the Holy Imams
(a.s.). Asbagh says: We were shocked by these events when a person
appeared riding a piebald pony whose face was under a veil.

When he came close to us, he greeted us and we replied. When he began to
speak, we realized that it was Amirul Momineen, Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(a.s.). He said: “Arrange for the funeral rites of Salman.” We began to
prepare for the same and tried to procure shroud and anointments. His
Eminence, said: “No need for all that, we have it with us.”

So we brought the wooden plank and water. The Imam performed the funeral
bath himself and shrouded the body. Then he stood in the front and we
followed behind him in the funeral prayers. After that His Eminence,
placed the last remains in the grave with his own hands.

When we were returning from the funeral, I said: “O Amirul Momineen
(a.s.), how did you come here and who informed you of Salman’s death?”
The Imam said: “O Asbagh, I adjure you in the name of Allah that you
will not reveal this secret as long as I am alive.” I asked, “O Amirul
Momineen (a.s.), will I pass away before you?”

He replied: “No.” “Then you may put me under the oath. I will not
disclose it to anyone, till the Almighty Allah does not issue the
command about you and He is powerful over everything.” Then the Imam
said: The Prophet (S) had informed me that Salman will pass away at that
time. I recited the prayer at Kufa mosque and went home and went to
sleep.

I dreamt that someone was saying: Salman has passed away. I woke up at
once and mounted my pony taking the necessary items for the funeral,
like the shroud and camphor etc. and set out from there. The Almighty
Allah made Madayan very near and I reached here so soon.” Saying this
His Eminence, disappeared from my sight and I could not understand
whether he went to the heavens of the earth. When I reached Kufa I heard
that the same day the Imam reached Kufa and prayed the Maghrib Prayer
there.[^33]

Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated from Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari that one day
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) prayed the Morning Prayer with us and turning to
us said: “O people, may Allah reward you for the calamity of the passing
away of Salman.”

This made the people talk among themselves. Ali (a.s.) tied the turban
of the Prophet and wore his garments, took up his staff and tied up his
sword, mounted the Prophet’s she camel, Ghazba, and told Qambar, count
ten steps, Qambar says that when I reached to ten, we had reached the
door of Salman.

Zazan has also narrated that when time approached for the death of
Salman, I asked him who would give the funeral bath to him? He replied:
“One who bathed the Messenger of Allah (S). I said: “You are in Madayan
and he is in Medina?” Salman said: “O Zazan, when I pass away and you
close my lips you will hear a voice.” So when I closed his mouth after
his death I came to the door and saw Amirul Momineen (a.s.). He said: O
Zazan, Abu Abdullah Salman, has entered the mercy of Allah.”

When he removed the sheet from Salman’s face, Salman smiled. Imam Ali
(a.s.) said: “Bravo, O Abu Abdullah, when you meet the Prophet you
narrate to him all that passed on his brother at the hands of his
Ummah.” After that Imam Ali (a.s.) began his funeral rites. When he
recited the funeral prayers, I heard his Takbir in a loud voice. Then we
saw two persons with the Imam.

We asked who they were and we were told that it was Ja’far, brother of
Ali (a.s.) and the other was Khizr. And they are accompanied by seventy
thousand rows of angel, each row having a thousand angels. It is
mentioned in *Mashariqul Anwar* that when Imam Ali (a.s.) removed the
sheet from Salman’s face, he smiled and tried to get up. Imam Ali (a.s.)
told him to go back to his condition of death, so he reverted to his
former condition.

Qutub Rawandi has narrated that one morning Amirul Momineen (a.s.) came
to the mosque of Medina and said: “I saw the Prophet in my dreams,
saying that Salman has passed away from the world. And Salman has made a
bequest to me that I will perform his final rites. So I am going to
Madayan to fulfill his wishes.

Umar said: “Take his shroud from Baitul Maal.” Imam Ali (a.s.) said, “It
is already arranged.” Then he came out of Medina with a group of
companions and set out for Madayan. People returned to Medina and Imam
Ali (a.s.) came back before Noon. And he said: “I have buried Salman.”
Many refused to believe this story so much so that after some days, a
letter arrived that Salman had died that day and a Bedouin had performed
his last rites. All were astounded on being informed of this.

It is narrated from Saad bin Abi Waqqas in *Rauzatul Waizneen* that he
paid a visit to Salman when the latter was ill. He found him crying. “O
Abu Abdullah,” asked Saad, “Why are you crying?” Although when the Holy
Prophet (S) passed away from the world, he was satisfied with you and
you are going to him to Hauze Kauthar.”

Salman said, “I am not crying due to death and neither am I sorrowful of
the world. It is because the Holy Prophet (S) has taken oath from us and
said that each of you should possess the necessary luggage as travelers
usually have. And I can see those things around me that make me sad.

There was a mat, a cup and a pot with him. Shaykh Kishi has through
reliable chains of narrators, narrated that Salman said: “The Holy
Prophet (S) said: ‘When it is time of your death, some groups will visit
you and find good and bad smell. They would not be consuming food. That
is they will be angels.’”

Then Salman took out a small bag and said: “The Messenger of Allah (S)
has gifted it to me.” And it was a nice fragrance. And he said:
“Dissolve it in water.” Then he sprinkled it around himself. Then he
told his wife to shut the door. She arose and obliged him. When she
returned, she found that his soul had flown to the holy abode.

An Account of Abu Dharr
-----------------------

We should know that according to traditions it seems that Abu Dharr was
the second most important companion of the Prophet. His name, according
to the most reliable report was Jundab bin Junadah, and his agnomen was
Abu Dharr. He was a member of the Arab tribe of Bani Ghiffar.

Kulaini has narrated through authentic chains from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) told one of his companions: Shall
I not tell about the story of the conversion of Salman and Abu Dharr to
Islam? He said he was aware of the story of Salman, and would like to
know how Abu Dharr embraced Islam.

And he made a mistake of not asking about the account of both the
companions. The Messenger of Allah (S) said: He used to graze his sheep
at Abu Batan Markah, which is at a distance of one station from Mecca.
Suddenly a wolf attacked his flock from the right and Abu Dharr chased
him away with his staff.

Then he attacked from the left and Abu Dharr striked it with his staff
and said: I have not seen a worse wolf that you. The wolf began to speak
by the miracle of the Prophet: By Allah, the people of Mecca are worse
than me. The Almighty Allah sent a messenger to them and they say that
he is a liar. They call him names and consider him incapable. When Abu
Dharr heard this, he told his wife to pack some victuals, pot and staff.

Taking these items he set out for Mecca on foot to investigate the
information he had received from the wolf. Thus after many hardships and
a long distance he at last entered Mecca. He was feeling extremely
thirsty. On reaching the Zamzam well, he pulled out a bucket of water
and saw that the bucket was full of milk. He thought that it was a proof
of what the wolf had said.

And it was also a miracle of the Prophet. Thus he drank the milk and
came to a corner of the mosque. He found a group of Quraish and sat down
with them. They were talking ill of the Prophet as the wolf had
mentioned. They were occupied in this whole day. In the evening, Abu
Talib arrived and when they saw him, they said: Keep quiet, Muhammad’s
uncle is here!” So they fell silent. When Abu Talib arrived, they began
to converse with him.

After dusk when Abu Talib took their leave, Abu Dharr also followed him.
He turned to me and asked: “What do you want?” “I am searching for the
Prophet who has appeared among you,” I said. “What do you want from
him?” he asked. I said: “I want to start believing in him, testify to
his truthfulness and follow him.” Abu Talib asked, “Will you really do
this?” “Doubtlessly,” said I.

So he said: “Come tomorrow at the same time and I will take you to him.”
Abu Dharr says that he spent the night in the holy mosque of Mecca and
joined the gathering of the same infidels in the morning. Like the
previous day, they again began to talk ill of the Messenger of Allah (S)
and when Abu Talib arrived, they stopped their discussions and began to
converse with him.

Thus when Abu Talib arose from there I also set out with him. Like the
previous day he again asked the same question and I replied in the same
way. Then he asked with emphasis if I would indeed act on what I was
saying and I agreed. So he took me to a house in which Hamza was
present. I greeted him and he asked the purpose of my visit. I gave the
same explanation.

So he asked me if I testified to the Oneness of Allah and that Muhammad
is the Messenger of Allah? I said: I testify that there is no god except
Allah, and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. Hamza took me to the
house in which there was Ja’far Tayyar. I greeted him and he also asked
the purpose of my visit. I again offered the same explanation. He told
me to recite the two testimonies (Shahadatain) and I recited the same.

Ja’far took me to the house of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and he also first
asked about the purpose of my visit and then asked me to recite the dual
formula of faith. Then he took me to the house in which the Messenger of
Allah (S) was seated. I greeted him and took my seat. The Messenger of
Allah (S) also asked me about the purpose of my visit and then taught me
the dual Kalimah (Shahadatain).

I recited the same and the Prophet said: O Abu Dharr, go back to your
native place, and by the time you reach, there your cousin would have
passed away from the world and except for you there will no heir. Take
his property and live with your family, till the time I declare my
prophethood. After that you can join me. So Abu Dharr returned home to
find that the son of his uncle had expired.

He took charge of all his property and continued to live there till the
Holy Prophet (S) migrated to Medina and the religion of Islam gained
popularity. After that he came to Medina and met the Prophet. Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: This was the account of Abu Dharr’s acceptance
of Islam. And the narrator felt sorry that he had declined to hear about
the account of Salman’s acceptance of faith. Then he requested the
Prophet to mention the story of Salman also, but the Prophet refused to
oblige him.

Ibn Abde Barr, a great Sunni scholar, has mentioned in *Istiab*, from
the Messenger of Allah (S) that Abu Dharr was an example of the piety of
Prophet Isa (a.s.) in this community. According to another tradition, he
was a facsimile of Isa bin Maryam (a.s.) in piety. Moreover it is also
narrated that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: Abu Dharr has obtained some
such sciences which people cannot bear and he has placed some knots over
it, so that nothing comes out of it.

Ibn Babawayh has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that one day Abu Dharr came to the Prophet and
Jibraeel (a.s.) was speaking to the Prophet in private in the form of
Dahiya Kalbi. Abu Dharr thought that it was really Dahiya Kalbi talking
about some confidential matters so he went away from there. Jibraeel
said: O Messenger of Allah (S), Abu Dharr passed away from here and did
not even greet us? If he had greeted we would have replied to him. O
Prophet, there is a supplication of his which is famous among all the
folks of the heavens. When I go away you ask him.

So when Jibraeel flew away to the heavens, Abu Dharr arrived there again
and the Prophet asked him why he had not greeted them previously. He
said: I thought that perhaps you had called Dahiya Kalbi for a private
meeting. I didn’t like to disturb you. The Prophet said: “It was
Jibraeel and he complained about you for not having greeted us.”

Abu Dharr felt very sorry. The Messenger of Allah (S) asked: “What is
that supplication through which you supplicate Allah, about which
Jibraeel said that it was well known among the folks of heavens?” He
said: I recite this:  
 “In the name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful. O Allah! Indeed I
ask You for safety and faith from You. And the testimony from Your
Prophet and release from all the calamities. And thankfulness upon
salvation and needlessness from evil people.”

It is mentioned in *Tafsir Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.)* that: Once the Holy
Prophet’s (S) close and sincere companion, Abu Dharr Ghiffari,
approached the Prophet and said: O Allah’s Messenger! I have sixty
female sheep.

If I take them for grazing to the forest, I cannot bear separation from
your honor. On the other hand, if I hand them over to any shepherd for
grazing, I fear he may behave harshly with them and not graze them
properly. Please suggest what I should do to overcome this confusion.
The Holy Prophet (S) replied: You yourself go and graze them. So Abu
Dharr went with his animals to the jungle and returned on the seventh
day.

The Holy Prophet (S) asked him: O Aba Zar! What did you do with your
animals? The latter replied: A very strange thing happened. When I was
busy performing my prayer, a wolf attacked them. I became perplexed and
could not instantly decide whether I should interrupt my prayer or
continue it, overlooking the fate of my sheep. Finally I preferred the
prayer. At that time Satan inserted doubt in my heart saying: If the
wolf eats up your animals, you will lose your source of sustenance.

I told the Satan: In any case my faith in the Oneness of God, in His
Prophet, in his cousin Ali (a.s.) and his progeny would remain with me
and so also my love and friendship with them and my enmity towards their
enemies. So, in such a case, losing and missing every other thing of the
world would be easy for me to bear.

I continued my prayer. What I then saw was that a wolf caught hold of a
sheep but at the same time a tiger jumped on the wolf and tore it into
two pieces, freed the lamb and sent it to its group and told me: O Aba
Zar! Continue your prayer and do not worry about your animals, as Allah
Almighty has appointed me to protect them until you finish your prayer.

Upon hearing this, I busied myself with my prayer. This surprised me to
an extent known only to Allah Almighty. When I completed my Prayer, that
tiger came to me and said: Go to the Holy Prophet (S) and tell him:
Allah Almighty has given honor to your companion and the protector of
your Shariat and has appointed a tiger to protect his animals  
 Hearing this event all in the audience were surprised. Then the Holy
Prophet (S) said: O Aba Zar! I, Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain (a.s.)
believe in what you said. But those who were hypocrites said: This is
the result of a preplanned affair between Muhammad (S) and Abu Dharr
(r.a.).

He wants to deceive us in this way. Twenty of them decided to go and
look personally into the reported matter about the sheep. Let us see,
they said, whether a tiger really protects the sheep when Abu Dharr is
engaged in Prayer. They themselves observed that the tiger was taking
rounds near Abu Dharr; that the tiger sends back any lamb to the flock
when separated so long as Abu Dharr prays.

They themselves saw that when Abu Dharr finished his worship, the tiger
called on him and said: Take care of your sheep. They are safe. Then
that tiger addressed the hypocrites saying: O group of hypocrites! Did
you deny that Allah Almighty may make me an obedient servant of one who
is the friend of Allah, His Prophet, Ali (a.s.) and their progeny and of
those who take intercession so that I should take care of his animals?

I swear by the Holy Being, Who has given honor and excellence to
Muhammad (S) and to his purified progeny and declare that Almighty Allah
has made me a slave of Abu Dharr to such an extent that if he orders me
to tear all of you into pieces, I would do so instantly. I swear by that
Being, swearing by Whom is the highest of all swearing, and announce
that if Abu Dharr requests Almighty Allah giving mediation of Muhammad
(S) and his purified progeny that He may turn the water of all the
oceans into the oil of Zambaq and Baan and turn all the mountains into
musk, amber and camphor and to turn the branches of all the trees in the
world into emeralds, Almighty Allah would never turn down his request
and would do whatever he asks.

When Abu Dharr (r.a.) came to the Holy Prophet (S), the latter told him:
O Aba Zar! Since you have obeyed Allah properly, He has made an animal
your slave so that it may prevent your enemies from attacking you and
thus you are the best of those persons in whose praise Almighty Allah
had said: **“…and keep up prayer…”**

Kulaini has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Imam
Musa Kazim (a.s.) that Abu Dharr said: “I am sick of the world and I
denounce it. Except for two loaves of barley bread, from which I eat one
in the morning and one at night. Except two garments of woven hair, from
which one I tie to the waist and cover myself with another.”

Moreover, it is narrated through good chains of narrators from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that Abu Dharr in his sermon used to observe: O
seeker of knowledge, there is nothing in the world whose merit does not
benefit and its demerit does not harm, except for the one that the
Almighty Allah blesses. Therefore seek that about which you hope would
benefit you.

O seeker of knowledge, your family, wealth and property should not make
you so much involved, because on the day you will be separated from them
you will be like a guest who stays the night with some people and
separates from them the next morning. And except for a little sleep from
which you will awake soon there is no difference between death and
resurrection.

O seeker of knowledge, before that day send good deeds on the day you
will stand to give account of your deeds. And on that day you will get
the reward of your deeds and will be recompensed for all that you do  
 .  
 Moreover, it is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) through
authentic chains of narrators that a man asked Abu Dharr why people were
inclined to death?

Abu Dharr replied: Because you have attached yourself to the world and
destroyed your hereafter. And that is why you don’t want to be
transferred from the world to the hereafter. Then that man asked: How we
would be presented before Allah?

He replied: It would be like a traveler who returns home and the sinners
among you like the runaway slave who is brought back to his master. Then
he asked: What will be our condition before the Lord? Abu Dharr replied:
“Present your deeds according to the Book of Allah as He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْأَبْرَارَ لَفِي نَعِيمٍ. وَإِنَّ الْفُجَّارَ لَفِي جَحِيمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Most surely the righteous are in bliss, and most surely the wicked
are in burning fire…”***[^34]

That man asked: “Where is the mercy of Allah?” He replied: “Near the
righteous.” Moreover it is narrated from the same Imam that a person
wrote to Abu Dharr to bestow him with some new knowledge. Abu Dharr
replied: “There is no end to knowledge and there are countless sciences,
but if possible you should not wrong one you befriend.” He said: “Have
seen anyone wronging one that he likes?” “Yes,” said Abu Dharr, “Your
life is most beloved to you, when you disobey Allah, you cause harm to
your self.”

It is narrated from the same Imam that there was a man in Medina, who
used to attend the mosque of the Prophet. One day he entered the mosque
and said: O Allah, remove my loneliness and grant me a good companion.
When he finished supplicating, he saw a person seated in the corner of
the mosque. He approached him and saluted and asked: O servant of Allah,
who are you? Abu Dharr said: I am Abu Dharr. That person said: Allah is
the greatest.

Allah is the greatest. Abu Dharr asked him why he recited the Takbir. He
replied: When I entered the mosque, I had prayed that the Almighty Allah
should honor me with your meeting. Abu Dharr said: I was more rightful
of saying the Takbir as I am the deserving companion. Indeed I have
heard from the Messenger of Allah (S) that he said: I and you will be
standing on an elevated place on Judgment Day, till the people complete
their accounts. O man, go away from me, because Uthman has banned my
company, and I don’t want you to have any problem.”

Through trustworthy chains of narrators, it is narrated from the same
Imam that one day Abu Dharr came to the Prophet and said: “O Messenger
of Allah (S), the climate of Medina does not suit me, do you allow me to
take my nephew and move to the area of tribe of Mazniya?”

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “I fear that a group of Arab riders will
attack you and kill your nephew; and that you will return in bad state
and stand before me leaning on your staff. And say: The son of my
brother has been killed by the oppressors and they have seized our
animals.” Abu Dharr said: “If Allah, wills the best will come about.”

At last the Messenger of Allah (S) allowed him and he left Medina with
his wife and nephew. When he reached the Mazina tribe, after some days a
group of riders from Farara tribe attacked them and Uyyana bin Haseen
seized his sheep and slew his nephew. They also kidnapped his wife who
was from the Bani Ghiffar tribe. At last Abu Dharr rushed to the
Messenger of Allah (S) and narrated the story to him.

He displayed the point of the spear with which he had been hit and it
had almost reached his stomach. Thus Abu Dharr leaned on his staff and
said: “Allah and His Messenger had spoken the truth, it happened as you
said. Now I stand before you leaning on my staff.” The Holy Prophet (S)
called the Muslims for help and they rushed out of Medina, pursued the
Farara tribe, and seized back from them all they had plundered from Abu
Dharr. They also killed a group of idolaters.[^35]

It is narrated from continuous reports of Shia as well as Sunni scholars
that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: The sky has not shaded and the
dusty earth has not borne the weight of any speaker more truthful than
Abu Dharr.” And Ibn Babawayh has through authentic chains of narrators
narrated from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) said:
“Abu Dharr is the Siddiq of this Ummah.”  
 Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated through authentic chains of narrators that
the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “O Abu Dharr, I only prefer for you
that which I prefer for myself.

I find you weak bodied, so don’t become the leader of even two persons
and never become the trustee of orphans’ properties.”

Ibn Babawayh has narrated through authentic chains of narrators that a
person asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) if Abu Dharr was better or Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.)? Imam (a.s.) asked: “How many months are there in a year?”
He replied: “Twelve.” Imam (a.s.) asked: “How many of them are sacred?”
The narrator said: “Four.”

Imam (a.s.) asked: “Is the month of Ramadan included in them?” The
narrator said: “No.” The Imam (a.s.) asked: “Sacred months are superior
or the month of Ramadan?” “Month of Ramadhan,” replied the narrator.
Imam (a.s.) said: “Same is the case of us, Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) that no
once can be compared to us.” One day Abu Dharr was sitting in the
company of the companions of the Prophet. They were discussing the
excellence of this Ummah.

Abu Dharr said: “The best person of this Ummah is Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(a.s.) and he is the distributor of Paradise and Hell and he is Siddiq
and Farooq of this Ummah and the Divine Proof on this Ummah.” When the
hypocrites heard this, they turned away from him and alleged that he was
lying. So Abu Amala Bahili arose and went to the Prophet and reported
the statement of Abu Dharr and narrated the denial of those people. The
Messenger of Allah (S) said: “The green sky has not shaded and the dusty
earth has not borne the weight of any speaker more truthful than Abu
Dharr.”

Moreover it is narrated through authentic chains of narrators that a
person asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) about this same tradition if the
Holy Prophet (S) had really mentioned thus. Imam (a.s.) replied, “Yes.”
So the reporter asked, “Then what is the position of the Messenger of
Allah (S) himself, Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and Hasan and Husain?” Imam
(a.s.) said: “Our example is like that of the month of Ramadhan whose
one night is equal to a thousand nights.” All senior companions are like
the sacred months and thus no one can be compared to us, Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.).”

In the book of Hasan bin Saeed it is narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) that one day a person came to Abu Dharr and gave him glad tidings
that his sheep have multiplied much. Abu Dharr said: “I am neither
pleased at their increase and nor am I fond of them. On the contrary I
prefer only that which is less and sufficient. Because I heard from the
Messenger of Allah (S) that he said: “Kindness to relatives and
trustworthiness will be present on both the edges of Sirat, when such a
person passes on it who has been very kind to his relatives and who has
not betrayed anyone’s trust, the Sirat will not put him into Hell.”

According to correct chains of narrators, it is narrated from the same
Imam that during the period of the Messenger of Allah (S) one day Abu
Dharr condemned a person for having a mother who was black. The
Messenger of Allah (S) said: “O Abu Dharr, do you ridicule him about his
mother?” Abu Dharr threw himself on the ground and wept and smeared his
face and head with dust. At last the Prophet was pacified.

Shaykh Tusi has narrated through reliable chains of narrators that
people told Abu Dharr: O companions of Messenger of Allah (S), how did
you begin your day?” He replied: “I began the day in two bounties. One
that the Almighty Allah has concealed my sin and another that people
praise me. And one who becomes proud of his praise is under a
misunderstanding.

Shaykh Kishi has narrated through authentic chains from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that one say Abu Dharr went in search of the Messenger of
Allah (S) and found him sleeping in an orchard. He wanted to know if the
Prophet was really sleeping, so he broke a dried piece of wood; the
Prophet raised up his head and said: O Abu Dharr are you trying to joke
with me? Do you not know that I also see your deeds in sleep as I see
them when I am awake? My eyes sleep, but my heart does not.”

Ibn Babawayh has narrated through authentic chains from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that most of the worship of Abu Dharr was in contemplation
of praise of the Almighty Allah and to seek lessons from nature.

Qutub Rawandi has narrated from Abu Dharr that he said: “One day, I and
Uthman came together to the Prophet. The Messenger of Allah (S) was
seated in the mosque and we sat down near him. After sometime Uthman
went away and continued to sit there. So the Messenger of Allah (S)
asked me what confidential conversation was I having with Uthman?

I said: I was reciting a chapter of Qur’an. His Eminence said: Very soon
he will become inimical to you and between you two the most unjust will
go to Hell. So I said: Indeed we belong to Allah and to Him we shall
return. So I asked the Prophet which of us would be more oppressive? The
Holy Prophet (S) said: O Abu Dharr, speak the truth even though it is
bitter. So much so that you meet me on Judgment Day with the oath that I
have taken from you.”

Through authentic chains of narrators it is narrated from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that Abu Dharr cried so much due to the fear of Allah, that
his eyes were hurt. People asked him to pray that the Almighty Allah
cures his eyes. Abu Dharr said: “I don’t care.” So they asked him which
calamity has made him oblivious of his eyes.

He said that he was confronted with two great questions and they
concerned Paradise and Hell. Ibn Babawayh has narrated from Abdullah bin
Abbas that one day the Messenger of Allah (S) was seated in Quba Masjid
and companions were sitting around him. He said: “The first to enter
from this door will a man of Paradise.”

When companions heard this a group of companions arose to try to enter
first. The Holy Prophet (S) said: The group that enters now and competes
with each other and informs me about the Roman month of Azar will be the
one to enter Paradise. So Abu Dharr entered with that group. The
Messenger of Allah (S) asked which Roman month was it? Abu Dharr said:
Azar was over.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “I know that, but I wanted the
companions to know that you are from the folks of Paradise. And why you
shouldn’t be when you will be removed from my sanctuary due to your love
for my Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and you will live in solitude and die in
loneliness, and a group of Iraqians will complete your last rites. And
that group will be in my company in Paradise which the Almighty Allah
has promised to the righteous.”

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that in the Battle of Tabuk, Abu Dharr was
left behind at a distance of three day’s travel, because he was on thin
and weak camel. When he realized that the animal cannot reach to the
caravan he hoisted his luggage on his back and set out on foot. When it
was day, and the sun arose high, Muslims saw him approaching.

The Holy Prophet (S) said: It is Abu Dharr and he is very thirsty. Take
water to him as soon as possible. People brought water for him. He drank
it and came running to the Prophet. He was carrying the pot. The
Messenger of Allah (S) asked: O Abu Dharr, you are carrying water, then
why were you thirsty?”

Abu Dharr said: “On the way I passed a rock on which rain water had
collected. When I tasted I found it very cool and sweet so I vowed that
till my beloved, the Prophet of Allah, does not drink it, I will not do
so.” The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “O Abu Dharr, may Allah have mercy
on you, you will live in strange land and you will die in solitude and
you will be raised alone and you will be sent to Paradise alone and some
people of Iraq will perform your last rites.”

Reliable biographers have narrated that Abu Dharr went to Syria during
the time of Umar and he stayed there till the time of Uthman. When he
learnt of the corruption of Uthman’s rule, especially the ill-treatment
of Ammar, he began to denounce the third Caliph openly and talk about
his high-handedness.

When Abu Dharr witnessed the injustice of Muawiyah he used to condemn
him and encourage people to love and devotion of Imam Ali (a.s.). He
used to narrate the excellence of Ali (a.s.) and he had inclined many
people to Shiaism. It is famous that it is according to the efforts of
Abu Dharr that we find some Shias in Syria and Jebel Amil.

Muawiyah complained about him to Uthman and said that if Abu Dharr
stayed there for some more time he would mislead the people from Uthman.
Uthman replied: “When you receive my letter, you should make Abu Dharr
sit on a fast camel and send him with a nasty driver. He should make the
camel run continuously till he reaches Medina. Abu Dharr should not be
able to sleep, so that he may forget us and he may remain restless for
sleep.”

When Muawiyah received this letter, he called Abu Dharr and mounted him
on the bare back of a refractory camel and handed him to a nasty driver
to take him to Medina. Abu Dharr was tall but very thin. At that time he
had aged and his hair had turned grey. So the driver continued to drive
the camel fast. There was no saddle or litter upon it, therefore Abu
Dharr’s thighs were injured. So much so that his flesh broke away.

It was in such a condition that he reached Medina. When people brought
him to Uthman he said: “May no one be pleased to see you O Jundab.” Abu
Dharr said: “My father had named me Jundab, but the Messenger of Allah
(S) had called me Abdullah.” Uthman said: “You claim to be a Muslim and
allege that we say that the Almighty Allah is poor and we are wealthy?
When did I claim thus?”

Abu Dharr said: “I never issued such a statement, but I witness that I
heard the Messenger of Allah (S) that when the descendants of Abil Aas
reach upto thirty, they would use the funds of the Almighty Allah to
obtain power and consider the people as their servants and practice
dishonesty in the religion of Allah. After that the Almighty Allah will
save the people from their clutches. And Ali Ibn Ibrahim has mentioned
in his *Tafsir:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ أَخَذْنَا مِيثَاقَكُمْ لَا تَسْفِكُونَ دِمَاءَكُمْ وَلَا
تُخْرِجُونَ أَنْفُسَكُمْ مِنْ دِيَارِكُمْ ثُمَّ أَقْرَرْتُمْ
وَأَنْتُمْ تَشْهَدُونَ. ثُمَّ أَنْتُمْ هٰؤُلَاءِ تَقْتُلُونَ
أَنْفُسَكُمْ وَتُخْرِجُونَ فَرِيقًا مِنْكُمْ مِنْ دِيَارِهِمْ
تَظَاهَرُونَ عَلَيْهِمْ بِالْإِثْمِ وَالْعُدْوَانِ وَإِنْ يَأْتُوكُمْ
أُسَارٰى تُفَادُوهُمْ وَهُوَ مُحَرَّمٌ عَلَيْكُمْ إِخْرَاجُهُمْ ۚ
أَفَتُؤْمِنُونَ بِبَعْضِ الْكِتَابِ وَتَكْفُرُونَ بِبَعْضٍ ۚ فَمَا
جَزَاءُ مَنْ يَفْعَلُ ذٰلِكَ مِنْكُمْ إِلَّا خِزْيٌ فِي الْحَيَاةِ
الدُّنْيَا ۖ وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ يُرَدُّونَ إِلَىٰ أَشَدِّ
الْعَذَابِ ۗ وَمَا اللَّهُ بِغَافِلٍ عَمَّا تَعْمَلُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when We made a covenant with you: You shall not shed your blood
and you shall not turn your people out of your cities; then you gave a
promise while you witnessed. Yet you it is who slay your people and turn
a party from among you out of their homes, backing each other up against
them unlawfully and exceeding the limits; and if they should come to
you, as captives you would ransom them- while their very turning out was
unlawful for you. Do you then believe in a part of the Book and
disbelieve in the other? What then is the reward of such among you as do
this but disgrace in the life of this world, and on the day of
resurrection they shall be sent back to the most grievous chastisement,
and Allah is not at all heedless of what you do.”***[^36]

Ali bin Ibrahim has mentioned that these verses were revealed about Abu
Dharr and Uthman due to the fact that when Abu Dharr entered Medina in a
bad condition and stood before Uthman leaning on his staff, at that
time, an amount of 100000 dirhams was piled before Uthman from the
Public Treasury and his companions were eyeing the money, expecting it
to be distributed among them.

Abu Dharr asked: “What money is it?” He replied: “It is an amount of
100000 dirhams brought for me from the surrounding areas and we are
waiting for an equal amount so that I can spend it in any way I like.”
Abu Dharr asked: “O Uthman, what is more 100000 dirhams or four dinars?”

He replied: “100000 dirhams.” Abu Dharr said: “Do you remember I and you
had visited the Prophet one night to find him extremely worried and he
did not even speak to us. When we visited him the next morning, we found
that he was very happy and satisfied. We said: May our parents be
sacrificed on you. Why was His Eminence so gloomy last night and that he
is happy this morning?”

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Last night, I had received four dinars
of public wealth and I was not able to distribute it. I feared that if I
died in that condition and that money should remain with me what my
position will be. By now it is given away, so I am comfortable.” Uthman
turned to Kaab al-Ahbar and asked: “What is your opinion about one who
paid the Zakat applicable on his wealth? Is anything else obligatory on
him?”

And according to another report he said: “O Kaab, what restrains the
Imam to sanction some amount to the Muslims from Public Treasury and
retain some amount so that he may give it to whomsoever he likes
according to the exigencies of time?” Kaab said: “There is no problem if
you melt them into gold and silver ingots.” Abu Dharr brought down his
staff on Kaab’s head and said: “O son of a Jewess, what concern have you
to interfere in the affairs of Muslims? The statement of the Almighty
Allah is correct or your words? When He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ يَكْنِزُونَ الذَّهَبَ وَالْفِضَّةَ وَلَا يُنْفِقُونَهَا
فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ فَبَشِّرْهُمْ بِعَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ. يَوْمَ يُحْمَىٰ
عَلَيْهَا فِي نَارِ جَهَنَّمَ فَتُكْوٰى بِهَا جِبَاهُهُمْ
وَجُنُوبُهُمْ وَظُهُورُهُمْ ۖ هٰذَا مَا كَنَزْتُمْ لِأَنْفُسِكُمْ
فَذُوقُوا مَا كُنْتُمْ تَكْنِزُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and (as for) those who hoard up gold and silver and do not spend it
in Allah’s way, announce to them a painful chastisement. On the day when
it shall be heated in the fire of hell, then their foreheads and their
sides and their backs shall be branded with it; this is what you hoarded
up for yourselves, therefore taste what you hoarded.”***[^37]

When Abu Dharr recited these verses, Uthman said: “You have become a
nasty old man, you have gone mad. If you had not been a companion of the
Prophet I would have put you to death.” Abu Dharr said, “O Uthman, you
are a liar, you cannot kill me. My beloved, the Holy Prophet (S) had
informed me that neither can anyone make me deviate from my religion nor
kill me. As for my intellect, it is that I remember well the tradition
that the Messenger of Allah (S) has stated about you and me.”

Uthman asked: What is it?” Abu Dharr replied: “I never issued such a
statement, but I witness that I heard the Messenger of Allah (S) that
when the descendants of Abil Aas reach upto thirty, they would use the
funds of the Almighty Allah to obtain power and consider the people as
their servants and practice dishonesty in the religion of Allah.

And they will distribute the amount among themselves. They will
interpret the Qur’an wrongly. They would enslave the people and take
dishonest persons as their advisors and dispute with the righteous.”
Uthman asked: “O companions of the Prophet, has anyone of you heard this
tradition from the Prophet.” All denied having heard such a thing in
order to please Uthman. Uthman said: “Call for Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(a.s.).” When he arrived, Uthman said: “See what this aged liar is
uttering.”

Imam Ali (a.s.) said: “It is enough Uthman, you cannot accuse him of
lying, because I have heard the Holy Prophet (S) say about him: “The
green sky has not shaded and the dusty earth not borne the weight of any
speaker more truthful than Abu Dharr.” All the companions present there
said: “By Allah, Ali is right, we have indeed heard this from the
Messenger of Allah (S).” Abu Dharr began to weep and he said: “You are
all eyeing this money greedily and accuse me of lying and attributing
falsehood to the Holy Prophet (S).”

Then he asked the hypocrites: “Which of you is best?” Uthman said: “Do
why think that you are better than us?” “Yes,” said Abu Dharr. “Since I
have separated from my beloved Prophet, I am wearing the same robe. I
have not sold away my religion in exchange of the world and you have
created heresies in the religion of God.

You have destroyed the religion for the sake of the world and spent
public wealth in wrong ways. The Almighty Allah will ask you and He will
not ask me.” Uthman at last asked: “I adjure you in the name of the
Prophet, tell me the truth.” Abu Dharr said: “Even if you had not
adjured me I would have stated the truth.”

Uthman asked: “Which city do you like most?” “The city which is the
sanctuary of God and sanctuary of the Messenger, I wish to worship there
till death.” Uthman said: “I will not send you there, because you have
no respect in my eyes.” Abu Dharr fell silent. Uthman again asked:
“Which place you hate most?” “Rabza,” he replied, “where I had lived in
infidelity.” Uthman said: “I will send you there.” Abu Dharr said: “I
told you the truth whatever you asked me.

Now you must also tell me truly whatever I ask you. If you send an army
to confront the enemy and I am also in that army and if I am taken a
prisoner and the enemy demands one-third of your wealth to release me,
will you pay that amount to get me freed?” “Yes,” said Uthman. Then he
asked: “If they ask for half of your wealth?” “Yes,” said Uthman. Then
he asked: “If they ask for all of your wealth?” Uthman said: “I will
give up all my wealth as a ransom to get you released.”

Abu Dharr said: “Allahu Akbar, my beloved the Messenger of Allah (S)
told me one day: O Abu Dharr what your condition will be when you will
be asked about your favorite place and you will say that it is Mecca. So
your residence there will not be accepted. Then you will be asked which
you hate most and you will say that it is Rabza and that you will be
sent there only?”

I asked: O Messenger of Allah (S), would such a time really come to
pass?” He replied: “Yes, by the one in whose control my life is, this
would really come to pass.” I said: “O Messenger of Allah (S), on that I
will take out my sword and fight Jihad valiantly.” But the Holy Prophet
(S) said: “No, keep quiet and don’t oppose anyone, if he is a black
slave. Indeed between you and Uthman the Almighty Allah has revealed a
few verses of Qur’an and the Holy Prophet (S) recited the verses
mentioned above.

And their connection with this incident is obvious to all. Thus is Abu
Dharr’s exile from Medina and his dialogue about his ransom. So Uthman
ordered Marwan bin Hakam to extern Abu Dharr and his family from Medina
and send him to Rabza. And he emphasized that none of the companions
should go to see him off. But Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) disobeyed Uthman along
with a particular group of people.

They went to say farewell to Abu Dharr and comforted him in his
troubles. Thus Muhammad bin Yaqub Kulaini has narrated that when Abu
Dharr set out from Medina, Amirul Momineen (a.s.), Imam Hasan (a.s.),
Imam Husain (a.s.), Aqil, brother of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and Ammar
Yasir accompanied him to see him off and at the time of farewell, Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) said: “O Abu Dharr, you became angry for the pleasure of
Allah, so you must hope for rewards only from Him.

These people feared that you might take control of their world and you
feared them for the sake of your religion and you secured your religion
from them, that is why they externed you and subjected you to troubles.
By Allah, if the paths of the earth and sky are closed for one who is
righteous, the Almighty Allah appoints calamities for him.

O Abu Dharr, your reality and loneliness and your being aloof from
falsehood is your companion.” Then Aqil said: “O Abu Dharr, you know
that we, Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) consider you dear and we know that you are
devoted to us and you honor us for the sake of the Prophet and except
for some truthful ones, all have disregarded it. So your reward is upon
the Almighty Allah and you are being exiled as a result of the love of
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), may Allah reward you for it.

O Abu Dharr, know that running away from troubles is cowardice and to
ask for immediate release is due to hopelessness. Therefore, do not
allow despair and cowardice near you and say: Allah is sufficient for
me, the best of the protectors. After that Imam Hasan (a.s.) said: O
Uncle, we all know how those people have dealt with you and the Almighty
Allah is aware of everything.

Remove the remembrance of the world through the remembrance of His
separation. And ease the hardships of the world through hope in comforts
of the hereafter, and be patient in difficulties. So that when you meet
the Holy Prophet (S) he should be pleased with you.” Then Imam Husain
(a.s.) said: “O Uncle, the Almighty Allah is able to change this
hardship into comfort. But every act of Allah is in accordance with the
exigencies suited for every day and every occasion.

These people stopped you from their luxury and you prevented them from
spoiling your religion. How needless you are from that from which you
were prevented and how needful they are from that which is secured from
them. May you find patience good, which is the best good deed and it is
from noble qualities. Give up grief and sadness which is of no use. Then
Ammar said: “May Allah subject to loneliness and trouble one who has
subjected you to this trouble and may He terrify one who has terrified
you.

By Allah, nothing prevents one to state the truth except the love and
desire of the world. And by Allah, the worship of Allah is in the
congregation of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and the kingship of the world is for
those who obtain power over it through force. That group called people
to materialism and they came and entrusted their religion to them; so
they suffered loss in the world as well as the hereafter and it is a
terrible loss.” Abu Dharr said: “Peace be upon you all and the mercy and
blessings of Allah. May my parents be sacrificed on these countenances.
Indeed, when I see you all, I am reminded of the Holy Prophet (S). I
have nothing to do with Medina except your company and devotion.

Uthman dislikes my stay in Medina just as Muawiyah despised my stay in
Syria. Uthman swore that he would send me out of Medina to some other
place and I was hoping that he would send me to Kufa. But he feared that
I will wean away Kufians from the obedience of his brother. So he didn’t
like and accept my going there and he swore that he would send me to a
place where I have no companion and where I cannot meet any of my
friends. By Allah, I don’t want any company except that for Allah. And
when Allah is with me, I don’t care for my loneliness. He is the Lord of
the Mighty Throne and is powerful over everything. Salutations on the
Messenger of Allah (S) and his purified progeny.”

Shaykh Mufeed has narrated through his chains from a Syrian man that
when Uthman externed Abu Dharr from Medina and sent him to Syria, he
used to preach to us moral stories and when he began he first praised
and glorified the Almighty Allah and invoke blessings on Muhammad and
Progeny of Muhammad and then say: “So to say: We were living in
ignorance before the revelation of divine book and before the Holy
Prophet (S) could be sent to us.

In the period of Ignorance, we were such that we fulfilled the covenants
and spoke the truth and observed the rights of neighbors. And honor the
guests and adopt equity with the poor. And made them share our wealth.
When the Almighty Allah revealed the Book and sent His Prophet (S) to
us, we found those practices to be liked by Allah and the Prophet and
the followers of Islam more deserved to follow those practices.

And they remained on that practice for a long time, so much so that the
tyrant rulers created such heresies which were never seen before and
they destroyed the practice of the Prophet. They falsified one who spoke
the truth and gave preference to the impious over the righteous servants
of God. O Allah, whatever you have for me if it is better; call me to
Yourself before something is changed by me in your religion.

Or I might alter a practice of Your Prophet.” And he repeated this in
public many a times and these statements were reported to Muawiyah by
Habib bin Muslima. Abu Dharr was accused of instigating the people
against Muawiyah and Muawiyah wrote to Uthman about it and Uthman told
him to send Abu Dharr to Medina. When he was brought to Medina, he was
exiled from Medina to Rabza.

Moreover it is narrated from some Syrians that when Uthman sent Abu
Dharr to Syria, he used to stand among the people everyday and dispense
good advice and encouraged them obedience of the Almighty Allah. He used
to time and again speak about the excellence of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) that
he had heard from the Messenger of Allah (S) and attract the people to
become attached to these holy personalities. When Muawiyah learnt of
these activities, he wrote to Uthman: “So to say: People gather around
Abu Dharr every morning and evening and he preaches such things.

If you are in need of the people of Syria, you must immediately recall
Abu Dharr, or he would soon wean away the people from me and you.”
Uthman replied: “As soon as you receive my reply, send Abu Dharr to me
immediately. Was Salaam.” When this letter arrived, Muawiyah summoned
Abu Dharr and read out Uthman’s letter to him. He said: “Go to Medina as
soon as possible.” Abu Dharr returned, loaded his belongings on the
camel and set out from there.

People of Syria had gathered around him and they were saying: “O Abu
Dharr, may Allah have mercy on you.” Abu Dharr said: “He had sent me to
you in anger and now I being recalled to be punished. I think that such
dealings will continue between me and him, till a pious man is laid to
rest or till people are saved from the mischief of a corrupt man.” With
these words he departed from there. When general public learnt that Abu
Dharr was leaving Syria, they ran out to see him off and they came upto
Daire Maran. Abu Dharr halted there and the people also camped there.

Abu Dharr recited the prayers with them and he led the prayers. After
prayers, he said: O people, I advise you that which is beneficial to
you. I don’t want to prolong the discussion. And he said: I praise the
Creator of the worlds. The audience also said: Praise be to Allah. Then
he testified to the oneness of Allah and prophethood of the Prophet.
People also followed him in this.

Then he said: I witness that resurrection is truth, Paradise is truth,
Hell is a fact and I confess to all that the Messenger of Allah (S) had
brought from the Lord. And I make all of you witnesses on this belief of
mine. All said: We testify to all that you have said. Then Abu Dharr
said: “All of you who die on these correct articles of faith should get
the glad tidings of salvation, provided he does not co-operate with the
sinner and must not hold the actions of oppressors to be good and
neither should he help them.

O people, along with your prayer and fasting you must consider it
necessary to be angry with the people for the sake of the Almighty, when
you see that they are disobeying the Almighty Allah and you must not
please your rulers through those actions that invite the anger of the
Almighty Allah. If people create heresies in the religion of Allah,
whose reality is unknown to you, you must be aloof from them and condemn
them even if they are hard on you and throw you out of their court and
deprive you of their bestowals and exile you from their towns so that
the Almighty Allah is pleased with you.

Because the Almighty Allah is more majestic and higher than all and it
is not proper for anyone to please a creature and anger Him. May Allah
forgive me and you, I entrust you all to the Almighty Allah and invoke
His mercy for you.” People said: “May the Almighty Allah grant you
health and may He have mercy on you. O Abu Dharr, O companion of the
Messenger of Allah (S), would you not like us to take you back to our
city?

And protect you from the mischief of the enemies?” Abu Dharr said: “May
Allah have mercy on you. Go back, because I am more patient on
calamities than you are. You must never fall into disunity.” With these
words, he set out from there and reached Medina and came to Uthman.
Uthman said: “May Allah not give the eyes such a lifespan.”

This saying was common about aged people among the Arabs. Abu Dharr
said: “By Allah, my parents did not survive that long. But may Allah,
not keep alive one who disobeys Him and becomes a slave to his selfish
desires.” Kaab al-Ahbar arose and said: “O old man, are you not afraid
of Allah that you speak in this way in the presence of the chief of
believers?” Abu Dharr beat his staff upon Kaab’s head and said: “O son
of a Jew, who are you to interfere in the affairs of Muslims. By Allah,
Judaism has not left your heart.”

Uthman said: “By Allah, I and you will not live in the same city. You
have become senile and mad. Take him away! Mount him on the bare back of
a camel and drive it to Rabza with speed, so that he may live there
alone without any companion or helper till the Almighty Allah does with
him what He likes.”

Thus he was thrown out disrespectfully and beaten with sticks. Uthman
ordered that no should accompany him to the gates of the city. When
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) came to know about it, he wept so much that his
beard became wet with tears. And he said: “Does such a behavior befit a
companion of the Prophet?

Surely we belong to Allah and to Him we shall return.” Then he came to
see him off with Imam Hasan (a.s.), Imam Husain (a.s.), Ubaidullah,
Qatham, Fazl and Abdullah, sons of Abbas. When Abu Dharr saw them, he
came and began to weep in their separation and said: May my parents be
sacrificed on these countenances, when I saw these faces, I used to be
reminded of the Messenger of Allah (S) and I used to be surrounded by
blessings.

Then he raised his hands to the sky and said: “O Allah, I am devoted to
them. Even if they cut me into pieces, I will not give up their love for
the sake of Your obedience and seeking the rewards of the Hereafter. You
all may go back now, may Allah have mercy on you. I pray to the Almighty
Allah that He bestows me with Caliphate among you, the best of
Caliphate. Then they said farewell to Abu Dharr and returned from there
weeping in his separation.

Shaykh Kishi has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that Uthman called his two freed slaves, gave
each of them 200 dinars to go to Abu Dharr, convey his greetings to him
and ask him to take the amount and use it as he wished. They brought
Uthman’s message. Abu Dharr asked: “Has he given the same allowance to
all Muslims?”

“No,” said the servants. Abu Dharr said: “I am also a Muslim and it is
not lawful for me to take more than what the others are given.” “Uthman
says that it is his personal wealth and swears by the One, except whom
there is no god that nothing unlawful is included in it.” Abu Dharr
said: “I don’t need this money and I began this day in such a condition
that I am needless of all the people.”

The servants said: “May Allah make you prosperous, this money will help
you, as we cannot see anything with you with which you may obtain
comfort.” Abu Dharr said: “There are two loaves of dry barley bread
under this mat, some days old. What will I do with these gold coins? By
Allah I will not take them and Allah knows that I am not powerful on
less or more.

Indeed, I began this morning with needlessness; and love for Ali Ibn Abi
Talib (a.s.) and his progeny, who are the guides of humanity and are
themselves guides, pleased at the pleasure of Allah and the best
creatures of the Almighty. They guide the people with truth and behave
with justice. I have heard the Messenger of Allah (S) say thus about
them. And it is extremely shameful for an old man to lie. So take this
money back and tell him that I neither need this nor any other money he
has, till I will meet my Lord and He will judge between me and him.”

Shaykh Mufeed has narrated that when Abu Dharr was brought from Syria to
Uthman he asked: “O Abu Dharr, which is your favorite town?” Abu Dharr
replied: “The city to which I migrated.” Uthman said: “You can never
remain in the city in which I reside.” Abu Dharr said: “You may send me
to Mecca, the sanctuary of God.”

Uthman said: “This is also not acceptable.” Abu Dharr said: “Send me to
Kufa as companions of the Prophet reside there.” “No,” said Uthman. Abu
Dharr said: “I don’t like any other place and I will not like to go
there.” Uthman said: “Go to Rabza.” Abu Dharr said: “The Messenger of
Allah (S) has commanded me to accept the command of tyrants and allow
myself to be taken wherever I am taken, even if my nose and ears are cut
off like that of a black slave.” At last Abu Dharr left for Rabza and
after remaining there for sometime came back to Uthman. He saw two rows
of people standing before Uthman.

Abu Dharr said: “O Uthman, you threw me out of this city and sent me to
a place which is neither tillable nor do I possess animals except for a
few sheep and neither do I have a servant except for a freed slave girl.
And neither is there any shade except that of the trees. Therefore, give
me a servant and some sheep so that I may arrange to live off them.”
Uthman turned his face away.

Abu Dharr went to the other side and completed the proof by repeating
his demand. But Uthman didn’t relent. Habib bin Muslima said: “O Abu
Dharr, I give you a thousand dirhams, a servant and 500 sheep.” Abu
Dharr said: “Give them to someone who is more in need. I don’t want
anything from you; I only ask from Uthman the right which the Almighty
Allah has fixed for me in His Book.”

At that moment Imam Ali (a.s.) entered and Uthman told him: “Why don’t
you take this fool away from me?” “Who is a fool?” asked Imam Ali
(a.s.). “Abu Dharr,” replied Uthman. Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “He is
not a fool. I heard the Messenger of Allah (S) say that: The green sky
has not shaded and the dusty earth not borne the weight of any speaker
more truthful than Abu Dharr.

O Uthman, consider him to be the believer of the people of Firon. If he
lies, it will harm him only and if he is truthful, some of what he
promises will indeed befall you.”  
 Shaykh Kishi has narrated through Abdul Malik bin Abu Dharr Ghiffari
through authentic chains that when Uthman tore up a number of copies of
Qur’an, Amirul Momineen (a.s.) called me and asked me to bring my
father.

When I conveyed the message of Imam Ali (a.s.) to my father he hastened
to the Imam immediately. His Eminence, said: “O Abu Dharr, a great
matter has occurred in Islam today! They have torn up the Book of Allah
and placed a piece of iron in it. It is incumbent on the Almighty Allah
to apply iron to the body of one who has applied iron to the Qur’an and
cut it up into shreds.”

Abu Dharr said: “I have heard from the Messenger of Allah (S) that the
tyrants who had ruled on Musa (a.s.) fought against the family of the
prophet and overpowered them and they continued to slay them for a long
time. At last the Almighty Allah sent some youths upon them who had come
from another town and they confronted them. And O Amirul Momineen
(a.s.), in this Ummah you are like them.” Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said:
“O Abu Dharr, so you have predicted my death?” He said: “By Allah, I
know that from the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) people will initiate the killings
with you.”

Moreover, through authentic chains of narrators, it is narrated from
Huzaifa bin Usaid that he says: I saw Abu Dharr clinging to the knob of
the Kaaba and saying: I am Jundab, one who knows me, knows me and one
who does not know me should know that I am Abu Dharr son of Junadah. I
have indeed heard from the Messenger of Allah (S) that: Whosoever
deviated from me for first, second and third time would be among the
followers of Dajjal (anti-Christ). Indeed, the example of my progeny in
this Ummah is like that of the Ark of Nuh. One who boarded it was saved
and one who left it was drowned. I have conveyed whatever I was supposed
to convey.”[^38]

Ibn Abil Hadid has narrated from Ibn Abbas that when Uthman exiled Abu
Dharr to Rabza he also prohibited everyone to see him off; and he
appointed Marwan bin Hakam to take Abu Dharr out of Medina. Thus
everyone was cowed down by Uthman’s fear and no one went out to see off
Abu Dharr.

But His Eminence, Ali (a.s.), Imam Hasan (a.s.), Imam Husain (a.s.),
Aqil and Ammar Yasir accompanied him. When they came to Abu Dharr, Imam
Hasan (a.s.) began to speak with Abu Dharr. Marwan said: “Perhaps you
are unaware that Uthman has prohibited talking with this man? If you
were unaware you should know it now.” Amirul Momineen (a.s.) whipped
Marwan and said: “Get out from here, may Allah humiliate you and put you
into the fire.” Marwan came to Uthman infuriated and reported everything
to him.

Uthman was also enraged. When Amirul Momineen (a.s.) returned to Medina
after saying farewell to Abu Dharr, people told him that Uthman was
enraged with him for having accompanied Abu Dharr.” Imam Ali (a.s.)
said: “His anger on me is like the fury of the horse which chews at the
reins. But how much ever he may chew, it is of no use to him.” Thus when
he met Uthman, he asked: “Why did you send my messenger and disregarded
my command?”

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “Your messenger wanted to send me back,
therefore I sent him back. And since your command was against the
command of Allah, I could not have acted on it.” There was a heated
exchange between Uthman and Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and Imam Ali (a.s.)
arose from the meeting in anger. Since the dispute was of no good
consequence a group of companions pacified both the parties.

Moreover, Ibn Abil Hadid has narrated that Abu Dharr’s exile to Syria
through Uthman was due to the fact that when Uthman began to
misappropriate public wealth, and started distributing money according
to his wish to Marwan and other hypocrites, Abu Dharr began to protest
about it in streets and publicly recite the following verse of Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ يَكْنِزُونَ الذَّهَبَ وَالْفِضَّةَ وَلَا يُنْفِقُونَهَا
فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ فَبَشِّرْهُمْ بِعَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and (as for) those who hoard up gold and silver and do not spend it
in Allah’s way, announce to them a painful chastisement…”***[^39]

Uthman continued to receive reports of these protests, but he was busy
in his affairs and he paid no attention to Abu Dharr, but when many
complaints piled up, Uthman sent a freed slave to Abu Dharr and told him
to refrain from these activities. Abu Dharr said: “Uthman restrains men
from reading the Book of Allah. And he stops me from condemning one who
disobeys the command of God. By Allah, if I please the Almighty it would
be more preferable to him than to please Uthman. Rather than I keep
Uthman pacified and make God angry. Uthman was further infuriated by
this, but he did not confront him due to some exigency.

Then one day Uthman asked in his assembly: “Is it allowed for the Imam
to borrow something from Baitul Maal which he may later repay?” Kaab
al-Ahbar said that there was no problem in it. Abu Dharr said: “O son of
two Jews, will you teach us our religion?” Uthman said: “O Abu Dharr,
this is the limit of your harassment to me and my companions.” Then he
ordered that Abu Dharr should be exiled to Syria. In Syria, Abu Dharr
observed the unholy behavior of Muawiyah and began to condemn him too.

One day Muawiyah sent 300 gold coins to Abu Dharr. Abu Dharr told the
messenger: “If it is my share, which you did not give me this year, I
will accept it and if it is a gift and favor from you, I am not in need
of it.” And he returned it. When Muawiyah constructed the Green Palace
in Damascus, Abu Dharr said: “O Muawiyah, if it is made from the wealth
of Allah, you have been dishonest, and if you have got it made from
personal wealth, you have been extravagant.”

In the same way, Abu Dharr used to say in Syria, some heresies have
appeared in this age, which are neither according to the Book of Allah
nor conform to the practice of the Prophet. I see that truth is being
trampled upon and falsehood is being popularized. The truthful are
regarded as liars and the share of the righteous is given to the
sinners.” At last Habib bin Muslima Fehri said to Muawiyah: “Abu Dharr
will mislead the people of Syria from you, so you must do something
about him.”

Moreover, it is narrated from Julam bin Jundal that: During the reign of
Uthman I was the agent of Muawiyah in Qansarin. One day I came to
Muawiyah for some errand. Suddenly I heard someone screaming at the
door: “A line of camels is coming to you on which is loaded the fire of
Hell. O Allah, curse those who restrain others from evil but themselves
act upon it.”

This infuriated Muawiyah and he asked: “Do you know this man?” “No,” I
replied. Muawiyah said: “He is Jundab bin Junadah. He comes every day to
the entrance of my palace and calls out in the same manner.” Then he
ordered that he should be eliminated. Some people caught hold of Abu
Dharr and brought him to Muawiyah. Muawiyah said: “O enemy of Allah and
Messenger. Everyday you come and talk in this way? If I could kill any
companion of the Prophet without the permission of Uthman, I would have
killed you.

But I will take permission from Uthman about you.” Julam says: “I tried
to see Abu Dharr, because he was from my tribe. When I saw him, he was
wheat complexioned and tall and thin man. His beard was sparse and due
to old age his waist had become absolutely thin.” Thus in reply to
Muawiyah, Abu Dharr said: “I am not the enemy of Allah and the
Messenger. On the contrary, you and your father is the enemy of Allah.
You accepted Islam for convenience, whereas you were really infidels.

And the Messenger of Allah (S) had often invoked curse on you and prayed
that may you never become satiated by eating. The Messenger of Allah (S)
had informed that when the ruler of this Ummah will be one with big eyes
and long neck, he will be a glutton and he would never feel satiated. At
that time the people of my Ummah should beware of his mischief. Muawiyah
said: I am not that person. Abu Dharr said: “Only you are that same one,
the Messenger of Allah (S) has informed me that it is you.

One day you passed the Prophet and I heard that the Prophet was saying:
O Allah, curse this man and never make him satiated of food except in
grave. Then I heard him say that his abode was in the Fire. Muawiyah
laughed at this and ordered Abu Dharr to be taken into custody. After
that he wrote about all this to Uthman who called him to Medina as was
previously mentioned.

Shaykh Tusi has narrated that Abu Sahla said: I set out for Hajj with
Salman. When we reached Rabza, we went to visit Abu Dharr. Abu Dharr
said: “After me, mischief will appear. When it occurs, it is must upon
you to remain attached to the Book of Allah and the leader of religion,
Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.); and you must not leave them, because I have
heard the Messenger of Allah (S) say: Ali is the first of those who
believed in me and he testified before all others.

On Judgment Day he would be first to shake hands with me. He is the
Siddiq Akbar of this Ummah and the Farooq Azam who separates the truth
from falsehood. He is the king of believers and master of property of
hypocrites.[^40]  
 Ibn Babawayh has narrated from Naeem bin Qanab that he said: I went to
Rabza to visit Abu Dharr and saw a lady there.

I asked where Abu Dharr was. She said that he had gone out. Suddenly I
saw him coming pulling two camels behind him. Each of the camels had a
water skin hanging from their necks. I arose, greeted him and then sat
down again. When he entered the house, I heard that he was telling his
woman as the Prophet had said that: Woman is like a curved bone, if you
try to straighten it, it will break, and if you leave it as it is, you
will benefit from it.

Then he placed a bowl before me containing a roasted animal like Asfar
and he told me to eat as he himself was fasting. Then he performed two
rakats prayers and after that he came and began to eat. I said: “Wow, I
never knew that a person like you could lie in this way. You said that
you were fasting!” Abu Dharr said: I have fasted three days in this
month and thus earned the reward of fasting for the whole month. Now I
have the choice of fasting the remaining days or not.”

Ibn Tawus has through authentic chains narrated from Muawiyah bin
Thaliba etc. that when Abu Dharr was in his terminal illness, we went to
visit him and asked him to make his bequest. He said: I have appointed
Amirul Momineen as my legatee. I said: Do you mean Uthman? “No,” I call
only Amirul Momineen, who is the rightful chief of believers, that is
Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.). He is the spring of the world through whom the
earth is stable and inhabited.

Only he is the divine scholar of this Ummah. If he goes away from you,
you will see endless evil and corruption in the world.” I said: “We know
that you love much the one whom the Holy Prophet (S) loved. Tell me whom
do you love most?” He replied: “The most beloved to me in the world is
that oppressed elder whose rights have been usurped by the people, that
is Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.).”

Barqi has narrated through correct chains of narrators from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that one day in Rabza, people saw Abu Dharr watering his
mule. They asked him if he had no servant to do this? He replied: I have
heard from the Messenger of Allah (S) that he said: Every morning the
quadrupeds supplicate: O Allah, give me a master who feeds and gives me
water, and who does not put a load more than which I could bear. That is
why I water him myself.”

Shaykh Kishi has narrated that the Messenger of Allah (S) said in favor
of Abu Dharr: “The green sky has not shaded and the dusty earth not
borne the weight of any speaker more truthful than Abu Dharr. He will
live alone, enter Paradise alone and will be raised alone.” He used to
publicly announce the excellence of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and say that
only he is the legatee and Caliph of the Holy Prophet (S). That is why
he was externed from the sanctuary of Allah and the Prophet and he was
made to mount the bare-backed camel to be taken to Medina.

He used to regularly call out that rows of Hellfire are being brought
for you. And he used to say that I heard from the Messenger of Allah
(S): When the descendants of Abil Aas reach upto thirty, they would
corrupt the religion of Allah; consider the people as their servants and
consider the wealth of Allah as their own. That is why he was killed in
starvation and poverty and he continued to observe patience.

Moreover it is narrated that when the time of Abu Dharr’s death
approached he told his wife to slaughter a sheep and to cook the mutton,
and when he was dead, to go and sit on the road to Iraq and say to the
first caravan that arrives: O servants of Allah, a companion of the
Prophet has passed away in this area. Please could you take the trouble
to perform his last rites? Then Abu Dharr said: The Messenger of Allah
(S) had informed me that I would die in a strange land and some
righteous people of his Ummah will perform my last rites.

Then Al-Qama bin Aswad Nakhai has narrated that we were traveling for
Hajj with Malik Ashtar along with some other believers. When we reached
Rabza, we found a lady by the road. She said: O servants of Allah, O
righteous Muslims, a companion of the Prophet, Abu Dharr has passed away
in this strange area. And there is no one who can help me with his final
journey.

So we looked at each other and thanked Allah for giving us such an
opportunity. But we were much aggrieved at this and said: Verily we
belong to Allah and to Him we shall return. Thus we went along with that
poor lady and began to perform the last rites of Abu Dharr. There was a
dispute among us as each of us wanted to shroud him with his own money.
At last it was decided to share the expenses equally.

After that we jointly performed his funeral bath. After that Malik
Ashtar led the funeral prayers and we buried him. Then Malik Ashtar
stood by his grave and said: O Allah, this Abu Dharr is the companion of
Your Messenger, he worshipped with Your worshippers and fought Jihad
with the polytheists for Your pleasure and he did not make any change in
any of Your dispensations. But he opposed through his tongue and heart,
all the innovations that were created in Your religion by the
hypocrites.

That is why he was oppressed and thrown out of his hometown in
degradation after being deprived of his rights. And he continued to live
in a strange land. O Allah, destroy the glory and power of the one who
deprived him of his rights and who externed him from the place of his
migration and the sanctuary of the Messenger. We all raised our hands.

Then the lady of the house brought the roasted animal and said: Abu
Dharr had adjured you not to step out of this house till you don’t
partake this dish. So we partook from it and then returned from there.
Shaykh Tusi has narrated this incident from Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.).  
 It is mentioned in *Rauzatul Waezeen* that someone asked Abu Dharr at
the time of his death, where his property was.

He replied: “It is my deed.” People said: “We are asking you about
silver and gold.” Abu Dharr said: “I never passed any day on the earth
in possession of anything. I have heard from my beloved, the Messenger
of Allah (S) that he used to say: “The treasure of man is his grave.”  
 Ibn Abil Hadid has narrated through another report that they reached
Abu Dharr when he was yet alive.

Abu Dharr told them: “I have heard the Messenger of Allah (S) tell some
people among whom I was also there: one of you will die in loneliness
and a group of believers will be present to perform the last rites. And
all of those among whom the Holy Prophet (S) issued this prophecy have
passed away in their native towns, except me.

So I am that man. If I or my wife had possessed a garment sufficient to
act as my shroud, I would never have accepted anyone giving me a shroud.
And I adjure you in the name of Allah, that none of you should give me a
shroud who has served as a ruler. Or who has served as a leader of a
group or have been a friend of an oppressor or had served as a messenger
of an oppressor.

There was an Ansari man in that group who had never participated in any
type of rulership. He said: O respected Uncle, I will shroud you in this
same sheet that I have covered myself with and the two pieces of cloth
that are present in my luggage. Their thread was spun by my mother and I
have myself woven those clothes. Abu Dharr said: “All right, only you
must give me the shroud.”

Shaykh Mufeed has narrated from Abu Amama Bahili that when Uthman sent
Abu Dharr to Rabza, Abu Dharr wrote a letter to Huzaifa bin Yaman: In
the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. So to say: O brother,
fear Allah, as is wont to be feared so that your weeping is more and
free the heart from the attachments of the world and remain awake at
nights in the worship of Allah and impose hardships on your body in
obedience of the Lord, because He is deserving of this weeping and
austerity; one who knows that Hell is for those on whom the Almighty
Allah is angry, that is why his weeping and austerity and remaining
awake at nights in worship is more.

Till he comes to know that the Almighty Allah is pleased with him. And
he is deserving for it who knows that Paradise is for one with whom the
Almighty Allah is pleased. That is why he is inclined to truth. Perhaps
through this he may achieve salvation and in order to obtain the
satisfaction of Allah he may consider it easy to leave his family and
property and his wakefulness of nights and fasting of the days, and
consider it easy to fight Jihad with oppressors and apostates.

So much so that he should come to know that the Almighty Allah has made
Paradise compulsory on him all this cannot be known except after death.
And one who wants to be in vicinity of divine mercy in Paradise and in
the companionship of prophets, it is necessary for him to become just as
I have described. O my brother, you are from those whom I can confide my
sorrow and complain to them that these oppressors have helped each other
in causing pain to me.

Indeed, I have myself seen and heard the oppressions of these oppressors
and if I refused them, they deprived me of their bestowals and exiled me
from one place to another, separating me from my brothers and relatives
and threw me out from the sanctuary of Allah and His Messenger. And I
seek refuge from the Almighty that my complaint should be registered
with Him that they have acted in this way with me. I tell you that I am
pleased with what the Almighty Allah has chosen for me and whatever He
has commanded for me.

I am describing my circumstances to you so that you may pray to Allah
for my and other people’s salvation and that you may supplicate the
Almighty Allah to bestow me and other Muslims with that which is more
beneficial and whose consequence is better. And peace be upon you.”  
 In reply to this, Huzaifa wrote: In the name of Allah, the Beneficent,
the Merciful. So to say: O my brother, I received your letter in which
you warned me of my return in Judgment Day and emphasized fearing
disobedience of God.

You encourage me to adopt all such actions in which my well being lies.
O brother, you have always been the well wisher of me and all Muslims
and had always been affectionate for us all and have always been fearful
with regard to us. You have always commanded good and refrained from
evils.

But no one is guided to the pleasures of the Almighty except that they
be from Allah and no one escapes His anger and chastisement except
through His mercy and forgiveness. Therefore I ask Him for myself and
special friends and all the people of this Ummah, His general blessings
and encompassing mercy. My brother, through your letter we came to know
whatever oppression you are meted out, like being exiled to a strange
land etc. all this was extremely sad for us.

My brother, if I knew that your problems could be solved through wealth,
I would have most willingly sacrificed all my wealth for you. By Allah,
if it had been possible to share your woes, and if I can take up half of
your problems, I would have asked them for it. But all these matters are
only as much for us as is acceptable to the Almighty Allah. O brother,
we and you together should petition the court of the Almighty and become
inclined to His rewards and save ourselves from His chastisement.

Indeed, they will soon torture us and very soon they will cut off the
fruits of life from our bodies and summon us in the court of Almighty
and we would have to submit. Then our deeds will be presented before
Allah and we shall be helpless of the deeds that we have sent in
advance. O brother, do not regret whatever has been wasted by you and
don’t be aggrieved at whatever pains you have received.

On the contrary ask the Almighty Allah to give you a good reward for
them and continue to hope for a great reward from Him. O brother, I find
death better than worldly life for yourself and myself, because
countless mischiefs have appeared that are approaching continuously like
dark nights. People of the world have prepared their steeds and are
trampling the wealth of the world with their hooves. In these mischiefs,
swords will be unsheathed and death will overpower the people. One who
comes out or is involved with them or who rides through them, will be
doubtlessly killed.

And Arab tribes, whether they be townsmen or gypsies, will take part in
these mischiefs, and in that period the most oppressive will be the most
respected and one who is the most pious, will be the most degraded.
Therefore may the Merciful Allah keep us in His refuge from such
circumstances, in which the condition of the people would be such.
Indeed, I will not omit praying for you in any position, because the
Almighty Allah has commanded in the Holy Qur’an and promised its
fulfillment:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ادْعُونِي أَسْتَجِبْ لَكُمْ ۚ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ عَنْ
عِبَادَتِي سَيَدْخُلُونَ جَهَنَّمَ دَاخِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Call upon Me, I will answer you; surely those who are too proud for
My service shall soon enter hell abased.”***[^41]

Therefore we seek refuge of Allah from His disobedience in worship and
deviation from His obedience. We pray that the Almighty Allah may give
me and you salvation and a goodly end. And peace be upon you.”

Ali bin Ibrahim and Kulaini have narrated that Abu Dharr had a son named
Zar. He died in Rabza. When Abu Dharr had buried him, he stood besides
his grave and placing his hand on his grave said: O Zar, may Allah have
mercy on you; you were a dutiful son of your parents and when you passed
away from the world, I was satisfied with you. Your separation has not
put me to any loss and except for the Merciful Lord, I don’t have any
need from anyone nor do I seek any benefit from anyone that I should be
perturbed with any loss.

If after death, there had been no hardship and fear, I would have liked
to be in your place. I am aggrieved not because of you and I don’t weep
for your separation but I weep upon you. If only I had known what
questions were posed to you and what replies you offered. O Allah, You
had made some duties obligatory on him and also made him responsible for
some of my rights.

O my Lord, I have forgiven him my rights, You also forgive Your rights
to him and forgive me, because you are more deserving of generosity and
mercy.  
 Abu Dharr owned some sheep through which he subsisted along with his
family. But once they all were destroyed in some epidemic.

His wife also expired in Rabza. So he lived alone with his daughter. She
says that three days passed but they did not get a grain to eat. When
hunger overpowered us my father said: Come dear, let us go to
wilderness, perhaps we would find some grass there which we can consume.

So I took my father and went into the desert, but we could not find
anything. So my father gathered some sand and placed his head on it.
When I glanced at him, I saw that he was near to his death. I began to
weep and I asked: Father dear, what will I do in this lonely desert? He
said: Don’t worry, after I die, a group of Iraqis will arrive and they
will perform my last rites, because my beloved, the Messenger of Allah
(S) had informed me during the Battle of Tabuk.

Daughter dear, when I have departed for the heavenly abode, cover me
with a sheet and sit on the road to Iraq. When the caravan arrives, you
must say: Abu Dharr, companion of the Prophet has died in this
wilderness. Abu Dharr’s daughter narrates that a group of the people of
Rabza came to visit my father and asked: O Abu Dharr, what are you
suffering from, what is your complaint? Abu Dharr replied: I am
suffering from my sins.

They asked: What do you want? He replied: I want the mercy of my Lord.
People said: If you like, we can get you a doctor. He said: It is the
doctor who has made me sick. The Almighty Allah is the physician and all
the pain is due to Him only. Then his daughter narrates that when my
father saw the Angel of Death, he said: Welcome to a friend who has
arrived when he was most needed.

Deliverance may not be for one who regrets meeting you. May the Almighty
Allah convey me next to His mercy through him. By your right, you know
that I had always been eager to meet you and I have never despised
death. His daughter says that when he passed away, I covered him with a
sheet and waited on the road. Some people arrived and I told them: O
Muslims, Abu Dharr, companion of the Prophet has passed away. They
alighted from their mounts and wept in his grief.

Then they performed his last rites and buried him after prayers. Malik
Ashtar was also among them. It is narrated from Malik that: I shrouded
him in a cloth I used to carry around and it was worth 4000 dirhams. His
daughter says that I used to remain on his grave in such a way that
whenever he used to pray during his lifetime, I also prayed in the same
way and fasted as he had fasted in his lifetime.

One night I saw him that after the Midnight Prayer he was reciting the
Qur’an like he recited during his lifetime. I asked: Father dear, how
did the Almighty Allah deal with you? He replied: I was presented to my
Merciful Lord and He was happy with me and I was satisfied with Him. He
granted me many blessings and honored me. But my daughter, you must
perform good deeds but never feel proud. Often history has mentioned
wife of Abu Dharr instead of his daughter.

Ahmad bin Athim Kufi has narrated that those who participated in the
final rites of Abu Dharr were: Ahnaf bin Qays Tamim, Saa-sa bin Sauhan
al-Abdi, Kharija bin Salat Tamimi, Abdullah bin Muslima Tamimi, Hilal
bin Malik Nazle, Jarir bin Abdullah Bajali, Aswad bin Yazid al-Khafi and
Malik bin Ashtar bin Harith etc. These people at once washed Abu Dharr
and arranged for his shrouding. After the burial, Malik bin Ashtar
standing by the side of the grave delivered a speech which referred to
Abu Dharr’s affairs and a supplication about him. After the praise of
the Almighty Allah he said:

“O Allah, Abu Dharr was a companion of Your Prophet and a believer in
Your Books and Your Prophets. He fought very bravely in Your way,
remained steadfast to Your Islamic laws and never changed or distorted
any of Your commands.”

“O my Lord, seeing some conventions of the Book and the tradition he
raised his voice and drew the attention of those responsible for the
Ummah towards making improvements, as a result of which they tortured
him, drove him from place to place, humiliated him, turned him out of
the country of Your dear Prophet and put him to extreme hardships. At
last he breathed his last in a state of utter loneliness in a deserted
place.”

“O Allah, grant Abu Dharr a big portion of those heavenly blessings,
which You have promised for the believers and take revenge on one who
has banished him from Medina and given him full deserved punishment.”

Malik Ashtar prayed for Abu Dharr in his speech and all those who were
present there said: “Amen.”  
 Ibn Abde Barr has mentioned in *Istiab*, that Abu Dharr passed away in
31st or 32nd year Hijri and Abdullah bin Masud performed his funeral
prayer. Some have said that he died in 34 Hijri but the former report is
more accurate.

An Account of Miqdad bin Aswad Kindi
------------------------------------

Excellence of Miqdad had been mentioned in the previous chapters. And
among the companions there is none equal to him after Salman and Abu
Dharr. Ibn Athir has mentioned in *Jamiul Usul* that his agnomen was Abu
Saeed. Some have also said that it was Abul Aswad. He was the son of
Marwah bin Thalaba bin Matrud bin Amara Kindi. Some have said that he
was from the Qasa-a tribe. Some state that he was a native of
Hadhramaut.

Since his father had a treaty with Kinda tribe, he became associated
with that clan. And since Miqdad was an associate of Aswad bin Abde
Yaghus Zuhri, he began to be called as Zuhri. And that is why he was
also known as Ibn Aswad. Some have said that Aswad had brought him up.
And Ibn Abde Barr has stated that he was a slave of Aswad bin Abde
Yaghus. And since Aswad had adopted him as a son, Miqdad was called as
Ibn Aswad.

The Islam of Miqdad was earliest and he had participated in Badr, Uhud
and other battles along with the Messenger of Allah (S). He was an
accomplished, noble and senior companion of the Prophet. He passed away
in 32 Hijri in Jarf which is at a distance of one Farsakh from Medina.
After his death, people carried him to Medina and buried him at Baqi
Cemetery. At the time of his death, his age is mentioned to be seventy
years. Upto here we had quoted the statements of Ibn Athir.

Kulaini has narrated through authentic chains from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) had married Zaba-a daughter of
Abdul Muttalib to him.

Ibn Babawayh has narrated through authentic chains from Imam Ali Reza
(a.s.) that once Jibraeel came to the Prophet and said: O Messenger of
Allah (S), your Lord sends you His greetings and says that: Virgins are
like fruits on the trees.

When they are ripe, the best thing to do with them is to pluck them from
the trees. If you don’t, the wind will spoil them and the sun will
destroy them. In the same way when virgins reach maturity, there is no
recourse except to give them husbands. If it is not done, it would not
be possible to keep them safe from corruption.

The Messenger of Allah (S) mounted the pulpit and delivered a sermon and
informed them about that which the Almighty Allah had commanded. So
people asked: O Messenger of Allah (S), to whom should we marry our
daughters? He replied: “With those who are compatible to them.” They
asked: “Who are their equals?”

His Eminence, replied: “Believers are compatible and equal to each
other.” Then he came down and married Zaba-a to Miqdad bin Aswad. Then
he said: “I have married my cousin to Miqdad so that marriage becomes an
easy matter. That people do not care for lineage etc. and they may give
the hands of their daughter to anyone from the believers.”

Kulaini has narrated through authentic chains from Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) that one day Uthman said to Miqdad: “Refrain from criticizing me
and praising Ali, or I would send you back to your first master.” When
it was time for the death of Miqdad, he told Ammar Yasir: “Tell Uthman
that I am going back to my first master; that is to the Almighty Allah.”

Shaykh Tusi has narrated that when people paid allegiance to Uthman,
Miqdad said to Abdur Rahman bin Auf: By Allah, whatever passed on the
Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet, its equal is not found anywhere else. Abdur
Rahman said: What concern do you have with all this?

Miqdad said: By Allah, I love them because the Messenger of Allah (S)
loved them. And by Allah, seeing their conditions, I feel so sad that I
cannot describe it, because Quraish was honored over all the people due
to them. Then all conspired together to usurp the rulership of the Holy
Prophet (S), Abdur Rahman said: Woe be unto you, by Allah, I have made
these efforts only for you and did not like the Caliphate to go to Ali.
Miqdad said: By Allah, you ignored the one who would have guided the
people to truth and ruled them with justice.

By Allah, if I had supporters, I would have indeed fought the Quraish in
the same way as I had fought in Badr and Uhud. Abdur Rahman said: May
your mother mourn for you! O Miqdad you should leave such talks lest
people become deviated and there is serious mischief.

By Allah, I fear that dispute will appear among the people because of
you. The narrator says that when Miqdad arose from that meeting, I went
to him and said: O Miqdad, I will support you. He said: May Allah have
mercy on you, what I intend cannot be obtained through two or three
persons. After that the narrator went to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and
reported his dialogue with Miqdad. Imam (a.s.) prayed for Miqdad.

It is mentioned in *Ikhtisas* quoting from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that: The position of Miqdad in this Ummah is the position of the Arabic
letter of Alif in Qur’an, such that no other letter is like it. In the
same way no one is having the perfection of Miqdad.

And Shaykh Kishi has narrated through authentic chains that there was no
one among the companions who had not committed an inappropriate deed,
except for Miqdad bin Aswad, as his heart with regard to truth was like
an iron slab. Moreover through authentic chains of narrators, it is
narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S)
said: O Salman, if your knowledge is exposed to Miqdad, he would become
an infidel.

Moreover through good chains of narrators it is narrated from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that all companions of the Prophet apostasied
after the Messenger of Allah (S) except for three: Salman, Abu Dharr and
Miqdad. The narrator asked: What do you say about Ammar? Imam (a.s.)
replied: He was also somewhat inclined to apostasy. Then he said: If you
want such a person who never had any such doubt, it is Miqdad.

Salman thought that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) had command on the Isme Azam
(great name of Allah) if he prays through them, indeed the earth will
swallow those hypocrites. Then why he was helpless before them? When
this matter passed his mind people caught his collar and put a rope
around his neck. So much so that there developed a hole in his neck.
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) passed by him and he said: O Abu Abdullah it is
because of the thought that passed through your mind.

Pay allegiance to Abu Bakr. Then Salman paid allegiance. And Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) ordered Abu Dharr to remain silent in such a way that
his critics may not be able to shake him. But he did not accept and he
continued to express the truth till Uthman did with him what he did.
After that some companions again became inclined to truth and the first
of these were Abu Saasan Ansari, Abu Amr and Sheeter. In the same way
their number came to seven and except for them none who believed in the
rightfulness of Amirul Momineen (a.s.).

[^1]: Surah Shura 42:23

[^2]: Surah Kahf 18:107

[^3]: The author says: This tradition requires interpretation: Perhaps
it implies that if they had not supported Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that
day and all had pledged allegiance of Abu Bakr, the Almighty Allah would
have sent chastisement on the people and no one would have survived. And
whatever is mentioned in this report about Ibn Masud is opposed to other
reports that condemn him and there is doubt in his integrity.

[^4]: Surah Raad 13:39

[^5]: Surah Baqarah 2:97

[^6]: Surah Baqarah 2:97

[^7]: Surah Baqarah 2:97

[^8]: Surah Baqarah 2:97

[^9]: Surah Alaq 96:6-7

[^10]: Surah Baqarah 2:109

[^11]: Surah Baqarah 2:207

[^12]: Surah Tin 95:6

[^13]: It is very likely that he would not have understood the secrets
of that knowledge and he would have denied it, and it would have led to
his infidelity.

[^14]: These traditions tell us about the level of the knowledge of
those personalities, therefore no one should harbor doubts about them
which could lead one to sin.

[^15]: Fire worship

[^16]: Surah Hujurat 49:12

[^17]: Surah Qasas 28:83

[^18]: Surah Hujurat 49:13

[^19]: The author says: This matter is also from the miracles of Salman,
that years before the Battle of Jamal he had informed about the incident
and had also identified Ayesha’s camel.

[^20]: Surah Hajj 22:21

[^21]: The author says: Shaykh Kishi has narrated a lengthy sermon of
Salman in which he has spoken of the rights of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and the
oppressors of the Ummah and the usurpers. And most incidents and
oppressions that befell the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), and the uprising of Bani
Umayyah and their mischief mongering and the uprising of Bani Abbas and
most of the past and future events like the killing of Nafs-e-Zakiyyah
and the advent of Qaim Aale Muhammad and the sinking of the army of
Sufyani at Baidah etc. which are mentioned in authentic traditions and
which shall be mentioned in the account of occultation, if Allah, the
High allows.

[^22]: It is a grass used as a vegetable by poor people.

[^23]: The author says: Perhaps the negation is about direct address by
the angel without the mediation of the Almighty Allah and the angel used
to talk to Salman as mentioned previously.

[^24]: This tradition is also like the previous one, that Abu Dharr
would not have been able to bear the divine secrets that Salman was
cognizant of. This tradition also most likely implies the excess
knowledge of Salman. And Allah knows best.

[^25]: Surah Nisa 4:65

[^26]: The author says: It is not unlikely that Bedouin may imply Umar
as usually this word was used to denote him due to Taqayyah.

[^27]: The statements of Ibn Abil Hadid and others with regard to the
death of Salman do not seem to be true. While it is proved that Salman
was the governor of Madayan till the beginning period of the Caliphate
of Imam Ali (a.s.) as is clear from the report after this.

[^28]: Surah Mominoon 23:100

[^29]: Surah Mujadila 58:6

[^30]: Surah Kahf 18:49

[^31]: Surah Bani Israel 17:13-14

[^32]: Surah Mominoon 23:88

[^33]: The author says: This report contains many extraordinary points:
for example the incident Salman’s death during his Caliphate and his
coming from Kufa, which is against general belief but since this report
contains many useful points, I have included it.

[^34]: Surah Infitar 82:13-14

[^35]: The author says: Abu Dharr’s opposition to the Holy Prophet (S)
negates his usual character. Perhaps it was in the initial period of his
life in Islam when his faith was yet to be perfected. And it is also
possible that it was to show the miracle of the Prophet or to show the
priority of divine rewards to the comfort of the world.

[^36]: Surah Baqarah 2:84-85

[^37]: Surah Taubah 9:34-35

[^38]: The author says: ‘Time’ implies the second time, thus it means
fighting against Amirul Momineen (a.s.).

[^39]: Surah Taubah 9:34

[^40]: The author says: The mention of Salman in this report is
surprising due to some reasons as is very much obvious for those who are
knowledgeable.

[^41]: Surah Momin 40:60


