Bequests of the Messenger of Allah (S) and incidents that occurred at the time of his death
===========================================================================================

Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated that when the Holy Prophet (S) returned from
the Farewell Hajj he was informed that his end was near. So he used to
regularly sermonize the people and restrain them from the mischiefs that
were to follow his death. And he used to exhort them not to disobey his
instructions. He used to emphasize that they don’t abandon his Sunnah
and that they don’t create innovations in the religion of Allah.

They should remain attached to his progeny and his Ahlul Bayt (a.s.),
and consider their obedience, help, protection and following obligatory
on themselves. The Prophet used to warn to him against apostasy and
about falling into disputes. He used to regularly tell them: O people I
am going before you and you will meet me at Hauze Kauthar. Then I will
ask you how you dealt with those two important things that I left among
you; which is the Book of Allah and my progeny and Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

Therefore, you should mind how you behave with them. Doubtlessly, the
Kind and the Informed Lord has informed me that these two will not
separate till they reach me at Hauze Kauthar. Doubtlessly, I am leaving
these two among you, therefore, you must not precede my Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) in any matter and do not separate from them; do not fall short in
fulfillment of their rights, or you would be destroyed.

And don’t teach them anything as they are more learned than you. I
should not find you turning away from religion and to turn apostates and
pull out swords against each others. After which you meet me on the
battlefield against me and Ali. You should know that Ali is my brother
and successor. He will fight for the interpretation of Qur’an just as I
have fought for its revelation. Thus the Holy Prophet (S) stressed these
points in various gatherings.

Then he formed an army of hypocrites and mischief-makers and placed it
under the command of Usamah bin Zaid and ordered him to take the
companions and march to Rum to the place where his father had been
martyred. And the reason of sending that army was to assure that Medina
is cleared of hypocrites and mischief-makers. And that no one should
dispute with Amirul Momineen (a.s.) so that the matter of Caliphate is
decided in his favor.

Thus Usamah was sent upto Jarf and ordered to camp there till the forces
gather around him. And he emphasized much that people should join him
and appointed some to assure that people obey these instructions.
Meanwhile the Messenger of Allah (S) was affected by his terminal
illness. When he fell ill he took the support of Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
and went to Baqi graveyard and most companions were with him.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: The Almighty Allah has commanded me to
pray for those buried at Baqi. When he reached there, he said: “Peace be
upon you, O people of the graves; be of good cheer in what you have
attained over (living) people. Seditions have come, thick and dark as a
black night; the beginnings of some follows quickly upon the ends of
others!”

He said further: “Jibraeel used to review the Qur’an with me once a
year, but this year he reviewed it with me twice. I see this as an
indication of the coming of my end.” Then addressing Ali (a.s.), he
continued: “I was, O Ali, given the choice of the treasures of this
world and eternal life or Paradise, but I chose Paradise and meeting my
Lord. When I die, you should wash me and cover my nakedness, for no one
shall look upon it except that he would be blinded.”

The Prophet then returned to his home, where he remained ill for three
days. On Wednesday, he went out to the mosque with his head tightly
bandaged with a cloth. He was leaning on Ali with his right hand, and on
Fazl bin Abbas with the other. He sat on the pulpit and praised Allah
repeatedly, then said: “O people, my term among you shall soon come to
an end.

Let, therefore, anyone who has entrusted me with an object of value come
to me that I may return it to him. Anyone to whom I am in debt, let him
come and declare it to me.” A man rose up and said: “O Apostle of Allah,
you owe me a promise; I married, and you promised me three ounces of
precious metal.” He said: “Give them to him, O Fazl.”

His condition was thus on Wednesday and Thursday, but on Friday, he
again sat on the pulpit and spoke to the people. He said: O people,
there is nothing which can stand between Allah and anyone that could
benefit a man or ward off evil from him except good deeds. O people, let
no ambitious man claim anything, or one full of desires, desire
anything!

For by Him Who sent me with the truth, only good deeds coupled with
Allah’s mercy can lead to salvation. Even I, had I rebelled against
Allah, would have fallen. O Allah, I have thrice conveyed (that is,
Allah’s command concerning Ali).” He then stepped down and led the
people in prayer, then entered his chamber. He was at the time in the
house of Umm Salma.

He remained there for one or two days; then Ayesha came asking him to
move to her chamber in order that she might nurse him. He agreed and
moved to the house in which Ayesha lived. His illness persisted for some
days, until he became seriously ill. Bilal then came at the time of
Morning Prayers, while the Messenger of Allah (S) was overwhelmed by his
illness, and called out: “Time for prayers, may Allah, have mercy on
you!” The Prophet answered: “Let one of the men lead the rest in
prayers.” Ayesha added: “Order Abu Bakr to lead people in prayers!”
Hafasa said: “Order Umar!”

The Prophet retorted: “Cease, for you two are like Yusuf’s little
women!” He then rose, even though he was unable to stand because of
weakness, He leaned on Ali and Fazl and went to the mosque dragging his
feet in weakness. When he entered, he found that Abu Bakr had already
stood facing the niche. He beckoned to him, and Abu Bakr stepped back.
The Messenger of Allah (S) stood up, and uttering the formula of
consecration (Takbiratul Ahram) he began the prayers.

When he had done and returned to his chamber, he called for Abu Bakr and
Umar along with others who were present and said: “Did I not command you
to go in Usamah’s army?” Abu Bakr replied, “I had already set out, but I
returned to see you.” Umar said: “I did not go because I did not wish to
be absent, thus have to inquire of the caravans to get news about you.”
He repeated three times: “Send off Usamah’s army. Curse be on one who
does not join Usamah’s army.”

He then fell into a swoon because of the fatigue which he suffered. He
remained thus unconscious for a while, so that the Muslims began to weep
and his wives and children began to wail loudly. But he regained
consciousness and said: “Bring me a pen and shoulder blade that I may
inscribe for you a writ after which you shall never go astray!”

Again he lost consciousness. One of his companions present was about to
go and fetch pen and shoulder blade, but Umar said to him: “Come back,
for he is hallucinating!” When the Prophet again regained consciousness,
some of his companions said: O Messenger of Allah (S), should we not
bring you a pen and shoulder blade?” “No” he said, “not after what you
have said! Rather, keep well my memory through kindness to the Zimmis,
and feed the poor. Observe regular prayers, be kind to the women whom
your right hands possess.”[^1]

Kulaini has narrated through authentic chains from Imam Musa Kazim
(a.s.) that he said: I asked my father, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.): Was it
not possible from Imam Ali (a.s.) to write the will of the Prophet as
the latter dictated and the proximate angels should have witnessed it?

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) fell silent and then he said after some
moments: “This is what happened, but when the time of the death of the
Prophet approached, Jibraeel with proximate and trustworthy angels
brought a complete document from the Almighty Allah which was sealed and
he said: “O Messenger of Allah (S), command all the people to leave the
place except Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) so that your successor Ali Ibn Abi
Talib (a.s.) may accept the heavenly document from us. And that you may
appoint us as witnesses that you have entrusted this matter to Ali and
made him responsible to act whatever is mentioned in it.”

The Holy Prophet (S) sent all the people out of the room, except Ali Ibn
Abi Talib (a.s.) and Lady Fatima Zahra (s.a.) who was behind the
curtain. Jibraeel said: O Messenger of Allah (S), your Lord sends you
His greetings; this document is one about which I had firstly taken your
promise on the Night of Meraj and then on other occasions also, and I
had myself witnessed it and made other angels as witnesses even though I
was myself sufficient as a witness.”

The Messenger of Allah (S) began to tremble in the fear of the Almighty
and he said: “O Jibraeel, my Lord is clean of all defects, and every
kind of well being is from Him and every good thing is from Him only. My
Lord has stated the truth and He has fulfilled His promise. Give me the
document.” Jibraeel handed the document to the Holy Prophet (S) and
said: “Please pass it to Amirul Momineen (a.s.).”

The Prophet handed it to Imam Ali (a.s.) and said: “Read it.” Imam Ali
(a.s.) read it word by word, till the end. After that the Holy Prophet
(S) said: “This is the promise and oath of my Lord that He has given me
and it is His trust that He had given me and I have conveyed it to you.
And I have fulfilled all the conditions of well being of the Ummah. And
I have completed the messages of God. Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “May
by parents be sacrificed on you, I witness that you have delivered the
message and acted for the well being of the Ummah, I testify for you
what you said and my flesh and skin, ear, eyes and blood witness.”

Jibraeel said: “I am also a witness to all that you have mentioned.”
Then the Holy Prophet (S) said: “O Ali, you have obtained my will and
have understood and you have become a guarantor from me and Allah, that
you will fulfill all the oaths that are mentioned in this document.
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “Indeed, O Messenger of Allah (S), may my
parents be sacrificed on you, I guarantee that and it is upon Allah to
give me the good sense to act upon it and help me in this.”

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “O Ali, I want to take the witness on
this document so that when you come to me on Judgment Day, it should
witness that I had exhausted the arguments on you.” Imam Ali (a.s.)
said: “You may appoint your witnesses.” The Holy Prophet (S) said:
“Jibraeel and Mikaeel have arrived with proximate angels and they are
present here and they are witnesses between me and you.” Imam Ali (a.s.)
said: “Yes I also make them witnesses on you, may my parents be
sacrificed on you.”

Thus the Prophet made those angels witnesses and among the condition
that had been stated by Jibraeel under the command of the Almighty Allah
included that the Holy Prophet (S) said: “O Ali, you will fulfill the
condition that you love and be friendly to one who is the friend of
Allah and Prophet and you will be inimical to and be aloof from those
who are enemies of Allah and the Prophet. And that you will observe
patience on their oppression when they usurp your rights and take away
your share and destroy your sanctity.” Imam Ali (a.s.) said: “Yes, O
Messenger of Allah (S), I will do exactly as you say.”

Then Amirul Momineen (a.s.) says: “By the one who split the seed and
created the creatures, I heard from Jibraeel say to the Messenger of
Allah (S): O Messenger of Allah (S), inform Ali that hypocrites will
dishonor his sanctity even though his sanctity is the sanctity of Allah
and the Prophet and they will dye his beard in his blood.” When I heard
this from Jibraeel, I fell unconscious and I said: “I have accepted it.
Even though people may trespass my sanctity, render my practice invalid,
cut up the Qur’an into pieces, destroy the Kaaba and dye my beard with
my blood, I will be patient in all this and hope for rewards from Allah
till I come to you in an oppressed condition.”

Then the Holy Prophet (S) called for Lady Fatima, Hasan and Husain and
informed them also like he had informed Amirul Momineen (a.s.). They
also accepted all the conditions like Imam Ali (a.s.). After that he
sealed the document with seals of gold from Paradise whose gold had not
been melted in fire. And then the document was entrusted to Amirul
Momineen (a.s.).

When Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) reached this point, the narrator asked:
“What else was mentioned in that document?” Imam (a.s.) replied: “It
contained the practices of Allah and His Messenger.” The narrator also
asked: “Was it also mentioned that hypocrites will usurp the Caliphate
of Imam Ali (a.s.)?” Imam (a.s.) replied: “Yes, perhaps you have not
heard the following statement of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا نَحْنُ نُحْيِي الْمَوْتَىٰ وَنَكْتُبُ مَا قَدَّمُوا
وَآثَارَهُمْ ۚ وَكُلَّ شَيْءٍ أَحْصَيْنَاهُ فِي إِمَامٍ مُبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely We give life to the dead, and We write down what they have
sent before and their footprints, and We have recorded everything in the
manifest Imam.”***[^2]

“Is *Imam Mubeen* (manifest Imam) *Lauhe Mahfuz* (Protected Tablet) or
it is Amirul Momineen (a.s.)?” Imam (a.s.) then said: “The Messenger of
Allah (S) asked Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and Lady Fatima Zahra (s.a.), did
you understand what I told you? And do you agree to act upon it?” Both
agreed to act on it, saying: “We have accepted it as it deserves to be
accepted and we will be patient in those things that will be difficult
for us and we would not become angry.”

Kulaini has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that Jibraeel, the
trustworthy brought the news of the death of the Holy Prophet (S) when
he was not suffering from any illness. By the command of the Prophet,
announcement was made and all people gathered in his audience.

The Holy Prophet (S) ordered the Emigrants and Helpers to arm
themselves. Then he mounted the pulpit and informed the people about his
passing away and he said: “I remind of Allah, to the one who will be the
ruler of the community after me, he should indeed have mercy on Muslims,
he should consider their elders respectable and be kind to their young,
honor their scholars and not harm them in any way, which may degrade
them and not make them poor which would lead them to infidelity.

And he must not close the door (of justice) so that their strong may
oppress the weak. And must not post them in boundaries of infidels for a
long time, which would cause their generations to be cut off. Then he
said: I have conveyed the message and I have been your well wisher, so
you all must be witnesses. Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: This was the
last discourse of the Prophet from a pulpit.”

Kulaini, Ibn Babawayh, Shaykh Tusi, Shaykh Mufeed and most Shia and
Sunni tradition scholars have narrated from authentic chains, from Imam
Zainul Abideen (a.s.), Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) etc. that when the time of the death of the Holy Prophet (S)
approached and his illness took a serious turn, the Prophet called for
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and Abbas. The house of the Prophet was crowded
by the Companions of the Prophet, and Emigrants and Helpers.

The Messenger of Allah (S) placed his head in the lap of Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) and His Eminence, Abbas was standing in front of the Prophet and
with the corner of his sheet was fanning the face of the Messenger. His
Eminence, opened his eyes and said: O Abbas, O uncle of the Messenger,
accept my will regarding my family members and my wives. Take my
inheritance and repay my debts and fulfill the promises I have made with
others and free me from responsibility.

Abbas said: O Messenger of Allah (S), I have grown old, and you are more
kind than the Ruh-e-Asif (wind) and more generous than the spring cloud.
My personal wealth will not be sufficient to fulfill your generosities
and promises. And you turn this matter to one who is stronger than me.
The Holy Prophet (S) repeated this thrice to Abbas and Abbas replied in
the same way every time. The Prophet said: “To whom should I give my
inheritance who will accept it like it is wont to be accepted and who
will not ask to be excused like you?”

Then the Prophet glanced at Imam Ali (a.s.) and said: “O Ali, you take
my inheritance as my inheritance is only restricted to you and no one
can dispute with you and accept my bequest, fulfill my promises and
repay my loans. O Ali, you are my Caliph on my family members and you
will propagate my messages.” Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “I looked at
the blessed head of the Prophet that it was shaking due to illness in my
lap.

I became restless and tears came to my eyes and fell on the holy face of
the Prophet and my heart became agitated and I could not give any reply
to him.” The Prophet repeated his words but again my voice choked in my
throat due to grief. At last in a very weak tone, I said: “All right, O
Messenger of Allah (S), may my parents be sacrificed on you.” At that
time, the Holy Prophet (S) told him to make him sit up. I made him sit
up and supporting his back with my chest, I also sat up with him.

His Eminence, said: “O Ali, only you are my brother in the world and the
Hereafter and my successor and Caliph on my Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and my
Ummah.” Then he told Bilal, get my helmet which is called Zuljabeen, my
coat of mail called Zulfadool, my standard called Uqab, my Zulfiqar, my
turban, Sahab, another turban, Tahiya, my chador, pot, small cane and
walking stick, Mamshooq. Abbas says: I had never seen that earthen jar
before. When it was brought, it was so luminous that it almost blinded
the onlookers.

Then His Eminence, said: “Jibraeel brought this garment for me said: O
Messenger of Allah (S), insert this into the circles of your coat of
mail. And tie it to your waist instead of a belt. Then he called for two
pairs of Arabian shoes, one was laced and another plain; and called for
the robe that he had worn on the night of Meraj. And the garment he had
worn on the day of Uhud.

And called for all his three caps one of which he wore on journeys,
another on Eid days, and the third he wore when meeting his companions.
Then he said: O Bilal, bring my two mules, Shahba and Duldul. And he
called for his two she-camels, Ghazba and Sahba and his two horses,
Junah and Haidhoom. Junah used to remain at the gate of the Masjid. When
the Prophet used to send someone on an errand he used to ride that
animal.

And Haidhoom was one that the Holy Prophet (S) rode in the Battle of
Uhud. And Jibraeel was exhorting it to move forward. He also called for
his ass, Yafur. Thus when Bilal brought all these things, the Holy
Prophet (S) told Abbas to sit in Ali’s place supporting his back. And he
said to Ali (a.s.): Get up and take charge of all these things during my
lifetime so that all the people present here may witness it. And no one
may dispute about it with you after me.

Imam Ali (a.s.) says: I arose with the command of the Prophet but my
feet were not strong enough to walk. Thus with lot of difficulty, I went
ahead and took all the things to my home, then I came back and stood
before the Prophet. After that the Messenger of Allah (S) took off his
ring and put it on my finger. At that time all Bani Hashim and other
Muslims were crowding in the house.

Due to weakness the head of His Eminence was not stable, sometimes it
turned to the right and sometimes to the left. In that same condition
His Eminence, said in a loud voice which was audible to all: O Muslims,
Ali is my brother, my successor and my Caliph in my Ummah.

Only he will repay my debts, fulfill my promises. O sons of Hashim and O
sons of Abdul Muttalib, and O Muslims, do not be inimical to Ali and do
not disregard his commands or you shall go astray. Do not feel jealous
of him, and do not become aloof from him and be inclined to others, or
you will become deniers.” After that he told Abbas: “Get up from Ali’s
place.”

Abbas said: “You are making an old man stand up and making a youth sit
in his place?” the Prophet said thrice and each time Abbas gave the same
reply. After that he gave up and arose from there and Imam Ali (a.s.)
went and sit in that place. When the Messenger of Allah (S) saw that
Abbas was angry, he said: “Don’t do something that may cause me to
depart from the world while I am angry with you and my anger takes you
to Hell.” When he heard this, he took his seat. The Prophet said: “O
Ali, make me lie down.” When he made to lie down, he said to Bilal: Call
my sons, Hasan and Husain.”

They were summoned there and the Prophet embraced them and he began to
smell and kiss the two blossoms of prophethood. Imam Ali (a.s.) says:
“Since I feared that the two boys would cause discomfort to the Prophet,
I stepped forward to separate them from him. His Eminence, said: “O Ali,
leave them, so that I may smell them and they may smell them and that
they may derive comfort from my company and I seek solace from their
love, because after me, terrible calamities will fall on them. And curse
of Allah be on one who terrifies them and oppresses them.

O Allah, I entrust them and the best of the believer, that is Ali Ibn
Abi Talib (a.s.) to You. After that Shaykh Mufeed narrates that the Holy
Prophet (S) said farewell to the people and all went out, except for
Abbas and his son, Fazl, Imam Ali (a.s.) and some family members. Abbas
said: “O Messenger of Allah (S), if this matter of Caliphate is given to
us Bani Hashim, please give us its glad tidings so that we are pleased
by it.

And if you think that people would oppress us and take away the
Caliphate from us, you may plead to the companions about us.” The
Prophet said: “After me they will weaken you and you will be overpowered
by others.” Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) began to weep at this information and they
became hopeless of life of the Holy Prophet (S). During that time Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) used to remain in the service of the Prophet and he
never went out except for some urgent and necessary errands.

Ibn Babawayh, Shaykh Mufeed, Shaykh Tusi, Shaykh Tabarsi, Ibn Shahr
Ashob and other scholars of tradition have narrated through authentic
chains of narrators from Imam Ali (a.s.), Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.),
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and Umm Salma, Ayesha etc. that in the last
stage of the Prophet’s illness Amirul Momineen (a.s.) had gone out for
some work, when the Prophet said: “Call my helper, my friend and my
brother.” Ayesha sent someone to Abu Bakr and Hafasa to Umar and called
them. When they arrived and the Prophet saw them, he covered his head
and face with a cloth. The two went away. Then the Prophet removed the
cloth from his face and said: “Call my friend, my beloved and my
brother.”

Then the two wives called their respective fathers. When they arrived,
the Prophet turned away from them or concealed his face. They said: “Not
us, he has called for Ali.” Lady Fatima summoned Amirul Momineen (a.s.).
When he arrived, the Prophet embraced him and placed his holy mouth to
his blessed ear and covered his face with his cloth and spoke to him in
private for a long time till perspiration dripped from their faces.

People had gathered behind the house of the Prophet. Abu Bakr and Umar
were also standing at the door outside. When Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
emerged, people asked, “What private talk did the Holy Prophet (S) have
with you?” His Eminence, replied: “He taught me a thousand chapters of
knowledge, and each chapter opened into thousands of doors.” According
to another report, Prophet Khizr was present in the vestibule.

He asked Imam Ali (a.s.): “Did the Messenger of Allah (S) mention some
secrets to you?” Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “Yes, he taught me a
thousand types of sciences and each opened thousands of channels for
me.” Khizr (a.s.) asked: “Did you understand and memorize all the
sciences?” “Yes,” he replied. He asked: “What are the dark spots in
every moon?” His Eminence, replied: “The Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ آيَتَيْنِ ۖ فَمَحَوْنَا آيَةَ
اللَّيْلِ وَجَعَلْنَا آيَةَ النَّهَارِ مُبْصِرَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We have made the night and the day two signs, then We have made
the sign of the night to pass away and We have made the sign of the day
manifest…”***[^3]

Khizr (a.s.) said: “You are right, O Ali.” And it is mentioned in the
report of Ayesha that when Amirul Momineen (a.s.) arrived, the Holy
Prophet (S) took him under his blanket and spoke to him in private till
his soul departed from his body and the hand of the Prophet was on
Amirul Momineen (a.s.).

Ibn Babawayh has narrated from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) through authentic
chains of narrators that when the death of the Prophet approached he
called me and said: “O Ali, only you are my successor and Caliph on my
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and on my Ummah during my lifetime and after my death.

Your friend is my friend and my friend is the friend of Allah. And your
enemy is my enemy and my enemy is the enemy of Allah. O Ali, whoever
denies your Imamate after me, will be such that he has denied my
prophethood during my lifetime, because you are from me and I am from
you.”

Then he called me near and taught me a thousand chapters of knowledge
and each chapter opened thousands of doors of knowledge. According to
another report he said: “He taught me a thousand chapters of all the
lawful and prohibited and all that which was to occur till Judgment Day
and each chapter opened thousands of chapters. So much so that I also
came to know about the death of people and the calamities that would
befall them. And I came to know how to judge with truth.”

Saffar has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) through authentic
chains of narrators that one day the Holy Prophet (S) during his illness
performed the Morning Prayer in the Masjid. Then he recited a sermon and
mentioned the commands and prohibitions to the people and gave them good
counsel with reminders of the Hereafter.

Then in order to warn the people, he said: “O Fatima, perform good
deeds, and worship Allah, because without action no one can grant any
benefit to you.” People were pleased on hearing this and they enjoyed
his company. His wives were also happy that his illness was cured. Then
he combed his hair, applied antimony to his eyes. But he passed away
from the world, the same day. The narrator asked: “When did the Prophet
teach a thousand chapters to Amirul Momineen (a.s.)?” Imam (a.s.)
replied: “Before that day.”

Shaykh Mufeed has narrated through reliable chains from Abdullah bin
Abbas that Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.), Abbas and Fazl bin Abbas during the
terminal illness of the Prophet, came to him and said: The men and women
of Ansar are present in the mosque and they are weeping for you. The
Prophet asked why they were crying. He was told: “Because they fear that
you will leave them in this illness.”

The Prophet said: “Hold my hand,’ then he came out wrapped in a sheet
and wearing a turban. Then he mounted the pulpit and after praise and
glorification of Allah said: O people, why did you deny the death of
your Prophet? I have regularly informed me about my and your death. If
any prophet had remained in the world forever before me, I would also
have remained thus. You should know that I am leaving this world and
leaving among that which if you remain attached to it you will never go
astray.

And it is the Book of Allah that you recite every morning and night. So
do not be inclined to materialism and do not be jealous of each other.
Do not cultivate mutual enmity. And live like brothers as the Almighty
Allah has commanded you. And indeed I leave my Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), my
progeny among you and advise you about them and advise about the Ansar
that you must observe their rights and value their efforts about Allah,
and His Prophet and the believers.

You should know that they allowed you to live in their homes. Shared
half their fruits with you and preferred your self over themselves even
though they were themselves in need. So one who rules over the Muslims,
should be kind and affectionate to the righteous ones of the Ansar and
should forgive their wrong-doers.” Thus this was the last instance of
the Prophet coming on the pulpit, till he passed away from the world.

Shaykh Mufeed has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from
Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that when the last moments of the Holy
Prophet (S) approached, Jibraeel arrived and said: “O Messenger of Allah
(S), would you like to go back to the world?”

“No,” said the Messenger, “I have fulfilled all the duties of
prophethood.” Jibraeel asked: “Would you not like to remain alive any
more?” “No,” he replied, “I prefer to join my exalted friends; that is
prophets, legatees and the saints of the Almighty Allah.” Then the
Prophet advised the people and said: “O people, there will be no Prophet
after me and there will no Sunnah after my Sunnah.

So anyone who claims prophethood after me or creates some heresy in my
religion, his claim and heresy will be in Hellfire. And one who makes
such a claim should be put to death and one who follows such a one, will
go to Hell. People keep retaliation and rights alive and do not be
disunited. And remain Muslims and follow the leaders of religion so that
you are secured from the punishment of the world and the Hereafter.”
Then he recited the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَتَبَ اللَّهُ لَأَغْلِبَنَّ أَنَا وَرُسُلِي ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ قَوِيٌّ
عَزِيزٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah has written down: I will most certainly prevail, I and My
apostles; surely Allah is Strong, Mighty.”***[^4]

Moreover, through authentic chains of narrators it is narrated from Abu
Saeed Khudri that the last sermon that the Prophet delivered was the
sermon that he recited in his last illness and he came out of the house
leaning on Ali and Maimoona, his freed slave girl. Then he mounted the
pulpit and said: “O people, I leave two important things among you.”
Then he fell silent. A person stood to ask what those two important
things were.

The Prophet was angry at this so much that his face turned red, and he
asked: “Have I not informed you about it? But now I want to explain it.
But I am breathless due to the illness.” Then he said: “One of them is
Qur’an which is like a rope hanging from the heavens to the earth, one
end of which is in the hand of the Almighty and another end is with you.
And the next thing is my Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).”

Then he said: “I am telling you about this but I know that some are
still in the loins of polytheists but in spite of your majority I am
more hopeful of them. By Allah, none loves my Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) except
that the Almighty Allah will bestow him with an effulgence on Judgment
Day. Till they will reach me at Hauze Kauthar. And no one is inimical to
them but that the Almighty Allah doesn’t deprive him of His mercy on
Judgment Day.” The narrator says: “I narrated this tradition to Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and he certified its veracity.”

Shaykh Tusi has narrated through authentic chains of narrators that
Salman said: I was in the service of the Messenger of Allah (S) during
his last illness. I was sitting with him and asking about his well
being. And when I wanted to leave, the Prophet told me to be seated so
that I can also be a witness of the most meritorious facts. So I sat
down and suddenly I saw some persons from the Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet
and some companions arrive there. Lady Fatima also came but when she saw
her father’s weakness she was moved to tears and her voice was choked.

When the Holy Prophet (S) saw this, he asked, “Why are you weeping, my
dear; may Allah brighten your eyes and may you never have to weep.” When
Fatima said, “How I cannot weep on seeing you in this condition?” His
Eminence, said: “O Fatima, trust in the Lord and observe patience as
your ancestors from the prophets had done. And be patient like the wives
of the prophets. O Fatima, do you want me to give you a good news?”
“Yes, father,” she replied. His Eminence said: “Don’t you know that the
Almighty Allah selected your father from all the creatures and sent him
as a prophet on all the creatures.

After that He selected Ali (a.s.) and commanded me to perform your
wedding with him. And with the command of Allah, I appointed him as my
vizier and successor. O Fatima, the right of Ali (a.s.) on all Muslims
is much more than the rights of others and his Islam is the earliest and
his knowledge is more than all others and his forbearance is most, and
he is having the most value among the people.”

Lady Fatima was pleased at this and the Prophet asked: “O Fatima, have I
made you happy?” “Yes,” she said, “O respected father.” His Eminence
asked: “Would you like me to state more in the excellence of your
husband and my cousin?” “Yes,” she said, “O respected father.” So the
Prophet said: “Ali is the foremost in this Ummah to believe in Allah and
His Prophet and after that the first of those who brought faith was your
mother, Khadija and the first to help in my prophethood was Ali (a.s.).

O Fatima, there is no doubt that Ali is my brother, me selected one and
the father of my sons. Indeed the Almighty Allah has gifted good
qualities to Ali (a.s.), such that no one else is bestowed and neither
will anyone else be given such qualities after him, therefore you must
observe a good patience and know that very soon, your father is to go
into the court of the Lord.”

Lady Fatima said, “Father, first you made be happy, and in the end you
have made me aggrieved.” The Holy Prophet (S) said, “My dear, the
affairs of the world are like this only, its happiness is joined with
its sorrow and its cleanliness is mixed with its filth. Do you want me
to state more?” “Yes,” she said, “O the Messenger of Allah (S).” The
Holy Prophet (S) said: “The Creator of the Universe created the
creatures and divided them into two; and appointed me and Ali (a.s.)
among the best people, from the People of the Right. And he divided
families in both the parts and made me and Ali (a.s.) among the best of
the families as mentioned by Him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا ۚ إِنَّ
أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and made you tribes and families that you may know each other;
surely the most honorable of you with Allah is the one among you most
careful (of his duty)…”***[^5]

Then from those tribes he appointed the clans and made us to be from the
best of the clans, as He has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people
of the House! and to purify you a (thorough) purifying.”***[^6]

Then he selected me from my Ahlul Bayt and chose Ali, Hasan, Husain and
you from them. So I am the best from the descendants of Adam and Ali is
the best among the Arabs and you are the best among all the women of the
world and Hasan and Husain are the best among the youth of Paradise and
the Mahdi will be from your progeny through whom the Almighty Allah will
fill up the earth with justice and equity as it would be fraught with
injustice and oppression before that.”

Furat bin Ibrahim has narrated through authentic chains of narrators
from Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari that the Holy Prophet (S) said Lady
Fatima during his last illness: “May my parents be sacrificed on you,
send someone and call your husband.” Lady Fatima asked Imam Husain
(a.s.) to call his father. When Amirul Momineen (a.s.) arrived, he heard
that Fatima was saying: “O father, how sad we feel due to your pain.”

And the Prophet was saying: “After today there will be no discomfort for
your father, and O Fatima, you should note that in my grief you should
not tear your collar and hit at your face, and neither should you wail
in unreasonable way; you must say only what your father had stated at
the death of his son, Ibrahim: The eyes weep and the heart is pained but
I don’t say anything that can earn divine anger; and O Ibrahim we are
aggrieved for you.”

Then the Messenger of Allah (S) said, “If Ibrahim had been alive, he
would have been a prophet.” Then he said, “O Ali come near me.” When he
arrived, the Prophet said, “Bring your ear near to my mouth.” Ayesha and
Hafasa tried to hear what the Prophet was saying but he said: O Allah,
block their hearing so that they may not hear what I am saying.” Then he
said, “O my brother, have you heard what the Almighty Allah has said in
Qur’an?”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ أُولٰئِكَ هُمْ خَيْرُ
الْبَرِيَّةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(As for) those who believe and do good, surely they are the best of
men.”***[^7]

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said that he had indeed heard that. The Holy
Prophet (S) said, “It is you and your Shia and helpers and they and I
have been promised Hauze Kauthar on Judgment Day, when all the nations
would be pleading for forgiveness and their deeds will be presented
before the Almighty Allah. At that time the Almighty Allah will call you
and your Shias and you will arrive with illuminated faces and limbs in a
satiated condition. O Ali, have you heard what the Almighty Allah has
said in Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ وَالْمُشْرِكِينَ فِي
نَارِ جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا ۚ أُولَٰئِكَ هُمْ شَرُّ الْبَرِيَّةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely those who disbelieve from among the followers of the Book and
the polytheists shall be in the fire of hell, abiding therein; they are
the worst of men.”***[^8]

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said, “Yes, O Messenger of Allah (S).” The Holy
Prophet (S) said, “They are Jews, Bani Umayyah and their followers, and
your enemies and the enemies of your Shias. On Judgment Day they will be
raised hungry, thirsty and black faced and they will be involved in a
terrible chastisement.” The same tradition is mentioned in *Kitab Sulaym
bin Qays* from Ali (a.s.).  
 In *Tafsir Muhammad bin Abbas bin Mahyar* it is narrated from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and Ibn Babawayh has narrated through authentic
chains of narrators from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that the Holy
Prophet (S) during his last moments said to Lady Fatima: “When I have
gone, do not injure your face in my grief and neither should you tear
out your hair; you should not wail and protest at my death and don’t
call for dirge singers.”

It is mentioned in *Basharatul Mustafa* that when the Messenger of Allah
(S) was in his terminal illness, Lady Fatima (s.a.) arrived with Hasan
and Husain. When she saw the Holy Prophet (S) in this condition she
became restless and she threw herself on the Messenger of Allah (S) and
clinging to his holy chest, she wept much. His Eminence, said, “O
Fatima, do not cry, be patient.” Fatima arose; the Prophet was also
weeping. Then he said thrice: O Allah, these are my Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
and I entrust them to every believer.”

Shaykh Mufeed has narrated that when the end of the Prophet was near, he
said to Amirul Momineen (a.s.), “O Ali, place my head in your lap, the
command of the Lord has arrived. And when my soul has left my body, pull
out your hands from below me and pass them over your face and turn my
face to the Qiblah. Then prepare for my last rites. And you should be
the first to pray on me and don’t leave me alone till you don’t lay me
in the grave. In all these matters, seek help only from the Almighty.”

Thus when Amirul Momineen (a.s.) took his head in his lap, the Prophet
became unconscious. Lady Fatima used to glance at his holy face and weep
and wail and she recited a couplet as follows: “The Prophet had such an
illuminated face that people sought rains through it. And he was a
helper of the orphans and refuge of the widows.” When the Prophet heard
Lady Fatima’s voice he opened his eyes and said in a thin voice: Dear
daughter, this was composed by your uncle, Abu Talib. On the contrary
you should say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا مُحَمَّدٌ إِلَّا رَسُولٌ قَدْ خَلَتْ مِنْ قَبْلِهِ الرُّسُلُ ۚ
أَفَإِنْ مَاتَ أَوْ قُتِلَ انْقَلَبْتُمْ عَلَىٰ أَعْقَابِكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Muhammad is no more than an apostle; the apostles have already
passed away before him; if then he dies or is killed will you turn back
upon your heels?”***[^9]

Lady Fatima cried bitterly, and the Holy Prophet (S) called her near and
confided a secret to her which made her extremely happy. When the Holy
Prophet (S) passed away, Imam Ali (a.s.) removed his hand from under the
holy face of the Prophet and passed it over his face, and he closed the
eyes of the Messenger of Allah (S), covered him with a cloth.

Someone asked Lady Fatima: “What did the Messenger of Allah (S) tell
you?” She replied: “He told me that I would be the first to join him
from Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and I will not live much longer after the passing
away of the Holy Prophet (S). Due to this my grief was dispelled and I
understood that I will not remain separated from my father for a long
time.”

[^1]: The author says: The tradition of pen and paper is narrated
through various channels in Sahih Bukhari, Sahih Muslim and all reliable
books of Ahle Sunnat. And they have narrated from Ibn Abbas that he wept
so much that the pebbles of the Masjid became wet due to his tears. He
used to say: Ah Thursday, what a day it was in which the Prophet’s
illness intensified and he told them to bring pen and paper so that he
may write for them such a thing that they will never go astray after
them. So companions disputed in this matter, even though it was unlawful
to argue in the presence of the Holy Prophet (S). Umar said: The
Messenger of Allah (S) is talking nonsense. And according to another
report he said: He is overcome by pain, you have the Qur’an, the Book of
Allah is sufficient for us. At last, all the people who had gathered
there began to argue among themselves. Some said: We should get the pen
and paper so that the Messenger of Allah (S) may write for us a document
after which you will never go astray. Some said: Umar is right; when
voices were raised and there was a lot of dispute, the Holy Prophet (S)
said: Get out from here. Ibn Abbas says: It was the worst tragedy that
befell the Muslims that people did not allow the Prophet to write the
document and they disputed and made noise in his presence. O Aziz, in
the presence of this tradition, which is related by the Ahle Sunnat, no
sane person can dare to doubt the testimony of Umar and in the testimony
of one that considers him to be a Muslim. If a grocer or grain-seller
wants to make a will and someone prevents him, people condemn him. But
when the Holy Prophet (S) wanted to make such a will which would assure
the deliverance of the Ummah and someone prevents it, and troubles him,
and alleges that he is talking nonsense, what will be the end of such a
person: It is naught but revelation that is revealed, (Surah Najm 53:4).
Moreover the Almighty Allah says: Those who trouble Allah and His
Messenger, Allah has cursed them in the world and the Hereafter: Surely
(as for) those who speak evil things of Allah and His Apostle, Allah has
cursed them in this world and the hereafter, and He has prepared for
them a chastisement bringing disgrace. (Surah Ahzab 33:57). And what
trouble can be more serious that the Prophet in spite of his status and
affection when he was near his death, and did not expect any benefit
from them, they express their malice. And they deviate from his
obedience. The Holy Prophet (S) repeatedly tells them to go with
Usamah’s army but they do not agree. The Messenger of Allah (S) tells
them to bring pen and paper, they don’t comply with his wishes, lest the
matter of Caliphate should be more clearly bequeathed to Amirul Momineen
(a.s.). The Holy Prophet (S) knew their intentions, how they would take
revenge from his Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) after him, therefore curse of Allah
be on them and those who consider them Muslims, and on those who
hesitates to curse them. And the explanation will be given at its
appropriate place.

[^2]: Surah Yasin 36:12

[^3]: Surah Bani Israel 17:12

[^4]: Surah Mujadila 58:21

[^5]: Surah Hujurat 49:13

[^6]: Surah Ahzab 33:33

[^7]: Surah Bayyina 98:7

[^8]: Surah Bayyina 98:6

[^9]: Surah Aale Imran 3:144


