Incidents that occurred at the tomb of the Prophet
==================================================

Shaykh Tusi has narrated that when people wanted to construct the
building containing the tomb of the Prophet, at the head side of the
holy grave of the Prophet and at the feet side the fragrance of Musk
emanated from there such that had never been perceived before.

Kulaini has narrated through authentic chains from Muthanna Khatib that
he says: I was in Medina when the ceiling near the grave of the Prophet
in the Prophet’s mosque needed repairs. Masons used to go up and come
down. I asked Ismail bin Ammar that we should ask Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) if
it is possible to go up to that place below which, is the holy grave of
the Prophet.

The next day Ismail reported that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) says that he
did not like anyone to climb the ceiling above the holy grave of the
Prophet, because I am not satisfied that he may see something that may
cause him to lose his vision or he may see the Prophet standing up for
prayer, or sitting with some of his pure wives.

Moreover according to correct chains of narrators, it is narrated from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that in 41 A.H. Muawiyah decided to perform the
Hajj and sent a carpenter with wood and tools and wrote a letter to the
governor of Medina to break up the pulpit of the Prophet and make a
pulpit as big as the pulpit of Syria. When he decided to break the
pulpit of the Prophet, there occurred a solar eclipse and a terrible
earthquake began which compelled them to drop the idea and they reported
this matter to Muawiyah.

He replied: “You must do as I have ordered you to.” On reading this
letter, they dismantled the Prophet’s pulpit and made a new pulpit.
Saffar etc. have narrated through authentic and correct chains of
narrators from the Infallibles (a.s.) that one day the Messenger of
Allah (S) sat with his companions and said: “My life is good for you as
well as my death.” Companions said, “We know that your holy life is good
for us, because through you we have been guided to the right path and
achieved salvation from the fire of Hell. But how can your death be good
for us?”

The Messenger of Allah (S) said, “After my death, your deeds will be
presented before me; and when I see your good deeds, I would pray for
you that may Allah increase your Taufeeq. And seeing your bad deeds, I
will ask Allah to forgive you.” A hypocrite said, “How would you pray
for us, when your bones (Allah’s refuge) would have decayed into dust.”
The Holy Prophet (S) said, “It is not so, the Almighty Allah has made my
and my Ahlul Bayt’s flesh prohibited for the earth and our bodies do not
decay in the earth.”

Through authentic chains of narrators it is narrated from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that no prophet or successor of Prophet remains in the
grave for more than three days; after that his flesh, bones and soul are
lifted up; and people come to visit that place where they are buried and
salutations that are recited on them from near and far are received by
them.

It is narrated through many authentic chains of narrators from the same
Imam that when Abu Bakr usurped the Caliphate of Ali (a.s.), he (Ali)
asked him, “Did the Holy Prophet (S) not order you to obey me?” “No,” he
replied, “If he had ordered me, I would have obeyed you.” Imam (a.s.)
said, “Will you obey if right now you were to see the Holy Prophet (S)
and he were to order you?” “Yes” he replied. Imam Ali (a.s.) said, “Come
with me to Masjid Quba.” When they reached Masjid Quba, Abu Bakr saw
that the Messenger of Allah (S) was standing up in prayers.

When the Holy Prophet (S) concluded his prayer, Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
said, “Abu Bakr denies that you ordered my obedience.” The Holy Prophet
(S) told Abu Bakr, “I ordered you time and again. Go now and do not
deviate from his obedience.” Abu Bakr was highly terrified at this scene
and when he was returning from there, he met Umar, who asked him what
the matter was. Abu Bakr said that the Holy Prophet (S) said this and
this.

Umar said, “That Ummah was destroyed that appointed a fool like you as
their ruler. Perhaps you don’t know all this is the sorcery of Bani
Hashim.”  
 It is quoted in *Ikhtisas* and *Basairud Darajat*, rather in all books,
through authentic chains of narrators from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that
when people dragged Amirul Momineen (a.s.) by his collar to the mosque
to pay allegiance to Abu Bakr, Imam Ali (a.s.) stood by the Prophet’s
grave and repeated what Prophet Harun (a.s.) had told Prophet Musa
(a.s.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ابْنَ أُمَّ إِنَّ الْقَوْمَ اسْتَضْعَفُونِي وَكَادُوا يَقْتُلُونَنِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Son of my mother! surely the people reckoned me weak and had
well-nigh slain me…”***[^1]

At that moment, a hand emerged from the grave of the Prophet and moved
to Abu Bakr and everyone recognized that it was the hand of the Prophet
and a voice, which everyone recognized to be the voice of the Holy
Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَكَفَرْتَ بِالَّذِي خَلَقَكَ مِنْ تُرَابٍ ثُمَّ مِنْ نُطْفَةٍ ثُمَّ
سَوَّاكَ رَجُلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do you disbelieve in Him Who created you from dust, then from a
small seed, then He made you a perfect man?”***[^2]

According to another report, a plate came out from the grave on which
was inscribed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَكَفَرْتَ بِالَّذِي خَلَقَكَ مِنْ تُرَابٍ ثُمَّ مِنْ نُطْفَةٍ ثُمَّ
سَوَّاكَ رَجُلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do you disbelieve in Him Who created you from dust, then from a
small seed, then He made you a perfect man?”***[^3]

Moreover, Saffar etc. have narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that
he asked: Why do you torture the Messenger of Allah (S)? People asked
how we torture the Holy Prophet (S)? Imam (a.s.) said: “Perhaps you
don’t know that your deeds are shown to the Prophet. When he sees any of
your sins, he is aggrieved.”

Kulaini, Saffar and others have narrated through authentic chains of
narrators from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that on Friday eve, the soul of
the Prophet and the souls of the previous prophets and souls of
successors and the soul of Imam Zamana (a.s.) are taken up to the sky
and they do Tawaf of the sky seven times. And perform 2 rakats prayers
at every side.

When it is morning, their knowledge increases to a great degree and it
has come down in another report that when the Almighty Allah wants to
increase the fresh knowledge of Imam Zamana (a.s.), except for the
knowledge of the prohibited and lawful in Islam, He sends that piece of
knowledge to the Holy Prophet (S) through an angel.

Then the Holy Prophet (S) sends him to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) who in
turn sends him to Imam Hasan (a.s.) and so on till he reaches Imam
Zamana (a.s.). Himyari and Saffar have narrated through authentic chains
of narrators that Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) said: “Yesterday, I saw the Holy
Prophet (S) at this place and I hugged His Eminence.”  
 The author says: The meanings and interpretations of these traditional
reports have already been mentioned in *Biharul Anwar* and if the
Almighty Allah wills, secrets and finer points will be narrated in the
book of Imamate.

And it is enough for the Shia to believe in these traditions, to follow
them and believe in them in brief and leave the knowledge upon the Imams
and not allow doubts to haunt them, because doubts are satanic and
instigations of the self can lead to infidelity and apostasy; especially
for those who are incapable of solving them. And I conclude this book at
this point and request the brothers in faith that they forgive me for
mistakes in this book and may the Almighty Allah not deprive from
rewards the servant who is already drowned in sins, and I beg you to
pray for my forgiveness.

Because too many involvements and adverse circumstances and too many
critics and shortage of those who recognize the truth; in spite of all
this, the sayings of Ahlul Bayt of prophethood that were since a long
time, abandoned and concealed due to the disinterest of the people, I
gathered for Shia and arranged them and for those who were ignorant of
Arabic language, I translated into local language so that they may come
to know about the sayings and practices of the leaders of faith and
proximates of the court of the Lord of the worlds.

And I ask Allah for its recompense and don’t care for those who do not
recognize the truth and only Allah is sufficient for me and He is the
best of the guardians and this book was completed on 25th Zilhajj, 1087
A.H. And praise be to the first and the last and may Allah bless
Muhammad (S), chief of the messengers and his infallible and purified
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

[^1]: Surah Araaf 7:150

[^2]: Surah Kahf 18:37

[^3]: Surah Kahf 18:37


